CODE OF ORDINANCES
OF THE
CITY OF SHELDON, IOWA
Prepared By:   Local Government Professional Services, Inc.
DBA Iowa Codification
P. O. Box 244
114 E 5th Street
Storm Lake, Iowa 50588
(641) 355-4072
www.sc-ic.com
Adopted October 4, 2023, by Ordinance No. 023-3279
SUPPLEMENT RECORD
SUPPLEMENT                        ORDINANCES AMENDING CODE
Supp. No. Repeals, Amends or Adds Ord. No.   Date    Subject
Apr-24    Ch. 165                 O23-3280   12-6-23 Planned Unit Development -
                                                     Special Exceptions
          Ch. 165                 O23-3281   12-6-23 Residential Dwelling
                                                     Standards
          Ch. 165                 O24-3282   1-17-24 Rezoning from AG to SR and
                                                     RS
          7.09                    O24-3283   3-20-24 Debt Collections
Sep-24    7.09                    O24-3284   3-20-24 Debt Collections
          Ch. 165                 O24-3285   5-15-24 Rezoning to SR
          92.02;
          92.03;
          92.04;                  O24-3286   6-19-24 Water Rates
          92.05;
          92.13
          99.02;
          99.04;                  O24-3287   6-19-24 Sewer Service Charges
          99.05
          35.18                   O24-3288.1 9-5-24  Authority to Cite
                                                     Violations
          7.05(4)                 O24-3288.2 9-5-24  Operating Budget
                                                     Preparation
          60.02;                  O24-3288.3 9-5-24  Pedestrian's Right-of-Way
          65.05
          18.03                   O24-3288.4 9-5-24  Publication of Minutes
          136.04                  O24-3288.5 9-5-24  Sidewalk Liability
          50.09                   O24-3288.6 9-5-24  Adult Establishment
                                                     Nuisances
          5.02                    O24-3288.7 9-5-24  Bond Requirements
          5.06                    O24-3288.8 9-5-24  Electronic Meetings
Dec-24    Ch. 165                 O24-3289   9-18-24 Rezoning to RM
          115.04                  O24-3290   12-4-24 Cemetery Rates
                                                     Sheldon Urban Renewal Area
          Ch. 9                   O24-3291   12-4-24 - Removing 2025 Removal
                                                     Parcels
Jun-25    41.14(3)                O25-3292   6-4-25  Fireworks
          92.02;
          92.03;
          92.04;                  O25-3293   6-18-25 Water Utility
          92.05;
          92.09;
          92.14
          99.02;
          99.04;                  O25-3294   6-18-25 Sewer Service Charges
          99.05
Jul-25    Ch. 100                 O25-3295   7-2-25  Stormwater Utility
Oct-25    63.04(2)                O25-3296   8-20-25 Speed Limits on Park
                                                     Street
          120.05(8)               O25-3297   9-17-25 Liquor Licenses and Wine
                                                     and Beer Permits
          7.05(4)(D)(1);          O25-3298   9-17-25 Public Hearing
          7.05(6)                                    Requirements
          17.06                   O25-3299   9-17-25 Council Compensation
          15.04                   O25-3300   9-17-25 Mayor Compensation
          55.20                   O25-3301   10-1-25 False Representation of
                                                     Service Animal
          5.07(1)                 O25-3302   10-1-25 Conflict of Interest
CHAPTER 1
CODE OF ORDINANCES
 
1.01 Title                  1.08 Amendments
1.02 Definitions            1.09 Catchlines and Notes
1.03 City Powers            1.10 Altering Code
1.04 Indemnity              1.11 Severability
1.05 Personal Injuries      1.12 Warrants
1.06 Rules of Construction  1.13 General Standards for Action1.14
1.07 Extension of Authority 1.14 
 
1.01   TITLE.
This code of ordinances shall be known and may be cited as the Code of
Ordinances of the City of Sheldon, Iowa.
1.02   DEFINITIONS.
Where words and phrases used in this Code of Ordinances are defined in the Code
of Iowa, such definitions apply to their use in this Code of Ordinances unless
such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the Council
or repugnant to the context of the provision. Other words and phrases used
herein have the following meanings, unless specifically defined otherwise in
another portion of this Code of Ordinances or unless such construction would be
inconsistent with the manifest intent of the Council or repugnant to the
context of the provision:
   1.   “Alley” means a public right-of-way, other than a street, affording
secondary means of access to abutting property.
   2.   “City” means the city of Sheldon, Iowa.
   3.   “Clerk” means the city clerk of Sheldon, Iowa.
   4.   “Code” means the specific chapter of this Code of Ordinances in which a
specific subject is covered and bears a descriptive title word (such as the
Building Code and/or a standard code adopted by reference).
   5.   “Code of Ordinances” means the Code of Ordinances of the City of
Sheldon, Iowa.
   6.   “Council” means the city council of Sheldon, Iowa.
   7.   “County” means O'Brien County or Sioux County, Iowa.
   8.   “IAC” means the Iowa Administrative Code
   9.   “May” confers a power.
   10.   “Measure” means an ordinance, amendment, resolution, or motion.
   11.   “Must” states a requirement.
   12.   “Occupant” or “tenant,” applied to a building or land, includes any
person who occupies the whole or a part of such building or land, whether alone
or with others.
   13.   “Ordinances” means the ordinances of the City of Sheldon, Iowa, as
embodied in this Code of Ordinances, ordinances not repealed by the ordinance
adopting this Code of Ordinances, and those enacted hereafter.
   14.   “Person” means an individual, firm, partnership, domestic or foreign
corporation, company, association or joint stock association, trust, or other
legal entity, and includes a trustee, receiver, assignee, or similar
representative thereof, but does not include a governmental body.
   15.   “Public way” includes any street, alley, boulevard, parkway, highway,
sidewalk, or other public thoroughfare.
   16.   “Shall” imposes a duty.
   17.   “Sidewalk” means that surfaced portion of the street between the edge
of the traveled way, surfacing, or curb line and the adjacent property line,
intended for the use of pedestrians.
   18.   “State” means the State of Iowa.
   19.   “Statutes” or “laws” means the latest edition of the Code of Iowa, as
amended.
   20.   “Street” or “highway” means the entire width between property lines of
every way or place of whatever nature when any part thereof is open to the use
of the public, as a matter of right, for purposes of vehicular traffic.
Words that are not defined in this Code of Ordinances or by the Code of Iowa
have their ordinary meaning unless such construction would be inconsistent with
the manifest intent of the Council, or repugnant to the context of the
provision.
1.03   CITY POWERS.
The City may, except as expressly limited by the Iowa Constitution, and if not
inconsistent with the laws of the Iowa General Assembly, exercise any power and
perform any function it deems appropriate to protect and preserve the rights,
privileges, and property of the City and of its residents, and to preserve and
improve the peace, safety, health, welfare, comfort, and convenience of its
residents, and each and every provision of this Code of Ordinances shall be
deemed to be in the exercise of the foregoing powers and the performance of the
foregoing functions.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.1)
1.04   INDEMNITY.
The applicant for any permit or license under this Code of Ordinances, by
making such application, assumes and agrees to pay for any injury to or death
of any person or persons whomsoever, and any loss of or damage to property
whatsoever, including all costs and expenses incident thereto, however arising
from or related to, directly, indirectly, or remotely, the issuance of the
permit or license, or the doing of anything thereunder, or the failure of such
applicant, or the agents, employees, or servants of such applicant, to abide by
or comply with any of the provisions of this Code of Ordinances or the terms
and conditions of such permit or license, and such applicant, by making such
application, forever agrees to indemnify the City and its officers, agents, and
employees, and agrees to save them harmless from any and all claims, demands,
lawsuits, or liability whatsoever for any loss, damage, injury, or death,
including all costs and expenses incident thereto, by reason of the foregoing.
The provisions of this section shall be deemed to be a part of any permit or
license issued under this Code of Ordinances or any other ordinance of the
City, whether expressly recited therein or not.
1.05   PERSONAL INJURIES.
When action is brought against the City for personal injuries alleged to have
been caused by its negligence, the City may notify in writing any person by
whose negligence it claims the injury was caused. The notice shall state the
pendency of the action, the name of the plaintiff, the name and location of the
court where the action is pending, a brief statement of the alleged facts from
which the cause arose, that the City believes that the person notified is
liable to it for any judgment rendered against the City, and asking the person
to appear and defend. A judgment obtained in the suit is conclusive in any
action by the City against any person so notified, as to the existence of the
defect or other cause of the injury or damage, as to the liability of the City
to the plaintiff in the first named action, and as to the amount of the damage
or injury. The City may maintain an action against the person notified to
recover the amount of the judgment together with all the expenses incurred by
the City in the suit.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.14)
1.06   RULES OF CONSTRUCTION.
In the construction of this Code of Ordinances, the rules of statutory
construction as set forth in Chapter 4 of the Code of Iowa shall be utilized to
ascertain the intent of the Council, with the understanding that the term
“statute” as used therein will be deemed to be synonymous with the term
“ordinance” when applied to this Code of Ordinances.
1.07   EXTENSION OF AUTHORITY.
Whenever an officer or employee is required or authorized to do an act by a
provision of this Code of Ordinances, the provision shall be construed as
authorizing performance by a regular assistant, subordinate, or a duly
authorized designee of said officer or employee.
1.08   AMENDMENTS.
All ordinances that amend, repeal, or in any manner affect this Code of
Ordinances shall include proper reference to chapter, section, subsection, or
paragraph to maintain an orderly codification of ordinances of the City.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.2)
1.09   CATCHLINES AND NOTES.
The catchlines of the several sections of this Code of Ordinances, titles,
headings (chapter, section, and subsection), editor’s notes, cross references,
and State law references, unless set out in the body of the section itself,
contained in this Code of Ordinances, do not constitute any part of the law and
are intended merely to indicate, explain, supplement, or clarify the contents
of a section.
1.10   ALTERING CODE.
It is unlawful for any unauthorized person to change or amend, by additions or
deletions, any part or portion of this Code of Ordinances, or to insert or
delete pages, or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with this Code of
Ordinances in any manner that will cause the law of the City to be
misrepresented.
1.11   SEVERABILITY.
If any section, provision, or part of this Code of Ordinances is adjudged
invalid or unconstitutional, such adjudication will not affect the validity of
this Code of Ordinances as a whole or any section, provision, or part thereof
not adjudged invalid or unconstitutional.
1.12   WARRANTS.
If consent to enter upon or inspect any building, structure, or property
pursuant to a municipal ordinance is withheld by any person having the lawful
right to exclude, the City officer or employee having the duty to enter upon or
conduct the inspection may apply to the Iowa District Court in and for the
County, pursuant to Section 808.14 of the Code of Iowa, for an administrative
search warrant. No owner, operator or occupant, or any other person having
charge, care, or control of any dwelling unit, rooming unit, structure,
building, or premises shall fail or neglect, after presentation of a search
warrant, to permit entry therein by the municipal officer or employee.
1.13   GENERAL STANDARDS FOR ACTION.
Whenever this Code of Ordinances grants any discretionary power to the Council
or any commission, board, or officer or employee of the City and does not
specify standards to govern the exercise of the power, the power shall be
exercised in light of the following standard: The discretionary power to grant,
deny, or revoke any matter shall be considered in light of the facts and
circumstances then existing and as may be reasonably foreseeable, and due
consideration shall be given to the impact upon the public health, safety and
welfare, and the decision shall be that of a reasonably prudent person under
similar circumstances in the exercise of the police power.
1.14   STANDARD PENALTY.
Unless another penalty is expressly provided by this Code of Ordinances for
violation of any particular provision, section, or chapter, any person failing
to perform a duty required by this Code of Ordinances or otherwise violating
any provision of this Code of Ordinances or any rule or regulation adopted
herein by reference shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine of at least
$105.00 but not to exceed $855.00.† 1
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.3[2] and 903.1[1a])
 
Notes
1 † EDITOR’S NOTE: For civil penalty for violations of this Code of Ordinances, see
  Chapter 4.
CHAPTER 2
CHARTER
 
2.01 Title                              2.04 Number and Term of Council
2.02 Form of Government                 2.05 Term of Mayor
2.03 Powers and Duties of City Officers 2.06 Copies on File
 
2.01   TITLE.
This chapter may be cited as the charter of the City of Sheldon, Iowa.† 2
 
Notes
2 † EDITOR’S NOTE: Ordinance No. 1510 adopting a charter for the City was passed and
  approved by the Council on July 16, 1975.
2.02   FORM OF GOVERNMENT.
The form of government of the City is Mayor-Council, with appointed Manager,
form of government.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.4)
2.03   POWERS AND DUTIES OF CITY OFFICERS.
The Council and Mayor and other City officers have such powers and shall
perform such duties as are authorized or required by State law and by the
ordinances, resolutions, rules, and regulations of the City.
2.04   NUMBER AND TERM OF COUNCIL.
The Council consists of two Council Members elected at large and one Council
Member from each of three wards as established by this Code of Ordinances,
elected for overlapping terms of four years.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 376.2)
2.05   TERM OF MAYOR.
The Mayor is elected for a term of four years.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 376.2)
2.06   COPIES ON FILE.
The Clerk shall keep an official copy of the charter on file with the official
records of the Clerk and the Secretary of State, and shall keep copies of the
charter available at the Clerk’s office for public inspection.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.1[3])
CHAPTER 3
WARD BOUNDARIES
3.01   DIVISION INTO WARDS.
The City is divided into three wards described as follows:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.4 and 372.13[7])
   1.   First Ward – First Precinct. First Precinct in First Ward shall include
all of that area within the City limits in O’Brien County lying east of the
following line:
      Commencing at the south City limits on Washington Avenue, thence north on
Washington Avenue to 6th Street, thence northwesterly on 6th Street to 8th
Avenue, thence northwesterly on 8th Avenue to Park Street; thence east on Park
Street to a straight line that extends northerly from the center line of 23rd
Avenue; and thence north on that imaginary line to the north City limits.
   2.   Second Ward – Second Precinct. Second Precinct in Second Ward shall
include all of that area within the City limits in O’Brien County lying north
of 8th Street and east of Western Avenue, but west of the following line:
      Commencing at the intersection of Washington Avenue and 8th Street;
thence north on Washington Avenue to 6th Street; thence northwesterly on 6th
Street to 8th Avenue; thence northeasterly on 8th Avenue to Park Street; thence
east on Park Street toa straight line that extends northerly from the center
line of 23rd Avenue; and thence north on that imaginary line to the north City
limits.
   3.   Third Ward – Third and Fourth Precinct.
      Third Precinct in Third Ward shall include all of that area within the
City limits in O’Brien County lying south of 8th Street and west of Washington
Avenue.
      Fourth Precinct in Third Ward shall include that area within the City
limits in Sioux County lying west of Western Avenue.
CHAPTER 4
MUNICIPAL INFRACTIONS
 
4.01 Municipal Infraction    4.04 Civil Citations
4.02 Environmental Violation 4.05 Alternative Relief
4.03 Penalties               4.06 Alternative Penalties
 
4.01   MUNICIPAL INFRACTION.
A violation of this Code of Ordinances or any ordinance or code herein adopted
by reference or the omission or failure to perform any act or duty required by
the same, with the exception of those provisions specifically provided under
State law as a felony, an aggravated misdemeanor, or a serious misdemeanor, or
a simple misdemeanor under Chapters 687 through 747 of the Code of Iowa, is a
municipal infraction punishable by civil penalty as provided herein.† 3
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.22[3])
 
Notes
3 † EDITOR’S NOTE: For criminal penalty for violations of this Code of
  Ordinances, see Section 1.14.
4.02   ENVIRONMENTAL VIOLATION.
A municipal infraction that is a violation of Chapter 455B of the Code of Iowa
or of a standard established by the City in consultation with the Department of
Natural Resources, or both, may be classified as an environmental violation.
However, the provisions of this section shall not be applicable until the City
has offered to participate in informal negotiations regarding the violation or
to the following specific violations:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.22[1])
   1.   A violation arising from noncompliance with a pretreatment standard or
requirement referred to in 40 C.F.R. §403.8.
   2.   The discharge of airborne residue from grain, created by the handling,
drying, or storing of grain, by a person not engaged in the industrial
production or manufacturing of grain products.
   3.   The discharge of airborne residue from grain, created by the handling,
drying, or storing of grain, by a person engaged in such industrial production
or manufacturing if such discharge occurs from September 15 to January 15.
4.03   PENALTIES.
A municipal infraction is punishable by the following civil penalties:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.22[1])
   1.   Standard Civil Penalties.
      A.   First offense – not to exceed $750.00.
      B.   Each repeat offense – not to exceed $1,000.00.
Each day that a violation occurs or is permitted to exist constitutes a repeat
offense.
   2.   Special Civil Penalties.
      A.   A municipal infraction arising from noncompliance with a
pretreatment standard or requirement, referred to in 40 C.F.R. §403.8, by an
industrial user is punishable by a penalty of not more than $1,000.00 for each
day a violation exists or continues.
      B.   A municipal infraction classified as an environmental violation is
punishable by a penalty of not more than $1,000.00 for each occurrence.
However, an environmental violation is not subject to such penalty if all of
the following conditions are satisfied:
         (1)   The violation results solely from conducting an initial startup,
cleaning, repairing, performing scheduled maintenance, testing, or conducting a
shutdown of either equipment causing the violation or the equipment designed to
reduce or eliminate the violation.
         (2)   The City is notified of the violation within 24 hours from the
time that the violation begins.
         (3)   The violation does not continue in existence for more than eight
hours.
4.04   CIVIL CITATIONS.
Any officer authorized by the City to enforce this Code of Ordinances may issue
a civil citation to a person who commits a municipal infraction. A copy of the
citation may be served by personal service as provided in Rule of Civil
Procedure 1.305, by certified mail addressed to the defendant at defendant’s
last known mailing address, return receipt requested, or by publication in the
manner as provided in Rule of Civil Procedure 1.310 and subject to the
conditions of Rule of Civil Procedure 1.311. A copy of the citation shall be
retained by the issuing officer, and the original citation shall be sent to the
Clerk of the District Court. The citation shall serve as notification that a
civil offense has been committed and shall contain the following information:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.22[4])
   1.   The name and address of the defendant.
   2.   The name or description of the infraction attested to by the officer
issuing the citation.
   3.   The location and time of the infraction.
   4.   The amount of civil penalty to be assessed or the alternative relief
sought, or both.
   5.   The manner, location, and time in which the penalty may be paid.
   6.   The time and place of court appearance.
   7.   The penalty for failure to appear in court.
   8.   The legal description of the affected real property, if applicable.
If the citation affects real property and charges a violation relating to the
condition of the property, including a building code violation, a local housing
regulation violation, a housing code violation, or a public health or safety
violation, after filing the citation with the Clerk of the District Court, the
City shall also file the citation in the office of the County Treasurer.
4.05   ALTERNATIVE RELIEF.
Seeking a civil penalty as authorized in this chapter does not preclude the
City from seeking alternative relief from the court in the same action. Such
alternative relief may include, but is not limited to, an order for abatement
or injunctive relief.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.22[9])
4.06   ALTERNATIVE PENALTIES.
This chapter does not preclude a peace officer from issuing a criminal citation
for a violation of this Code of Ordinances or regulation if criminal penalties
are also provided for the violation. Nor does it preclude or limit the
authority of the City to enforce the provisions of this Code of Ordinances by
criminal sanctions or other lawful means.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.22[12])
CHAPTER 5
OPERATING PROCEDURES
 
5.01 Oaths                 5.07 Conflict of Interest
5.02 Bonds                 5.08 Resignations
5.03 Powers and Duties     5.09 Removal of Appointed Officers and Employees
5.04 Books and Records     5.10 Vacancies
5.05 Transfer to Successor 5.11 Gifts
5.06 Meetings              5.12 Fees, Charges, and Expenses for Annexation/De-
                           Annexation Applications
 
5.01   OATHS.
The oath of office shall be required and administered in accordance with the
following:
   1.   Qualify for Office. Each elected or appointed officer shall qualify for
office by taking the prescribed oath and by giving, when required, a bond. The
oath shall be taken, and bond provided, after such officer is certified as
elected but not later than noon of the first day that is not a Sunday or a
legal holiday in January of the first year of the term for which the officer
was elected.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 63.1)
   2.   Prescribed Oath. The prescribed oath is: “I, (name), do solemnly swear
that I will support the Constitution of the United States and the Constitution
of the State of Iowa, and that I will faithfully and impartially, to the best
of my ability, discharge all duties of the office of (name of office) in
Sheldon as now or hereafter required by law.”
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 63.10)
   3.   Officers Empowered to Administer Oaths. The following are empowered to
administer oaths and to take affirmations in any matter pertaining to the
business of their respective offices:
      A.   Mayor
      B.   City Clerk
      C.   Members of all boards, commissions, or bodies created by law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 63A.2)
5.02   BONDS.
Surety bonds are provided in accordance with the following:
   1.   Required. The Council shall provide by resolution for a surety bond or
blanket position bond running to the City and covering the Mayor, Clerk,
Treasurer, and such other officers and employees as may be necessary and
advisable except as allowed in Subsection 5.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 64.13)
   2.   Bonds Approved. Bonds shall be approved by the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 64.19)
   3.   Bonds Filed. All bonds, after approval and proper record, shall be
filed with the Clerk.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 64.23(6))
   4.   Record. The Clerk shall keep a book, to be known as the “Record of
Official Bonds” in which shall be recorded the official bonds of all City
officers, elective or appointive.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 64.24(1)(a))
   5.   Insurance Policy in Lieu of Bond. In lieu of a bond, a public officer
required to obtain a bond pursuant to Chapter 64 of the Code of Iowa may obtain
an insurance policy in an amount not less than the amounts required of a bond.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 64.3)
(Section 5.02 – Ord._O24-3288.7 – Sep. 24 Supp.)
5.03   POWERS AND DUTIES.
Each municipal officer shall exercise the powers and perform the duties
prescribed by law and this Code of Ordinances, or as otherwise directed by the
Council unless contrary to State law or City charter.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
5.04   BOOKS AND RECORDS.
All books and records required to be kept by law or ordinance shall be open to
examination by the public upon request, unless some other provisions of law
expressly limit such right or require such records to be kept confidential.
Access to public records that are combined with data processing software shall
be in accordance with policies and procedures established by the City.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 22.2 and 22.3A)
5.05   TRANSFER TO SUCCESSOR.
Each officer shall transfer to his or her successor in office all books,
papers, records, documents and property in the officer’s custody and
appertaining to that office.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
5.06   MEETINGS.
All meetings of the Council, any board or commission, or any multi-membered
body formally and directly created by any of the foregoing bodies shall be held
in accordance with the following:
   1.   Definitions. The following terms are defined for use in this section.
      A.   “Closed session” means a meeting to which all members of the public
do not have access as allowed by Section 21.5 of the Code of Iowa.
      B.   “Hybrid meeting” means a meeting involving both remote participation
and in-person participation by members.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 21.8(4)(a))
      C.   “Open session” means a meeting to which all members of the public
have access.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 21.2(3))
      D.   “Remote participation” means real-time participation by a remotely
located individual in a meeting which is being held in a different physical
location using integrated audio, video, and other digital tools.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 21.8(4)(b))
      E.   “Reasonable notice” means advising the news media who have filed a
request for notice with the governmental body and posting the notice on a
bulletin board or other prominent place which is easily accessible to the
public and clearly designated for that purpose at the principal office of the
body holding the meeting, or if not such office exists, at the building in
which the meeting is to be held.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 21.4(1))
      F.   “Teleconference participation” means participation using audio
conference tools involving multiple participants in at least two separate
locations.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 21.8(4)(c))
      G.   “Virtual meeting” means a meeting involving real-time interaction
using integrated audio, video, and other digital tools, in which participants
do not share a physical location.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 21.8(4)(d))
   2.   Notice of Meetings. Reasonable notice of the time, date, and place of
each meeting and its tentative agenda shall be given.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 21.4)
   3.   Meetings Open. All meetings shall be held in open session unless closed
sessions are held as expressly permitted by State law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 21.3)
   4.   Minutes. Minutes shall be kept of all meetings showing the date, time,
and place, the members present, and the action taken at each meeting. The
minutes shall show the results of each vote taken and information sufficient to
indicate the vote of each member present. The vote of each member present shall
be made public at the open session. The minutes shall be public records open to
public inspection.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 21.3)
   5.   Closed Session. A closed session may be held only by affirmative vote
of either two-thirds of the body or all of the members present at the meeting
and in accordance with Chapter 21 of the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 21.5)
   6.   Cameras and Recorders. The public may use cameras or recording devices
at any open session.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 21.7)
   7.   Electronic Meetings. A governmental body shall provide for hybrid
meetings, teleconference participation, virtual meetings, remote participation,
and other hybrid options for the members of the governmental body to
participate in official meetings. A governmental body conducting a meeting
pursuant to this subsection shall comply with all of the provisions of Chapter
21 of the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 21.8)
(Section 5.06 – Ord._O24-3288.8 – Sep. 24 Supp.)
5.07   CONFLICT OF INTEREST.
A City officer or employee shall not have an interest, direct or indirect, in
any contract or job of work or material or the profits thereof or services to
be furnished or performed for the City, unless expressly permitted by law. A
contract entered into in violation of this section is void. The provisions of
this section do not apply to:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5)
   1.   Compensation of Officers. The payment of lawful compensation of a City
officer, volunteer firefighter as defined in Section 85.61 of the Code of Iowa,
emergency medical care provider as defined in Section 147A.1 of the Code of
Iowa, or employee holding more than one City office or position, the holding of
which is not incompatible with another public office or is not prohibited by
law. This subsection shall not be construed to prohibit nominal stipends,
compensation, incentives, or benefits for volunteer firefighters or emergency
medical care providers.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5(3)(a))
(Subsection 1 – Ord._O25-3302 – Oct. 25 Supp.)
   2.   Investment of Funds. The designation of a bank or trust company as a
depository, paying agent, or for investment of funds.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[3b])
   3.   City Treasurer. An employee of a bank or trust company, who serves as
Treasurer of the City.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[3c])
   4.   Stock Interests. Contracts in which a City officer or employee has an
interest solely by reason of employment, or a stock interest of the kind
described in Subsection 8 of this section, or both, if the contracts are made
by competitive bid in writing, publicly invited and opened, or if the
remuneration of employment will not be directly affected as a result of the
contract and the duties of employment do not directly involve the procurement
or preparation of any part of the contract. The competitive bid qualification
of this subsection does not apply to a contract for professional services not
customarily awarded by competitive bid.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[3e])
   5.   Newspaper. The designation of an official newspaper.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[3f])
   6.   Existing Contracts. A contract in which a City officer or employee has
an interest if the contract was made before the time the officer or employee
was elected or appointed, but the contract may not be renewed.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[3g])
   7.   Volunteers. Contracts with volunteer firefighters or civil defense
volunteers.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[3h])
   8.   Corporations. A contract with a corporation in which a City officer or
employee has an interest by reason of stock holdings when less than five
percent of the outstanding stock of the corporation is owned or controlled
directly or indirectly by the officer or employee or the spouse or immediate
family of such officer or employee.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[3i])
   9.   Contracts. Contracts made by the City upon competitive bid in writing,
publicly invited and opened.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[3d])
   10.   Cumulative Purchases. Contracts not otherwise permitted by this
section, for the purchase of goods or services that benefit a City officer or
employee, if the purchases benefiting that officer or employee do not exceed a
cumulative total purchase price of $6,000.00 in a fiscal year.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[3j])
   11.   Franchise Agreements. Franchise agreements between the City and a
utility and contracts entered into by the City for the provision of essential
City utility services.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[3k])
   12.   Third Party Contracts. A contract that is a bond, note or other
obligation of the City and the contract is not acquired directly from the City
but is acquired in a transaction with a third party who may or may not be the
original underwriter, purchaser, or obligee of the contract.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[3l])
5.08   RESIGNATIONS.
An elected officer who wishes to resign may do so by submitting a resignation
in writing to the Clerk so that it shall be properly recorded and considered. A
person who resigns from an elective office is not eligible for appointment to
the same office during the time for which the person was elected if, during
that time, the compensation of the office has been increased.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[9])
5.09   REMOVAL OF APPOINTED OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES.
Except as otherwise provided by State or City law, all persons appointed to
City office or employment may be removed by the officer or body making the
appointment, but every such removal shall be by written order. The order shall
give the reasons, be filed in the office of the Clerk, and a copy shall be sent
by certified mail to the person removed, who, upon request filed with the Clerk
within 30 days after the date of mailing the copy, shall be granted a public
hearing before the Council on all issues connected with the removal. The
hearing shall be held within 30 days after the date the request is filed,
unless the person removed requests a later date.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.15)
5.10   VACANCIES.
A vacancy in an elective City office during a term of office shall be filled in
accordance with Section 372.13[2] of the Code of Iowa (2021, as amended).
5.11   GIFTS.
Except as otherwise provided in Chapter 68B of the Code of Iowa, a public
official, public employee or candidate, or that person’s immediate family
member, shall not, directly or indirectly, accept or receive any gift or series
of gifts from a “restricted donor” as defined in Chapter 68B and a restricted
donor shall not, directly or indirectly, individually or jointly with one or
more other restricted donors, offer or make a gift or a series of gifts to a
public official, public employee, or candidate.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 68B.22)
5.12   FEES, CHARGES, AND EXPENSES FOR ANNEXATION/DE-ANNEXATION APPLICATIONS.
Any person or entity submitting an application to the City pursuant to Chapter
368 of the Code of Iowa shall pay a fee as set by resolution of the City
Council. Until the fee has been paid in full, no action shall be taken on any
application brought to the Council pursuant to Chapter 368 of the Code of Iowa.
CHAPTER 6
CITY ELECTIONS
 
6.01 Nominating Method to Be Used 6.04 Preparation of Petition and Affidavit
6.02 Nominations by Petition      6.05 Filing; Presumption; Withdrawals;
                                  Objections
6.03 Adding Name by Petition      6.06 Persons Elected
 
6.01   NOMINATING METHOD TO BE USED.
All candidates for elective municipal offices shall be nominated under the
provisions of Chapter 45 of the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 376.3)
6.02   NOMINATIONS BY PETITION.
Nominations for elective municipal offices of the City may be made by
nomination paper or papers signed by not less than 25 eligible electors,
residents of the City.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 45.1)
6.03   ADDING NAME BY PETITION.
The name of a candidate placed upon the ballot by any other method than by
petition shall not be added by petition for the same office.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 45.2)
6.04   PREPARATION OF PETITION AND AFFIDAVIT.
Nomination papers shall include a petition and an affidavit of candidacy. The
petition and affidavit shall be substantially in the form prescribed by the
State Commissioner of Elections, shall include information required by the Code
of Iowa, and shall be signed in accordance with the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 45.3, 45.5 and 45.6)
6.05   FILING; PRESUMPTION; WITHDRAWALS; OBJECTIONS.
The time and place of filing nomination petitions, the presumption of validity
thereof, the right of a candidate so nominated to withdraw and the effect of
such withdrawal, and the right to object to the legal sufficiency of such
petitions, or to the eligibility of the candidate, shall be governed by the
appropriate provisions of Chapter 44 of the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 45.4)
6.06   PERSONS ELECTED.
The candidates who receive the greatest number of votes for each office on the
ballot are elected, to the extent necessary to fill the positions open.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 376.8[3])
CHAPTER 7
FISCAL MANAGEMENT
 
7.01        7.06 Budget Amendments
Purpose
7.02
Finance     7.07 Accounting
Officer
7.03 Cash   7.08 Financial Reports
Control
7.04 Fund   7.09 Debts Subject to Setoff Constituting “Qualifying Debt” Pursuant to Iowa
Control     Code Section 421.65
7.05
Operating
Budget
Preparation
 
7.01   PURPOSE.
The purpose of this chapter is to establish policies and provide for rules and
regulations governing the management of the financial affairs of the City.
7.02   FINANCE OFFICER.
The Clerk is the finance and accounting officer of the City and is responsible
for the administration of the provisions of this chapter.
7.03   CASH CONTROL.
To assure the proper accounting and safe custody of moneys the following shall
apply:
   1.   Deposit of Funds. All moneys or fees collected for any purpose by any
City officer shall be deposited through the office of the finance officer. If
any said fees are due to an officer, they shall be paid to the officer by check
drawn by the finance officer and approved by the Council only upon such
officer’s making adequate reports relating thereto as required by law,
ordinance, or Council directive.
   2.   Deposits and Investments. All moneys belonging to the City shall be
promptly deposited in depositories selected by the Council in amounts not
exceeding the authorized depository limitation established by the Council or
invested in accordance with the City’s written investment policy and State law,
including joint investments as authorized by Section 384.21 of the Code of
Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.21, 12B.10, 12C.1)
   3.   Petty Cash Fund. The finance officer shall be custodian of a petty cash
fund for the payment of small claims for minor purchases, collect-on-delivery
transportation charges, and small fees customarily paid at the time of
rendering a service, for which payments the finance officer shall obtain some
form of receipt or bill acknowledged as paid by the vendor or agent. At such
time as the petty cash fund is approaching depletion, the finance officer shall
draw a check for replenishment in the amount of the accumulated expenditures
and said check and supporting detail shall be submitted to the Council as a
claim in the usual manner for claims and charged to the proper funds and
accounts. It shall not be used for salary payments or other personal services
or personal expenses.
7.04   FUND CONTROL.
There shall be established and maintained separate and distinct funds in
accordance with the following:
   1.   Revenues. All moneys received by the City shall be credited to the
proper fund as required by law, ordinance, or resolution.
   2.   Expenditures. No disbursement shall be made from a fund unless such
disbursement is authorized by law, ordinance, budget resolution or other
resolution, was properly budgeted, and supported by a claim approved by the
Council.
   3.   Emergency Fund. No transfer may be made from any fund to the Emergency
Fund.
(545 IAC 2.5[2])
   4.   Debt Service Fund. Except where specifically prohibited by State law,
moneys may be transferred from any other City fund to the Debt Service Fund to
meet payments of principal and interest. Such transfers must be authorized by
the original budget or a budget amendment.
(545 IAC 2.5[3])
   5.   Capital Improvements Reserve Fund. Except where specifically prohibited
by State law, moneys may be transferred from any City fund to the Capital
Improvements Reserve Fund. Such transfers must be authorized by the original
budget or a budget amendment.
(545 IAC 2.5[4])
   6.   Utility and Enterprise Funds. A surplus in a Utility or Enterprise Fund
may be transferred to any other City fund, except the Emergency Fund, by
resolution of the Council. A surplus may exist only after all required
transfers have been made to any restricted accounts in accordance with the
terms and provisions of any revenue bonds or loan agreements relating to the
Utility or Enterprise Fund. A surplus is defined as the cash balance in the
operating account or the unrestricted net position calculated in accordance
with generally accepted accounting principles, after adding back the net
pension and other postemployment benefits, liabilities, and the related
deferred inflows of resources and deducting the related deferred outflows of
resources, in excess of:
      A.   The amount of the expenses of disbursements for operating and
maintaining the utility or enterprise for the preceding three months; and
      B.   The amount necessary to make all required transfers to restricted
accounts for the succeeding three months.
(545 IAC 2.5[5])
   7.   Balancing of Funds. Fund accounts shall be reconciled at the close of
each month and a report thereof submitted to the Council.
7.05   OPERATING BUDGET PREPARATION.
The annual operating budget of the City shall be prepared in accordance with
the following:
   1.   Proposal Prepared. The finance officer is responsible for preparation
of the annual budget detail, for review by the Mayor and Council and adoption
by the Council in accordance with directives of the Mayor and Council.
   2.   Boards and Commissions. All boards, commissions, and other
administrative agencies of the City that are authorized to prepare and
administer budgets must submit their budget proposals to the finance officer
for inclusion in the proposed City budget at such time and in such form as
required by the Council.
   3.   Submission to Council. The finance officer shall submit the completed
budget proposal to the Council each year at such time as directed by the
Council.
   4.   Annual Statement.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 24.2A(2))
      A.   On or before 4:00 p.m. on March 5 of each year, the City shall file,
with the Department of Management, a report containing all necessary
information for the Department of Management to compile and calculate amounts
required to be included in the statement mailed under Paragraph B.
      B.   Not later than March 15, the County Auditor, using information
compiled and calculated by the Department of Management shall send to each
property owner or taxpayer within the County, by regular mail, an individual
statement containing all of the required information as provided under Section
24.2(2)(B)(1-10) of the Code of Iowa.
      C.   The Department of Management shall prescribe the form for the report
required under Paragraph A, the statements to be mailed under Paragraph B, and
the public hearing notice required under Paragraph D.
      D.   The Council shall set a time and place for a public hearing on the
City’s proposed property tax amount for the budget year and the City’s
information included in the statements under Paragraph B. The proposed property
tax hearing shall be set on a date on or after March 20 of the budget year
immediately preceding the budget year for which the tax is being proposed. At
the hearing, the Council shall receive oral or written testimony from any
resident or property owner of the City. This public hearing shall be separate
from any other meeting of the Council, including any other meeting or public
hearing relating to the City’s budget, and other business of the City that is
not related to the proposed property tax amounts and the information in the
statements shall not be conducted at the public hearing. After all testimony
has been received and considered, the governing body may decrease, but not
increase, the proposed property tax amount to be included in the City’s budget.
         (1)   Notice of the public hearing shall be published at least once,
not less than four or more than 20 days prior to the hearing in a newspaper
published at least once weekly and having general circulation in the City.
However, if the City has a population of 200 or less, publication may be made
by posting in three public places in the City.
(Code of Iowa, Sec, 24.2A(4)(b)(2))
(Subparagraph (1) – Ord._O25-3298 – Oct. 25 Supp.)
         (2)   Notice of the hearing shall also be posted and clearly
identified on the City’s internet site for public viewing beginning on the date
of the newspaper publication and shall be maintained on the City’s internet
site with all such prior year notices.
         (3)   Additionally, if the City maintains a social media account on
one or more social media applications, the public hearing notice or an
electronic link to the public hearing notice shall be posted on each such
account on a date no later than the date of publication of the notice.
         (4)   Failure of a newspaper to publish a required notice under this
paragraph shall not be considered a failure of a political subdivision to
provide required notice under this paragraph if all of the following conditions
are met:
            a.   Notice of the public hearing was provided to each property
owner and each taxpayer within the political subdivision in statements required
under Subsection 2, Paragraph B.
            b.   The political subdivision can demonstrate to the County
Auditor that the political subdivision provided sufficient time for the
newspaper to publish the notice.
(Subsection 4 – Ord._O24-3288.2 – Sep. 24 Supp.)
   5.   Council Review. The Council shall review the proposed budget and may
make any adjustments it deems appropriate in the budget before accepting such
proposal for publication, hearing, and final adoption.
   6.   Notice of Hearing. Following, and not until, completion of requirements
of Subsection 4 of this section, the Council shall set a time and place for
public hearing on the budget to be held before April 30 and shall publish
notice of the hearing at least once, not less than four or more than 20 days
before the hearing. A summary of the proposed budget and a description of the
procedure for protesting the City budget under Section 384.19 of the Code of
Iowa, in the form prescribed by the Director of the Department of Management,
shall be included in the notice. Proof of publication of the notice under this
subsection must be filed with the County Auditor. However, if the City has a
population of 200 or less, publication may be made by posting in three public
places in the City.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.16(3))
(Subsection 6 – Ord._O25-3298 – Oct. 25 Supp.)
   7.   Copies of Budget on File. Not less than 20 days before the date that
the budget must be certified to the County Auditor and not less than 10 days
before the public hearing, the Clerk shall make available a sufficient number
of copies of the detailed budget to meet the requests of taxpayers and
organizations, and have them available for distribution at the offices of the
Mayor and Clerk and at the City library.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.16[2])
   8.   Adoption and Certification. After the hearing, the Council shall adopt,
by resolution, a budget for at least the next fiscal year and the Clerk shall
certify the necessary tax levy for the next fiscal year to the County Auditor
and the County Board of Supervisors. The tax levy certified may be less than,
but not more than, the amount estimated in the proposed budget submitted at the
final hearing, unless an additional tax levy is approved at a City election.
Two copies each of the detailed budget as adopted and of the tax certificate
must be transmitted to the County Auditor.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.16[5])
7.06   BUDGET AMENDMENTS.
A City budget finally adopted for the following fiscal year becomes effective
July 1 and constitutes the City appropriation for each program and purpose
specified therein until amended as provided by this section.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.18)
   1.   Program Increase. Any increase in the amount appropriated to a program
must be prepared, adopted, and subject to protest in the same manner as the
original budget.
(545 IAC 2.2)
   2.   Program Transfer. Any transfer of appropriation from one program to
another must be prepared, adopted, and subject to protest in the same manner as
the original budget.
(545 IAC 2.3)
   3.   Activity Transfer. Any transfer of appropriation from one activity to
another activity within a program must be approved by resolution of the
Council.
(545 IAC 2.4)
   4.   Administrative Transfers. The finance officer shall have the authority
to adjust, by transfer or otherwise, the appropriations allocated within a
specific activity without prior Council approval.
(545 IAC 2.4)
7.07   ACCOUNTING.
The accounting records of the City shall consist of not less than the
following:
   1.   Books of Original Entry. There shall be established and maintained
books of original entry to provide a chronological record of cash received and
disbursed.
   2.   General Ledger. There shall be established and maintained a general
ledger controlling all cash transactions, budgetary accounts and for recording
unappropriated surpluses.
   3.   Checks. Two signatures are required on all City checks. Checks shall be
prenumbered and signed by any two of the following: City Clerk, City Manager,
Mayor, and Mayor Pro Tem, following Council approval, except as provided by
Subsection 5 hereof. In the absence of the City Clerk, the Deputy City Clerk
may sign.
   4.   Budget Accounts. There shall be established such individual accounts to
record receipts by source and expenditures by program and activity as will
provide adequate information and control for budgeting purposes as planned and
approved by the Council. Each individual account shall be maintained within its
proper fund and so kept that receipts can be immediately and directly compared
with revenue estimates and expenditures can be related to the authorizing
appropriation. No expenditure shall be posted except to the appropriation for
the function and purpose for which the expense was incurred.
   5.   Immediate Payment Authorized. The Council may by resolution authorize
the Clerk to issue checks for immediate payment of amounts due, which if not
paid promptly would result in loss of discount, penalty for late payment or
additional interest cost. Any such payments made shall be reported to the
Council for review and approval with and in the same manner as other claims at
the next meeting following such payment. The resolution authorizing immediate
payment shall specify the type of payment so authorized and may include (but is
not limited to) payment of utility bills, contractual obligations, payroll, and
bond principal and interest.
   6.   Utilities. The finance officer shall perform and be responsible for
accounting functions of the municipally owned utilities.
7.08   FINANCIAL REPORTS.
The finance officer shall prepare and file the following financial reports:
   1.   Monthly Reports. There shall be submitted to the Council each month a
report showing the activity and status of each fund, program, sub-program, and
activity for the preceding month.
   2.   Annual Report. Not later than December 1 of each year there shall be
published an annual report containing a summary for the preceding fiscal year
of all collections and receipts, all accounts due the City, and all
expenditures, the current public debt of the City, and the legal debt limit of
the City for the current fiscal year. The Annual Financial Report shall be
prepared on forms and pursuant to instructions prescribed by the Auditor of
State. Beginning with the Annual Financial Report published by December 1,
2025, each report shall include a list of bonds, notes, or other obligations
issued by the City during the most recently completed fiscal year, and the
applicable lists for other fiscal years beginning on or after July 1, 2024, for
which obligations remain unpaid, payable from any source, including the amount
of the issuance, the project or purpose of the issuance, whether the issuance
was approved at election, eligible to be subject to a petition for an election,
or was exempt from approval at election as the result of statutory exclusions
based on population of the City or amount of the issuance, and identification
of issuances from the fiscal year or prior fiscal years related to the same
project or purpose.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.22)
7.09   DEBTS SUBJECT TO SETOFF CONSTITUTING “QUALIFYING DEBT” PURSUANT TO IOWA
CODE 421.65.
All debts or charges authorized herein by the City of Sheldon Code or otherwise
set by resolution approved by the Sheldon City Council shall be deemed
“qualifying debts” subject to the provisions of Iowa Code, including but not
limited to 421.65, for which the City shall provide those procedures as set out
herein
Chapter 7 of the City Code. Such “qualifying debts” include, but are not
limited to the following:
   1.   Past-due utility bills – water, sewer, stormwater, garbage service;
   2.   Unreturned (overdue) or damaged library materials/equipment;
   3.   Past-due law enforcement tickets, including parking tickets;
   4.   Past due Crossroads Pavilion, Community Services Center fees, shelter
house, any rental fees at any City building or bills for damages regarding any
City property;
   5.   Past due campground fees;
   6.   Outdoor aquatic center season pass, entry fees, lessons or concessions;
   7.   Past-due sidewalk repair/replacement costs;
   8   Past-due sidewalk snow/ice removal invoice;
   9.   Past-due mowing invoice;
   10.   Past-due nuisance abatement invoice, including demolitions;
   11.   Past-due animal impound fee invoice;
   12.   Past-due connection fees, permit fees, lift station fees, private
water lines, curb box (shut off), water meters;
   13.   Past-due false alarm fees;
   14.   Emergency services fees, including eligible fire, EMA, ambulance, and
police;
   15.   Past-due zoning & sign permits, subdivision, Planning & Zoning and
Board of Adjustment fees including engineering fees incurred on behalf of
developer;
   16.   Any debt which is in the form of a liquidated sum due, owing, and
payable to the clerk of the district court; and
   17.   Any other liquidated sum certain, owing, and payable to the City of
Sheldon, Iowa, with respect to which the City has afforded the debtor notice
provided herein.
   18.   Procedure for Certification to the Iowa Department of Revenue for
Setoff. With respect to any debt herein, the City shall provide the debtor
fifteen (15) days advance written notice to the debtor’s last-known address,
affording the debtor a period of fifteen (15) days within which to protest or
appeal the delinquency to the City Clerk. If the delinquency is upheld by the
City Clerk, or the debtor has not paid the debt within fifteen (15) of the date
of the notice, the City may certify the delinquency to the Iowa Department of
Revenue for purposes of collection pursuant to Iowa Code 421.65.
(Section 7.09 – Ord._O24-3284 – Apr. 24 Supp.)
CHAPTER 8
INDUSTRIAL PROPERTY TAX EXEMPTIONS
 
8.01 Purpose                        8.06 Applications
8.02 Definitions                    8.07 Approval
8.03 Period of Partial Exemption    8.08 Exemption Repealed
8.04 Amounts Eligible for Exemption 8.09 Dual Exemptions Prohibited
8.05 Limitations
 
8.01   PURPOSE.
The purpose of this chapter is to provide for a partial exemption from property
taxation of the actual value added to industrial real estate by the new
construction of industrial real estate, research-service facilities,
warehouses, and distribution centers.
8.02   DEFINITIONS.
For use in this chapter the following terms are defined:
   1.   “Actual value added” means the actual value added as of the first year
for which the exemption is received.
   2.   “Distribution center” means a building or structure used primarily for
the storage of goods that are intended for subsequent shipment to retail
outlets. Distribution center does not mean a building or structure used
primarily to store raw agricultural products, used primarily by a manufacturer
to store goods to be used in the manufacturing process, used primarily for the
storage of petroleum products, or used for the retail sale of goods.
   3.   “New construction” means new buildings and structures and includes new
buildings and structures that are constructed as additions to existing
buildings and structures. New construction does not include reconstruction of
an existing building or structure that does not constitute complete replacement
of an existing building or structure or refitting of an existing building or
structure unless the reconstruction of an existing building or structure is
required due to economic obsolescence and the reconstruction is necessary to
implement recognized industry standards for the manufacturing and processing of
specific products and the reconstruction is required for the owner of the
building or structure to continue competitively to manufacture or process those
products, which determination shall receive prior approval from the City
Council.
   4.   “New machinery and equipment assessed as real estate” means new
machinery and equipment assessed as real estate pursuant to Section 427A.1[1e]
of the Code of Iowa, unless the machinery or equipment is part of the normal
replacement or operating process to maintain or expand the existing operational
status.
   5.   “Research-service facilities” means a building or group of buildings
devoted primarily to research and development activities, including (but not
limited to) the design and production or manufacture of prototype products for
experimental use and corporate research services that do not have a primary
purpose of providing on-site services to the public.
   6.   “Warehouse” means a building or structure used as a public warehouse
for the storage of goods pursuant to Chapter 554, Article 7, of the Code of
Iowa, except that it does not mean a building or structure used primarily to
store raw agricultural products or from which goods are sold at retail.
8.03   PERIOD OF PARTIAL EXEMPTION.
The actual value added to industrial real estate by the new construction of
industrial real estate, research-service facilities, warehouses, and
distribution centers is eligible to receive a partial exemption from taxation
for a period of five years. The exemption shall also apply to the acquisition
of or improvement to machinery and equipment assessed as real estate pursuant
to Section 427A.1[1e] of the Code of Iowa, unless the machinery or equipment is
part of the normal replacement or operating process to maintain or expand the
existing operational status.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 427B.3)
8.04   AMOUNTS ELIGIBLE FOR EXEMPTION.
The amount of actual value added, which is eligible to be exempt from taxation,
shall be as follows:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 427B.3)
   1.   For the first year, 75 percent.
   2.   For the second year, 60 percent.
   3.   For the third year, 45 percent.
   4.   For the fourth year, 30 percent.
   5.   For the fifth year, 15 percent.
8.05   LIMITATIONS.
The granting of the exemption under this chapter for new construction
constituting complete replacement of an existing building or structure shall
not result in the assessed value of the industrial real estate being reduced
below the assessed value of the industrial real estate before the start of the
new construction added.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 427B.3)
8.06   APPLICATIONS.
An application shall be filed for each project resulting in actual value added
for which an exemption is claimed.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 427B.4)
   1.   The application for exemption shall be filed by the owner of the
property with the local assessor by February 1 of the assessment year in which
the value added is first assessed for taxation.
   2.   Applications for exemption shall be made on forms prescribed by the
Director of Revenue and shall contain information pertaining to the nature of
the improvement, its cost, and other information deemed necessary by the
Director of Revenue.
8.07   APPROVAL.
A person may submit a proposal to the City Council to receive prior approval
for eligibility for a tax exemption on new construction. If the City Council
resolves to consider such proposal, it shall publish notice and hold a public
hearing thereon. Thereafter, at least 30 days after such hearing, the City
Council, by ordinance, may give its prior approval of a tax exemption for new
construction if the new construction is in conformance with City zoning. Such
prior approval shall not entitle the owner to exemption from taxation until the
new construction has been completed and found to be qualified real estate.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 427B.4)
8.08   EXEMPTION REPEALED.
When in the opinion of the City Council continuation of the exemption granted
by this chapter ceases to be of benefit to the City, the City Council may
repeal this chapter, but all existing exemptions shall continue until their
expiration.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 427B.5)
8.09   DUAL EXEMPTIONS PROHIBITED.
A property tax exemption under this chapter shall not be granted if the
property for which the exemption is claimed has received any other property tax
exemption authorized by law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 427B.6)
CHAPTER 9
URBAN RENEWAL
EDITOR’S NOTE 
The following ordinances not codified herein, and specifically saved from
repeal, have been adopted establishing Urban Renewal Areas in the City and
remain in full force and effect. The Urban Renewal Plan for the City is on
file in the office of the Clerk.
ORDINANCE NO. ADOPTED    NAME OF AREA
O89-2954      09-06-1989 Sheldon Urban Renewal District
O89-2972      11-15-1989 Sheldon Urban Renewal District
                         Amendment No. 1
O94-3064      12-21-1994 Sheldon Urban Renewal District
                         Amendment No. 2
O97-3089      07-16-1997 Sheldon Urban Renewal District
                         Amendment No. 3
O97-3091      01-21-1998 Sheldon Urban Renewal District
                         Amendment No. 4
O99-3104      05-05-1999 Sheldon Urban Renewal District
                         Amendment No. 5
O00-3118      12-20-2000 Sheldon Urban Renewal District
                         Amendment No. 6
O06-3167      11-15-2006 Sheldon Urban Renewal District
                         Amendment No. 7
O07-3169      03-07-2007 Sheldon Urban Renewal District
                         Amendment No. 8
O07-3169      01-19-2007 Sheldon Urban Renewal District
                         Amendment No. 9
O08-3186      10-15-2008 Sheldon Urban Renewal District
                         Amendment No. 10
O13-3212      02-20-2013 Amended and Restated Sheldon Urban Renewal Plan
R15-4171      05-05-2015 Amended and Restated Sheldon Urban Renewal Plan,
                         Amendment No. 1
O16-3223      12-30-2016 Amended and Restated Sheldon Urban Renewal Plan,
                         Amendment No. 2
R17-4344      03-15-2017 Amended and Restated Sheldon Urban Renewal Plan,
                         Amendment No. 3
R17-4364      07-19-2017 Amended and Restated Sheldon Urban Renewal Plan,
                         Amendment No. 4
R20-4510      04-15-2020 Amended and Restated Sheldon Urban Renewal Plan,
                         Amendment No. 5
R21-4648      06-02-2021 Amended and Restated Sheldon Urban Renewal Plan,
                         Amendment No. 6
R22-3792      06-15-2015 Amended and Restated Sheldon Urban Renewal Plan,
                         Amendment No. 7
O24-3291      12-4-2024  Sheldon Urban Renewal Area - Removing 2025 Removal
                         Parcels
 
CHAPTER 10
URBAN REVITALIZATION
EDITOR’S NOTE 
The following ordinances not codified herein, and specifically saved from
repeal, have been adopted designating Urban Revitalization Areas in the City
and remain in full force and effect. The Urban Revitalization Plan for the
City is on file in the office of the Clerk.
ORDINANCE NO.                     ADOPTED    NAME OF AREA
O99-3110* see also R94-3159, O94- 12-15-1999 1994 Urban Revitalization Plan
3061, and O96-3085
O95-3070                          8-2-1995   Sheldon Urban Revitalization Plan
                                             #2
O00-3117                          12-06-2000 1994 Urban Revitalization Plan
095-3070                                     Sheldon Urban Revitalization Plan
                                             #2
O01-3125                          11-07-2001 Urban Revitalization Plan for
                                             Sunshine Addition
O13-3212                          07-17-2013 Trilogy Multi-residential Urban
                                             Revitalization Area
O17-3230                          09-20-2017 Prairie Trail Multi-family Urban
                                             Revitalization Area
R21-4705                          11-17-2021 Trilogy Multi-Residential Urban
                                             Revitalization Area
R21-4706                          11-17-2021 Prairie Trail Multi-Family Urban
                                             Revitalization Plan
 
CHAPTER 11
HOTEL/MOTEL TAX
 
11.01 Tax Imposed 11.02 Tax Exemption
 
11.01   TAX IMPOSED.
A tax is hereby imposed upon the sales price from the renting of any and all
rooms, apartments, or sleeping quarters in any lodging within the City limits,
at a rate of seven percent of such sales price derived from the renting of a
room, apartment, or sleeping quarters. The revenues derived from said tax are
to be used for any purposes permitted by law, including, but not limited to:
   1.   For the acquisition of sites for, and the construction, improvement,
enlarging, equipping, repair, operation, or maintenance of, recreation,
convention, cultural, or entertainment facilities;
   2.   For the payment of principal and interest, when due, on bonds or other
evidence of indebtedness issued by the City, for those recreation, convention,
cultural, or entertainment facilities; and
   3.   For the promotion and encouragement of tourist and convention business
in the City and surrounding areas.
11.02   TAX EXEMPTION.
All of the following are exempted from the provisions of this chapter and from
the computation of any amount of tax imposed by Section 11.01:
   1.   The sales price from the renting of lodging to a person where the
lodging is rented by the same person for a period of more than 31 consecutive
days, except as provided in Subsection 2 of this section.
   2.   The sales price from the renting of lodging to a person where the
lodging is rented by the same person for the period beginning after 90
consecutive days of rental by such person, if the rental is a room, apartment,
or sleeping quarter in a hotel, motel, inn, public lodging house, or rooming
house, or in any place where sleeping accommodations are furnished to a
transient guest.
   3.   The sales price of lodging furnished to the guests of a religious
institution if the property is exempt under Section 427.1[8] of the Code of
Iowa, and the purpose of renting is to provide a place for a religious retreat
or function and not a place for transient guests generally.
   4.   The sales price from the renting of sleeping rooms in dormitories and
in memorial unions at all universities and colleges located in the City.
   5.   The sales price of lodging furnished to the guests of a nonprofit
lodging provider and the purpose of renting is to provide a place for the
friends and family of a hospital patient during a time of medical need of the
patient and the length of stay is based upon the needs of the friends, family,
or patient. For purposes of this subsection, “nonprofit lodging provider” means
a nonprofit entity which is exempt from federal income taxation pursuant to
Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code that maintains an established
facility that provides lodging to friends and family of a hospital patient
during a time of medical need of the patient.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 423A.5)
CHAPTER 15
MAYOR
 
15.01 Term of Office    15.04 Compensation
15.02 Powers and Duties 15.05 Voting
15.03 Appointments
 
15.01   TERM OF OFFICE.
The Mayor is elected for a term of four years.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 376.2)
15.02   POWERS AND DUTIES.
The powers and duties of the Mayor are as follows:
   1.   Chief Executive Officer. Act as the chief executive officer of the City
and presiding officer of the Council, supervise all departments of the City,
except for supervisory duties delegated to the City Manager, give direction to
department heads concerning the functions of the departments, and have the
power to examine all functions of the municipal departments, their records and
to call for special reports from department heads at any time.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.14[1])
   2.   Proclamation of Emergency. Have authority to take command of the police
and govern the City by proclamation, upon making a determination that a time of
emergency or public danger exists. Within the City limits, the Mayor has all
the powers conferred upon the Sheriff to suppress disorders.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.14[2])
   3.   Special Meetings. Call special meetings of the Council when the Mayor
deems such meetings necessary to the interests of the City.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.14[1])
   4.   Mayor’s Veto. Sign, veto, or take no action on an ordinance, amendment,
or resolution passed by the Council. The Mayor may veto an ordinance,
amendment, or resolution within 14 days after passage. The Mayor shall explain
the reasons for the veto in a written message to the Council at the time of the
veto.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.5 and 380.6[2])
   5.   Reports to Council. Make such oral or written reports to the Council as
required. These reports shall concern municipal affairs generally, the
municipal departments, and recommendations suitable for Council action.
   6.   Negotiations. Represent the City in all negotiations properly entered
into in accordance with law or ordinance. The Mayor shall not represent the
City where this duty is specifically delegated to another officer by law,
ordinance, or Council direction.
   7.   Contracts. Whenever authorized by the Council, sign contracts on behalf
of the City.
   8.   Professional Services. Upon order of the Council, secure for the City
such specialized and professional services not already available to the City.
In executing the order of the Council, the Mayor shall act in accordance with
this Code of Ordinances and the laws of the State.
   9.   Licenses and Permits. Sign all licenses and permits that have been
granted by the Council, except those designated by law or ordinance to be
issued by another municipal officer.
   10.   Nuisances. Issue written order for removal, at public expense, any
nuisance for which no person can be found responsible and liable.
   11.   Absentee Officer. Make appropriate provision that duties of any
absentee officer be carried on during such absence.
15.03   APPOINTMENTS.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.4)
   1.   The following appointments shall be made by the Mayor:
      A.   Mayor Pro Tem
      B.   Water Appeal Board
      C.   Zoning Board of Adjustment
   2.   The following appointments shall be made by the Mayor with Council
approval:
      A.   Library Board of Trustees
      B.   Parks and Recreation Board
      C.   Museum Board of Trustees
      D.   Housing Review Board
      E.   Recreation Trails Board
      F.   Crossroads Pavilion Board
      G.   Cemetery Board
      H.   Police Chief
      I.   Ambulance Service Director and Assistant Director
15.04   COMPENSATION.
The salary of the Mayor is currently $4,800.00 per year, which shall be paid on
an annual basis for services rendered in the preceding year. Effective January
1, 2026, the salary of the Mayor will be $6,360.00 per year.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13(8))
(Section 15.04 – Ord._O25-3300 – Oct. 25 Supp.)
15.05   VOTING.
The Mayor is not a member of the Council and shall not vote as a member of the
Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.4)
CHAPTER 16
MAYOR PRO TEM
 
16.01 Vice President of Council 16.03 Voting Rights
16.02 Powers and Duties         16.04 Compensation
 
16.01   VICE PRESIDENT OF COUNCIL.
The Mayor shall appoint a member of the Council as Mayor Pro Tem, who shall
serve as vice president of the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.14[3])
16.02   POWERS AND DUTIES.
Except for the limitations otherwise provided herein, the Mayor Pro Tem shall
perform the duties of the Mayor in cases of absence or inability of the Mayor
to perform such duties. In the exercise of the duties of the office the Mayor
Pro Tem shall not have power to appoint, employ, or discharge from employment
officers or employees that the Mayor has the power to appoint, employ, or
discharge without the approval of the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.14[3])
16.03   VOTING RIGHTS.
The Mayor Pro Tem shall have the right to vote as a member of the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.14[3])
16.04   COMPENSATION.
If the Mayor Pro Tem performs the duties of the Mayor during the Mayor’s
absence or disability for a continuous period of 15 days or more, the Mayor Pro
Tem may be paid for that period the compensation as determined by the Council,
based upon the Mayor Pro Tem’s performance of the Mayor’s duties and upon the
compensation of the Mayor.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[8])
CHAPTER 17
CITY COUNCIL
 
17.01 Number and Term of Council 17.04 Council Meetings
17.02 Powers and Duties          17.05 Appointments
17.03 Exercise of Power          17.06 Compensation
 
17.01   NUMBER AND TERM OF COUNCIL.
The Council consists of two Council Members elected at large and one Council
Member from each of three wards as established by this Code of Ordinances,
elected for terms of four years.
17.02   POWERS AND DUTIES.
The powers and duties of the Council include, but are not limited to the
following:
   1.   General. All powers of the City are vested in the Council except as
otherwise provided by law or ordinance.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.2[1])
   2.   Wards. By ordinance, the Council may divide the City into wards based
upon population, change the boundaries of wards, eliminate wards, or create new
wards.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[7])
   3.   Fiscal Authority. The Council shall apportion and appropriate all
funds, and audit and allow all bills, accounts, payrolls, and claims, and order
payment thereof. It shall make all assessments for the cost of street
improvements, sidewalks, sewers, and other work, improvement, or repairs that
may be specially assessed.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.2[1], 384.16 and 384.38[1])
   4.   Public Improvements. The Council shall make all orders for the
construction of any improvements, bridges, or buildings.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.2[1])
   5.   Contracts. The Council shall make or authorize the making of all
contracts. No contract shall bind or be obligatory upon the City unless
approved by the Council through ordinance, the City budget or by resolution.
(Code of Iowa, Ch. 26.10)
   6.   Employees. The Council shall authorize, by resolution, the number,
duties, term of office, and compensation of employees or officers not otherwise
provided for by State law or the Code of Ordinances.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
   7.   Setting Compensation for Elected Officers. By ordinance, the Council
shall prescribe the compensation of the Mayor, Council members, and other
elected City officers, but a change in the compensation of the Mayor does not
become effective during the term in which the change is adopted, and the
Council shall not adopt such an ordinance changing the compensation of any
elected officer during the months of November and December in the year of a
regular City election. A change in the compensation of Council members becomes
effective for all Council members at the beginning of the term of the Council
members elected at the election next following the change in compensation.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[8])
17.03   EXERCISE OF POWER.
The Council shall exercise a power only by the passage of a motion, a
resolution, an amendment, or an ordinance in the following manner:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.3[1])
   1.   Action by Council. Passage of an ordinance, amendment, or resolution
requires a majority vote of all of the members of the Council. Passage of a
motion requires a majority vote of a quorum of the Council. A resolution must
be passed to spend public funds in excess of $100,000.00 on a public
improvement project, or to accept public improvements and facilities upon their
completion. Each Council member’s vote on a measure must be recorded. A measure
that fails to receive sufficient votes for passage shall be considered
defeated.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.4)
   2.   Overriding Mayor’s Veto. Within 30 days after the Mayor’s veto, the
Council may pass the measure again by a vote of not less than two-thirds of all
of the members of the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.6[2])
   3.   Measures Become Effective. Measures passed by the Council become
effective in one of the following ways:
      A.   An ordinance or amendment signed by the Mayor becomes effective when
the ordinance or a summary of the ordinance is published, unless a subsequent
effective date is provided within the ordinance or amendment.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.6[1a])
      B.   A resolution signed by the Mayor becomes effective immediately upon
signing.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.6[1b])
      C.   A motion becomes effective immediately upon passage of the motion by
the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.6[1c])
      D.   If the Mayor vetoes an ordinance, amendment, or resolution and the
Council repasses the measure after the Mayor’s veto, a resolution becomes
effective immediately upon repassage, and an ordinance or amendment becomes a
law when the ordinance or a summary of the ordinance is published, unless a
subsequent effective date is provided within the ordinance or amendment.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.6[2])
      E.   If the Mayor takes no action on an ordinance, amendment, or
resolution, a resolution becomes effective 14 days after the date of passage,
and an ordinance or amendment becomes law when the ordinance or a summary of
the ordinance is published, but not sooner than 14 days after the date of
passage, unless a subsequent effective date is provided within the ordinance or
amendment.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.6[3])
“All of the members of the Council” refers to all of the seats of the Council
including a vacant seat and a seat where the member is absent, but does not
include a seat where the Council member declines to vote by reason of a
conflict of interest.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.1[a])
17.04   COUNCIL MEETINGS.
Procedures for giving notice of meetings of the Council and other provisions
regarding the conduct of Council meetings are contained in Section 5.06 of this
Code of Ordinances. Additional particulars relating to Council meetings are the
following:
   1.   Regular Meetings. The regular meetings of the Council are on the first
and third Wednesday of each month at 4:30 p.m. in the Council Chambers at the
Sheldon Community Services Center, unless otherwise directed by resolution of
the Council.
   2.   Special Meetings. Special meetings shall be held upon call of the Mayor
or upon the request of a majority of the members of the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[5])
   3.   Quorum. A majority of all Council members is a quorum.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[1])
   4.   Rules of Procedure. The Council shall determine its own rules and
maintain records of its proceedings.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[5])
   5.   Compelling Attendance. Any three members of the Council can compel the
attendance of the absent members at any regular, adjourned, or duly called
meeting, by serving a written notice upon the absent members to attend at once.
17.05   APPOINTMENTS.
The Council shall appoint the following officials and prescribe their powers,
duties, compensation, and term of office:
   1.   City Clerk
   2.   City Attorney
   3.   City Manager
   4.   Deputy Clerk
   5.   Public Works Director
   6.   Airport Commission
   7.   Water Superintendent
   8.   Sewer Superintendent
   9.   Planning and Zoning Commission
   10.   Fire Chief
   11.   Community Development Director
17.06   COMPENSATION.
The salary of each Council member is currently $2,600.00 annually, payable
annually for services rendered in the preceding year. Effective January 1,
2026, the salary shall be $2,756.00 annually.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13(8))
(Section 17.06 – Ord._O25-3299 – Oct. 25 Supp.)
CHAPTER 18
CITY CLERK
 
18.01 Appointment and Compensation 18.08 Records
18.02 Powers and Duties: General   18.09 Attendance at Meetings
18.03 Publication of Minutes       18.10 Licenses and Permits
18.04 Recording Measures           18.11 Notification of Appointments
18.05 Other Publications           18.12 Elections
18.06 Authentication               18.13 City Seal
18.07 Certification
 
18.01   APPOINTMENT AND COMPENSATION.
The Council shall appoint by majority vote a City Clerk to serve at the
discretion of the Council. The Clerk shall receive such compensation as
established by resolution of the Council. The Clerk shall be appointed and/or
removed by the Council upon the recommendation of the City Manager.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[3])
18.02   POWERS AND DUTIES: GENERAL.
The Clerk or, in the Clerk’s absence or inability to act, the Deputy Clerk has
the powers and duties as provided in this chapter, this Code of Ordinances, and
the law. The Clerk shall perform all such duties under the direction of the
City Manager.
18.03   PUBLICATION OF MINUTES.
Within 15 days following a regular or special meeting of the Council, the Clerk
shall cause the minutes of the proceedings of the Council, including the total
expenditure from each City fund, to be delivered to a newspaper of general
circulation in the City for publication. The publication shall include a list
of all claims allowed and a summary of all receipts and shall show the gross
amount of the claims.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13(6))
(Section 18.03 – Ord._O24-3288.4 – Sep. 24 Supp.)
18.04   RECORDING MEASURES.
The Clerk shall promptly record each measure considered by the Council and
record a statement with the measure, where applicable, indicating whether the
Mayor signed, vetoed, or took no action on the measure, and whether the measure
was repassed after the Mayor’s veto.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.7[1 and 2])
18.05   OTHER PUBLICATIONS.
The Clerk shall cause to be published all ordinances, enactments, proceedings,
and official notices requiring publication as follows:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.3)
   1.   Time. If notice of an election, hearing, or other official action is
required by this Code of Ordinances or law, the notice must be published at
least once, not less than four or more than 20 days before the date of the
election, hearing, or other action, unless otherwise provided by law.
   2.   Manner of Publication. A publication required by this Code of
Ordinances or law must be in a newspaper published at least once weekly and
having general circulation in the City.
18.06   AUTHENTICATION.
The Clerk shall authenticate all measures except motions with the Clerk’s
signature, certifying the time and manner of publication when required.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.7[4])
18.07   CERTIFICATION.
The Clerk shall certify all measures establishing any zoning district, building
lines, or fire limits and a plat showing the district, lines, or limits to the
recorder of the County containing the affected parts of the City.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.11)
18.08   RECORDS.
The Clerk shall maintain the specified City records in the following manner:
   1.   Ordinances and Codes. Maintain copies of all effective City ordinances
and codes for public use.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.7[5])
   2.   Custody. Have custody and be responsible for the safekeeping of all
writings or documents in which the City is a party in interest unless otherwise
specifically directed by law or ordinance.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
   3.   Maintenance. Maintain all City records and documents (or accurate
reproductions) for at least five years except that ordinances, resolutions,
Council proceedings, records, and documents (or accurate reproductions)
relating to the issuance, cancellation, transfer, redemption, or replacement of
public bonds or obligations shall be kept for at least 11 years following the
final maturity of the bonds or obligations. Ordinances, resolutions, Council
proceedings, records, and documents (or accurate reproductions) relating to
real property transactions shall be maintained permanently.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[3 and 5])
   4.   Provide Copy. Furnish upon request to any municipal officer a copy of
any record, paper, or public document under the Clerk’s control when it may be
necessary to such officer in the discharge of such officer’s duty; furnish a
copy to any citizen when requested upon payment of the fee set by Council
resolution; under the direction of the Mayor or other authorized officer, affix
the seal of the City to those public documents or instruments that by this Code
of Ordinances are required to be attested by the affixing of the seal.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4 and 5] and 380.7[5])
   5.   Filing of Communications. Keep and file all communications and
petitions directed to the Council or to the City generally. The Clerk shall
endorse thereon the action of the Council taken upon matters considered in such
communications and petitions.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
18.09   ATTENDANCE AT MEETINGS.
The Clerk shall attend all regular and special Council meetings, and, at the
direction of the City Manager, the Clerk shall attend meetings of committees,
boards, and commissions. The Clerk shall record and preserve a correct record
of the proceedings of such meetings.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
18.10   LICENSES AND PERMITS.
The Clerk shall issue, or revoke licenses and permits when authorized by this
Code of Ordinances, and keep a record of licenses and permits issued which
shall show date of issuance, license or permit number, official receipt number,
name of person to whom issued, term of license or permit, and purpose for which
issued.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
18.11   NOTIFICATION OF APPOINTMENTS.
The Clerk shall inform all persons appointed by the Mayor or Council to offices
in the City government of their positions and the time at which they shall
assume the duties of their offices.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
18.12   ELECTIONS.
The Clerk shall perform the duties relating to elections in accordance with
Chapter 376 of the Code of Iowa.
18.13   CITY SEAL.
The City seal is in the custody of the Clerk and shall be attached by the Clerk
to all transcripts, orders, and certificates that it may be necessary or proper
to authenticate. The City seal is circular in form, in the center of which are
the words “CORPORATE SEAL” and around the margin of which are the words “CITY
OF SHELDON, IOWA.”
CHAPTER 19
CITY TREASURER
 
19.01 Appointment  19.03 Duties Of Treasurer
19.02 Compensation 19.04 Boards and Commissions
 
19.01   APPOINTMENT.
The City Clerk is the Treasurer and performs all functions required of the
position of Treasurer.
19.02   COMPENSATION.
The Clerk receives no additional compensation for performing the duties of the
Treasurer.
19.03   DUTIES OF TREASURER.
The duties of the Treasurer are as follows:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
   1.   Custody of Funds. Be responsible for the safe custody of all funds of
the City in the manner provided by law and Council direction.
   2.   Record of Fund. Keep the record of each fund separate.
   3.   Record Receipts. Keep an accurate record of all money or securities
received by the Treasurer on behalf of the City and specify the date, from
whom, and for what purpose received.
   4.   Record Disbursements. Keep an accurate account of all disbursements,
money, or property, specifying date, to whom, and from what fund paid.
   5.   Special Assessments. Keep a separate account of all money received by
the Treasurer from special assessments.
   6.   Deposit Funds. Upon receipt of moneys to be held in the Treasurer’s
custody and belonging to the City, deposit the same in depositories selected by
the Council.
   7.   Reconciliation. Reconcile depository statements with the Treasurer’s
books and certify monthly to the Council the balance of cash and investments of
each fund and amounts received and disbursed.
   8.   Debt Service. Keep a register of all bonds outstanding and record all
payments of interest and principal.
   9.   Other Duties. Perform such other duties as specified by the Council by
resolution or ordinance.
19.04   BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS.
The City Treasurer is the Treasurer of all boards and commissions and pays out
all money under control of the respective boards and commissions on orders
signed by the respective chairs and secretaries of such boards and commissions
but, receives no additional compensation for such services.
CHAPTER 20
CITY ATTORNEY
 
20.01 Appointment and Compensation 20.06 Provide Legal Opinion
20.02 Attorney for City            20.07 Attendance at Council Meetings
20.03 Power of Attorney            20.08 Prepare Documents
20.04 Ordinance Preparation        20.09 Representation of City Employees
20.05 Review and Comment
 
20.01   APPOINTMENT AND COMPENSATION.
The Council shall appoint by majority vote a City Attorney to serve at the
discretion of the Council. The City Attorney shall receive such compensation as
established by resolution of the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
20.02   ATTORNEY FOR CITY.
The City Attorney shall act as attorney for the City in all matters affecting
the City’s interest and appear on behalf of the City before any court,
tribunal, commission, or board. The City Attorney shall prosecute or defend all
actions and proceedings when so requested by the Mayor or Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
20.03   POWER OF ATTORNEY.
The City Attorney shall sign the name of the City to all appeal bonds and to
all other bonds or papers of any kind that may be essential to the prosecution
of any cause in court, and when so signed the City shall be bound upon the
same.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
20.04   ORDINANCE PREPARATION.
The City Attorney shall prepare those ordinances that the Council may desire
and direct to be prepared and report to the Council upon all such ordinances
before their final passage by the Council and publication.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
20.05   REVIEW AND COMMENT.
The City Attorney shall, upon request, make a report to the Council giving an
opinion on all contracts, documents, resolutions, or ordinances submitted to or
coming under the City Attorney’s notice.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
20.06   PROVIDE LEGAL OPINION.
The City Attorney shall give advice or a written legal opinion on City
contracts and recommend alterations before they become binding upon the City.
The City Attorney shall also give advice or a written legal opinion on all
questions of law relating to City matters submitted by the Mayor, Mayor Pro
Tem, a majority of Council members, or the City Manager.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
20.07   ATTENDANCE AT COUNCIL MEETINGS.
The City Attorney shall attend meetings of the Council at the request of the
Mayor or Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
20.08   PREPARE DOCUMENTS.
The City Attorney shall, upon request, formulate drafts for contracts, forms,
and other writings that may be required for the use of the City.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
20.09   REPRESENTATION OF CITY EMPLOYEES.
The City Attorney shall not appear on behalf of any City officer or employee
before any court or tribunal for the purely private benefit of said officer or
employee. The City Attorney shall, however, if directed by the Council, appear
to defend any City officer or employee in any cause of action arising out of or
in the course of the performance of the duties of his or her office or
employment.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 670.8)
CHAPTER 21
CITY MANAGER
 
21.01 Office Created; Appointment; Term 21.03 Powers and Duties
21.02 Compensation                      21.04 Certain Officers Not to Be Under
                                        Jurisdiction
 
21.01   OFFICE CREATED; APPOINTMENT; TERM.
The office of City Manager is hereby created, which shall be filled by
appointment of the Council. The appointee shall hold office for an indefinite
term, subject to applicable employment agreement.
21.02   COMPENSATION.
The compensation of the City Manager shall be such amount as may from time to
time be fixed by resolution of the Council.
21.03   POWERS AND DUTIES.
The City Manager is directly responsible to the Council for the administration
of municipal affairs as set forth herein. All departments and agencies shall
report and be responsible to the City Manager. All departmental activity
requiring the attention of the Council shall be brought before that body by the
City Manager, and all Council policy concerning administration shall be
coordinated through the City Manager. The powers and duties of the City Manager
include the following:
   1.   Enforcement of all City laws and regulations as directed by the
Council;
   2.   Administration of City policies established by the Council;
   3.   Continuous study of the City government’s operating procedures,
organization and facilities, and recommending fiscal and other policies to the
Mayor and Council whenever necessary;
   4.   Preparation and administration of the City’s annual operating budget;
   5.   Supervision of the City’s administrative policies and procedures
including personnel and purchasing.
   6.   Keeping the Mayor and Council informed on the progress of its programs
and the status of its policies.
   7.   Coordinating and directing all City services provided through the
various departments.
   8.   Appointment and removal of City employees in accordance with Council
policies and ordinances regarding this activity.
   9.   Perform such other duties as may hereafter be directed by the Council
and the Mayor, such other duties to be compatible to the City Manager’s office
and permitted under law.
21.04   CERTAIN OFFICERS NOT TO BE UNDER JURISDICTION.
The City Attorney, Director of Sheldon Chamber and Development Corporation, and
Fire Chief are not under the jurisdiction of the City Manager but are directly
responsible to the Council.
CHAPTER 22
LIBRARY BOARD OF TRUSTEES
 
22.01 Public Library                   22.07 Nonresident Use
22.02 Library Trustees                 22.08 Expenditures
22.03 Qualifications of Trustees       22.09 Annual Report
22.04 Organization of the Board        22.10 Injury to Books or Property
22.05 Powers and Duties                22.11 Theft
22.06 Contracting with Other Libraries 22.12 Notice Posted
 
22.01   PUBLIC LIBRARY.
The public library for the City is known as the Sheldon Public Library. It is
referred to in this chapter as the Library.
22.02   LIBRARY TRUSTEES.
The Board of Trustees of the Library, hereinafter referred to as the Board,
consists of seven resident members. All members are to be appointed by the
Mayor with the approval of the Council.
22.03   QUALIFICATIONS OF TRUSTEES.
All members of the Board shall be bona fide citizens and residents of the City.
Members shall be over the age of 18 years.
22.04   ORGANIZATION OF THE BOARD.
The organization of the Board shall be as follows:
   1.   Term of Office. All appointments to the Board shall be for six years,
except to fill vacancies. Each term shall commence on July 1. Appointments
shall be made every two years of one-third the total number or as near as
possible, to stagger the terms.
   2.   Vacancies. The position of any Trustee shall be vacated if such member
moves permanently from the City and shall be deemed vacated if such member is
absent from six consecutive regular meetings of the Board, except in the case
of sickness or temporary absence from the City. Vacancies in the Board shall be
filled in the same manner as an original appointment except that the new
Trustee shall fill out the unexpired term for which the appointment is made.
   3.   Compensation. Trustees shall receive no compensation for their
services.
22.05   POWERS AND DUTIES.
The Board shall have and exercise the following powers and duties:
   1.   Officers. To meet and elect from its members a President, a Secretary,
and such other officers as it deems necessary. The City Treasurer shall serve
as Board Treasurer, but shall not be a member of the Board.
   2.   Physical Plant. To have charge, control, and supervision of the
Library, its appurtenances, fixtures, and rooms containing the same.
   3.   Charge of Affairs. To direct and control all affairs of the Library.
   4.   Hiring of Personnel. To employ a Library Director, and authorize the
Library Director to employ such assistants and employees as may be necessary
for the proper management of the Library, and fix their compensation; provided,
however, prior to such employment, the compensation of the Library Director,
assistants, and employees shall have been fixed and approved by a majority of
the members of the Board voting in favor thereof.
   5.   Removal of Personnel. To remove the Library Director, by a two-thirds
vote of the Board, and provide procedures for the removal of the assistants or
employees for misdemeanor, incompetence, or inattention to duty, subject
however, to the provisions of Chapter 35C of the Code of Iowa.
   6.   Purchases. To select, or authorize the Library Director to select, and
make purchases of books, pamphlets, magazines, periodicals, papers, maps,
journals, other Library materials, furniture, fixtures, stationery, and
supplies for the Library within budgetary limits set by the Board.
   7.   Use by Nonresidents. To authorize the use of the Library by
nonresidents and to fix charges therefor unless a contract for free service
exists.
   8.   Rules and Regulations. To make and adopt, amend, modify, or repeal
rules and regulations, not inconsistent with this Code of Ordinances and the
law, for the care, use, government, and management of the Library and the
business of the Board, fixing and enforcing penalties for violations.
   9.   Expenditures. To have exclusive control of the expenditure of all funds
allocated for Library purposes by the Council, and of all moneys available by
gift or otherwise for the erection of Library buildings, and of all other
moneys belonging to the Library including fines and rentals collected under the
rules of the Board.
   10.   Gifts. To accept gifts of real property, personal property, or mixed
property, and devices, and bequests, including trust funds; to take the title
to said property in the name of the Library; to execute deeds and bills of sale
for the conveyance of said property; and to expend the funds received by them
from such gifts, for the improvement of the Library.
   11.   Enforce the Performance of Conditions on Gifts. To enforce the
performance of conditions on gifts, donations, devices, and bequests accepted
by the City by action against the Council.
   12.   Record of Proceedings. To keep a record of its proceedings.
   13.   County Historical Association. To have authority to make agreements
with the local County historical association where such exists, and to set
apart the necessary room and to care for such articles as may come into the
possession of the association. The Trustees are further authorized to purchase
necessary receptacles and materials for the preservation and protection of such
articles as are in their judgment of a historical and educational nature and
pay for the same out of funds allocated for Library purposes.
22.06   CONTRACTING WITH OTHER LIBRARIES.
The Board has power to contract with other libraries in accordance with the
following:
   1.   Contracting. The Board may contract with any other boards of trustees
of free public libraries, with any other city, school corporation, private or
semiprivate organization, institution of higher learning, township, or County,
or with the trustees of any County library district for the use of the Library
by their respective residents.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.5 and Ch. 28E)
   2.   Termination. Such a contract may be terminated at any time by mutual
consent of the contracting parties. It also may be terminated by a majority
vote of the electors represented by either of the contracting parties. Such a
termination proposition shall be submitted to the electors by the governing
body of a contracting party on a written petition of not less than five percent
in number of the electors who voted for governor in the territory of the
contracting party at the last general election. The petition must be presented
to the governing body not less than 40 days before the election. The
proposition may be submitted at any election provided by law which is held in
the territory of the party seeking to terminate the contract.
22.07   NONRESIDENT USE.
The Board may authorize the use of the Library by persons not residents of the
City or County in any one or more of the following ways:
   1.   Lending. By lending the books or other materials of the Library to
nonresidents on the same terms and conditions as to residents of the City, or
County, or upon payment of a special nonresident Library fee.
   2.   Depository. By establishing depositories of Library books or other
materials to be loaned to nonresidents.
   3.   Bookmobiles. By establishing bookmobiles or a traveling library so that
books or other Library materials may be loaned to nonresidents.
   4.   Branch Library. By establishing branch libraries for lending books or
other Library materials to nonresidents.
22.08   EXPENDITURES.
All money appropriated by the Council for the operation and maintenance of the
Library shall be set aside in an account for the Library. Expenditures shall be
paid for only on orders of the Board, signed by its President and Secretary.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.20 and 392.5)
22.09   ANNUAL REPORT.
The Board shall make a report to the Council immediately after the close of the
fiscal year. This report shall contain statements as to the condition of the
Library, the number of books added, the number circulated, the amount of fines
collected, and the amount of money expended in the maintenance of the Library
during the year, together with such further information as may be required by
the Council.
22.10   INJURY TO BOOKS OR PROPERTY.
It is unlawful for a person willfully, maliciously or wantonly to tear, deface,
mutilate, injure or destroy, in whole or in part, any newspaper, periodical,
book, map, pamphlet, chart, picture, or other property belonging to the Library
or reading room.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.1)
22.11   THEFT.
No person shall take possession or control of property of the Library with the
intent to deprive the Library thereof.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 714.1)
22.12   NOTICE POSTED.
There shall be posted in clear public view within the Library notices informing
the public of the following:
   1.   Failure to Return. Failure to return Library materials for two months
or more after the date the person agreed to return the Library materials, or
failure to return Library equipment for one month or more after the date the
person agreed to return the Library equipment, is evidence of intent to deprive
the owner, provided a reasonable attempt, including the mailing by restricted
certified mail of notice that such material or equipment is overdue and
criminal actions will be taken, has been made to reclaim the materials or
equipment.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 714.5)
   2.   Detention and Search. Persons concealing Library materials may be
detained and searched pursuant to law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 808.12)
CHAPTER 23
PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION
 
23.01 Planning and Zoning Commission 23.04 Compensation
23.02 Term of Office                 23.05 Powers and Duties
23.03 Vacancies
 
23.01   PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION.
The City Planning and Zoning Commission, hereinafter referred to as the
Commission, consists of nine members, seven of whom are residents of the City.
The resident members shall be appointed by the Council and shall not hold any
elective office in the City government. The additional two members of the
Commission are one member of the County Boards of Supervisors, or a person
designated by the Boards, and one resident of the area outside the City over
which the zoning jurisdiction of the City has been extended, both jointly
appointed by the County Boards of Supervisors of the affected counties.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 414.6, 414.23, and 392.1)
23.02   TERM OF OFFICE.
The term of office of the members of the Commission shall be five years. The
terms of not more than one-third of the members will expire in any one year.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)
23.03   VACANCIES.
If any vacancy exists on the Commission, caused by resignation or otherwise, a
successor for the residue of the term shall be appointed in the same manner as
the original appointee.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)
23.04   COMPENSATION.
All members of the Commission shall serve without compensation, except their
actual expenses, which shall be subject to the approval of the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)
23.05   POWERS AND DUTIES.
The Commission shall have and exercise the following powers and duties:
   1.   Selection of Officers. The Commission shall choose annually at its
first regular meeting one of its members to act as Chairperson and another as
Vice Chairperson, who shall perform all the duties of the Chairperson during
the Chairperson’s absence or disability.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)
   2.   Adopt Rules and Regulations. The Commission shall adopt such rules and
regulations governing its organization and procedure as it may deem necessary.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)
   3.   Zoning. The Commission shall have and exercise all the powers and
duties and privileges in establishing the City zoning regulations and other
related matters and may from time to time recommend to the Council amendments,
supplements, changes, or modifications, all as provided by Chapter 414 of the
Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 414.6)
   4.   Recommendations on Improvements. The design and proposed location of
public improvements shall be submitted to the Commission for its
recommendations prior to any actions being taken by the City for the
construction or placement of such improvements. Such requirements and
recommendations shall not act as a stay upon action for any such improvement if
the Commission, after 30 days’ written notice requesting such recommendations,
has failed to file the same.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)
   5.   Review and Comment on Plats. All plans, plats, or re-plats of
subdivisions or re-subdivisions of land in the City or adjacent thereto, laid
out in lots or plats with the streets, alleys, or other portions of the same
intended to be dedicated to the public in the City, shall first be submitted to
the Commission and its recommendations obtained before approval by the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)
   6.   Fiscal Responsibilities. The Commission shall have full, complete, and
exclusive authority to expend, for and on behalf of the City, all sums of money
appropriated to it and to use and expend all gifts, donations, or payments that
are received by the City for City planning and zoning purposes.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)
   7.   Limitation on Entering Contracts. The Commission shall have no power to
contract debts beyond the amount of its original or amended appropriation as
approved by the Council for the present year.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)
   8.   Annual Report. The Commission shall each year make a report to the
Mayor and Council of its proceedings, with a full statement of its receipts and
disbursements and the progress of its work during the preceding fiscal year.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)
CHAPTER 24
PARKS AND RECREATION BOARD
 
24.01 Parks and Recreation Board Created 24.04 Reports
24.02 Board Organization                 24.05 Rules and Fees
24.03 Duties of the Board                24.06 Penalties
 
24.01   PARKS AND RECREATION BOARD CREATED.
A Parks and Recreation Board is hereby created to advise the Council on the
needed facilities to provide open space such as parks, playgrounds, and
community facilities for other forms of recreation. It shall also plan and
oversee City programs and encourage other programs to enhance the leisure time
activities of the City’s residents of all ages.
24.02   BOARD ORGANIZATION.
The Board shall consist of five members residing within the official zoning
districts of the City, appointed by the Mayor with the approval of the Council,
for overlapping terms of five years. The Board shall choose from its membership
a Chairperson, Vice Chairperson, and Secretary every two years. Members shall
serve without compensation but may receive reimbursement for expenses incurred
in the performance of their duties. Vacancies shall be filled in the same
manner as the original appointment for the balance of the term.
24.03   DUTIES OF THE BOARD.
In addition to its duty to make a plan for recreation and for the facilities
for recreation, and to update and revise these plans as required, the Board
shall make recommendations regarding properties devoted to parks and
recreation. The Board shall work closely with various groups and organizations
such as the schools, community college and various volunteers to provide
recreational opportunities and services. The Board shall assist in the
development of the annual budget and proposed capital projects.
24.04   REPORTS.
The Board shall make written reports to the Council of its activities from time
to time as it deems advisable, or upon Council request.
24.05   RULES AND FEES.
The Board has the power to make rules and regulations for the use of parks or
other recreational facilities or for the conduct of recreation programs,
subject to rules as established by the Council. Such rules shall be either
posted on the facility or otherwise publicized in a manner to provide adequate
notice to the using public. The Board shall annually review all fees charged
for parks and recreation programs and recommend to the Council any changes. All
changes to fees shall be approved by resolution of the Council.
24.06   PENALTIES.  Violation of a Board rule which has been approved by the
Council may be cause for denial of a facility or participation in a program,
but such denial which extends more than one day may be appealed to the Board.
The violation may be prosecuted as a misdemeanor or a municipal infraction.
CHAPTER 25
MUSEUM BOARD OF TRUSTEES
 
25.01 Purpose                        25.06 Officers
25.02 Establishment of Museum        25.07 Powers and Duties
25.03 Composition; Appointment; Term 25.08 Reports
25.04 Vacancies                      25.09 Financial Procedures
25.05 Compensation
 
25.01   PURPOSE.
The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the establishment of a free
public museum for the City and for the creation and appointment of a City
Museum Board of Trustees, and to specify the Board’s powers and duties.
25.02   ESTABLISHMENT OF MUSEUM.
There is hereby established a free public museum for the City, to be known as
the Prairie Museum.
25.03   COMPOSITION; APPOINTMENT; TERM.
The Board of Trustees of the City Museum, hereinafter referred to as the Board,
consists of seven members residing within the Sheldon Community School
District. Such Board members shall be appointed by the Mayor with the approval
of the Council. All appointments to the Board are for five years except to fill
vacancies. Each term shall commence on July 1. Appointments are made in such a
manner as to stagger the terms so that, as nearly as possible, one-third of the
terms will expire every two years.
25.04   VACANCIES.
The position of any trustee shall be vacant if he or she moves permanently from
the school district or if he or she is absent from six consecutive regular
meetings of the Board except in cases of sickness or temporary absence from the
school district. Vacancies in the Board shall be filled by appointment of the
Mayor, with approval of the Council, and the new trustee shall fill out the
unexpired term for which the appointment is made.
25.05   COMPENSATION.
Trustees of the Prairie Museum shall serve without compensation but may receive
reimbursement for expenses incurred in the performance of their duties.
25.06   OFFICERS.
The Board shall elect every two years from its membership a Chairperson, Vice
Chairperson, and such other officers as it deems necessary. The City Clerk
shall serve as the Board Treasurer but shall not be a member of the Board.
25.07   POWERS AND DUTIES.
The Board shall have and exercise the following powers and duties:
   1.   To have charge, control and supervision of the public museum, its
appurtenances, fixtures, and rooms containing the same.
   2.   To direct and control all the affairs of the museum.
   3.   To make and adopt, amend, modify, or repeal rules and regulations not
inconsistent with ordinances and the law subject to approval by the Council,
for the use, government, and management of the museum and the business of the
Board. Such rules shall be either posted on the facility or otherwise
publicized in a manner to provide adequate notice to the using public.
   4.   To accept gifts or real property, personal property, or mixed property
and devices or bequests including trust funds; to take title to such property
in the name of the museum; and to expend the funds received by them from such
gifts for the improvement of the museum.
   5.   To have authority to make agreements with local and County historical
associations, where such exist, and to set apart the necessary room, and to
care for such articles as may come into the possession of the associations. The
trustees are further authorized to purchase necessary receptacles and materials
for the preservation and protection of such articles as are, in their judgment,
of a historical and educational nature and to pay for the same from funds
allocated for museum purposes by the Council.
   6.   To employ such staff as may be necessary for the proper management of
the museum, and to fix their compensation; provided, however, prior to such
employment, the matter shall have been approved by the Council.
   7.   To have exclusive control of the expenditure of all funds allocated for
museum purposes and of all moneys available by gift or otherwise, including
rentals collected, under the rules of the Board; subject to the limitation of
expenditures for salaries, supplies, contracts, and capital outlays set forth
in the annual budget provided by the Council for museum purposes.
   8.   To keep records of its proceedings.
25.08   REPORTS.
The Board shall make written reports to the Council of its activities from
time-to-time, as it deems advisable or upon Council request. Board revenues and
expenditures shall be reported monthly by the Clerk in the manner of other
departmental expenditures, and a copy shall be provided to each member of the
Board and in the Clerk’s report to the Council.
25.09   FINANCIAL PROCEDURES.
All money appropriated by the Council from the General Fund for the operation
and maintenance of the museum, and all receipts, shall be set aside in an
account for the museum. Purchasing shall follow the procedures established by
the Council for all departments of the City, and payments will be made by
warrant written by the Clerk-Treasurer for invoices submitted and approved by
the Board.
CHAPTER 26
AIRPORT COMMISSION
 
26.01 Airport Commission   26.05 Officers
26.02 Appointment and Term 26.06 Powers and Duties
26.03 Vacancies            26.07 Financial Reports
26.04 Compensation         26.08 Rules and Penalties
 
26.01   AIRPORT COMMISSION.
There is hereby created an Airport Commission consisting of five members. At
least three members shall be residents of the official zoning (including
extraterritorial) districts of the City, as established and defined in this
Code. The Commission shall include at least three persons who by profession,
occupation, training, or education have familiarity with the legal,
construction, business and economic development, and accounting professions or
with management experience. At least one elected City official (Mayor or City
Council member) may be appointed to serve as a voting member, but no more than
two.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 330.20)
26.02   APPOINTMENT AND TERM.
Commissioners shall be appointed by the Council for staggered terms of three
years. Each term shall commence on July 1. Members who are not elected City
officials (Mayor or Council members) will be limited to two consecutive full
terms and may be reappointed after a full one-year gap in service. Partial
terms will not count towards the two-term limit. Elected City officials who are
appointed to serve to the Commission are not subject to term limits and will be
appointed annually and their term on the Commission will immediately cease when
they are no longer elected City officials.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 330.20)
26.03   VACANCIES.
Vacancies shall be filled by appointment of the Council to fill out the
unexpired term for which the appointment was made.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 330.20)
26.04   COMPENSATION.
Members of the Commission shall serve without compensation.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 330.20)
26.05   OFFICERS.
The Commission shall elect from its own members a Chairperson, Vice
Chairperson, and Secretary who shall serve for such term as the Commission
shall determine.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 330.20)
26.06   POWERS AND DUTIES.
The Commission shall have and exercise the following powers and duties.
   1.   General. The Commission has all the powers in relation to airports
granted to cities under State law except powers to sell the airport.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 330.21)
   2.   Budget. The Commission shall annually certify the amount of tax to be
levied for airport purposes, and upon such certification the Council may
include all or a portion of said amount in its budget.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 330.21)
   3.   Funds. All funds derived from taxation or otherwise for airport
purposes shall be under the full and absolute control of the Commission for the
purposes prescribed by law, and shall be deposited with the Clerk to the credit
of the Airport Commission, and shall be disbursed only on the written orders of
the Airport Commission, including the payment of all indebtedness arising from
the acquisition and construction of airports and the maintenance, operation,
and extension thereof.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 330.21)
   4.   Fees For Use of Property. The Commission shall have the power to
establish fees, rents, concessions, and charges for use of the property and
services of the airport facilities and staff. It shall have the power to employ
a manager and such assistants and employees as it deems necessary, subject to
the amounts provided for such purpose by the Council through budgetary
appropriation.
   5.   Reports. The Commission shall make written reports to the Council of
its activities from time to time as it deems advisable or upon request of the
Council.
26.07   FINANCIAL REPORTS.
   1.   The Airport Commission shall immediately after the close of each
municipal fiscal year, file with the City Clerk a detailed and audited written
report of all money received and disbursed by the Commission during said fiscal
year, and shall publish a summary thereof in an official newspaper.
   2.   The Commission’s revenues and expenditures shall be reported monthly by
the Clerk in the manner of other departmental revenues and expenditures, and a
copy shall be provided to each member of the Commission and in the Clerk’s
report to the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 330.22)
26.08   RULES AND PENALTIES.
Every person using the airport, or entering upon airport property, shall comply
with the rules established by the Commission. Such rules shall be effective
after adoption, following notice and hearing in compliance with Section 362.3
of the Code of Iowa. Publication and posting of the rules shall be in two or
more prominent locations on airport property. Following notice to a person who
violates an operating rule of the Commission, or of State or federal aviation
law, and hearing on a charge of such violation, the Commission may deny a
person or persons charged the use of the airport or its facilities if it is
shown that the violation caused serious danger to other users or to property,
showed negligence, or that there had been a pattern of repeated violations such
as to eliminate the probability of inadvertence in committing the violation.
The denial order shall state a term not exceeding one year. Such rules shall
extend to the air space above the airport, the land within the City limits, and
the area within two miles of the boundaries of the airport, regardless of the
territorial limits of the airport or City, and as the Commission shall provide.
CHAPTER 27
CABLE REGULATORY COMMISSION
 
27.01 Purpose                      27.03 Powers and Duties
27.02 Appointment and Compensation 27.04 City Policy
 
27.01   PURPOSE.
The Council desires to assure full compliance with its cable franchise (See
Chapters 112 and 113), that the franchise be interpreted and applied to the
benefit of the City and its residents, that quality and updated services be
delivered throughout the City, and that the public interest be protected in all
matters relating to the cable services delivery system.
27.02   APPOINTMENT AND COMPENSATION.
The Council is the Cable Regulatory Commission and performs all functions
required for the position of the Commission. Council members receive no
additional compensation for performing the duties of the Commission.
27.03   POWERS AND DUTIES.
The Commission shall have the following powers and duties:
   1.   To keep abreast of developments in cable technologies, services, and
programming.
   2.   To become competent in cable regulation, finances, and standards of
operation.
   3.   To act as the local regulatory agent of the cable franchise.
   4.   To develop policies for the day-to-day regulation and administration of
the cable franchise.
   5.   To encourage cordial relations between cable subscribers and the local
cable manager and their staff.
   6.   To develop policies for handling and resolving subscriber complaints
which could not be resolved satisfactorily by the cable manager. Such
complaints shall be in writing. If either the subscriber or the local cable
manager are in disagreement with the decision of the Commission, the
dissatisfied party shall have the right to appeal to the Commission. In the
event the aggrieved party is in disagreement with the final decision of the
Commission, said party shall have the right to appeal to the Iowa District
Court.
   7.   To monitor the operation of the cable system.
   8.   To consider, discuss, and make decisions on issues regarding rates and
possible revocation procedures.
   9.   To resolve any matter relating to the cable franchise or system,
including the cable budget.
   10.   To consult with the local cable manager on the best updating of the
cable system, services, and programming.
   11.   To evaluate its own proceedings and actions and all cable-related
activities.
   12.   To submit an annual report to the Mayor regarding:
      A.   A.   The state of cable regulation;
      B.   B.   The state of cable services and technologies; and
      C.   C.   Any recommendations it may have for the future of cable in the
City.
   13.   To negotiate the terms and conditions of the cable television
franchise agreements, said agreements subject to final Council approval.
27.04   CITY POLICY.
All administrative, personnel, accounting, budgetary, and procurement policies
of the City shall govern the Commission in all of its operations.
CHAPTER 28
HOUSING REVIEW BOARD
 
28.01 Housing Review Board Created       28.06 Access to Monies and Assets
28.02 Composition, Appointment, and Term 28.07 Reports
28.03 Compensation and Fees              28.08 Cooperation and Coordination
28.04 Duties                             28.09 Non-Discrimination Statement
28.05 Authority
 
28.01   HOUSING REVIEW BOARD CREATED.
The Sheldon Housing Review Board is hereby created to:
   1.   Receive, review, evaluate, and approve or disapprove applications for
grants or loans from the Housing Fund of the City;
   2.   Otherwise determine eligibility to receive grants or loans from the
Housing Fund of the City;
   3.   Establish rules of procedure;
   4.   Develop criteria for the review and evaluation of applications for
grants or loans from the Housing Fund of the City consistent with the purpose
of the existence of such fund to make housing available in the City; and
   5.   Advise and make reports to the Council and other governmental or inter-
governmental agencies concerning the Housing Fund of the City and the use and
management of the monies therein.
28.02   COMPOSITION, APPOINTMENT, AND TERM.
The Sheldon Housing Review Board, hereinafter referred to as the SHRB, shall
consist of eight voting members, all citizens of the City, who shall be
appointed by the Mayor and approved by the Council. Members shall serve
staggered four-year terms. Each term shall commence January 1. In appointing
members to the Board, the Mayor shall select four persons who are officers of
lending institutions having offices in the City; three persons who by
profession, occupation, training, or education are familiar with the real
estate market and real estate values in the City, and one person who is a
member of the Council. Ex officio members of the SHRB shall be the City Manager
and a representative of the Sheldon Chamber and Development Corporation.
28.03   COMPENSATION AND FEES.
Members of the SHRB shall serve without compensation but may receive
reimbursement for expenses incurred in the performance of their duties. Members
of the SHRB may develop a schedule and charge fees to defray the operating
expenses of the Board.
28.04   DUTIES.
The duties of members of the SHRB shall be as follows:
   1.   Receive, review, evaluate, and approve or disapprove applications for
grants or loans from the Housing Fund.
   2.   Develop procedures, forms, and criteria for the processing and
evaluation of applications for grants or loans from the Housing Fund.
   3.   Issue letters of approval or disapproval as to each application for
grants or loans from the Housing Fund.
   4.   Appoint a chairman and secretary of the SHRB, keep minutes and records
of meetings, maintain, and store the minutes and records of the SHRB at City
Hall, and conduct all regular meetings of the SHRB at City Hall.
   5.   Keep up-to-date on State and federal government criteria to be used in
the review and evaluation of applications for grants or loans from the Housing
Fund.
   6.   Develop, make available, and disseminate to businesses, organizations,
and individuals in or serving the community an affirmative marketing plan
intended to promote the use of the Housing Fund so as to maximize benefits to
the community to be derived therefrom.
28.05   AUTHORITY.
The authority of the SHRB shall be such that the Board shall review and
evaluate applications for grants or loans from the Housing Fund independently
and objectively. The decisions of the SHRB concerning eligibility, and the
approval or disapproval of applications, shall be final. All approved
applications shall be subject to the availability of monies from the Housing
Fund for use in assisting the purchase of a particular housing unit or real
estate. The SHRB shall approve and record mortgages, financing statements,
security agreements, notes, or other applicable security or debt instruments to
secure the repayment of housing assistance monies paid on behalf of approved
applicants receiving grants or loans from the Housing Fund, and the City shall
be named as mortgagee, creditor, secured party, etc. therein. Further, the SHRB
shall cause such mortgages, financing statements, security agreements, notes,
or other applicable security or debt instruments to be promptly recorded or
otherwise to be perfected so as to establish the priority of the security
interest of the City as prior and superior to all other security interest which
are not purchase money security interests or otherwise entitled to a higher
priority.
28.06   ACCESS TO MONIES AND ASSETS.
The SHRB, its officers, agents, employees, etc., shall have no direct access to
the monies and assets of the Housing Fund. All monies received by the SHRB
shall be deposited in special accounts of the City established for such
purpose, and all expenses paid by the SHRB or disbursements made from the
monies or assets of the Housing Fund shall be pursuant to instruments drawn on
a special Housing Fund account of the City which shall require the signature of
the Mayor or the City Manager in addition to the signatures of any voting
members or officers of the SHRB.
28.07   REPORTS.
The SHRB shall make periodic reports of its deliberations, decisions, financial
status, and activities to the City and agencies of the State or federal
government, as required by law or requested by the Mayor or City Manager. The
SHRB shall also provide accounting information to the City's auditors for
purposes of the annual City audit.
28.08   COOPERATION AND COORDINATION.
The SHRB shall cooperate with the City Manager and other City staff and
employees in the coordination of meetings, activities, and deliberations so as
to provide for the most efficient and sensible management of City Hall
facilities and the scheduling of the use of such facilities. Further, the SHRB
shall cooperate with the City Manager in coordinating the use of other City
staff time in the preparation of documents, reports, correspondence, and the
matters to be prepared by City staff on behalf of the SHRB.
28.09   NON-DISCRIMINATION STATEMENT.
The Sheldon Housing Review Board shall follow applicable local, State, and
federal civil rights law.
CHAPTER 29
RECREATION TRAILS BOARD
 
29.01 Board Created                       29.05 Duties
29.02 Composition, Appointment, and Terms 29.06 Reports
29.03 Compensation                        29.07 Rules
29.04 Vacancies
 
29.01   BOARD CREATED.
A Recreation Trails Board is hereby created to advise the Council on the needed
facilities for building, creating, and maintaining recreational trails for the
City.
29.02   COMPOSITION, APPOINTMENT, AND TERMS.
The Board shall consist of nine members residing within the Sheldon Community
School District. Such Board members shall be appointed by the Mayor, with
approval by the City Council, for staggered terms of three years. The Board
shall choose its Chairman, Vice-Chairman, and Secretary on an annual basis.
29.03   COMPENSATION.
The members of the Board shall serve without compensation but may receive their
actual expenses.
29.04   VACANCIES.
Vacancies on the Board shall be filled in the same manner as the original
appointments.
29.05   DUTIES.
   1.   In addition to its duties to plan for development and maintaining a
recreational trail system in the City, the Board shall have authority over the
property and seasonal personnel devoted to the recreation trail facilities,
subject to the limitation of expenditures for salaries and supplies, contracts,
and capital outlays set forth in the annual budget provided by the Council for
recreation trails operations. The Board shall cooperate with the City Manager
and Public Works Director in the allotment of time of City employees for
recreational trail purposes.
   2.   The Board shall accept gifts of real property, personal property, mixed
property, devices, or bequests (including trust funds) to take title in the
name of the Recreational Trails Board, and shall expend the funds received by
them from such gifts for the improvement of the recreation trail.
   3.   The Board shall have exclusive control of the expenditure of all funds
allocated for recreation trail purposes and all monies available by gift or
otherwise under the rules of the Board, subject to the limitation of
expenditures for supplies, contracts, and capital outlays set forth in the
annual budget provided by the Council for recreational trail purposes.
29.06   REPORTS.
The Board shall make written reports to the Council of its activities from time
to time as it deems advisable or upon Council request. Its revenues and
expenditures shall be reported monthly by the Clerk in the manner of other
departmental expenditures, and a copy shall be provided to each member of the
Board and in the Clerk’s report to the Council. Budget requests shall be
submitted to the Council on or before January 1 of each year.
29.07   RULES.
The Board shall have power to make rules and regulations for the use of
recreation trails, subject to the approval of the rules by the Council. Such
rules shall be posted on the facility or otherwise publicized in a manner to
provide adequate notice to the using public. Violation of a Board rule which
has been approved by the Council and adopted by ordinance may be cause for
denial of use of the trail or participation in a program. The violation may be
prosecuted as a misdemeanor.
CHAPTER 30
CROSSROADS PAVILION BOARD
 
30.01 Board Created                  30.05 Responsibilities of the Board
30.02 Appointment and Qualifications 30.06 Responsibilities of the General
                                     Manager
30.03 Organization of the Board      30.07 Authority of the General Manager
30.04 Meetings and Minutes           30.08 Removal of Board Members
 
30.01   BOARD CREATED.
There is created a seven-member Crossroads Pavilion Board, hereinafter referred
to as the Board, for the purpose of making recommendations on the operation of
the Crossroads Pavilion consistent with the terms and provisions of this
chapter. Board members shall serve without compensation but may be reimbursed
for the actual expenses incurred in the performance of their office. The main
objective of the Board shall be to make recommendations on the operation of the
Crossroads Pavilion in a professional and businesslike manner so as to generate
optimum revenues from the facility, while minimizing the expenses. The Board’s
principal goal shall be to recommend ways to keep the operating subsidy from
general tax dollars to the lowest possible amount, while simultaneously
maximizing the facility’s beneficial impact on the City’s economy.
30.02   APPOINTMENT AND QUALIFICATIONS.
The Crossroads Pavilion Board shall consist of seven members. Five members
residing within the Sheldon Community School District or other individuals
having pertinent experience that will aid in the successful operation of the
Crossroads Pavilion shall be appointed by the Mayor to the Board, with the
approval of the Council. Two Council members shall be appointed by the Mayor to
the Board and said members shall have voting authority. The City Manager shall,
ex officio, be a non-voting member of the Board. All appointments to the Board
are for five years except to fill vacancies. Each term shall commence on July
1. Appointments are made in such a matter as to stagger the terms so that, as
nearly as possible, one third of the terms will expire every two years. Board
members shall be people who, by virtue of their background, education, and
experience, have demonstrated their ability to accept responsibility and to use
prudent judgement.
30.03   ORGANIZATION OF THE BOARD.  
As soon as possible after the appointment of the initial members, the Board
shall organize for the transaction of business, elect a chairperson, a vice-
chairperson, and such other officers as it deems necessary, and adopt bylaws
and regulations to govern the proceedings of the Board. The City Manager may
not be an officer of the Board. Four members of the Board shall constitute a
quorum for the transaction of business. All actions of the Board shall be by
either resolution or motion and the affirmative vote of a majority of the
members present shall be necessary for the passage of either action.
30.04   MEETINGS AND MINUTES.  
The Board will generally schedule at least one public meeting each month, or as
circumstances require. The notice of the meetings and the conduct of the
meetings shall comply with applicable open meetings laws. Minutes of each
meeting shall be kept, and all resolutions and minutes shall be open to public
inspection consistent with applicable open records laws.
30.05   RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE BOARD.  
The Board shall make recommendations to the Council and the Crossroads Pavilion
General Manager on the operation of the facility. Specifically, the Board shall
make recommendations on the following matters:
   1.   The rules and regulations for the operation of the facility.
   2.   The purchase, lease, sale, or exchange of personal property for the
benefit and efficient operation of the facility.
   3.   The rates and fees for the use of the facility and services.
   4.   Advertising within the facility and on behalf of the facility, and
events held therein.
   5.   Application for, and acceptance of, grants or subsidies from any other
unit of government.
   6.   The procurement of insurance as is felt necessary for the protection of
the facility.
   7.   How to actively market and advertise the services offered by the
facility.
   8.   Acceptance of gifts, donations, devices, and bequests that may be made
to the City for the purpose of establishing, increasing, or improving the
facility.
   9.   The expenditures of the facility’s revenues and the municipal funds
allotted to the facility.
   10.   The types of events to promote or co-promote activities and events
held at the facility.
   11.   The employment of a competent person as General Manager of the
facility who shall be the administrative head of the facility.
   12.   Such other matters as may be reasonably necessary to provide for the
operation and marketing of the facility and the adjacent park land.
Notwithstanding the foregoing limited responsibilities of the Board, the
Council reserves the right, to the extent permitted by Section 392.1 of the
Code of Iowa, to delegate to the Board such additional temporary or permanent
powers, authorities, and duties (including, but not limited to, rulemaking
authority) as it may deem reasonably necessary for the efficient operation of
the facility. The Council may make such delegation by motion, resolution, or
ordinance.
30.06   RESPONSIILITIES OF THE GENERAL MANAGER.  
It shall be the responsibility of the General Manager to:
   1.   Publish and make known to the public the schedule of fees and charges
for all services offered at the facility, and the rules and regulations
governing the public’s and promoter’s use of the facility.
   2.   Cause the preparation of an annual financial audit through appropriate
City channels covering program activities and financial status and deliver the
same to the Council within 60 days of the end of the fiscal period.
   3.   Deposit all moneys received with the City Treasurer to be credited to
the facility and make all disbursements utilizing the claim and warrant
procedures of the City.
   4.   Utilize the City’s policies and procedures in the personnel
administration of all facility employees subject to any outstanding labor
contract.
   5.   Make all purchases of materials, supplies, equipment, and services
reasonably necessary for the operation of the facility in accordance with City
purchasing policies.
   6.   File with the Clerk for public inspection and transmittal to Council
copies of agendas and minutes of all Board meetings and resolutions duly passed
by the Board within 14 days of the meetings at which such action was taken.
   7.   Prepare an annual budget for review and recommendation of the Board to
be transmitted to the Council for approval and adoption. The budget shall
include all proposed expenditures of facility revenues and municipal funds
allotted for the facility. The approved budget will be the working document for
administration of the facility.
   8.   Utilize all the available services provided by the City, and refrain
from duplicating them.
   9.   Employ such persons consistent with, and authorized in, the annual
budget as approved by the Council.
30.07   AUTHORITY OF THE GENERAL MANAGER.  
The Crossroads Pavilion General Manager shall report to the City Manager. The
Council recognizes that the General Manager must have certain authority to
promote the use of the facility. Therefore, the General Manager shall maintain
the following authority, subject to such limitations as the Council may from
time-to-time impose:
   1.   To advertise the facility locally and regionally to maximize use.
   2.   To lease and schedule events at the facility on such terms as the
General Manager determines will maximize revenue to the City.
   3.   To enter into contracts to promote and co-promote events at the
facility, including contracts involving the pledge of money and guarantees.
   4.   To authorize payment of fees to persons and organizations performing at
the facility.
   5.   To arrange for food and beverage services at the facility under such
terms as to maximize revenues to the City.
   6.   To enter into agreements with off-site ticket sellers to sell and
promote ticket sales at the facility.
   7.   To purchase contracts of insurance, as may be required to comply with
requirements of individuals and organizations using the facility.
   8.   To submit bids which may include guarantees and warranties to acquire
conventions and similar events for the facility.
   9.   To enter into contracts with sales representatives for various services
to be performed on behalf of the City for the operation of the events center
facility.
30.08   REMOVAL OF BOARD MEMBERS.  
Board Members may be removed by a majority vote of the Council.
CHAPTER 34
POLICE DEPARTMENT
 
34.01 Department Established       34.06 Peace Officers Appointed
34.02 Organization                 34.07 Powers and Duties of Police Chief
34.03 Peace Officer Qualifications 34.08 Departmental Rules
34.04 Required Training            34.09 Summoning Aid
34.05 Compensation                 34.10 Taking Weapons
 
34.01   DEPARTMENT ESTABLISHED.
The Police Department of the City is established to provide for the
preservation of peace and enforcement of law and ordinances within the
corporate limits of the City.
34.02   ORGANIZATION.
The department consists of the Police Chief, Sergeants, K-9 Officer and dog,
and such other law enforcement officers and personnel, whether full or part
time, as may be provided. The Police Chief and peace officers shall be under
the supervision and control of the City Manager.
34.03   PEACE OFFICER QUALIFICATIONS.
In no case shall any person be selected or appointed as a law enforcement
officer unless such person meets the minimum qualification standards
established by the Iowa Law Enforcement Academy.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 80B.11)
34.04   REQUIRED TRAINING.
All peace officers shall have received the minimum training required by law at
an approved law enforcement training school within one year of employment.
Peace officers shall also meet the minimum in-service training as required by
law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 80B.11[2])
(501 IAC 3 and 8)
34.05   COMPENSATION.
Members of the department are designated by rank and receive such compensation
as shall be determined by resolution of the Council.
34.06   PEACE OFFICERS APPOINTED.
The Mayor shall appoint and dismiss the Police Chief, subject to the consent of
a majority of the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.4, 400.13)
34.07   POWERS AND DUTIES OF POLICE CHIEF.
The Police Chief has the following powers and duties subject to the approval of
the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
   1.   General. Perform all duties required of the Police Chief by law or
ordinance.
   2.   Enforce Laws. Enforce all laws, ordinances, and regulations and bring
all persons committing any offense before the proper court.
   3.   Writs. Execute and return all writs and other processes directed to the
Police Chief.
   4.   Accident Reports. Report all motor vehicle accidents investigated to
the State Department of Transportation.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.266)
   5.   Prisoners. Be responsible for the custody of prisoners, including
conveyance to detention facilities as may be required.
   6.   Assist Officials. When requested, provide aid to other City officers,
boards, and commissions in the execution of their official duties.
   7.   Investigations. Provide for such investigation as may be necessary for
the prosecution of any person alleged to have violated any law or ordinance.
   8.   Record of Arrests. Keep a record of all arrests made in the City by
showing whether said arrests were made under provisions of State law or City
ordinance, the offense charged, who made the arrest, and the disposition of the
charge.
   9.   Reports. Compile and submit to the Mayor and Council an annual report
as well as such other reports as may be requested by the Mayor or Council.
   10.   Command. Be in command of all officers appointed for police work and
be responsible for the care, maintenance, and use of all vehicles, equipment,
and materials of the department.
34.08   DEPARTMENTAL RULES.
The Police Chief shall establish such rules, not in conflict with the Code of
Ordinances, and subject to the approval of the City Manager, as may be
necessary for the operation of the department.
34.09   SUMMONING AID.
Any peace officer making a legal arrest may orally summon as many persons as
the officer reasonably finds necessary to aid the officer in making the arrest.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 804.17)
34.10   TAKING WEAPONS.
Any person who makes an arrest may take from the person arrested all items that
are capable of causing bodily harm which the arrested person may have within
such person’s control, to be disposed of according to law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 804.18)
CHAPTER 35
FIRE DEPARTMENT AND EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY
35.01 Establishment and Purpose      35.11 Obedience to Fire Chief
35.02 Definitions                    35.12 Constitution
35.03 Organization                   35.13 Accidental Injury Insurance
35.04 Approved by Council            35.14 Liability Insurance
35.05 Training                       35.15 EMA Liability
35.06 Compensation                   35.16 Calls Outside City
35.07 Department Personnel Appointed 35.17 Mutual Aid
35.08 Authority                      35.18 Authority to Cite Violations
35.09 Duties of Fire Chief           35.19 Emergency Ambulance Service
35.10 EMA Duties                     35.20 Fees and Charges
 
35.01   ESTABLISHMENT AND PURPOSE.
A volunteer fire department and Emergency Management Agency (EMA) are hereby
established to prevent and extinguish fires, to protect lives and property
against fires, to promote fire prevention and fire safety, to carry out the
responsibility of the City in times of public emergency, and to answer all
emergency calls for which there is no other established agency. The EMA shall
function in accordance with an emergency operations plan which shall be
coordinated with plans adopted by the County and State, in accordance with
State law.
35.02   DEFINITIONS.
For use in this chapter, the following terms are defined:
   1.   “Emergency management” means the protection of persons and property by
all measures available to the City government and with such assistance as
required and possible from other governmental agencies, together with organized
efforts of private persons and agencies to meeting public emergencies. It
encompasses pre-planning, prevention, and assistance to those affected by
public emergencies.
   2.   “Emergency operations plan” means an outline of duties and
responsibilities and their assignment to persons, officers and agencies as
drawn up under the direction of the City, and as approved by resolution of the
Council.
   3.   “Public emergencies” means:
      A.   Any natural disaster or manmade calamity, including (but not limited
to) flood, conflagration (fire), cyclone, tornado, derecho, earthquake, riot,
or explosion resulting in the death or injury of persons or the destruction of
property to the extent that extraordinary measures must be taken to protect the
public health, safety, and welfare.
      B.   Any threat to public health, safety, and welfare resulting from
declared or undeclared war against the United States.
35.03   ORGANIZATION.
The department consists of the Fire Chief and such other officers and personnel
as may be authorized by the Council. The EMA will be under the supervision of
the fire department and the Executive Director and Assistant Director of the
EMA will be appointed by the Fire Chief and subject to Council approval.
35.04   APPROVED BY COUNCIL.
No person, having otherwise qualified, shall be appointed to the department
until such appointment is submitted to and approved by a majority of the
Council members.
35.05   TRAINING.
All members of the department shall meet the minimum training standards
established by the State Fire Marshal and attend and actively participate in
regular or special training drills or programs as directed by the Fire Chief.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 100B.2[4])
35.06   COMPENSATION.
Members of the department shall be designated by rank and receive such
compensation as shall be determined by resolution of the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
35.07   DEPARTMENT PERSONNEL APPOINTED.
The Council shall appoint the Fire Chief. The Fire Chief shall continue serving
until re-appointed or replaced. The other operational officers of the
department shall be appointed by the Fire Chief, subject to Council approval.
Other members of the department shall be appointed by the Fire Chief subject to
Council approval. The department shall elect a Secretary, Treasurer, and such
other officers as deemed necessary for the orderly conduct of their affairs and
meetings.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
35.08   AUTHORITY.
Fire Chief appoints the Emergency Management Agency Director, subject to
approval by the Council and order of succession shall be determined by the by-
laws.
35.09   DUTIES OF FIRE CHIEF.
The Fire Chief shall perform all duties required of the Fire Chief by law or
ordinance, including (but not limited to) the following:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
   1.   Enforce Laws. Enforce ordinances and laws regulating fire prevention
and the investigation of the cause, origin, and circumstances of fires.
   2.   Technical Assistance. Upon request, give advice concerning private fire
alarm systems, fire extinguishing equipment, fire escapes and exits, and
development of fire emergency plans.
   3.   Authority at Fires. When in charge of a fire scene, direct an operation
as necessary to extinguish or control a fire, perform a rescue operation,
investigate the existence of a suspected or reported fire, gas leak, or other
hazardous condition, or take any other action deemed necessary in the
reasonable performance of the department’s duties.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 102.2)
   4.   Control of Scenes. Prohibit an individual, vehicle, or vessel from
approaching a fire scene and remove from the scene any object, vehicle, vessel,
or individual that may impede or interfere with the operation of the Fire
Department.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 102.2)
   5.   Authority to Barricade. When in charge of a fire scene, place or erect
ropes, guards, barricades, or other obstructions across a street, alley, right-
of-way, or private property near the location of the fire or emergency so as to
prevent accidents or interference with the firefighting efforts of the Fire
Department, to control the scene until any required investigation is complete,
or to preserve evidence related to the fire or other emergency.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 102.3)
   6.   Command. Be charged with the duty of maintaining the efficiency,
discipline, and control of the Fire Department. The members of the Fire
Department shall, at all times, be subject to the direction of the Fire Chief.
   7.   Property. Exercise and have full control over the disposition of all
fire apparatus, tools, equipment, and other property used by or belonging to
the Fire Department.
   8.   Notification. Whenever death, serious bodily injury, or property damage
in excess of $200,000.00 has occurred as a result of a fire, or if arson is
suspected, notify the State Fire Marshal’s Division immediately. For all other
fires causing an estimated damage of $50.00 or more or emergency responses by
the Fire Department, file a report with the Fire Marshal’s Division within 10
days following the end of the month. The report shall indicate all fire
incidents occurring and state the name of the owners and occupants of the
property at the time of the fire, the value of the property, the estimated
total loss to the property, origin of the fire as determined by investigation,
and other facts, statistics, and circumstances concerning the fire incidents.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 100.2 and 100.3)
   9.   Right of Entry. Have the right, during reasonable hours, to enter any
building or premises within the Fire Chief’s jurisdiction for the purpose of
making such investigation or inspection that under law or ordinance may be
necessary to be made and that is reasonably necessary to protect the public
health, safety, and welfare.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 10A.514
   10.   Recommendation. Make such recommendations to owners, occupants,
caretakers, or managers of buildings necessary to eliminate fire hazards.
   11.   Assist State Fire Marshal. At the request of the State Fire Marshal,
and as provided by law, aid said marshal in the performance of duties by
investigating, preventing, and reporting data pertaining to fires.
   12.   Records. Cause to be kept records of the Fire Department personnel,
firefighting equipment, depreciation of all equipment and apparatus, the number
of responses to alarms, their cause, and location, and an analysis of losses by
value, type, and location of buildings.
   13.   Reports. Compile and submit to the Mayor and Council an annual report
of the status and activities of the department as well as such other reports as
may be requested by the Mayor or Council.
35.10   EMA DUTIES.
In addition to carrying out the responsibility of the City in times of public
emergency as provided in Sections 35.01 and 35.02, the EMA shall have such
other duties as the Mayor may from time to time assign to said agency,
including (but not limited to) the following:
   1.   Assisting with traffic control and duties as assigned at accident, fire
and rescue scenes or other emergency calls, City functions, and public events,
provided such assistance is requested by, and under the direction of, the Fire
Chief, fire officer on duty, or other first responder, such as a peace officer;
   2.   Assisting with capturing stray livestock and other animals, evidence
searches, and missing person searches, provided such assistance is requested
by, and under the direction of, the Fire Chief, fire officer on duty, or other
first responder, such as a peace officer;
   3.   Transporting healthcare workers and other critical workers to and from
their places of employment during incidents of severe weather;
   4.   Maintaining, testing, and operating, with the assistance of the Public
Works Department, the outdoor warning system for the City;
   5.   Any and all other duties that are incidental to the foregoing and that
do not require training or certifications beyond the requirements for an EMA
employee or volunteer.
35.11   OBEDIENCE TO FIRE CHIEF.
No person shall willfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order or
direction of the Fire Chief.
35.12   CONSTITUTION.
The department shall adopt a constitution and bylaws as they deem calculated to
accomplish the object contemplated, and such constitution and bylaws and any
change or amendment to such constitution and bylaws before being effective,
must be approved by the Council.
35.13   ACCIDENTAL INJURY INSURANCE.
The Council shall contract to insure the City against liability for worker’s
compensation and against statutory liability for the costs of hospitalization,
nursing, and medical attention for volunteer firefighters injured in the
performance of their duties as firefighters whether within or outside the
corporate limits of the City. All volunteer firefighters shall be covered by
the contract.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 85.2, 85.61, and Sec. 410.18)
35.14   LIABILITY INSURANCE.
The Council shall contract to insure against liability of the City or members
of the department for injuries, death, or property damage arising out of and
resulting from the performance of departmental duties within or outside the
corporate limits of the City.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 670.2 and 517A.1)
35.15   EMA LIABILITY.
Insofar as permitted by State law, the City, when acting in consonance with the
emergency operations plan, shall not be liable for failure to provide
protection or prevent damages to persons or property, the purpose of such plan
being to ameliorate conditions arising from the emergency by organized effort.
The City shall carry such insurance on voluntary emergency workers as deemed
advisable by the Council upon recommendation of the City Attorney.
35.16   CALLS OUTSIDE CITY.
The department shall answer calls to fires and other emergencies outside the
City limits if the Fire Chief determines that such emergency exists and that
such action will not endanger persons and property within the City limits.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.4[2 and 3])
35.17   MUTUAL AID.
The City shall provide fire service to rural townships, and the department may
enter into mutual aid agreements with other legally constituted fire
departments, subject to approval by resolution of the Council. Copies of any
such agreements shall be filed with the Clerk.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.4[2 and 3])
35.18   AUTHORITY TO CITE VIOLATIONS.
Fire officials acting under the authority of Chapter 10A, Subchapter V, Part 2
of the Code of Iowa, may issue citations in accordance with Chapter 805 of the
Code of Iowa, for violations of Chapter 10A, Subchapter V, Part 2 of the Code
of Iowa or a violation of a local fire safety code.   
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 100.41)
(Section 35.18 – Ord._O24-3288.1 – Sep. 24 Supp.)
35.19   EMERGENCY AMBULANCE SERVICE.
[See Chapter 37]
35.20   FEES AND CHARGES.
The fire department shall charge service fees, as set by resolution of the
Council, for services within the City and surrounding area which shall be based
on the actual costs for the type of service or call. All fees and charges are
due upon presentation of a statement by the City and shall be paid to the City.
The City may cause a suit to be brought for the collection of any fees or
charges due it for services provided in good faith.
CHAPTER 36
HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCE SPILLS
 
36.01 Purpose                     36.05 Notifications
36.02 Definitions                 36.06 Police Authority
36.03 Cleanup Required            36.07 Liability
36.04 Liability for Cleanup Costs
 
36.01   PURPOSE.
In order to reduce the danger to the public health, safety, and welfare from
the leaks and spills of hazardous substances, these regulations are promulgated
to establish responsibility for the treatment, removal, and cleanup of
hazardous substance spills within the City limits.
36.02   DEFINITIONS.
For purposes of this chapter the following terms are defined:
   1.   “Cleanup” means actions necessary to contain, collect, control,
identify, analyze, clean up, treat, disperse, remove, or dispose of a hazardous
substance.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 455B.381[1])
   2.   “Hazardous condition” means any situation involving the actual,
imminent, or probable spillage, leakage, or release of a hazardous substance
onto the land, into a water of the State, or into the atmosphere which creates
an immediate or potential danger to the public health or safety or to the
environment.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 455B.381[4])
   3.   “Hazardous substance” means any substance or mixture of substances that
presents a danger to the public health or safety and includes, but is not
limited to, a substance that is toxic, corrosive, or flammable, or that is an
irritant or that generates pressure through decomposition, heat, or other
means. “Hazardous substance” may include any hazardous waste identified or
listed by the administrator of the United States Environmental Protection
Agency under the Solid Waste Disposal Act as amended by the Resource
Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976, or any toxic pollutant listed under
Section 307 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act as amended to January 1,
1977, or any hazardous substance designated under Section 311 of the Federal
Water Pollution Control Act as amended to January 1, 1977, or any hazardous
material designated by the Secretary of Transportation under the Hazardous
Materials Transportation Act.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 455B.381[5])
   4.   “Responsible person” means a person who at any time produces, handles,
stores, uses, transports, refines, or disposes of a hazardous substance, the
release of which creates a hazardous condition, including bailees, carriers,
and any other person in control of a hazardous substance when a hazardous
condition occurs, whether the person owns the hazardous substance or is
operating under a lease, contract, or other agreement with the legal owner of
the hazardous substance.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 455B.381[7])
36.03   CLEANUP REQUIRED.
Whenever a hazardous condition is created by the deposit, injection, dumping,
spilling, leaking, or placing of a hazardous substance, so that the hazardous
substance or a constituent of the hazardous substance may enter the environment
or be emitted into the air or discharged into any waters, including ground
waters, the responsible person shall cause the condition to be remedied by a
cleanup, as defined in the preceding section, as rapidly as feasible to an
acceptable, safe condition. The costs of cleanup shall be borne by the
responsible person. If the responsible person does not cause the cleanup to
begin in a reasonable time in relation to the hazard and circumstances of the
incident, the City may, by an authorized officer, give reasonable notice, based
on the character of the hazardous condition, said notice setting a deadline for
accomplishing the cleanup and stating that the City will proceed to procure
cleanup services and bill the responsible person for all costs associated with
the cleanup if the cleanup is not accomplished within the deadline. In the
event that it is determined that immediate cleanup is necessary as a result of
the present danger to the public health, safety, and welfare, then no notice
shall be required, and the City may proceed to procure the cleanup and bill the
responsible person for all costs associated with the cleanup. If the bill for
those services is not paid within 30 days, the City Attorney shall proceed to
obtain payment by all legal means. If the cost of the cleanup is beyond the
capacity of the City to finance it, the authorized officer shall report to the
Council and immediately seek any State or federal funds available for said
cleanup.
36.04   LIABILITY FOR CLEANUP COSTS.
The responsible person shall be strictly liable to the City for all of the
following:
   1.   The reasonable cleanup costs incurred by the City or the agents of the
City as a result of the failure of the responsible person to clean up a
hazardous substance involved in a hazardous condition.
   2.   The reasonable costs incurred by the City or the agents of the City to
evacuate people from the area threatened by a hazardous condition caused by the
person.
   3.   The reasonable damages to the City for the injury to, destruction of,
or loss of City property, including parks and roads, resulting from a hazardous
condition caused by that person, including the costs of assessing the injury,
destruction, or loss.
   4.   The excessive and extraordinary cost incurred by the City or the agents
of the City in responding at and to the scene of a hazardous condition caused
by that person.
36.05   NOTIFICATIONS.
   1.   A person manufacturing, storing, handling, transporting, or disposing
of a hazardous substance shall notify the State Department of Natural Resources
and the Police Department of the occurrence of a hazardous condition as soon as
possible but not later than six hours after the onset of the hazardous
condition or discovery of the hazardous condition. The Police Chief shall
immediately notify the Department of Natural Resources.
   2.   Any other person who discovers a hazardous condition shall notify the
Police Department, which shall then notify the Department of Natural Resources.
36.06   POLICE AUTHORITY.
If the circumstances reasonably so require, the law enforcement officer or an
authorized representative may:
   1.   Evacuate persons from their homes to areas away from the site of a
hazardous condition, and
   2.   Establish perimeters or other boundaries at or near the site of a
hazardous condition and limit access to cleanup personnel.
   3.   For the purposes of this section, the Sheldon Fire Chief, Sheldon
Emergency Management Director, or Fire/EMA Command Officer on duty is
considered an authorized representative.
No person shall disobey an order of any law enforcement officer or authorized
representative issued under this section.
36.07   LIABILITY.
The City shall not be liable to any person for claims of damages, injuries, or
losses resulting from any hazardous condition, unless the City is the
responsible person as defined in Section 36.02(4).
CHAPTER 37
AMBULANCE SERVICE
 
37.01 Established                 37.06 Duties of the Director
37.02 Appointment of Director and 37.07 Service Generally
Assistant
37.03 Appointment of Members      37.08 Service Outside City and Priority of
                                  Calls
37.04 Compensation of Members     37.09 Fees and Charges
37.05 Constitution
 
37.01   ESTABLISHED.
There is hereby established the Sheldon Community Ambulance Team, hereinafter
referred to as SCAT, to provide ambulance service for the City and surrounding
areas.
37.02   APPOINTMENT OF DIRECTOR AND ASSISTANT.
SCAT shall have a Director and an Assistant Director to act in the absence of
the Director, both of whom shall be appointed from the membership of the
ambulance team by the Mayor, subject to approval of the Council.
37.03   APPOINTMENT OF MEMBERS.
SCAT shall consist of such number of members as established by the Council from
time to time who shall be appointed by the Director, subject to approval of the
Council.
37.04   COMPENSATION OF MEMBERS.
The members of SCAT shall be compensated for their services by the City
according to rates which will be established by Council resolution.
37.05   CONSTITUTION.
SCAT shall adopt a constitution and bylaws as they deem calculated to
accomplish the object contemplated, and such constitution and bylaws and any
change or amendment to such constitution and bylaws before being effective,
must be approved by the Council.
37.06   DUTIES OF THE DIRECTOR.
The Director of SCAT shall:
   1.   Keep all records or logs necessary or as required by law;
   2.   Make all reports necessary or as required by law;
   3.   Be responsible for the efficient administration of SCAT;
   4.   Complete all Medicare or welfare claims as required by law;
   5.   Cooperate with the authorized agents of the City, the City Manager, or
Clerk in the financial administration of SCAT; and
   6.   Coordinate all ambulance service activities with the City as may be
required by the rules and regulations of the City or pursuant to any written
agreement which may be executed by and between the City and contiguous
counties.
37.07   SERVICE GENERALLY.
SCAT shall provide such services to the City and surrounding areas, including
contiguous counties, as may be fixed or required from time to time by the
Council by rule or regulation or by written agreement between the City and
contiguous counties.
37.08   SERVICE OUTSIDE CITY AND PRIORITY OF CALLS.
Emergency ambulance service or nonemergency ambulance service shall be given
outside the City limits in accordance with rules and regulations as provided by
the Council. However, emergency calls shall have priority over ambulance
transfers of a nonemergency nature. The Director or Assistant Director acting
in the Director’s absence shall make the final determination as to priority of
calls or whether a nonemergency transfer will be made.
37.09   FEES AND CHARGES.
The ambulance service shall charge such rates for services to the City and
surrounding area, including contiguous counties and townships, as may be fixed,
or required from time to time by written agreement, between the City and
contiguous counties and townships. All ambulance fees and charges are set by
Council resolution and are due upon presentation of a statement by the City for
such fees and shall be paid to the City. The City may cause a suit to be
brought for the collection of any fees or charges due it for ambulance services
provided in good faith. The City is required by law to not seek collection from
Medicare for certain services since the rates are set by the State.
CHAPTER 38
RAPID ENTRY SYSTEM
 
38.01 Applicability 38.03 Installation Requirements
38.02 Definitions   38.04 Penalties for Offenses
 
38.01   APPLICABILITY.
The provisions of this chapter apply to all buildings within the City that are
used for public buildings, restricted business, industrial, commercial, or
limited commercial use, and:
   1.   Which contain a fire alarm system that uses an automatic dialer, or
which contain an automatic fire suppression system, or which are required to
prepare and have available material safety data sheets or hazardous chemical
inventory forms under the Superfund Amendments and Reauthorization Act of 1986
(SARA Tile II).
   4.   To multi-family residential structures, including senior citizen
apartment or condominium complexes, that have restricted access through locked
doors and have a common corridor for access to the living units.
   5.   To governmental structures and nursing care facilities.
   6.   To all high-rise buildings, i.e., structures having floors 50 feet
above ground level.
   7.   To commercial and industrial buildings identified by fire officials as
difficult to access during emergencies.
However, any building or structure having on-site 24-hour security personnel
may be exempt from the requirements of this section at the discretion of the
Fire Department.
38.02   DEFINITIONS.
For use in this chapter, the following terms are defined:
   1.   “Automatic dialer” means a device that automatically dials and relays a
pre-recorded message to a central station, the O’Brien or Sioux County Dispatch
Center, or Sheldon Emergency Services.
   2.   “Automatic fire suppression system” means a system or assembly of
piping, valves, controls, and sprinklers, which are designed and installed to
comply with the National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) standards, which
utilize water, foam, CO2, or others gas to automatically react to suppress
fire.
   3.   “Central system” means an office of a private company to which remote
alarm and supervisory signaling devices are transmitted and where personnel are
in attendance at all times to supervise the circuits and investigate signals.
   4.   “Fire alarm system” means equipment which automatically actuates a fire
alarm when the detecting element is exposed to fire, smoke, abnormal rise or
decrease in temperature, or activation of a sprinkler system or manually
activated device.
   5.   “Lock box” means a high security key vault, which is listed under
Underwriters Laboratories (UL) 1610 and UL 1037 standards, master keyed with a
Medeco Biaxial Level 7 or equivalent lock. Locks shall be keyed to the key
configuration provided by Sheldon Emergency Services.
   6.   “Lock box document vault” means a high security steel plate vault, a
minimum of 14 inches by 12 inches wide by two inches deep, constructed to the
same standards as the lock box, for the storage of documents.
38.03   INSTALLATION REQUIREMENTS.
   1.   The owner of applicable buildings, as described above, shall install or
cause to be installed a lock box system or lock box document vault prior to the
issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy for any portion of the building for new
or remodeling construction or within 18 months of the adoption date of this
chapter if no new construction or remodeling takes place.
   2.   The owner or occupant is responsible for ordering and installing the
lock box.
   3.   The Fire Chief shall designate the type of key lock box system to be
implemented within the City and shall have the authority to require all
structures to use the designated system.
   4.   The lock box shall be installed on the front of the building near the
main entry door, on the right-hand side, between six and eight feet above the
ground, unless approved at a higher or lower level by the Building Inspector.
   5.   The lock box is not required to be attached to, or monitored by, an
alarm system, but it is recommended.
   6.   The lock box shall contain the keys for the exterior doors, the keys
for all interior doors within the building, and a scaled floor plan of the
building. In lieu of having the interior keys at this location, a second lock
box may be located within the main lobby of the building to hold these keys.
Contents that are to be provided by the owner or occupant that are to be placed
into the box are:
      A.   Marked and tagged keys for access to the central core of the
building.
      B.   A current telephone list of contact people for each business.
      C.   A map or diagram showing locations of sprinkler room and alarm
panel.
   7.   Where a building contains a business that is required to maintain
Material Safety Data Sheets (MSDS), a lock box document vault shall be
installed. The lock box document vault shall be installed on the front of the
building, near the main entry door, on the right-hand side, between six and
eight feet above the ground, unless approved at a higher or lower level by the
Building Inspector. The vault shall contain copies of the MSDS that are
required to be on file within the building, as well as a floor plan or written
description that indicates the location of the general areas of these
materials.
   8.   The Fire Chief shall be authorized to implement rules and regulations
for the use of the lock box system.
38.04   PENALTIES FOR OFFENSES.
Any violation of this chapter is hereby declared to be an offense punishable
pursuant to Chapter 4.
CHAPTER 40
PUBLIC PEACE
 
40.01 Assault            40.04 Failure to Disperse
40.02 Harassment         40.05 Disturbing the Peace
40.03 Disorderly Conduct 40.06 Disorderly Houses
 
40.01   ASSAULT.
No person shall, without justification, commit any of the following:
   1.   Pain or Injury. Any act that is intended to cause pain or injury to
another or that is intended to result in physical contact that will be
insulting or offensive to another, coupled with the apparent ability to execute
the act.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 708.1[1])
   2.   Threat of Pain or Injury. Any act that is intended to place another in
fear of immediate physical contact which will be painful, injurious, insulting,
or offensive, coupled with the apparent ability to execute the act.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 708.1[2])
An act described in Subsections 1 and 2 shall not be an assault under the
following circumstances: (i) if the person doing any of the enumerated acts,
and such other person, are voluntary participants in a sport, social or other
activity, not in itself criminal, and such act is a reasonably foreseeable
incident of such sport or activity, and does not create an unreasonable risk of
serious injury or breach of the peace; (ii) if the person doing any of the
enumerated acts is employed by a school district or accredited nonpublic
school, or is an area education agency staff member who provides services to a
school or school district, and intervenes in a fight or physical struggle or
other disruptive situation that takes place in the presence of the employee or
staff member performing employment duties in a school building, on school
grounds, or at an official school function, regardless of the location, whether
the fight or physical struggle or other disruptive situation is between
students or other individuals, if the degree and the force of the intervention
is reasonably necessary to restore order and to protect the safety of those
assembled.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 708.1)
40.02   HARASSMENT.
No person shall commit harassment.
   1.   A person commits harassment when, with intent to intimidate, annoy, or
alarm another person, the person does any of the following:
      A.   Communicates with another by telephone, telegraph, writing, or via
electronic communication without legitimate purpose and in a manner likely to
cause the other person annoyance or harm.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 708.7)
      B.   Places any simulated explosive or simulated incendiary device in or
near any building, vehicle, airplane, railroad engine or railroad car, or boat
occupied by the other person.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 708.7)
      C.   Orders merchandise or services in the name of another, or to be
delivered to another, without such other person’s knowledge or consent.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 708.7)
      D.   Reports or causes to be reported false information to a law
enforcement authority implicating another in some criminal activity, knowing
that the information is false, or reports the alleged occurrence of a criminal
act, knowing the same did not occur.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 708.7)
   2.   A person commits harassment when the person, purposefully and without
legitimate purpose, has personal contact with another person, with the intent
to threaten, intimidate or alarm that other person. As used in this section,
unless the context otherwise requires, “personal contact” means an encounter in
which two or more people are in visual or physical proximity to each other.
“Personal contact” does not require a physical touching or oral communication,
although it may include these types of contacts.
40.03   DISORDERLY CONDUCT.
No person shall do any of the following:
   1.   Fighting. Engage in fighting or violent behavior in any public place or
in or near any lawful assembly of persons, provided that participants in
athletic contests may engage in such conduct that is reasonably related to that
sport.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 723.4[1a])
   2.   Noise. Make loud and raucous noise in the vicinity of any residence or
public building which intentionally or recklessly causes unreasonable distress
to the occupants thereof.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 723.4[1b])
   3.   Abusive Language. Direct abusive epithets or make any threatening
gesture that the person knows or reasonably should know is likely to provoke a
violent reaction by another.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 723.4[1c])
   4.   Disrupt Lawful Assembly. Without lawful authority or color of
authority, disturb any lawful assembly or meeting of persons by conduct
intended to disrupt the meeting or assembly.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 723.4[1d])
   5.   False Report of Catastrophe. By words or action, initiate or circulate
a report or warning of fire, epidemic, or other catastrophe, knowing such
report to be false or such warning to be baseless.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 723.4[1e])
   6.   Disrespect of Flag. Knowingly and publicly use the flag of the United
States in such a manner as to show disrespect for the flag as a symbol of the
United States, with the intent or reasonable expectation that such use will
provoke or encourage another to commit trespass or assault. As used in this
subsection:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 723.4[1f])
      A.   “Deface” means to intentionally mar the external appearance.
      B.   “Defile” means to intentionally make physically unclean.
      C.   “Flag” means a piece of woven cloth or other material designed to be
flown from a pole or mast.
      D.   “Mutilate” means to intentionally cut up or alter so as to make
imperfect.
      E.   “Show disrespect” means to deface, defile, mutilate, or trample.
      F.   “Trample” means to intentionally tread upon or intentionally cause a
machine, vehicle, or animal to tread upon.
   7.   Funeral or Memorial Service. Within 1,000 feet of the building or other
location where a funeral or memorial service is being conducted, or within
1,000 feet of a funeral procession or burial:
      A.   Make loud and raucous noise that causes unreasonable distress to the
persons attending the funeral or memorial service or participating in the
funeral procession.
      B.   Direct abusive epithets or make any threatening gesture that the
person knows or reasonably should know is likely to provoke a violent reaction
by another.
      C.   Disturb or disrupt the funeral, memorial service, funeral
procession, or burial by conduct intended to disturb or disrupt the funeral,
memorial service, funeral procession, or burial.
This subsection applies to conduct within 60 minutes preceding, during, and
within 60 minutes after a funeral, memorial service, funeral procession, or
burial.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 723.5)
40.04   FAILURE TO DISPERSE.
A peace officer may order the participants in a riot or unlawful assembly or
persons in the immediate vicinity of a riot or unlawful assembly to disperse.
No person within hearing distance of such command shall refuse to obey.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 723.3)
40.05   DISTURBING THE PEACE.
No person shall do any of the following:
   1.   Disturb the peace by making or causing to be made any excessive, loud,
or unusual noise, including but not limited to any such noises made by the
blowing of automobile or other horns, the ringing of bells or the use of
sirens, radios, stereos, or any other type of speaking device or noise maker;
or to disturb the peace by making or causing to be made any disturbances of any
election, public meeting, or any other gathering where citizens are peaceable
and lawfully assembled.
   2.   Operate or cause to be operated any “outdoor sound system” at any place
in the City at any time during the hours of midnight to 7:00 a.m. For the
purposes of this subsection, an “outdoor sound system” means any sound
equipment, stereo equipment, or amplification equipment that is permanently or
temporarily placed outdoors, or which directs sound outdoors.
   3.   The provisions of this section shall not apply to any person engaged in
providing official police, fire, or ambulance services, or to any person
engaged in providing emergency utility services, or to any person engaged in
authorized activities on public school property.
40.06   DISORDERLY HOUSES.
   1.   Definition. “Disorderly house” means any structure or any room therein,
or any part of the premises adjacent thereto, in or upon which occurs any
disorderly conduct, defined as any person making any loud or raucous noise in
the vicinity of any residence or public building which causes, or which a
person should reasonably expect to cause, unreasonable distress to the
occupants thereof, or any of the following prohibited activities:
      A.   The open storage, use, or consumption of a controlled substance, as
defined in Chapter 124 of the Code of Iowa, under which possession of such
substance would be an offense;
      B.   Gambling, in violation of Chapter 99 B of the Code of Iowa;
      C.   Dispensing, selling, or consumption of an alcoholic beverage in
violation of Chapter 123 of the Code of Iowa; or
      D.   Acts of prostitution, pimping, or pandering as defined in Chapter
725 of the Code of Iowa.
   2.   Keeping a Disorderly House. It is unlawful for any person to knowingly
keep (i.e., own or have control of) a structure, or of a room therein, or any
part of the adjacent premises that is considered to be a disorderly house, as
defined in Subsection 1.
   3.   Frequenting or Being Found in a Disorderly House. A party or social
gathering at a disorderly house, as defined in Subsection 1, shall cease and
disperse immediately upon the order of any officer of the Police Department or
O’Brien County Sheriff’s Office, and all persons not domiciled at the site of
such disorderly house shall leave the premises immediately. Any person who
fails or refuses to obey and abide by such order shall be guilty of a violation
of this section.
CHAPTER 41
PUBLIC HEALTH AND SAFETY
41.01 Distributing Dangerous Substances                  41.09 Antenna and
                                                         Radio Wires
41.02 False Reports to or Communications with Public     41.10 Barbed Wire and
Safety Entities                                          Electric Fences
41.03 Providing False Identification Information         41.11 Discharging
                                                         Weapons
41.04 Refusing to Assist Officer                         41.12 Throwing and
                                                         Shooting
41.05 Harassment of Public Officers and Employees        41.13 Urinating and
                                                         Defecating
41.06 Interference with Official Acts                    41.14 Fireworks
41.07 Removal of an Officer’s Communication or Control 41.15 Illegal Dumping
Device
41.08 Abandoned or Unattended Refrigerators              41.16 Failure to
                                                         Assist
 
41.01   DISTRIBUTING DANGEROUS SUBSTANCES.
No person shall distribute samples of any drugs or medicine, or any corrosive,
caustic, poisonous or other injurious substance unless the person delivers such
into the hands of a competent person, or otherwise takes reasonable precautions
that the substance will not be taken by children or animals from the place
where the substance is deposited.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 727.1)
41.02   FALSE REPORTS TO OR COMMUNICATIONS WITH PUBLIC SAFETY ENTITIES.
No person shall do any of the following:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 718.6)
   1.   Report or cause to be reported false information to a fire department,
a law enforcement authority, or other public safety entity, knowing that the
information is false, or report the alleged occurrence of a criminal act
knowing the act did not occur.
   2.   Telephone an emergency 911 communications center, knowing that he or
she is not reporting an emergency or otherwise needing emergency information or
assistance.
   3.   Knowingly provide false information to a law enforcement officer who
enters the information on a citation.
41.03   PROVIDING FALSE IDENTIFICATION INFORMATION.
No person shall knowingly provide false identification information to anyone
known by the person to be a peace officer, emergency medical care provider, or
firefighter, whether paid or volunteer, in the performance of any act that is
within the scope of the lawful duty or authority of that officer, emergency
medical care provider, or firefighter.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 719.1A)
41.04   REFUSING TO ASSIST OFFICER.
Any person who is requested or ordered by any magistrate or peace officer to
render the magistrate or officer assistance in making or attempting to make an
arrest, or to prevent the commission of any criminal act, shall render
assistance as required. No person shall unreasonably and without lawful cause,
refuse or neglect to render assistance when so requested.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 719.2)
41.05   HARASSMENT OF PUBLIC OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES.
No person shall willfully prevent or attempt to prevent any public officer or
employee from performing the officer’s or employee’s duty.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 718.4)
41.06   INTERFERENCE WITH OFFICIAL ACTS.
No person shall knowingly resist or obstruct anyone known by the person to be a
peace officer, jailer, emergency medical care provider under Chapter 147A of
the Code of Iowa, medical examiner or firefighter, whether paid or volunteer,
or a person performing bailiff duties pursuant to Section 602.1303[4] of the
Code of Iowa, in the performance of any act that is within the scope of the
lawful duty or authority of that officer, jailer, emergency medical care
provider, medical examiner or firefighter, or person performing bailiff duties,
or shall knowingly resist or obstruct the service or execution by any
authorized person of any civil or criminal process or order of any court. The
terms “resist” and “obstruct” as used in this section do not include verbal
harassment unless the verbal harassment is accompanied by a present ability and
apparent intention to execute a verbal threat physically.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 719.1)
41.07   REMOVAL OF AN OFFICER’S COMMUNICATION OR CONTROL DEVICE.
No person shall knowingly or intentionally remove or attempt to remove a
communication device or any device used for control from the possession of a
peace officer or correctional officer, when the officer is in the performance
of any act which is within the scope of the lawful duty or authority of that
officer and the person knew or should have known the individual to be an
officer.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 708.12)
41.08   ABANDONED OR UNATTENDED REFRIGERATORS.
No person shall abandon or otherwise leave unattended any refrigerator, ice
box, or similar container, with doors that may become locked, outside of
buildings and accessible to children, nor shall any person allow any such
refrigerator, ice box, or similar container, to remain outside of buildings on
premises in the person’s possession or control, abandoned or unattended and so
accessible to children.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 727.3)
41.09   ANTENNA AND RADIO WIRES.
It is unlawful for a person to allow antenna wires, antenna supports, radio
wires, or television wires to exist over any street, alley, highway, sidewalk,
public way, public ground, or public building without written consent of the
Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[2])
41.10   BARBED WIRE AND ELECTRIC FENCES.
It is unlawful for a person to use barbed wire or electric fences to enclose
land within the City limits without the written consent of the Council unless
such land consists of 10 acres or more and is used as agricultural land.
41.11   DISCHARGING WEAPONS.
   1.   No person shall discharge any firearms within the City except peace
officers in the line of duty or peace officers using a police target range and
no persons shall discharge any bow and arrow or similar device within the City;
however, the Council may, upon written application, grant annual permits to
groups, organizations, or individuals approved by the Council, allowing the
permittees to conduct trap-shoots, skeet shoots, archery, or rifle ranges in
certain areas designated by the permit and under conditions that will in no way
endanger persons or property and under the supervision of the permittee.
Persons discharging or shooting firearms or bow and arrows or similar devices
in the areas designated in the permit and while under the supervision of a
permittee shall not be subject to the terms of this section. The Council may
revoke the permit granted at any time at its discretion, where the discharge or
shooting of firearms or bows and arrows and similar devices under a permit, in
its opinion, constitutes a nuisance or in any way endangers persons or
property.
   2.   No person shall intentionally discharge a firearm in a reckless manner.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 657.9 and 481(A))
41.12   THROWING AND SHOOTING.
It is unlawful for a person to throw stones, bricks, or missiles of any kind or
to shoot arrows, paintballs, rubber guns, slingshots, air rifles, BB guns,
airsoft guns, or other dangerous instruments or toys on or into any street,
alley, highway, sidewalk, public way, public ground, or public building,
without written consent of the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[2])
41.13   URINATING AND DEFECATING.
It is unlawful for any person to urinate or defecate onto any sidewalk, street,
alley, or other public way, or onto any public or private building, including
but not limited to the wall, floor, hallway, steps, stairway, doorway, or
window thereof, or onto any public or private land.
41.14   FIREWORKS.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 727.2)
   1.   Definitions. For purposes of this section:
      A.   “Consumer fireworks” means the following fireworks, as described in
Chapter 3 of the American Pyrotechnics Association (“APA”) Standard 87-1:
         (1)   First-class consumer fireworks:
            a.   Aerial shell kits and reloadable tubes;
            b.   Chasers;
            c.   Helicopters and aerial spinners;
            d.   Firecrackers;
            e.   Mine and shell devices;
            f.   Missile-type rockets;
            g.   Roman candles;
            h.   Sky rockets and bottle rockets;
            i.   Multiple tube devices under this paragraph which are
manufactured in accordance with APA Standard 87-1, Section 3.5.
         (2)   Second-class consumer fireworks:
            a.   Cone fountains;
            b.   Cylindrical fountains;
            c.   Flitter sparklers;
            d.   Ground and hand-held sparkling devices, including multiple
tube ground and hand-held sparkling devices that are manufactured in accordance
with APA Standard 87-1, Section 3.5;
            e.   Ground spinners;
            f.   Illuminating torches;
            g.   Toy smoke devices that are not classified as novelties
pursuant to APA Standard 87-1, Section 3.2;
            h.   Wheels;
            i.   Wire or dipped sparklers that are not classified as novelties
pursuant to APA Standard 87-1, Section 3.2.
      B.   “Display fireworks” includes any explosive composition, or
combination of explosive substances, or article prepared for the purpose of
producing a visible or audible effect by combustion, explosion, deflagration,
or detonation, and includes fireworks containing any explosive or flammable
compound, or other device containing any explosive substance. “Display
fireworks” does not include novelties or consumer fireworks enumerated in
Chapter 3 of the APA Standard 87-1.
      C.   “Novelties” includes all novelties enumerated in Chapter 3 of the
APA Standard 87-1, and that comply with the labeling regulations promulgated by
the United States Consumer Product Safety Commission.
   2.   Display Fireworks. It is unlawful for any person to use or explode any
display fireworks; provided, the City Council may, upon application in writing,
grant a permit for the display of display fireworks by municipalities, fair
associations, amusement parks, and other organizations or groups of individuals
approved by the City when the display fireworks will be handled by a competent
operator, unless the permit requirement is exempted from Iowa Code.. No permit
shall be granted hereunder unless the operator or sponsoring organization has
filed with the City evidence of insurance in the amount of $1,000,000 per
occurrence with $2,000,000 aggregate.
   3.   Consumer Fireworks.
      A.   State Code Dates. Allowed by Section 364.2(6) of the Code of Iowa:
         (1)   July 3 between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m.
            a.   Except when July 3 falls on a Saturday or Sunday preceding
July 4, in which fireworks shall be allowed between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and
11:00 p.m.
         (2)   July 4 between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m.
         (3)   December 31 between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 12:30 a.m. on the
immediately following day.
      B.   City Allowed Dates.
         (1)   July 1 and 2 between the hours of 12:00 p.m. and 10:00 p.m.
      C.   It is unlawful for any person to use consumer fireworks on real
property other than that person’s real property or on the real property of a
person who has consented to the use of consumer fireworks on that property.
(Subsection 3 – Ord._O25-3292 – Jun. 25 Supp.)
   4.   Novelties. This section does not apply to novelties.
41.15   ILLEGAL DUMPING.
It is illegal to place trash, litter, or solid waste into a privately owned or
rented dumpster without the permission of the owner/lessee. Dumpsters located
in public areas, such as parks, are only to be used for trash, litter, or solid
waste originating in the public space.
41.16   FAILURE TO ASSIST.
A person who reasonably believes another person is suffering from a risk of
serious bodily injury or imminent danger of death shall, if the person is able,
attempt to contact local law enforcement or local emergency response
authorities, if doing so does not place the person or other person at risk of
serious bodily injury or imminent danger of death. No person shall without
lawful cause violate the provisions of this section. A person shall not be
required to contact local law enforcement or emergency response authorities if
the person knows or reasonably believes that the other person is not in need of
help or assistance.
CHAPTER 42
PUBLIC AND PRIVATE PROPERTY
 
42.01 Trespassing                          42.05 Unauthorized Entry
42.02 Criminal Mischief                    42.06 Fraud
42.03 Defacing Proclamations or Notices    42.07 Theft
42.04 Standing, Loitering, and Obstructing 42.08 Other Public Property Offenses
Persons
 
42.01   TRESPASSING.
   1.   Prohibited. It is unlawful for a person to knowingly trespass upon the
property of another.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.8)
   2.   Definitions. For purposes of this section:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.7[1])
      A.   “Property” includes any land, dwelling, building, conveyance,
vehicle, or other temporary or permanent structure, whether publicly or
privately owned.
      B.   “Public utility” is a public utility as defined in Section 476.1 of
the Code of Iowa or an electric transmission line as provided in Chapter 478 of
the Code of Iowa.
      C.   “Public utility property” means any land, dwelling, building,
conveyance, vehicle, or other temporary or permanent structure owned, leased,
or operated by a public utility and that is completely enclosed by a physical
barrier of any kind.
      D.   “Railway corporation” means a corporation, company, or person
owning, leasing, or operating any railroad in whole or in part within this
State.
      E.   “Railway property” means all tangible real and personal property
owned, leased, or operated by a railway corporation, with the exception of any
administrative building or offices of the railway corporation.
      F.   “Trespass” means one or more of the following acts:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.7[2a])
         (1)   Entering upon or in property without the express permission of
the owner, lessee, or person in lawful possession with the intent to commit a
public offense or to use, remove therefrom, alter, damage, harass, or place
thereon or therein anything animate or inanimate.
         (2)   Entering or remaining upon or in property without justification
after being notified or requested to abstain from entering or to remove or
vacate therefrom by the owner, lessee, or person in lawful possession, or the
agent or employee of the owner, lessee, or person in lawful possession, or by
any peace officer, magistrate, or public employee whose duty it is to supervise
the use or maintenance of the property.
         (3)   Entering upon or in property for the purpose or with the effect
of unduly interfering with the lawful use of the property by others.
         (4)   Being upon or in property and wrongfully using, removing
therefrom, altering, damaging, harassing, or placing thereon or therein
anything animate or inanimate, without the implied or actual permission of the
owner, lessee, or person in lawful possession.
         (5)   Entering or remaining upon or in railway property without lawful
authority or without the consent of the railway corporation which owns, leases,
or operates the railway property. This paragraph does not apply to passage over
a railroad right-of-way, other than a track, railroad roadbed, viaduct, bridge,
trestle, or railroad yard, by an unarmed person if the person has not been
notified or requested to abstain from entering onto the right-of-way or to
vacate the right-of-way and the passage over the right-of-way does not
interfere with the operation of the railroad.
         (6)   Entering or remaining upon or in public utility property without
lawful authority or without the consent of the public utility that owns,
leases, or operates the public utility property. This paragraph does not apply
to passage over public utility right-of-way by a person if the person has not
been notified or requested by posted signage or other means to abstain from
entering onto the right-of-way or to vacate the right-of-way.
   3.   Specific Exceptions. “Trespass” does not mean either of the following:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.7[2b])
      A.   Entering upon the property of another for the sole purpose of
retrieving personal property which has accidentally or inadvertently been
thrown, fallen, strayed, or blown onto the property of another, provided that
the person retrieving the property takes the most direct and accessible route
to and from the property to be retrieved, quits the property as quickly as is
possible, and does not unduly interfere with the lawful use of the property.
This paragraph does not apply to public utility property where the person has
been notified or requested by posted signage or other means to abstain from
entering.
      B.   Entering upon the right-of-way of a public road or highway.
42.02   CRIMINAL MISCHIEF.
It is unlawful, for any person who has no right to do so, to intentionally
damage, deface, alter, or destroy property.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.1)
42.03   DEFACING PROCLAMATIONS OR NOTICES.
It is unlawful for a person intentionally to deface, obliterate, tear down, or
destroy in whole or in part, any transcript or extract from or of any law of
the United States or the State, or any proclamation, advertisement, or
notification, set up at any place within the City by authority of the law or by
order of any court, during the time for which the same is to remain set up.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.1)
42.04   STANDING, LOITERING, AND OBSTRUCTING PERSONS.
With the exception of persons authorized to use the public right-of-way, no
person shall:
   1.   Congregate, stand, loaf, or loiter upon any street, sidewalk, bridge,
trail, or crossing so as to obstruct the street, sidewalk, bridge, trail, or
crossing or hinder or prevent persons passing or attempting or desiring to pass
thereon. A violation under this subsection can be proven regardless of whether
a person or vehicle is actually hindered or prevented from passing.
   2.   Congregate, stand, loaf, or loiter in, or in front of, any hall, lobby,
doorway, passage, or entrance of any public building, theater, hotel, eating
house, lodging house, office building, store, shop, office, factory, or other
like building or driveway or parking area so as to obstruct such place or
hinder or prevent persons walking or driving along, or into or out of, such
place or attempting or desiring to do so. A violation under this subsection can
be proven regardless of whether a person is actually hindered or prevented from
passing.
A violation of this section shall be a simple misdemeanor, as defined in
Section 1.14.
42.05   UNAUTHORIZED ENTRY.
No unauthorized person shall enter or remain in or upon any public building,
premises, or grounds in violation of any notice posted thereon or when said
building, premises or grounds are closed and not open to the public. When open
to the public, a failure to pay any required admission fee also constitutes an
unauthorized entry.
42.06   FRAUD.
It is unlawful for any person to commit a fraudulent practice as defined in
Section 714.8 of the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 714.8)
42.07   THEFT.
It is unlawful for any person to commit theft as defined in Section 714.1 of
the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 714.1)
42.08   OTHER PUBLIC PROPERTY OFFENSES.
The following chapters of this Code of Ordinances contain regulations
prohibiting or restricting other activities or conditions that are also deemed
to be public property offenses:
   1.   Chapter 22 – Library
      A.   Section 22.10 – Injury to Books or Property
      B.   Section 22.11 – Theft of Library Property
   2.   Chapter 105 – Solid Waste Control and Recycling
      A.   Section 105.07 – Littering Prohibited
   3.   Chapter 135 – Street Use and Maintenance
      A.   Section 135.01 – Removal of Warning Devices
      B.   Section 135.02 – Obstructing or Defacing
      C.   Section 135.03 – Placing Debris On
      D.   Section 135.04 – Playing In
      E.   Section 135.05 – Traveling on Barricaded Street or Alley
      F.   Section 135.08 – Burning Prohibited
      G.   Section 135.12 – Dumping of Snow
   4.   Chapter 136 – Sidewalk Regulations
      A.   Section 136.11 – Interference with Sidewalk Improvements
      B.   Section 136.15 – Fires or Fuel on Sidewalks
      C.   Section 136.16 – Defacing
      D.   Section 136.17 – Debris on Sidewalks
      E.   Section 136.18 – Merchandise Display
      F.   Section 136.19 – Sales Stands
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.6B)
CHAPTER 43
DRUG PARAPHERNALIA
 
43.01 Purpose                      43.04 Determining Factors
43.02 Controlled Substance Defined 43.05 Possession of Drug Paraphernalia
43.03 Drug Paraphernalia Defined   43.06 Manufacture, Delivery, or Offering For
                                   Sale
 
43.01   PURPOSE.
The purpose of this chapter is to prohibit the use, possession with intent to
use, manufacture, and delivery of drug paraphernalia as defined herein.
43.02   CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE DEFINED.
The term “controlled substance” as used in this chapter is defined as the term
“controlled substance” is defined in the Uniform Controlled Substance Act,
Chapter 124 of the Code of Iowa, as it now exists or is hereafter amended.
43.03   DRUG PARAPHERNALIA DEFINED.
The term “drug paraphernalia” as used in this chapter means all equipment,
products, and materials of any kind which are used, intended for use, or
designed for use, in planting, propagating, cultivating, growing, harvesting,
manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing, preparing,
testing, analyzing, packaging, repackaging, storing, concealing, containing,
injecting, ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing into the human body a
controlled substance in violation of the Uniform Controlled Substances Act,
Chapter 124 of the Code of Iowa. It includes, but is not limited to:
   1.   Growing Kits. Kits used, intended for use, or designed for use in
planting, propagating, cultivating, growing, or harvesting of any species of
plant which is a controlled substance or from which a controlled substance can
be derived.
   2.   Processing Kits. Kits used, intended for use, or designed for use in
manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing, or preparing
controlled substances.
   3.   Isomerization Devices. Isomerization devices used, intended for use, or
designed for use in increasing the potency of any species of plant which is a
controlled substance.
   4.   Testing Equipment. Testing equipment used, intended for use, or
designed for use in identifying or in analyzing the strength, effectiveness, or
purity of controlled substances.
   5.   Scales. Scales and balances used, intended for use, or designed for use
in weighing or measuring controlled substances.
   6.   Diluents. Diluents and adulterants, such as quinine hydrochloride,
mannitol, mannite, dextrose, or lactose, used, intended for use, or designed
for use in cutting controlled substances.
   7.   Separators; Sifters. Separation gins and sifters used, intended for
use, or designed for use in removing twigs and seeds from, or in otherwise
cleaning or refining marijuana.
   8.   Mixing Devices. Blenders, bowls, containers, spoons, and mixing devices
used, intended for use, or designed for use in compounding controlled
substances.
   9.   Containers. Capsules, balloons, envelopes, and other containers used,
intended for use, or designed for use in packaging small quantities of
controlled substances.
   10.   Storage Containers. Containers and other objects used, intended for
use, or designed for use in storing or concealing controlled substances.
   11.   Injecting Devices. Hypodermic syringes, needles, and other objects
used, intended for use, or designed for use in parenterally injecting
controlled substances into the human body.
   12.   Ingesting-Inhaling Device. Objects used, intended for use, or designed
for use in ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing heroin, marijuana,
cocaine, hashish, or hashish oil into the human body, such as:
      A.   Metal, wooden, acrylic, glass, stone, plastic, or ceramic pipes with
or without screens, permanent screens, hashish heads, or punctured metal bowls;
      B.   Water pipes;
      C.   Carburetion tubes and devices;
      D.   Smoking and carburetion masks;
      E.   Roach clips, meaning objects used to hold burning materials, such as
a marijuana cigarette that has become too small or too short to be held in the
hand;
      F.   Miniature cocaine spoons and cocaine vials;
      G.   Chamber pipes;
      H.   Carburetor pipes;
      I.   Electric pipes;
      J.   Air driven pipes;
      K.   Chillums;
      L.   Bongs;
      M.   Ice pipes or chillers.
43.04   DETERMINING FACTORS.
In determining whether an object is drug paraphernalia for the purpose of
enforcing this chapter, the following factors should be considered in addition
to all other logically relevant factors:
   1.   Statements. Statements by an owner or by anyone in control of the
object concerning its use.
   2.   Prior Convictions. Prior convictions, if any, of an owner or of anyone
in control of the object under any State or federal law relating to any
controlled substance.
   3.   Proximity to Violation. The proximity of the object, in time and space,
to a direct violation of the Uniform Controlled Substance Act, Chapter 124 of
the Code of Iowa.
   4.   Proximity to Substances. The proximity of the object to controlled
substances.
   5.   Residue. The existence of any residue of controlled substances on the
object.
   6.   Evidence of Intent. Direct or circumstantial evidence of the intent of
an owner or of anyone in control of the object, to deliver it to persons whom
he or she knows, or should reasonably know, intend to use the object to
facilitate a violation of the Uniform Controlled Substances Act, Chapter 124 of
the Code of Iowa.
   7.   Innocence of an Owner. The innocence of an owner, or of anyone in
control of the object, as to a direct violation of the Uniform Controlled
Substances Act, Chapter 124 of the Code of Iowa, should not prevent a finding
that the object is intended for use, or designed for use as drug paraphernalia.
   8.   Instructions. Instructions, oral or written, provided with the object
concerning its use.
   9.   Descriptive Materials. Descriptive materials accompanying the object
explaining or depicting its use.
   10.   Advertising. National and local advertising concerning its use.
   11.   Displayed. The manner in which the object is displayed for sale.
   12.   Licensed Distributor or Dealer. Whether the owner, or anyone in
control of the object, is a legitimate supplier of like or related items to the
community, such as a licensed distributor or dealer of tobacco products.
   13.   Sales Ratios. Direct or circumstantial evidence of the ratio of sales
of the objects to the total sales of the business enterprise.
   14.   Legitimate Uses. The existence and scope of legitimate uses for the
object in the community.
   15.   Expert Testimony. Expert testimony concerning its use.
43.05   POSSESSION OF DRUG PARAPHERNALIA.
It is unlawful for any person to use, or to possess with intent to use, drug
paraphernalia to plant, propagate, cultivate, grow, harvest, manufacture,
compound, convert, produce, process, prepare, test, analyze, pack, repack,
store, contain, conceal, inject, ingest, inhale, or otherwise introduce into
the human body a controlled substance in violation of the Uniform Controlled
Substance Act, Chapter 124 of the Code of Iowa.
43.06   MANUFACTURE, DELIVERY, OR OFFERING FOR SALE.
It is unlawful for any person to deliver, possess with intent to deliver,
manufacture with intent to deliver, or offer for sale drug paraphernalia,
intending that the drug paraphernalia will be used, or knowing, or under
circumstances where one reasonably should know that it will be used, or knowing
that it is designed for use to plant, propagate, cultivate, grow, harvest,
manufacture, compound, convert, produce, process, prepare, test, analyze, pack,
repack, store, contain, conceal, inject, ingest, inhale, or otherwise introduce
into the human body a controlled substance in violation of the Uniform
Controlled Substances Act, Chapter 124 of the Code of Iowa.
CHAPTER 45
ALCOHOL CONSUMPTION AND INTOXICATION
 
45.01 Persons Under Legal Age            45.04 Social Host
45.02 Public Consumption or Intoxication 45.05 Under the Influence of a
                                         Controlled Substance
45.03 Open Containers in Motor Vehicles  45.06 Sniffing Glue or Other Chemical
                                         Substances
 
45.01   PERSONS UNDER LEGAL AGE.
As used in this section, “legal age” means 21 years of age or more.  
   1.   A person or persons under legal age shall not purchase or attempt to
purchase, consume, or individually or jointly have alcoholic beverages in their
possession or control; except in the case of any alcoholic beverage given or
dispensed to a person under legal age within a private home and with the
knowledge, presence, and consent of the parent or guardian, for beverage or
medicinal purposes or as administered to the person by either a physician or
dentist for medicinal purposes and except to the extent that a person under
legal age may handle alcoholic beverages during the regular course of the
person’s employment by a retail alcohol licensee, or wine or beer permittee
under State laws.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.47[2])
   2.   A person under legal age shall not misrepresent the person’s age for
the purpose of purchasing or attempting to purchase any alcoholic beverage from
any retail alcohol licensee.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49[3])
45.02   PUBLIC CONSUMPTION OR INTOXICATION.
   1.   As used in this section unless the context otherwise requires:
      A.   “Arrest” means the same as defined in Section 804.5 of the Code of
Iowa and includes taking into custody pursuant to Section 232.19 of the Code of
Iowa.
      B.   “Chemical test” means a test of a person’s blood, breath, or urine
to determine the percentage of alcohol present by a qualified person using
devices and methods approved by the Commissioner of Public Safety.
      C.   “Peace officer” means the same as defined in Section 801.4 of the
Code of Iowa.
      D.   “School” means a public or private school or that portion of a
public or private school that provides teaching for any grade from kindergarten
through grade twelve.
   2.   A person shall not use or consume alcoholic liquor, wine, or beer upon
the public streets or highways. A person shall not use or consume alcoholic
liquor in any public place, except premises covered by a retail alcohol
license. A person shall not possess or consume alcoholic liquors, wine, or beer
on public school property or while attending any public or private school-
related function. A person shall not be intoxicated in a public place.
   3.   A person shall not simulate intoxication in a public place.
   4.   When a peace officer arrests a person on a charge of public
intoxication under this section, the peace officer shall inform the person that
the person may have a chemical test administered at the person’s own expense.
If a device approved by the Commissioner of Public Safety for testing a sample
of a person’s breath to determine the person’s blood alcohol concentration is
available, that is the only test that need be offered the person arrested. In a
prosecution for public intoxication, evidence of the results of a chemical test
performed under this subsection is admissible upon proof of a proper
foundation. The percentage of alcohol present in a person’s blood, breath, or
urine established by the results of a chemical test performed within two hours
after the person’s arrest on a charge of public intoxication is presumed to be
the percentage of alcohol present at the time of arrest.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.46)
45.03   OPEN CONTAINERS IN MOTOR VEHICLES.
[See Section 62.01(50) and (51) of this Code of Ordinances.]
45.04   SOCIAL HOST.
A person who is the owner or lessee of, or who otherwise has control over,
property that is not a licensed premises shall not knowingly permit any person,
knowing or having reasonable cause to believe the person to be under the age of
eighteen, to consume or possess on such property any alcoholic beverage. The
provisions of this subsection shall not apply to a landlord or manager of the
property or to a person under legal age who consumes or possesses any alcoholic
beverage in connection with a religious observance, ceremony, or rite.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.47)
45.05   UNDER THE INFLUENCE OF A CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE.
A person shall not be under the influence, or simulate being under the
influence, of a controlled substance (in violation of the Uniform Controlled
Substances Act, 21 U.S.C. § 811) in a public place.
45.06   SNIFFING GLUE OR OTHER CHEMICAL SUBSTANCES.
No person shall, for the purpose of causing a condition of intoxication,
euphoria, excitement, exhilaration, stupefaction, or dulling of the senses or
nervous system, smell or inhale the fumes from any glue, cement, aerosol spray,
inhalers, and other solvents or chemicals having the property of releasing
vapors; however, this section shall not apply to the inhalation of any medicine
or anesthesia for medical or dental purposes.
CHAPTER 46
MINORS
 
46.01 Curfew                 46.03 Contributing to Delinquency
46.02 Cigarettes and Tobacco
 
46.01   CURFEW.
The Council has determined that a curfew for minors is necessary to promote the
public health, safety, morals and general welfare of the City and specifically
to reinforce the primary authority and responsibility of adults responsible for
minors; to protect the public from the illegal acts of minors committed after
the curfew hour; and to protect minors from improper influences and criminal
activity that prevail in public places after the curfew hour.
   1.   Definitions. For use in this section, the following terms are defined:
      A.   “Emergency errand” means, but is not limited to, an errand relating
to a fire, a natural disaster, an automobile accident or any other situation
requiring immediate action to prevent serious illness, bodily injury, or loss
of life.
      B.   “Knowingly” means knowledge that a responsible adult should
reasonably be expected to have concerning the whereabouts of a minor in that
responsible adult’s custody. It is intended to continue to hold the neglectful
or careless adult responsible for a minor to a reasonable standard of adult
responsibility through an objective test. It is therefore no defense that an
adult responsible for a minor was completely indifferent to the activities or
conduct or whereabouts of the minor.
      C.   “Minor” means any unemancipated person under the age of 18 years.
      D.   “Nonsecured custody” means custody in an unlocked multipurpose area,
such as a lobby, office or interrogation room that is not designed, set aside,
or used as a secure detention area, and the person arrested is not physically
secured during the period of custody in the area; the person is physically
accompanied by a law enforcement officer or a person employed by the facility
where the person arrested is being held; and the use of the area is limited to
providing nonsecured custody only while awaiting transfer to an appropriate
juvenile facility or to court, for contacting of and release to the person’s
parents or other responsible adult or for other administrative purposes; but
not for longer than six hours without the oral or written order of a judge or
magistrate authorizing the detention. A judge shall not extend the period of
time in excess of six hours beyond the initial six-hour period.
      E.   “Public place” includes stores, parking lots, parks, playgrounds,
streets, alleys, and sidewalks dedicated to public use and also includes such
parts of buildings and other premises, whether publicly or privately owned,
that are used by the general public or to which the general public is invited
commercially for a fee or otherwise; or in or on which the general public is
permitted without specific invitation; or to which the general public has
access. For purposes of this section, a vehicle or other conveyance is
considered to be a public place when in the areas defined above.
      F.   “Responsible adult” means a parent, guardian or other adult
specifically authorized by law or authorized by a parent or guardian to have
custody or control of a minor.
   2.   Curfew Established. It is unlawful for any minor to be or remain upon
any of the alleys, streets, or public places, or to be in places of business
and amusement, in the City between the hours of midnight and 5:00 a.m. of the
following day on days commencing on Sunday, Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday and
Thursday and between the hours of midnight and 5:00 a.m. on Friday and
Saturday.
   3.   Exceptions. The following are exceptions to the curfew:
      A.   The minor is accompanied by a responsible adult.
      B.   The minor is on the sidewalk or property where the minor resides or
on either side of the place where the minor resides and the adult responsible
for the minor has given permission for the minor to be there.
      C.   The minor is present at or is traveling between home and one of the
following:
         (1)   Minor’s place of employment in a business, trade or occupation
in which the minor is permitted by law to be engaged or, if traveling, within
one hour after the end or before the beginning of work;
         (2)   Minor’s place of religious activity or, if traveling, within one
hour after the end or before the beginning of the religious activity;
         (3)   Governmental or political activity or, if traveling, within one
hour after the end or before the beginning of the activity;
         (4)   School activity or, if traveling, within one hour after the end
or before the beginning of the activity;
         (5)   Assembly such as a march, protest, demonstration, sit-in or
meeting of an association for the advancement of economic, political, religious
or cultural matters, or for any other activity protected by the First Amendment
of the U.S. Constitution guarantees of free exercise of religion, freedom of
speech, freedom of assembly or, if traveling, within one hour after the end or
before the beginning of the activity.
      D.   The minor is on an emergency errand for a responsible adult;
      E.   The minor is engaged in interstate travel through the City
beginning, ending or passing through the City when such travel is by direct
route.
   4.   Responsibility of Adults. It is unlawful for any responsible adult
knowingly to permit or to allow a minor to be in any public place in the City
within the time periods prohibited by this section unless the minor’s presence
falls within one of the above exceptions.
   5.   Enforcement Procedures.
      A.   Determination of Age. In determining the age of the juvenile and in
the absence of convincing evidence such as a birth certificate or driver’s
license, a law enforcement officer on the street shall, in the first instance,
use his or her best judgment in determining age.
      B.   Grounds for Arrest; Conditions of Custody. Grounds for arrest are
that the person refuses to sign the citation without qualification; persists in
violating the ordinance; refuses to provide proper identification or to
identify himself or herself; or constitutes an immediate threat to the person’s
own safety or to the safety of the public. A law enforcement officer who
arrests a minor for a curfew violation may keep the minor in custody either in
a shelter care facility or in any nonsecured setting. The officer shall not
place bodily restraints, such as handcuffs, on the minor unless the minor
physically resists or threatens physical violence when being taken into
custody. A minor shall not be placed in detention following a curfew violation.
      C.   Notification of Responsible Adult. After a minor is taken into
custody, the law enforcement officer shall notify the adult responsible for the
minor as soon as possible. The minor shall be released to the adult responsible
for the minor upon the promise of such person to produce the child in court at
such time as the court may direct.
      D.   Minor Without Adult Supervision. If a law enforcement officer
determines that a minor does not have adult supervision because the law
enforcement officer cannot locate the minor’s parent, guardian or other person
legally responsible for the care of the minor, within a reasonable time, the
law enforcement officer shall attempt to place the minor with an adult relative
of the minor, an adult person who cares for the child or another adult person
who is known to the child.
   6.   Penalties.
      A.   Responsible Adult’s First Violation. In the case of a first
violation by a minor, the law enforcement officer shall, by certified mail,
send to the adult responsible for the minor, written notice of the violation
with a warning that any subsequent violation will result in full enforcement of
the curfew ordinance against both the responsible adult and minor, with
applicable penalties.
      B.   Responsible Adult’s Second Violation. Any responsible adult as
defined in this section who, following receipt of a warning, knowingly allows
the minor to violate any of the provisions of this section is guilty of a
municipal infraction.
      C.   Minor’s First Violation. In the case of a first violation by a
minor, the law enforcement officer shall give the minor a written warning,
which states that any subsequent violation will result in full enforcement of
the curfew ordinance against the responsible adult and the minor, with
applicable penalties, or, at the law enforcement officer’s discretion, may
issue the minor a citation for a first violation.
      D.   Minor’s Second Violation. For the minor’s second and subsequent
violations of any of the provisions of this section, the minor is guilty of a
municipal infraction.
46.02   CIGARETTES AND TOBACCO.
It is unlawful for any person under 21 years of age to smoke, use, possess,
purchase, or attempt to purchase any tobacco, tobacco products, alternative
nicotine products, vapor products, or cigarettes. Possession of tobacco,
tobacco products, alternative nicotine products, vapor products, or cigarettes
by an individual under 21 years of age shall not constitute a violation of this
section if the individual under 21 years of age possesses the tobacco, tobacco
products, alternative nicotine products, vapor products, or cigarettes as part
of the person’s employment and said person is employed by a person who holds a
valid permit under Chapter 453A of the Code of Iowa or who lawfully offers for
sale or sells cigarettes or tobacco products.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 453A.2)
46.03   CONTRIBUTING TO DELINQUENCY.
It is unlawful for any person to encourage any child under 18 years of age to
commit any act of delinquency.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 709A.1)
CHAPTER 47
PARK REGULATIONS
 
47.01 Purpose                47.05 Parks Closed
47.02 Use of Drives Required 47.06 Camping
47.03 Fires                  47.07 Crossroads Park
47.04 Littering
 
47.01   PURPOSE.
The purpose of this chapter is to facilitate the enjoyment of park facilities
by the general public by establishing rules and regulations governing the use
of park facilities.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12)
47.02   USE OF DRIVES REQUIRED.
No person shall drive any car, cycle, ATV, UTV, or other vehicle, or ride or
lead any horse, in any portion of a park except upon the established drives or
roadways therein or such other places as may be officially designated by the
City.
47.03   FIRES.
No fire shall be built, except in a place designated for such purpose, and such
fire shall be extinguished before leaving the area unless it is to be
immediately used by some other party.
47.04   LITTERING.
No person shall place, deposit, or throw any waste, refuse, litter, or foreign
substance in any area or receptacle except those provided for that purpose.
47.05   PARKS CLOSED.
No person, except those camping in designated areas, shall enter or remain
within any park between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.
47.06   CAMPING.
No person shall camp in any portion of a park except in portions prescribed or
designated by the Council, and the City may refuse camping privileges or
rescind any and all camping privileges for cause. Camping shall not be for a
period longer than three days, unless written consent and permission is given
by the Parks and Recreation Board for a period longer than three days. There
shall be no camping allowed in Crossroads Park.
47.07   CROSSROADS PARK.
Boating and canoeing are permitted in Crossroads Park pond, only in the area
designated for that purpose by the Council. Boats with electric motors are not
allowed. Ice skating and camping are not allowed in Crossroads Park. Parking or
driving on the grass at Crossroads Park is not allowed.
CHAPTER 50
NUISANCE ABATEMENT PROCEDURE
 
50.01 Definition of Nuisance    50.06 Abatement of Nuisance by Written Notice
50.02 Examples of Nuisances     50.07 Municipal Infraction Abatement Procedure
50.03 Other Nuisance Conditions 50.08 Applicability
50.04 Nuisances Prohibited      50.09 Adult Establishments
50.05 Nuisance Abatement
 
50.01   DEFINITION OF NUISANCE.
Whatever is injurious to health, indecent, or unreasonably offensive to the
senses, or an obstruction to the free use of property so as essentially to
interfere unreasonably with the comfortable enjoyment of life or property is a
nuisance.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 657.1)
50.02   EXAMPLES OF NUISANCES.
The following subsections include, but do not limit, the conditions that are
deemed to be nuisances in the City:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 657.2)
   1.   Offensive Smells. Erecting, continuing, or using any building or other
place for the exercise of any trade, employment, or manufacture that, by
occasioning noxious exhalations, unreasonably offensive smells, or other
annoyances, becomes injurious and dangerous to the health, comfort, or property
of individuals or the public.
   2.   Filth or Noisome Substance. Causing or suffering any offal, filth, or
noisome substance to be collected or to remain in any place to the prejudice of
others.
   3.   Impeding Passage of Navigable River. Obstructing or impeding without
legal authority the passage of any navigable river, harbor, or collection of
water.
   4.   Water Pollution. Corrupting or rendering unwholesome or impure the
water of any river, stream, or pond, or unlawfully diverting the same from its
natural course or state, to the injury or prejudice of others.
   5.   Blocking Public and Private Ways. Obstructing or encumbering, by
fences, buildings or otherwise, the public roads, private ways, streets,
alleys, commons, landing places, or burying grounds.
   6.   Signs and Billboards Obstructing Views. Billboards, signboards, and
advertising signs, whether erected and constructed on public or private
property, that so obstruct and impair the view of any portion or part of a
public street, avenue, highway, boulevard, or alley or of a railroad or street
railway track as to render dangerous the use thereof. (See also Section 62.06) 
   7.   Storing of Flammable Junk. Depositing or storing of flammable junk,
such as old rags, rope, cordage, rubber, bones and paper, by dealers in such
articles within the fire limits of the City, unless in a building of fireproof
construction. (See also Chapter 51) 
   8.   Air Pollution. Emission of dense smoke, noxious fumes, or fly ash.
   9.   Grass, Weeds, and Brush. Dense growth of all weeds, vines, brush, or
other vegetation in the City. All grass or weeds growing on lots and parcels to
a height in excess of six inches within the corporate limits of the City shall
constitute a nuisance. Any vines, noxious weeds or bushes that are extensively
overgrown on the premises shall constitute a public nuisance.
   10.   Diseased and Infested Trees, Bushes, and Shrubs. Trees, bushes, and
shrubs infected with disease or infested with invasive species including, but
not limited to, Dutch elm disease and emerald ash borer. (See also Chapter 151)
   11.   Obstructing Airport Air Space. Any object or structure hereafter
erected within 1,000 feet of the limits of any municipal or regularly
established airport or landing place, which may endanger or obstruct aerial
navigation including take-off and landing, unless such object or structure
constitutes a proper use or enjoyment of the land on which the same is located.
   12.   Houses of Ill Fame. Houses of ill fame, kept for the purpose of
prostitution and lewdness; gambling houses; places resorted to by persons
participating in criminal gang activity prohibited by Chapter 723A of the Code
of Iowa or places resorted to by persons using controlled substances, as
defined in Section 124.101 of the Code of Iowa, in violation of law, or houses
where drunkenness, quarreling, fighting, or breaches of the peace are carried
on or permitted to the disturbance of others.
   13.   Buildings Without Mandatory Connections. All residences and business
establishments within the City limits, intended for or used for human
habitation, occupancy, or use, that are without connection to the public water
and sewer system when it is reasonably available. (See also Chapters 90 and
95) 
   14.   Deposits on Parking or Lawn. The deposit or storage of any garbage or
refuse containers on the front lawn, parking, or area between the sidewalk and
curb on any streets.
   15.   Gravel. Gravel for use as a driveway or parking space(s).
   16.   Abandoned Appliances or Personal Property. The abandoning or otherwise
leaving unattended of any refrigerator, icebox, or similar container, with or
without doors that may become locked, outside of buildings. The allowing of any
such refrigerator, icebox, or similar container to remain outside of buildings
on premises in the person’s possession or control, abandoned or unattended.
Shall also include any abandoned, discarded, or unused objects or equipment
such as, but not limited to, lawn tractors, furniture, appliances, containers,
etc.
   17.   Construction Sites. The maintenance of a construction site in such a
manner that litter, and construction debris or construction materials shall be
prevented from being carried to adjoining or other properties by the elements
or negligence.
   18.   Housing Standards. A house or any residential dwelling, other than a
non-residential building or land, visible from any public place or private
premises remaining in an unclean or disorderly condition and nonconforming to
other orderly premises in the vicinity. Examples of unclean or disorderly
condition may include, but not limited to, broken or missing windows or doors,
holes within or deteriorating roof structure, siding that is missing or
deteriorating, or any other conditions that would otherwise allow for the
intrusion of rodents or other small animals to enter the premises freely.
   19.   Property Standards. Premises, land, landscaping or general maintenance
of any residential or commercial property in a current state or condition that
could potentially result in a decrease in property value or prove detrimental
to the neighborhood in which such property is located.
   20.   Compost. Any compost pile or other pile of natural grass, weeds, or
debris which may result in the harboring of diseases, emitting unpleasant
odors, emitting harmful gasses, attract rodents or other small animals, vermin,
or other disease-causing pests.
   21.   Debris on Public Right-of-Way. The depositing or storage of any
garbage or refuse containers, brush, rubbish, grass, rocks, building materials,
or any other debris or materials located on the parking or public right-of-way
area between the curb and sidewalk along any public street; except for a period
of not more than 24 hours while awaiting removal of garbage or recycling by
refuse haulers.
   22.   Storage, Collection, Discharge, or Depositing of Rotting Materials.
The storage, collection, discharge, or depositing of any liquid waste, offal,
filth, garbage, refuse, dead animals, or contaminated material in any private
or public place so as to threaten the health, safety; or is offensive to the
senses of any individual or the public; or conducive to the breeding and
harborage of flies, rats, or other vermin. Exempt from this nuisance definition
is the processing of game animals in accordance with Iowa Department of Natural
Resources regulations.
   23.   Debris, Refuse, Rubbish, Trash. Accumulations of waste boards, bricks,
concrete or rocks, animal or vegetable products or matter, ashes, barrels
(excluding solid waste collection barrels awaiting pickup), bones, bottles,
broken glass, brush, cans, cartons, cinders, coal, crates, pallets, decayed
fruits or vegetables, dirt, dust, excrement, fence wire, filth, firewood not
piled or stacked neatly, flammable materials, garbage, gasoline, grass,
household furniture, discarded or broken or abandoned toys, iron and other
metals, junk, kegs, leaves, logs, lumber not piled or stacked neatly, lumber
scraps, manure, nails, offal, oil, old wearing apparel, paper, plastic
(discarded containers or wrappers), plumbing fixtures, putrid fish or meat
entrails, rags, roof shingles, rubber, sawdust, soot, straw, sweepings, tarps
not in good repair, tires, toilets, tubs, vehicle parts, weeds, wire, wood or
metal shavings, any type of solid or yard waste (bagged or unbagged), or any
condition or item that would prohibit the routine maintenance of the property
or adversely affect the use and habitability of nearby property and of property
within the City as a whole. Foliage and shrub clippings or cuttings, leaves,
brush and fallen tree limbs or debris, firewood and other yard waste may be
stored in piles in a rear yard and should be stored temporarily pending
disposal or when used for mulch or composting or firewood.
   24.   Vehicle Part Storage. Other than within an enclosed building on
private property zoned residential, storage of any two or more vehicle parts
including, but not limited to, bumpers, engines, exhaust systems, doors,
fenders, hoods, mufflers, seats, windshields or windows, wheels, or any other
structural, mechanical, or decorative vehicle parts.
   25.   Other Nuisances. Any matter, thing, substance, or condition within the
City deemed to be a nuisance in Chapter 657 of the Code of Iowa, or defined as
a public nuisance in Chapter 657A of the Code of Iowa, or the successor
provisions of either chapter.
50.03   OTHER NUISANCE CONDITIONS.
The following chapters of this Code of Ordinances contain regulations
prohibiting or restricting other conditions that are deemed to be nuisances:
   1.   Junk and Junk Vehicles (See Chapter 51)
   2.   Parking Regulations (See Chapter 69)
   3.   Dangerous Buildings (See Chapter 145)
   4.   Storage and Disposal of Solid Waste (See Chapter 105)
   5.   Trees (See Chapter 151)
50.04   NUISANCES PROHIBITED.
The creation or maintenance of a nuisance is prohibited, and a nuisance, public
or private, may be abated in the manner provided for in this chapter or State
law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 657.3)
50.05   NUISANCE ABATEMENT.
Whenever the City Manager finds that a nuisance exists, such officer has the
authority to determine on a case-by-case basis whether to utilize the nuisance
abatement procedure described in Section 50.06 of this chapter or the municipal
infraction procedure referred to in Section 50.07. 
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3h])
50.06   ABATEMENT OF NUISANCE BY WRITTEN NOTICE.
Any nuisance, public or private, may be abated in the manner provided for in
this section:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3h])
   1.   Contents of Notice to Property Owner. The notice to abate shall
contain: † 1
      A.   Description of Nuisance. A description of what constitutes the
nuisance.
      B.   Location of Nuisance. The location of the nuisance or condition.
      C.   Acts Necessary to Abate. A statement of the act or acts necessary to
abate the nuisance.
      D.   Reasonable Time. A reasonable time within which to complete the
abatement.
      E.   Assessment of City Costs. A statement that if the nuisance or
condition is not abated as directed and no request for hearing is made within
the time prescribed, the City will abate it and assess the costs against the
property owner or tenant or renter upon which the nuisance exists.
   2.   Method of Service. The notice may be in the form of an ordinance or
sent by certified mail to the property owner.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3h])
   3.   Request for Hearing. Any person ordered to abate a nuisance may have a
hearing with the Council as to whether a nuisance exists and the appropriate
method of abatement. A request for a hearing must be made in writing and
delivered to the Clerk within the time stated in the notice, or it will be
conclusively presumed that a nuisance exists, and it must be abated as ordered.
The hearing will be before the Council at a time and place fixed by the
Council. The findings of the Council shall be conclusive and, if a nuisance is
found to exist, it shall be ordered abated within a reasonable time under the
circumstances in such manner as the City Council may determine appropriate.
Pursuant to Iowa law, evidence presented at the hearing may include hearsay if
deemed reasonably reliable by the Council.
   4.   No Hearing Requested. If no hearing is requested, it shall be
conclusively presumed that a nuisance exists, and it must be abated as ordered.
In such a case, the Council shall enter an order finding that a nuisance exists
and ordering that the City or persons retained by the City take appropriate
measures to abate the nuisance, if the property owner has not already done so.
   5.   Abatement in Emergency. If it is determined that an emergency exists by
reason of the continuing maintenance of the nuisance or condition, the City may
perform any action that may be required under this chapter without prior
notice. The City shall assess the costs as provided in Subsection 6 of this
section after notice to the property owner under the applicable provisions of
Subsections 1 and 2, and the hearing as provided in Subsection 3.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3h])
   6.   Abatement by City. If the person notified to abate a nuisance or
condition neglects or fails to abate as directed, the City may perform the
required action to abate, keeping an accurate account of the expense incurred.
The itemized expense account shall be filed with the Clerk, who shall pay such
expenses on behalf of the City.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3h])
   7.   Collection of Costs. The Clerk shall send a statement of the total
expense incurred by certified mail, including administrative fees and
attorney’s fees, to the property owner who has failed to abide by the notice to
abate, and if the amount shown by the statement has not been paid within one
month, the Clerk shall certify the costs to the County Treasurer and such costs
shall then be collected with, and in the same manner as, general property
taxes.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3h])
   8.   Installment Payment of Cost of Abatement. If the amount expended to
abate the nuisance or condition exceeds $500.00, the City may permit the
assessment to be paid in up to 10 annual installments, to be paid in the same
manner and with the same interest rates provided for assessments against
benefited property under State law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.13)
   9.   Failure to Abate. Any person causing or maintaining a nuisance who
shall fail or refuse to abate or remove the same within the reasonable time
required and specified in the notice to abate is in violation of this Code of
Ordinances.
 
Notes
  † EDITOR’S NOTE: A suggested form of notice for the abatement of nuisances is
  included in the Appendix of this Code of Ordinances. Caution is urged in the use
  of this administrative abatement procedure, particularly where cost of abatement
1 is more than minimal or where there is doubt as to whether or not a nuisance does
  in fact exist. If compliance is not secured following notice and hearings, we
  recommend you review the situation with your attorney before proceeding with
  abatement and assessment of costs. Your attorney may recommend proceedings in
  court under Chapter 657 of the Code of Iowa rather than this procedure.
50.07   MUNICIPAL INFRACTION ABATEMENT PROCEDURE.
In lieu of the abatement procedures set forth in Section 50.06, the
requirements of this chapter may be enforced under the procedures applicable to
municipal infractions as set forth in Chapter 4 of this Code of Ordinances.
50.08   APPLICABILITY.  
This chapter is applicable to all nuisance proceedings pending as of the date
of its adoption or commenced thereafter.
50.09   ADULT ESTABLISHMENTS.
   1.   As used in this section, “adult establishment” means any business that
provides nude or topless dancing or operates any other adult-oriented business.
   2.   A public safety nuisance exists when it is established by clear and
convincing evidence that an owner, manager, employee, contemporaneous patron,
or guest of an adult establishment commits any of the following acts either on
the premises or in any parking lots or areas, including but not limited to
public rights-of-way, adjacent to the premises:
      A.   Unlawfully discharges a firearm or uses an offensive weapon, as
defined in Section 724.1 of the Code of Iowa, regardless of whether it inflicts
injury or death.
      B.   Assaults another person with a dangerous weapon as defined in
Section 702.7 of the Code of Iowa resulting in injury or death.
      C.   Engages in a riot as defined in Section 723.1 of the Code of Iowa on
three or more dates within a 12-month period to which the police respond and
disperse a crowd. The participants need not be the same persons for each
incident.
   3.   When the City Attorney believes a serious threat to the public safety
exists, the City Attorney or any other attorney on behalf of the City Attorney,
may file a suit in equity in the district court without bond seeking abatement
of the public safety nuisance arising from an adult establishment.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 657.12)
(Section 50.09 – Ord._O24-3288.6 – Sep. 24 Supp.)
CHAPTER 51
JUNK AND JUNK VEHICLES
 
51.01 Definitions                       51.04 Exceptions
51.02 Junk and Junk Vehicles Prohibited 51.05 Notice to Abate
51.03 Junk and Junk Vehicles a Nuisance
 
51.01   DEFINITIONS.
For use in this chapter, the following terms are defined:
   1.   “Junk” means all old or scrap copper, brass, lead, or any other non-
ferrous metal; old or discarded rope, rags, batteries, paper, trash, rubber,
debris, waste or used lumber, or salvaged wood; dismantled vehicles, machinery,
and appliances or parts of such vehicles, machinery, or appliances including,
but not limited to, flat tires and stacked tires; iron, steel, or other old or
scrap ferrous materials; old or discarded glass, tinware, plastic or old or
discarded household goods or hardware; oversized or overflowing dumpsters.
Neatly stacked firewood located on a side yard or a rear yard is not considered
junk.
   2.   “Junk vehicle” means any vehicle legally placed in storage with the
County Treasurer or unlicensed and having any of the following characteristics:
      A.   Broken Glass. Any vehicle with a broken or cracked windshield,
window, headlight or tail light, or any other cracked or broken glass.
      B.   Broken, Loose, or Missing Part. Any vehicle with a broken, loose, or
missing fender, door, bumper, hood, steering wheel, or trunk lid.
      C.   Habitat for Nuisance Animals or Insects. Any vehicle that has become
the habitat for rats, mice, cats, snakes, or any other vermin or insects.
      D.   Flammable Fuel. Any vehicle that contains gasoline or any other
flammable fuel.
      E.   Inoperable. Any motor vehicle that lacks an engine or two or more
wheels or other structural parts, rendering said motor vehicle totally
inoperable, or that cannot be moved under its own power or has not been used as
an operating vehicle for a period of 30 days or more.
      F.   Defective or Obsolete Condition. Any other vehicle that, because of
its defective or obsolete condition, in any other way constitutes a threat to
the public health and safety.
Mere licensing of such vehicle shall not constitute a defense to the finding
that the vehicle is a junk vehicle.
   3.   “Vehicle” means every device in, upon, or by which a person or property
is or may be transported or drawn upon a highway or street, except devices
moved by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks, and
includes without limitation a motor vehicle, automobile, truck, motorcycle,
tractor, buggy, wagon, farm machinery, trailer, or any combination thereof.
51.02   JUNK AND JUNK VEHICLES PROHIBITED.
It is unlawful for any person to store, accumulate, or allow to remain on any
private property within the corporate limits of the City any junk or junk
vehicle.
51.03   JUNK AND JUNK VEHICLES A NUISANCE.
It is hereby declared that any junk or junk vehicle located upon private
property, unless excepted by Section 51.04, constitutes a threat to the health
and safety of the citizens and is a nuisance within the meaning of Section
657.1 of the Code of Iowa. If any junk or junk vehicle is kept upon private
property in violation hereof, the owner of or person occupying the property
upon which it is located shall be prima facie liable for said violation.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3a])
51.04   EXCEPTIONS.
The provisions of this chapter do not apply to any junk or a junk vehicle
stored within:
   1.   Structure. A garage or other enclosed structure;
   2.   Salvage Yard. An auto salvage yard or junk yard lawfully operated
within the City; or
   3.   Fence or Wall. A fully enclosed fence or wall of at least six feet in
height (properly permitted and in compliance with the Zoning Code), constructed
to screen such vehicles from public view and to prevent unauthorized entrance
and access to such vehicle.
51.05   NOTICE TO ABATE.
Upon discovery of any junk or junk vehicle located upon private property in
violation of Section 51.03, the City shall, within a reasonable amount of time,
initiate abatement procedures as outlined in Chapter 50 of this Code of
Ordinances.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3a])
CHAPTER 55
ANIMAL PROTECTION AND CONTROL
55.01 Definitions                  55.11 Owner’s Duty
55.02 Animal Neglect               55.12 Confinement
55.03 Livestock Neglect            55.13 At Large: Impoundment
55.04 Abandonment of Cats and Dogs 55.14 Disposition of Animals
55.05 Livestock                    55.15 Impounding Costs
55.06 At Large Prohibited          55.16 Pet Awards Prohibited
55.07 Damage or Interference       55.17 Tampering With A Rabies Vaccination
                                   Tag
55.08 Annoyance or Disturbance     55.18 Tampering With An Electronic Handling
                                   Device
55.09 Sanitation                   55.19 Stray Cats
55.10 Rabies Vaccination           55.20 False Represenation of Service Animal
 
55.01   DEFINITIONS.  
The following terms are defined for use in this chapter.
   1.   “Advertise” means to present a commercial message in any medium,
including (but not limited to) print, radio, television, sign, display, label,
tag, or articulation.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 717E.1)
   2.   “Animal” means a nonhuman vertebrate.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 717B.1)
   3.   “Animal shelter” means a facility which is used to house or contain
dogs or cats, or both, and which is owned, operated, or maintained by an
incorporated humane society, animal welfare society, society for the prevention
of cruelty to animals, or other nonprofit organization devoted to the welfare,
protection, and humane treatment of such animals.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 162.2)
   4.   “At large” means off the premises of the owner and not under the
control of a competent person, restrained within a motor vehicle, or housed in
a veterinary hospital or kennel. A dog is not deemed to be at large if:
      A.   It is attached to a leash of sufficient strength to restrain the dog
and not more than 10 feet in length, when such leash is held by a person
competent to govern the dog; or
      B.   It is properly restrained within a motor vehicle or housed in a
veterinary clinic; or
      C.   It is accompanied by or at heel beside and obedient to commands of
its owner or a competent responsible person.
   5.   “Business” means any enterprise relating to any of the following:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 717E.1)
      A.   The sale or offer for sale of goods or services.
      B.   A recruitment for employment or membership in an organization.
      C.   A solicitation to make an investment.
      D.   An amusement or entertainment activity.
   6.   “Commercial establishment” means an animal shelter, boarding kennel,
commercial breeder, commercial kennel, dealer, pet shop, pound, public auction,
or research facility.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 717.B1)
   7.   “Fair” means any of the following:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 717E.1)
      A.   The annual fair and exposition held by the Iowa State Fair Board
pursuant to Chapter 173 of the Code of Iowa or any fair event conducted by a
fair under the provisions of Chapter 174 of the Code of Iowa.
      B.   An exhibition of agricultural or manufactured products.
      C.   An event for operation of amusement rides or devices or concession
booths.
   8.   “Feral” means homeless, wild, or untamed animals.
   9.   “Game” means a “game of chance” or “game of skill” as defined in
Section 99B.1 of the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 717E.1)
   10.   “Injury” means an animal’s disfigurement; the impairment of an
animal’s health; or an impairment to the functioning of an animal’s limb or
organ, or the loss of an animal’s limb or organ.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 717.B1)
   11.   “Livestock” means an animal belonging to the bovine, caprine, equine,
ovine or porcine species, ostriches, rheas, and emus; farm deer (as defined in
Section 170.1 of the Code of Iowa); or poultry.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 717.1)
   12.   “Owner” means any person owning, keeping, sheltering, or harboring an
animal.
   13.   “Pet” means a living dog, cat, or an animal normally maintained in a
small tank or cage in or near a residence, including but not limited to a
rabbit, gerbil, hamster, mouse, parrot, canary, mynah, finch, tropical fish,
goldfish, snake, turtle, gecko, or iguana.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 717E.1)
   14.   “Pound” means a facility for the prevention of cruelty to animals
operated by the State, a municipal corporation, or other political subdivision
of the State for the purpose of impounding or harboring seized stray, homeless,
abandoned, or unwanted dogs, cats, or other animals; or a facility operated for
such a purpose under a contract with any municipal corporation or incorporated
society.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 162.2)
   15.   “Research facility” means any school or college of medicine,
veterinary medicine, pharmacy, dentistry, or osteopathic medicine, or hospital,
diagnostic or research laboratories, or other educational or scientific
establishment situated in the State concerned with the investigation of, or
instruction concerning the structure or function of living organisms, the
cause, prevention, control, or cure of diseases or abnormal conditions of human
beings or animals.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 162.2)
   16.   “Stray” means any animal whose owner or keeper, from time-to-time,
allows the animal to run free off of the property of the owner or keeper.
   17.   “Veterinarian” means a veterinarian licensed pursuant to Chapter 169
of the Code of Iowa who practices veterinary medicine in the State.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 717.B1)
55.02   ANIMAL NEGLECT.
   1.   It is unlawful for a person who owns or has custody of an animal and
confines that animal to fail to provide the animal with any of the following
conditions for the animal’s welfare:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 717B.3)
      A.   Access to food in an amount and quality reasonably sufficient to
satisfy the animal’s basic nutrition level to the extent that the animal’s
health or life is endangered.
      B.   Access to a supply of potable water in an amount reasonably
sufficient to satisfy the animal’s basic hydration level to the extent that the
animal’s health or life is endangered.  Access to snow or ice does not satisfy
this requirement.
      C.   Sanitary conditions free from excessive animal waste or the
overcrowding of animals to the extent that the animal’s health or life is
endangered.
      D.   Ventilated shelter reasonably sufficient to provide adequate
protection from the elements and weather conditions suitable for the age,
species, and physical condition of the animal so as to maintain the animal in a
state of good health to the extent that the animal’s health or life is
endangered. The shelter must protect the animal from wind, rain, snow, or sun
and have adequate bedding to provide reasonable protection against cold and
dampness. A shelter may include a residence, garage, barn, shed, or doghouse.
      E.   Grooming, to the extent it is reasonably necessary to prevent
adverse health effects or suffering.
      F.   Veterinary care deemed necessary by a reasonably prudent person to
relieve an animal’s distress from any of the following:
         (1)   A condition caused by failing to provide for the animal’s
welfare as described in this section.
         (2)   An injury or illness suffered by the animal causing the animal
to suffer prolonged pain and suffering.
   2.   This section does not apply to any of the following:
      A.   A person operating a commercial establishment under a valid
authorization issued or renewed under Section 162.2A of the Code of Iowa, or a
person acting under the direction or supervision of that person, if all of the
following apply:
         (1)   The animal, as described in Subsection 1, was maintained as part
of the commercial establishment’s operation.
         (2)   In providing conditions for the welfare of the animal, as
described in Subsection 1, the person complied with the standard of care
requirements provided in Section 162.10A[1] of the Code of Iowa, including any
applicable rules adopted by the Department of Agriculture and Land Stewardship
applying to: (i) a State licensee or registrant operating pursuant to Section
162.10A[2a] or [2b] of the Code of Iowa; or (ii) a permittee operating pursuant
to Section 162.10A[2c] of the Code of Iowa.
      B.   A research facility if the research facility has been issued or
renewed a valid authorization by the Department of Agriculture and Land
Stewardship pursuant to Chapter 162 of the Code of Iowa, and performs functions
within the scope of accepted practices and disciplines associated with the
research facility.
55.03   LIVESTOCK NEGLECT.
It is unlawful for a person who impounds or confines livestock in any place to
fail to provide the livestock with care consistent with customary animal
husbandry practices, or to deprive the livestock of necessary sustenance, or to
injure or destroy livestock by any means that causes pain or suffering in a
manner inconsistent with customary animal husbandry practices.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 717.2)
55.04   ABANDONMENT OF CATS AND DOGS.
It is unlawful for a person who owns or has custody of a cat or dog to
relinquish all rights in and duties to care for the cat or dog. This section
does not apply to any of the following:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 717B.8)
   1.   The delivery of a cat or dog to another person who will accept
ownership and custody of the cat or dog.
   2.   The delivery of a cat or dog to an animal shelter or that has been
issued or renewed a valid authorization by the Department of Agriculture and
Land Stewardship under Chapter 162 of the Code of Iowa.
   3.   A person who relinquishes custody of a cat at a location in which the
person does not hold a legal or equitable interest, if previously the person
had taken custody of the cat at the same location and provided for the cat’s
sterilization by a veterinarian.
55.05   LIVESTOCK.
It is unlawful for a person to keep livestock within the City except in
compliance with the City’s zoning regulations.
55.06   AT LARGE PROHIBITED.
It is unlawful for any owner to allow an animal to run at large within the
corporate limits of the City.
55.07   DAMAGE OR INTERFERENCE.
It is unlawful for the owner of an animal to allow or permit such animal to
pass upon the premises of another thereby causing damage to, or interference
with, the premises.
55.08   ANNOYANCE OR DISTURBANCE.
It is unlawful for the owner of a dog to allow or permit such dog to cause
serious annoyance or disturbance to any person by frequent and habitual
howling, yelping, barking, or otherwise, or by running after or chasing
persons, bicycles, automobiles, or other vehicles. It is also unlawful for any
owner to so confine a female dog that is in season so as to attract male dogs
to the area and by their presence cause a nuisance. Any such dog shall be
subject to seizure and impoundment at the expense of the owner during the
remainder of the heat period.
55.09   SANITATION.
   1.   An owner or person in charge of any pet animal shall keep all
structures, pens, coops, or yards wherein pet animals are confined clean,
devoid of vermin, and free of odors arising from urine or feces.
   2.   Any owner or person in charge of any pet animal who shall permit a pet
animal to be on public or private property shall provide for the disposal of
the solid waste material excreted by the pet animal by immediate removal of the
waste.
   3.   All feces removed as aforesaid shall be placed in a container until it
is removed and disposed of in a sanitary manner.
   4.   The provisions of this section shall not apply to dogs used to guide
the visually impaired while such dogs are acting in such capacity.
55.10   RABIES VACCINATION.
Every owner of a dog shall obtain a rabies vaccination for such animal. It is
unlawful for any person to own or have a dog in said person’s possession, six
months of age or over, which has not been vaccinated against rabies. Dogs kept
in State or federally licensed kennels and not allowed to run at large are not
subject to these vaccination requirements.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 351.33)
55.11   OWNER’S DUTY.
It is the duty of the owner of any dog, cat, or other animal that has bitten or
attacked a person or any person having knowledge of such bite or attack to
report this act to a local health or law enforcement official. It is the duty
of physicians and veterinarians to report to the local board of health the
existence of any animal known or suspected to be suffering from rabies.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 351.38)
55.12   CONFINEMENT.
If a local board of health receives information that an animal has bitten a
person or that a dog or animal is suspected of having rabies, the board shall
order the owner to confine such animal in the manner it directs. If the owner
fails to confine such animal in the manner directed, the animal shall be
apprehended and impounded by such board, and after 10 days the board may
humanely destroy the animal. If such animal is returned to its owner, the owner
shall pay the cost of impoundment. This section does not apply if a police
service dog or a horse used by a law enforcement agency and acting in the
performance of its duties has bitten a person.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 351.39)
55.13   AT LARGE: IMPOUNDMENT.
Animals found at large in violation of this chapter may be seized and
impounded, or at the discretion of the peace officer, the owner may be served a
summons to appear before a proper court to answer charges made thereunder.
55.14   DISPOSITION OF ANIMALS.
When an animal has been apprehended and impounded, written notice shall be
provided to the owner within two days after impoundment, if the owner’s name
and current address can reasonably be determined by accessing a tag or other
device that is on or part of the animal. Impounded animals may be recovered by
the owner upon payment of impounding costs, and if an unvaccinated dog, by
having it immediately vaccinated. If the owner fails to redeem the animal
within seven days from the date that the notice is mailed, or if the owner
cannot be located within seven days, the animal shall be disposed of in
accordance with law or destroyed by euthanasia.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 351.37, 351.41)
55.15   IMPOUNDING COSTS.
Impounding costs are $50.00 plus the current daily boarding fee.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 351.37)
55.16   PET AWARDS PROHIBITED.
(Code of Iowa, Ch. 717E)
   1.   Prohibition. It is unlawful for any person to award a pet or advertise
that a pet may be awarded as any of the following:
      A.   A prize for participating in a game.
      B.   A prize for participating in a fair.
      C.   An inducement or condition for visiting a place of business or
attending an event sponsored by a business.
      D.   An inducement or condition for executing a contract that includes
provisions unrelated to the ownership, care, or disposition of the pet.
   2.   Exceptions. This section does not apply to any of the following:
      A.   A pet shop licensed pursuant to Section 162.5 of the Code of Iowa if
the award of a pet is provided in connection with the sale of a pet on the
premises of the pet shop.
      B.   Youth programs associated with 4-H Clubs; Future Farmers of America;
the Izaak Walton League of America; or organizations associated with outdoor
recreation, hunting, or fishing, including but not limited to the Iowa
Sportsmen’s Federation.
55.17   TAMPERING WITH A RABIES VACCINATION TAG.
It is unlawful to tamper with a rabies vaccination tag.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 351.45)
   1.   A person commits the offense of tampering with a rabies vaccination tag
if all of the following apply:
      A.   The person knowingly removes, damages, or destroys a rabies
vaccination tag as described in Section 351.35 of the Code of Iowa.
      B.   The rabies vaccination tag is attached to a collar worn by a dog,
including as provided in Sections 351.25 and 351.26 of the Code of Iowa.
   2.   This section shall not apply to an act taken by any of the following:
      A.   The owner of the dog, an agent of the owner, or a person authorized
to take action by the owner.
      B.   A peace officer.
      C.   A veterinarian.
      D.   An animal shelter or pound.
55.18   TAMPERING WITH AN ELECTRONIC HANDLING DEVICE.
It is unlawful to tamper with an electronic handling device.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 351.46)
   1.   A person commits the offense of tampering with an electronic handling
device if all of the following apply:
      A.   The person knowingly removes, disables, or destroys an electronic
device designed and used to maintain custody or control of the dog or modify
the dog’s behavior.
      B.   The electronic device is attached to or worn by the dog or attached
to an item worn by the dog, including (but not limited to) a collar, harness,
or vest.
   2.   This section shall not apply to an act taken by any of the following:
      A.   The owner of the dog, an agent of the owner, or a person authorized
to take action by the owner.
      B.   A peace officer.
      C.   A veterinarian.
      D.   An animal shelter or pound.
55.19   STRAY CATS.
The City recognizes the need for innovation in addressing the issues presented
by stray and feral cats. To that end, it recognizes that Trap-Neuter-Return
(TNR) is an effective and humane method to manage and reduce the population of
stray and feral cats. The long-term goal of this program is to stabilize the
population of the feral cat colonies within the City. By implementing the TNR
program, the City hopes to increase the health and well-being of both the cat
population and the human community in the future. The City hereby affirms its
long-standing partnership with Sheldon Veterinary Medical Center (SVMC)
regarding stray animals, and supports the mission of SVMC to avoid euthanasia
in accordance with the following provisions:
   1.   The SVMC or the City will acquire written approval for businesses to
place live traps on their premises to catch stray and feral cats. In order to
reduce public health risks and injuries, all live traps shall be placed by, and
picked up by, a staff member of SVMC.
   2.   All trapped animals shall undergo an adequate holding period determined
by SVMC and City Administration (at SVMC) prior to their surgical
sterilization. The City shall only pay the hold for animals referred by the
Police Department, and the SVMC bill shall include officer’s name, date and
time, or police report number.
   3.   After the holding period, SVMC staff shall spay or neuter cats at SVMC
expense and discretion, and notch (ear-tip) the cat’s left ear, in a way that
does not harm the animal, for easy identification of previous enrollment in the
program. All animals shall receive a rabies vaccination. Upon completion of the
neutering, ear-tipping, and vaccination processes, animals shall be returned to
the community or to vicinity of their original location.
55.20   FALSE REPRESENTATION OF SERVICE ANIMAL.
   1.   Definitions. The following terms are defined for use in this section.
      A.   “Assistance animal” means an animal that qualifies as a reasonable
accommodation under the federal Fair Housing Act, 42 U.S.C. §3601 et seq., or
Section 504 of the federal Rehabilitation Act of 1973, 28 U.S.C. §794.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 216.8B(1)(a))
      B.   “Service animal” means a dog or miniature horse as set forth in the
implementing regulations of the federal Americans with Disabilities Act of
1990.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 216C.1A(2))
      C.   “Service animal in-training” means a dog or miniature horse that is
undergoing a course of development and training to do work or perform tasks for
the benefit of an individual that directly relates to the disability of the
individual.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 216C.1A(3))
   2.   A person commits the offense of intentional misrepresentation of an
animal as a service animal or a service-animal-in-training if, for the purpose
of obtaining any of the rights or privileges set forth in State or federal law,
the person intentionally misrepresents an animal in one’s possession as one’s
service animal or service-animal-in-training or a person with a disability’s
service animal or service-animal-in-training whom the person is assisting by
controlling.
(Code of Iowa, Section 216C.11(3)(B))
   3.   Penalty. A . A person who intentionally misrepresents an animal as a
service animal or a service-animal-in-training shall, upon conviction, be
subject to a fine as provided in Section 1.14 of this Code of Ordinances.
(Code of Iowa, Section 216C.11(3)(a))
(Section 55.20 – Ord._O25-3301 – Oct. 25 Supp.)
CHAPTER 56
DANGEROUS AND VICIOUS ANIMALS
 
56.01 Definitions                  56.03 Keeping of Vicious Animals Prohibited
56.02 Keeping of Dangerous Animals 56.04 Seizure, Impoundment, and Disposition
Prohibited
 
56.01   DEFINITIONS.
For use in this chapter, the following terms are defined:
   1.   “Dangerous animal” means† 5
      A.   Badgers, wolverines, weasels, skunks, and mink;
      B.   Raccoons;
      C.   Bats;
      D.   Scorpions.
   2.   “Vicious animal” means any animal, except for a dangerous animal as
listed above, that has attacked, bitten or clawed a person while running at
large and the attack was unprovoked, or any animal that has exhibited vicious
tendencies in present or past conduct, including such that said animal: (i) has
bitten more than one person during the animal’s lifetime; or (ii) has bitten
one person on two or more occasions during the animal’s lifetime; or (iii) has
attacked any domestic animal or fowl without provocation, causing injury or
death while off the property of the owner.
 
Notes
  † EDITOR’S NOTE: Certain other dangerous animals, listed in Chapter 717F.1,
5 Paragraph 5a, of the Code of Iowa, are specifically prohibited and regulated by
  the Iowa Department of Agriculture and Land Stewardship.
56.02   KEEPING OF DANGEROUS ANIMALS PROHIBITED.
No person shall keep, shelter, or harbor any dangerous animal as a pet, or act
as a temporary custodian for such animal, or keep, shelter, or harbor such
animal for any purpose or in any capacity within the City.
56.03   KEEPING OF VICIOUS ANIMALS PROHIBITED.
No person shall keep, shelter, or harbor for any reason within the City a
vicious animal except in the following circumstances:
   1.   Animals under the control of a law enforcement or military agency.
   2.   The keeping of guard dogs; however, guard dogs must be kept within a
structure or fixed enclosure at all times, and any guard dog found at large may
be processed as a vicious animal pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.
Any premises guarded by a guard dog shall be prominently posted with a sign
containing the wording “Guard Dog,” “Vicious Dog” or words of similar import,
and the owner of such premises shall inform the City Manager or peace officer
that a guard dog is on duty at said premises.
56.04   SEIZURE, IMPOUNDMENT, AND DISPOSITION.
   1.   In the event that a dangerous animal or vicious animal is found at
large and unattended upon public property, park property, public right-of-way,
or the property of someone other than its owner, thereby creating a hazard to
persons or property, such animal may, in the discretion of the City Manager or
peace officer, be destroyed if it cannot be confined or captured. The City
shall be under no duty to attempt the confinement or capture of a dangerous
animal or vicious animal found at large, nor shall it have a duty to notify the
owner of such animal prior to its destruction.
   2.   Upon the complaint of any individual that a person is keeping,
sheltering, or harboring a dangerous animal or vicious animal on premises in
the City, the City Manager or peace officer shall cause the matter to be
investigated and if after investigation, the facts indicate that the person
named in the complaint is keeping, sheltering or harboring a dangerous or
vicious animal in the City, the City Manager or peace officer shall order the
person named in the complaint to safely remove such animal from the City or
destroy the animal within three days of the receipt of such an order. Such
order shall be contained in a notice to remove the dangerous or vicious animal,
which notice shall be given in writing to the person keeping, sheltering, or
harboring the dangerous animal or vicious animal, and shall be served
personally or by certified mail. Such order and notice to remove the dangerous
animal or vicious animal shall not be required where such animal has previously
caused serious physical harm or death to any person, in which case the City
Manager or peace officer shall cause the animal to be immediately seized and
impounded or killed if seizure and impoundment are not possible without risk of
serious physical harm or death to any person.
   3.   The order to remove a dangerous animal or vicious animal issued by the
City Manager or peace officer may be appealed to the Council. In order to
appeal such order, written notice of appeal must be filed with the Clerk within
three days after receipt of the order contained in the notice to remove the
dangerous or vicious animal. Failure to file such written notice of appeal
shall constitute a waiver of the right to appeal the order of the City Manager
or peace officer.
   4.   The notice of appeal shall state the grounds for such appeal and shall
be delivered personally or by certified mail to the Clerk. The hearing of such
appeal shall be scheduled within seven days of the receipt of the notice of
appeal. The hearing may be continued for good cause. After such hearing, the
Council may affirm or reverse the order of the City Manager or peace officer.
Such determination shall be contained in a written decision and shall be filed
with the Clerk within three days after the hearing or any continued session
thereof.
   5.   If the Council affirms the action of the City Manager or peace officer,
the Council shall order in its written decision that the person owning,
sheltering, harboring, or keeping such dangerous or vicious animal remove such
animal from the City or destroy it. The decision and order shall immediately be
served upon the person against whom rendered in the same manner as the notice
of removal. If the original order of the City Manager or peace officer is not
appealed and is not complied with within three days or the order of the Council
after appeal is not complied with within three days of its issuance, the City
Manager or peace officer is authorized to seize, impound, or destroy such
dangerous or vicious animal. Failure to comply with an order of the City
Manager or peace officer issued pursuant to this chapter and not appealed, or
of the Council after appeal, constitutes a simple misdemeanor.
CHAPTER 60
ADMINISTRATION OF TRAFFIC CODE
 
60.01 Title                          60.05 Reports of Traffic Accidents
60.02 Definitions                    60.06 Peace Officer’s Authority
60.03 Administration and Enforcement 60.07 Obedience to Peace Officers
60.04 Power to Direct Traffic        60.08 Parades Regulated
 
60.01   TITLE.
Chapters 60 through 70 of this Code of Ordinances may be known and cited as the
“Sheldon Traffic Code” (and are referred to herein as the “Traffic Code”).
60.02   DEFINITIONS.
Where words and phrases used in the Traffic Code are defined by State law, such
definitions apply to their use in said Traffic Code and are hereby adopted by
reference. Those definitions so adopted that need further definition or are
reiterated, and other words and phrases used herein, have the following
meanings:
   1.   “Business District” means the territory contiguous to and including a
highway when 50 percent or more of the frontage thereon for a distance of 300
feet or more is occupied by buildings in use for business.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.1(7))
   2.   “MPH” means miles per hour.
   3.   “Parade” means any march or procession of persons or vehicles organized
for marching or moving on the streets in an organized fashion or manner or any
march or procession of persons or vehicles represented or advertised to the
public as a parade.
   4.   “Park” or “parking” means the standing of a vehicle, whether occupied
or not, otherwise than temporarily for the purpose of and while actually
engaged in loading or unloading merchandise or passengers.
   5.   “Peace officer” means every officer authorized to direct or regulate
traffic or to make arrests for violations of traffic regulations.
   6.   “Pedestrian” means a person afoot or a person using a pedestrian
conveyance.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.1(51))
   7.   “Pedestrian conveyance” means any human-powered device by which a
pedestrian may move other than by walking or by which a pedestrian may move
another person, including but not limited to a wheelchair, stroller,
skateboard, scooter, or other similar device. Pedestrian conveyance also
includes an electric personal assistive mobility device and any other device
used to move a person sitting or standing on the device regardless of whether
the device is powered by an electric motor, so long as the electric motor
produces less than 750 watts. Pedestrian conveyance does not include a bicycle.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.1(51A))
   8.   “Residence district” means the territory contiguous to and including a
highway not comprising a business, suburban, or school district, where 40
percent or more of the frontage on such a highway for a distance of 300 feet or
more is occupied by dwellings or by dwellings and buildings in use for
business.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.1(63))
   9.   “School district” means the territory contiguous to and including a
highway for a distance of 200 feet in either direction from a schoolhouse.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.1(70))
   10.   “Stand” or “standing” means the halting of a vehicle, whether occupied
or not, otherwise than for the purpose of and while actually engaged in
receiving or discharging passengers.
   11.   “Stop” means when required, the complete cessation of movement.
   12.   “Stop” or “stopping” means when prohibited, any halting of a vehicle,
even momentarily, whether occupied or not, except when necessary to avoid
conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a peace
officer or traffic control sign or signal.
   13.   “Suburban district” means all other parts of the City not included in
the business, school, or residence districts.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.1(78))
   14.   “Traffic control device” means all signs, signals, markings, and
devices not inconsistent with this chapter, lawfully placed or erected for the
purpose of regulating, warning, or guiding traffic.
   15.   “Vehicle” means every device in, upon, or by which any person or
property is or may be transported or drawn upon a highway. Vehicle does not
include:
      A.   Any device moved by human power, including a low-speed electric
bicycle.
      B.   Any device used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.
      C.   Any personal delivery device operated pursuant to Chapter 321O of
the Code of Iowa.
      D.   Any integral part of a truck tractor or road tractor which is
mounted on the frame of the truck tractor or road tractor immediately behind
the cab and which may be used to transport persons and property, but which
cannot be drawn upon the highway by the truck tractor or another motor vehicle.
      E.   Any steering axle, dolly, auxiliary axle, or other integral part of
another vehicle which in and of itself is incapable of commercially
transporting any person or property but is used primarily to support another
vehicle.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.1(90))
(Section 60.02 – Ord._O24-3288.3 – Sep. 24 Supp.)
60.03   ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT.
Provisions of this Traffic Code and State law relating to motor vehicles and
law of the road are enforced by the Police Department.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
60.04   POWER TO DIRECT TRAFFIC.
A peace officer or, in the absence of a peace officer, any officer of the Fire
Department when at the scene of a fire, is authorized to direct all traffic by
voice, hand, or signal in conformance with traffic laws. In the event of an
emergency, traffic may be directed as conditions require, notwithstanding the
provisions of the traffic laws.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 102.4 and 321.236[2])
60.05   REPORTS OF TRAFFIC ACCIDENTS.
The driver of a vehicle involved in an accident within the limits of the City
shall file a report as and when required by the Iowa Department of
Transportation. A copy of this report shall be filed with the City for the
confidential use of peace officers and shall be subject to the provisions of
Section 321.271 of the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.273)
60.06   PEACE OFFICER’S AUTHORITY.
A peace officer is authorized to stop a vehicle to require exhibition of the
driver’s license of the driver, to serve a summons or memorandum of traffic
violation, to inspect the condition of the vehicle, to inspect the vehicle with
reference to size, weight, cargo, log book, bills of lading, or other manifest
of employment, tires and safety equipment, or to inspect the registration
certificate, the compensation certificate, travel order, or permit of such
vehicle. A peace officer having probable cause to stop a vehicle may require
exhibition of the proof of financial liability coverage card issued for the
vehicle.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.492)
60.07   OBEDIENCE TO PEACE OFFICERS.
No person shall willfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order or
direction of any peace officer invested by law with authority to direct,
control, or regulate traffic.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.229)
60.08   PARADES REGULATED.
No person shall conduct or cause any parade on any street except as provided
herein:
   1.   Permit Required. No parade shall be conducted without first obtaining a
written permit from the Mayor. Such permit shall state the time and date for
the parade to be held and the streets or general route therefor. Such written
permit granted to the person organizing or sponsoring the parade shall be
permission for all participants therein to parade when such participants have
been invited by the permittee to participate therein. No fee shall be required
for such permit.
   2.   Parade Not a Street Obstruction. Any parade for which a permit has been
issued as herein required, and the persons lawfully participating therein,
shall not be deemed an obstruction of the streets notwithstanding the
provisions of any other ordinance to the contrary.
   3.   Control by Police and Firefighters. Persons participating in any parade
shall at all times be subject to the lawful orders and directions in the
performance of their duties of law enforcement personnel and members of the
Fire Department.
CHAPTER 61
TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES
 
61.01 Installation  61.04 Standards
61.02 Crosswalks    61.05 Compliance
61.03 Traffic Lanes 61.06 Moving or Damaging Devices
 
61.01   INSTALLATION.
The Council shall cause to be placed and maintained traffic control devices
when and as required under this Traffic Code or under State law or emergency or
temporary traffic control devices for the duration of an emergency or temporary
condition as traffic conditions may require to regulate, guide, or warn
traffic. The City shall keep a record of all such traffic control devices.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.255)
61.02   CROSSWALKS.
The Council is hereby authorized to designate and maintain crosswalks by
appropriate traffic control devices at intersections where, due to traffic
conditions, there is particular danger to pedestrians crossing the street or
roadway, and at such other places as traffic conditions require.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4] and 321.255)
61.03   TRAFFIC LANES.
The Police Department is hereby authorized to mark lanes for traffic on street
pavements at such places as traffic conditions require, consistent with this
Traffic Code. Where such traffic lanes have been marked, it is unlawful for the
operator of any vehicle to fail or refuse to keep such vehicle within the
boundaries of any such lane except when lawfully passing another vehicle or
preparatory to making a lawful turning movement.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4] and 321.255)
61.04   STANDARDS.
Traffic control devices shall comply with standards established by The Manual
of Uniform Traffic Control Devices for Streets and Highways.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.255)
61.05   COMPLIANCE.
No driver of a vehicle shall disobey the instructions of any official traffic
control device placed in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, unless
at the time otherwise directed by a peace officer, subject to the exceptions
granted the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle under Sections 321.231
and 321.231A of the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.256)
61.06   MOVING OR DAMAGING DEVICES.
It is unlawful for any person to move, deface, or otherwise damage any sign,
signal, or other traffic control device placed upon the streets of the City.
CHAPTER 62
GENERAL TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
 
62.01 Violation of Regulations          62.07 Obstructing Travel
62.02 Play Streets Designated           62.08 Exhaust Systems
62.03 Vehicles on Sidewalks             62.09 Engine Brakes and Compression
                                        Brakes
62.04 Clinging to Vehicle               62.10 Sheldon Recreation Trail
62.05 Quiet Zones                       62.11 Golf Carts
62.06 Obstructing View at Intersections
 
62.01   VIOLATION OF REGULATIONS.
Any person who willfully fails or refuses to comply with any lawful order of a
peace officer or direction of a Fire Department officer during a fire, or who
fails to abide by the applicable provisions of the following Iowa statutory
laws relating to motor vehicles and the statutory law of the road is in
violation of this section. These sections of the Code of Iowa are adopted by
reference and are as follows:
   1.   Section 321.17 – Misdemeanor to violate registration provisions.
   2.   Section 321.32 – Registration card, carried and exhibited; exception.
   3.   Section 321.37 – Display of plates.
   4.   Section 321.38 – Plates, method of attaching, imitations prohibited.
   5.   Section 321.57 – Operation under special plates.
   6.   Section 321.67 – Certificate of title must be executed.
   7.   Section 321.78 – Injuring or tampering with vehicle.
   8.   Section 321.79 – Intent to injure.
   9.   Section 321.91 – Limitation on liability; penalty for abandonment.
   10.   Section 321.98 – Operation without registration.
   11.   Section 321.99 – Fraudulent use of registration.
   12.   Section 321.104 – Penal offenses against title law.
   13.   Section 321.115 – Antique vehicles; model year plates permitted.
   14.   Section 321.174 – Operators licensed; operation of commercial
vehicles.
   15.   Section 321.174A – Operation of motor vehicles with expired license.
   16.   Section 321.180 – Instruction permits, commercial learner’s permits,
and chauffeur’s instruction permits.
   17.   Section 321.180B – Graduated driver’s licenses for persons aged
fourteen through seventeen.
   18.   Section 321.193 – Restrictions on licenses; penalty.
   19.   Section 321.194 – Special minors’ licenses.
   20.   Section 321.208A – Operation in violation of out-of-service order;
penalties.
   21.   Section 321.216 – Unlawful use of license and nonoperator’s
identification card; penalty.
   22.   Section 321.216B – Use of driver’s license or nonoperator’s
identification card by underage person to obtain alcohol.
   23.   Section 321.216C – Use of driver’s license or nonoperator’s
identification card by underage person to obtain tobacco, tobacco products
alternative nicotine products, vapor products, or cigarettes.
   24.   Section 321.218 – Operating without valid driver’s license or when
disqualified; penalties.
   25.   Section 321.219 – Permitting unauthorized minor to drive.
   26.   Section 321.220 – Permitting unauthorized person to drive.
   27.   Section 321.221 – Employing unlicensed chauffeur.
   28.   Section 321.222 – Renting motor vehicle to another.
   29.   Section 321.223 – Driver’s license inspection for motor vehicle
rental.
   30.   Section 321.224 – Record kept.
   31.   Section 321.232 – Speed detection jamming devices; penalty.
   32.   Section 321.234A – All-terrain vehicles, highway use.
   33.   Section 321.235A – Electric personal assistive mobility devices.
   34.   Section 321.235B – Low-speed electric bicycles.
   35.   Section 321.247 – Golf cart operation on City streets.
   36.   Section 321.257 – Official traffic control signal.
   37.   Section 321.259 – Unauthorized signs, signals or markings.
   38.   Section 321.260 – Interference with devices, signs, or signals;
unlawful possession; traffic signal preemption devices.
   39.   Section 321.262 – Leaving scene of traffic accident prohibited;
vehicle damage only; removal of vehicles.
   40.   Section 321.263 – Information and aid; leaving scene of personal
injury accident.
   41.   Section 321.264 – Striking unattended vehicle.
   42.   Section 321.265 – Striking fixtures upon a highway.
   43.   Section 321.266 – Reporting accidents.
   44.   Section 321.275 – Operation of motorcycles and motorized bicycles.
   45.   Section 321.276 – Use of electronic communication device while
driving; text-messaging.
   46.   Section 321.277 – Reckless driving.
   47.   Section 321.277A – Careless driving.
   48.   Section 321.278 – Drag racing prohibited.
   49.   Section 321.281 – Actions against bicyclists.
   50.   Section 321.284 – Open container in motor vehicles, drivers.
   51.   Section 321.284A – Open container in motor vehicles, passengers.
   52.   Section 321.288 – Control of vehicle; reduced speed.
   53.   Section 321.295 – Limitation on bridge or elevated structures.
   54.   Section 321.297 – Driving on right-hand side of roadways; exceptions.
   55.   Section 321.298 – Meeting and turning to right.
   56.   Section 321.299 – Overtaking a vehicle.
   57.   Section 321.302 – Overtaking and passing.
   58.   Section 321.303 – Limitations on overtaking on the left.
   59.   Section 321.304 – Prohibited passing.
   60.   Section 321.305 – One-way roadways and rotary traffic islands.
   61.   Section 321.306 – Roadways laned for traffic.
   62.   Section 321.307 – Following too closely.
   63.   Section 321.309 – Towing.
   64.   Section 321.310 – Towing four-wheel trailers.
   65.   Section 321.312 – Turning on curve or crest of grade.
   66.   Section 321.313 – Starting parked vehicle.
   67.   Section 321.314 – When signal required.
   68.   Section 321.315 – Signal continuous.
   69.   Section 321.316 – Stopping.
   70.   Section 321.317 – Signals by hand and arm or signal device.
   71.   Section 321.318 – Method of giving hand and arm signals.
   72.   Section 321.319 – Entering intersections from different highways.
   73.   Section 321.320 – Left turns; yielding.
   74.   Section 321.321 – Entering through highways.
   75.   Section 321.322 – Vehicles entering stop or yield intersection.
   76.   Section 321.323 – Moving vehicle backward on highway.
   77.   Section 321.323A – Approaching certain stationary vehicles.
   78.   Section 321.324 – Operation on approach of emergency vehicles.
   79.   Section 321.324A – Funeral processions.
   80.   Section 321.329 – Duty of driver; pedestrians crossing or working on
highways.
   81.   Section 321.330 – Use of crosswalks.
   82.   Section 321.332 – White canes restricted to blind persons.
   83.   Section 321.333 – Duty of drivers.
   84.   Section 321.340 – Driving through safety zone.
   85.   Section 321.341 – Obedience to signal indicating approach of railroad
train or railroad track equipment.
   86.   Section 321.342 – Stop at certain railroad crossings; posting warning.
   87.   Section 321.343 – Certain vehicles must stop.
   88.   Section 321.344 – Heavy equipment at crossing.
   89.   Section 321.344B – Immediate safety threat; penalty.
   90.   Section 321.354 – Stopping on traveled way.
   91.   Section 321.359 – Moving other vehicle.
   92.   Section 321.362 – Unattended motor vehicle.
   93.   Section 321.363 – Obstruction to driver’s view.
   94.   Section 321.364 – Preventing contamination of food by hazardous
material.
   95.   Section 321.365 – Coasting prohibited.
   96.   Section 321.366 – Acts prohibited on fully controlled access
facilities.
   97.   Section 321.367 – Following fire apparatus.
   98.   Section 321.368 – Crossing fire hose.
   99.   Section 321.369 – Putting debris on highway.
   100.   Section 321.370 – Removing injurious material.
   101.   Section 321.371 – Clearing up wrecks.
   102.   Section 321.372 – Discharging pupils, stopping requirements;
penalties.
   103.   Section 321.381 – Movement of unsafe or improperly equipped vehicles.
   104.   Section 321.381A – Operation of low-speed vehicles.
   105.   Section 321.382 – Upgrade pulls; minimum speed.
   106.   Section 321.383 – Exceptions; slow vehicles identified.
   107.   Section 321.384 – When lighted lamps required.
   108.   Section 321.385 – Head lamps on motor vehicles.
   109.   Section 321.386 – Head lamps on motorcycles, motorized bicycles and
all-terrain vehicles.
   110.   Section 321.387 – Rear lamps.
   111.   Section 321.388 – Illuminating plates.
   112.   Section 321.389 – Reflector requirement.
   113.   Section 321.390 – Reflector requirements.
   114.   Section 321.392 – Clearance and identification lights.
   115.   Section 321.393 – Color and mounting.
   116.   Section 321.394 – Lamp or flag on projecting load.
   117.   Section 321.395 – Lamps on parked vehicles.
   118.   Section 321.398 – Lamps on other vehicles and equipment.
   119.   Section 321.402 – Spot lamps.
   120.   Section 321.403 – Auxiliary driving lamps.
   121.   Section 321.404 – Signal lamps and signal devices.
   122.   Section 321.404A – Light-restricting devices prohibited.
   123.   Section 321.405 – Self-illumination.
   124.   Section 321.408 – Back-up lamps.
   125.   Section 321.409 – Mandatory lighting equipment.
   126.   Section 321.415 – Required usage of lighting devices.
   127.   Section 321.417 – Single-beam road-lighting equipment.
   128.   Section 321.418 – Alternate road-lighting equipment.
   129.   Section 321.419 – Number of driving lamps required or permitted.
   130.   Section 321.420 – Number of lamps lighted.
   131.   Section 321.421 – Special restrictions on lamps.
   132.   Section 321.422 – Red light in front, rear lights.
   133.   Section 321.423 – Flashing lights.
   134.   Section 321.430 – Brake, hitch, and control requirements.
   135.   Section 321.431 – Performance ability.
   136.   Section 321.432 – Horns and warning devices.
   137.   Section 321.433 – Sirens, whistles, airhorns, and bells prohibited.
   138.   Section 321.434 – Bicycle sirens or whistles.
   139.   Section 321.436 – Mufflers, prevention of noise.
   140.   Section 321.437 – Mirrors.
   141.   Section 321.438 – Windshields and windows.
   142.   Section 321.439 – Windshield wipers.
   143.   Section 321.440 – Restrictions as to tire equipment.
   144.   Section 321.441 – Metal tires prohibited.
   145.   Section 321.442 – Projections on wheels.
   146.   Section 321.444 – Safety glass.
   147.   Section 321.445 – Safety belts and safety harnesses; use required.
   148.   Section 321.446 – Child restraint devices.
   149.   Section 321.449 – Motor carrier safety rules.
   150.   Section 321.449A – Rail crew transport drivers.
   151.   Section 321.449B – Texting or using a mobile telephone while
operating a commercial motor vehicle.
   152.   Section 321.450 – Hazardous materials transportation regulations.
   153.   Section 321.454 – Width of vehicles.
   154.   Section 321.455 – Projecting loads on passenger vehicles.
   155.   Section 321.456 – Height of vehicles.
   156.   Section 321.457 – Maximum length.
   157.   Section 321.458 – Loading beyond front.
   158.   Section 321.460 – Spilling loads on highways.
   159.   Section 321.461 – Trailers and towed vehicles.
   160.   Section 321.462 – Drawbars and safety chains.
   161.   Section 321.463 – Maximum gross weight; exceptions, penalties.
   162.   Section 321.465 – Weighing vehicles and removal of excess.
   163.   Section 321.466 – Increased loading capacity; reregistration.
62.02   PLAY STREETS DESIGNATED.
The Police Department shall have authority to declare any street or part
thereof a play street and cause to be placed appropriate signs or devices in
the roadway indicating and helping to protect the same. Whenever authorized
signs are erected indicating any street or part thereof as a play street, no
person shall drive a vehicle upon any such street or portion thereof except
drivers of vehicles having business or whose residences are within such closed
area, and then any said driver shall exercise the greatest care in driving upon
any such street or portion thereof.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.255)
62.03   VEHICLES ON SIDEWALKS.
The driver of a vehicle shall not drive upon or within any sidewalk area except
at a driveway.
62.04   CLINGING TO VEHICLE.
No person shall drive a motor vehicle on the streets of the City unless all
passengers of said vehicle are inside the vehicle in the place intended for
their accommodation. No person shall ride on the running board of a motor
vehicle or in any other place not customarily used for carrying passengers. No
person riding upon any bicycle, coaster, roller skates, in-line skates, sled or
toy vehicle shall attach the same or himself or herself to any vehicle upon a
roadway.
62.05   QUIET ZONES.
Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating a quiet zone, no person
operating a motor vehicle within any such zone shall sound the horn or other
warning device of such vehicle except in an emergency.
62.06   OBSTRUCTING VIEW AT INTERSECTIONS.
It is unlawful to allow any tree, hedge, billboard, or other object to obstruct
the view of an intersection by preventing persons from having a clear view of
traffic approaching the intersection from cross streets. Any such obstruction
is deemed a nuisance and in addition to the standard penalty may be abated in
the manner provided by Chapter 50 of this Code of Ordinances.
62.07   OBSTRUCTING TRAVEL.
No person shall willfully and unnecessarily hinder, obstruct, or delay, or
willfully and unnecessarily attempt to delay, hinder, or obstruct, any other
person lawfully driving or traveling along or upon any City street, or offer or
barter or sell merchandise on said City streets so as to interfere with the
effective movement of traffic.
62.08   EXHAUST SYSTEMS.
No person shall modify the exhaust system of a motor vehicle in a manner which
will amplify or increase the noise of such vehicle above that emitted by the
muffler originally installed on the vehicle.
62.09   ENGINE BRAKES AND COMPRESSION BRAKES.
It is unlawful for any person in any part of the City to make, or cause to be
made, loud or disturbing noises with any mechanical devices operating by
compressed air and used for the purpose of assisting braking on any truck. The
City shall cause notices to be posted or signs erected indicating such
prohibition.
62.10   SHELDON RECREATIONAL TRAIL.
No equine animals are permitted upon or within any Sheldon Recreational Trail
(walking-biking trail). The driver of any motorized vehicle (other than an
emergency or other official vehicle) shall not drive upon or within any Sheldon
Recreational Trail (walking-biking trail) area except at a driveway or
sidewalk.
62.11   GOLF CARTS.
Golf carts may be operated on City streets and alleys within the City limits by
persons at least 18 years of age and possessing a valid driver’s license. The
operation of golf carts on City streets and alleys as provided above are
subject to the following additional conditions:
   1.   For purposes of this section, a “golf cart” shall not include any
vehicle that is an all-terrain vehicle (ATV), off-road utility vehicle (UTV),
or snowmobile as those terms are defined in Section 75.02.
   2.   A person operating a golf cart in the City must be at least 18 years of
age and possess a valid drivers’ license.
   3.   The owner or operator of a golf cart must maintain and provide current
proof of financial responsibility in accordance with Section 321.20B of the
Code of Iowa. The owner and operator of a golf cart are liable for any injury
or damage occasioned by the negligent operation of that golf cart.
   4.   A golf cart operator shall observe and obey all traffic regulations and
traffic control devices.
   5.   A golf cart shall be equipped with the following:
      A.   A slow-moving vehicle sign above the rear bumper of the cart.
      B.   A bicycle safety flag that shall be displayed five or more feet
above the surface of the street.
      C.   Adequate brakes.
      D.   Headlights.
      E.   Taillights.
      F.   Brake lights.
      G.   Working turn signals.
      H.   A working seat belt for each passenger riding in the golf cart.
   6.   A golf cart shall not be operated upon a City street which is a primary
road extension (this prohibition shall include HWY 18 and HWY 60) through the
City, but shall be allowed to directly cross a City street that is a primary
road extension through the City. Golf carts shall not be operated on sidewalks
or trails.
   7.   A golf cart shall only be operated on permitted City streets and alleys
from sunrise to sunset.
   8.   Whenever a golf cart is involved in an accident resulting in injury or
death to any person, or property damage amounting to $1,500.00 or more, either
the operator or someone acting for the operator shall immediately notify a law
enforcement officer.
CHAPTER 63
SPEED REGULATIONS
 
63.01 General                             63.04 Special Speed Zones
63.02 State Code Speed Limits             63.05 Minimum Speed
63.03 Parks, Cemeteries, and Parking Lots 63.06 Emergency Vehicles
 
63.01   GENERAL.
Every driver of a motor vehicle on a street shall drive the same at a careful
and prudent speed not greater than nor less than is reasonable and proper,
having due regard to the traffic, surface and width of the street and of any
other conditions then existing, and no person shall drive a vehicle on any
street at a speed greater than will permit said driver to bring it to a stop
within the assured clear distance ahead, such driver having the right to
assume, however, that all persons using said street will observe the law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.285)
63.02   STATE CODE SPEED LIMITS.
The following speed limits are established in Section 321.285 of the Code of
Iowa and any speed in excess thereof is unlawful unless specifically designated
otherwise in this chapter as a special speed zone.
   1.   Business District – 20 miles per hour.
   2.   Residence or School District – 25 miles per hour.
   3.   Suburban District – 45 miles per hour.
63.03   PARKS, CEMETERIES, AND PARKING LOTS.
A speed in excess of 15 miles per hour in any public park, cemetery, or parking
lot, unless specifically designated otherwise in this chapter, is unlawful.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[5])
63.04   SPECIAL SPEED ZONES.
In accordance with requirements of the Iowa Department of Transportation, or
whenever the Council shall determine upon the basis of an engineering and
traffic investigation that any speed limit listed in Section 63.02 is greater
or less than is reasonable or safe under the conditions found to exist at any
intersection or other place or upon any part of the City street system, the
Council shall determine and adopt by ordinance such higher or lower speed limit
as it deems reasonable and safe at such location. The following special speed
zones have been established:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.290)
   1.   Special 35 MPH Speed Zones. A speed in excess of 35 miles per hour is
unlawful on any of the following designated streets or parts thereof.
      A.   On 16th Street, from HWY 60 to the east City limits.
      B.   On all of Country Club Road.
      C.   On South 2nd Avenue, immediately south of 16th Street until
approximately 981.4 feet south of the intersection of 2nd Avenue and 16th
Street (approximately 104.1 feet south of the driveway of the property for
Parcel #0048170000, also known as 1901 South 2nd Avenue, which is south of 1701
South 2nd Avenue).
   2.   Special 45 MPH Speed Zones. A speed in excess of forty-five (45) miles
per hour is unlawful on any of the following designated streets or parts
thereof.
      A.   On Second Avenue, beginning at the southernmost corporate limit
boundary, which is currently located just north of the southernmost driveway
for Parcel #004197500 (3011 S 2nd Ave).
      B.   On Park Street (Highway 18) beginning 400 feet east of the
easternmost corporate limit boundary to approximately 215 feet to the west of
Wansink Avenue.
(Subsection 2 – Ord._O25-3296 – Oct. 25 Supp.)
63.05   MINIMUM SPEED.
A person shall not drive a motor vehicle at such a slow speed as to impede or
block the normal and reasonable movement of traffic, except when reduced speed
is necessary for safe operation, or in compliance with law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.294)
63.06   EMERGENCY VEHICLES.
The speed limitations set forth in this chapter do not apply to authorized
emergency vehicles or the rider of a police bicycle when responding to an
emergency call or when in the pursuit of an actual or suspected perpetrator of
a felony or in response to an incident dangerous to the public and the drivers
thereof use an audible signaling device or a visual signaling device. This
provision does not relieve the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle or the
rider of a police bicycle from the duty to drive or ride with due regard for
the safety of others.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.231)
CHAPTER 64
TURNING REGULATIONS
 
64.01 Turning at Intersections 64.03 Left Turn for Parking
64.02 U-Turns
 
64.01   TURNING AT INTERSECTIONS.
The driver of a vehicle intending to turn at an intersection shall do so as
follows:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.311)
   1.   Both the approach for a right turn and a right turn shall be made as
close as practical to the right-hand curb or edge of the roadway.
   2.   Approach for a left turn shall be made in that portion of the right
half of the roadway nearest the centerline thereof and after entering the
intersection the left turn shall be made so as to depart from the intersection
to the right of the centerline of the roadway being entered.
   3.   Approach for a left turn from a two-way street into a one-way street
shall be made in that portion of the right half of the roadway nearest the
centerline thereof and by passing to the right of such centerline where it
enters the intersection. A left turn from a one-way street into a two-way
street shall be made by passing to the right of the centerline of the street
being entered upon leaving the intersection.
The Council may cause markers, buttons or signs to be placed within or adjacent
to intersections and thereby require and direct, as traffic conditions require,
that a different course from that specified above be traveled by vehicles
turning at intersections, and when markers, buttons or signs are so placed, no
driver of a vehicle shall turn a vehicle at an intersection other than as
directed and required by such markers, buttons or signs.
64.02   U-TURNS.
It is unlawful for a driver to make a U-turn except at an intersection;
however, U-turns are prohibited within the Business District at any
intersection where a sign prohibiting U-turns is posted in accordance with
Chapter 61 of this Code of Ordinances.
64.03   LEFT TURN FOR PARKING.
No person shall make a left-hand turn, crossing the centerline of the street,
for the purpose of parking on said street.
CHAPTER 65
STOP OR YIELD REQUIRED
 
65.01 Stop or Yield                 65.04 Stop When Traffic Is Obstructed
65.02 School Stops                  65.05 Pedestrians' Right-of-Way
65.03 Stop Before Crossing Sidewalk
 
65.01   STOP OR YIELD.
Every driver of a vehicle shall stop or yield, as directed by traffic control
devices posted in accordance with Chapter 61 of this Code of Ordinances.
65.02   SCHOOL STOPS.
At any school crossing zone, every driver of a vehicle approaching said zone
shall bring the vehicle to a full stop at a point 10 feet from the approach
side of the crosswalk marked by an authorized school stop sign and thereafter
proceed in a careful and prudent manner until the vehicle shall have passed
through such school crossing zone.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.249)
65.03   STOP BEFORE CROSSING SIDEWALK.
The driver of a vehicle emerging from a private roadway, alley, driveway, or
building shall stop such vehicle immediately prior to driving onto the sidewalk
area and thereafter shall proceed into the sidewalk area only when able to do
so without danger to pedestrian traffic and shall yield the right-of-way to any
vehicular traffic on the street into which the vehicle is entering.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.353)
65.04   STOP WHEN TRAFFIC IS OBSTRUCTED.
Notwithstanding any traffic control signal indication to proceed, no driver
shall enter an intersection or a marked crosswalk unless there is sufficient
space on the other side of the intersection or crosswalk to accommodate the
vehicle.
65.05   PEDESTRIANS' RIGHT-OF-WAY.
Where traffic control signals are not in place or in operation, the driver of a
vehicle shall yield the right-of-way, slowing down or stopping, if need be, to
so yield to a pedestrian or a person riding a bicycle crossing the roadway
within any marked crosswalk or within any unmarked crosswalk at an
intersection.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.327)
(Section 65.05 – Ord._O24-3288.3 – Sep. 24 Supp.)
CHAPTER 66
LOAD AND WEIGHT RESTRICTIONS
 
66.01 Temporary Embargo                  66.04 Load Limits on Bridges
66.02 Permits for Excess Size and Weight 66.05 Truck Routes
66.03 Load Limits Upon Certain Streets
 
66.01   TEMPORARY EMBARGO.
If the Council declares an embargo when it appears by reason of deterioration,
rain, snow or other climatic conditions that certain streets will be seriously
damaged or destroyed by vehicles weighing in excess of an amount specified by
the signs, no such vehicles shall be operated on streets so designated by such
signs.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.471 and 472)
66.02   PERMITS FOR EXCESS SIZE AND WEIGHT.
The Council may, upon application and good cause being shown, issue a special
permit in writing authorizing the applicant to operate or move a vehicle or
combination of vehicles of a size or weight or load exceeding the maximum
specified by State law or the City over those streets or bridges named in the
permit which are under the jurisdiction of the City and for which the City is
responsible for maintenance.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.473 and 321E)
66.03   LOAD LIMITS UPON CERTAIN STREETS.
When signs are erected giving notice thereof, no person shall operate any
vehicle with a gross weight in excess of the amounts specified on such signs at
any time upon any of the streets or parts of streets for which said signs are
erected in accordance with Chapter 61 of this Code of Ordinances.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.473 and 475)
66.04   LOAD LIMITS ON BRIDGES.
Where it has been determined that any City bridge has a capacity less than the
maximum permitted on the streets of the City, or on the street serving the
bridge, the Council may cause to be posted and maintained signs on said bridge
and at suitable distances ahead of the entrances thereof to warn drivers of
such maximum load limits. No person shall drive upon said bridge any vehicle
weighing, loaded or unloaded, in excess of such posted limit.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.471)
66.05   TRUCK ROUTES.
When truck routes have been designated in accordance with Chapter 61 of this
Code of Ordinances, any motor vehicle exceeding established weight limits shall
comply with the established truck route regulations as follows:
   1.   Truck Routes Designated. Every motor vehicle, when loaded or empty,
having no fixed terminal within the City or making no scheduled or definite
stops within the City for the purpose of loading or unloading shall travel over
or upon those streets within the City designated as truck routes and none
other.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.473)
   2.   Deliveries Off Truck Route. Any motor vehicle, when loaded or empty,
having a fixed terminal, making a scheduled or definite stop within the City
for the purpose of loading or unloading shall proceed over or upon the
designated routes to the nearest point of its scheduled or definite stop and
shall proceed thereto, load or unload, and return by the most direct route to
its point of departure from said designated route.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.473)
   3.   Employer’s Responsibility. The owner or any other person employing or
otherwise directing the driver of any vehicle shall not require or knowingly
permit the operation of such vehicle upon a street in any manner contrary to
this section.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.473)
   4.   Trucks Prohibited. Except for deliveries, trucks are prohibited to
travel on the City’s residential collector streets and in the downtown area.
CHAPTER 67
PEDESTRIANS
 
67.01 Walking in Street 67.03 Pedestrian Crossing
67.02 Hitchhiking       67.04 Use of Sidewalks
 
67.01   WALKING IN STREET.
Pedestrians shall at all times when walking on or along a street, walk on the
left side of the street.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.326)
67.02   HITCHHIKING.
No person shall stand in the traveled portion of a street for the purpose of
soliciting a ride from the driver of any private vehicle.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.331)
67.03   PEDESTRIAN CROSSING.
Every pedestrian crossing a roadway at any point other than within a marked
crosswalk or within an unmarked crosswalk at an intersection shall yield the
right-of-way to all vehicles upon the roadway.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.328)
67.04   USE OF SIDEWALKS.
Where sidewalks are provided it is unlawful for any pedestrian to walk along
and upon an adjacent street.
CHAPTER 68
ONE-WAY TRAFFIC
68.01   ONE-WAY TRAFFIC REQUIRED.
When appropriate signage is in place, as provided for in Chapter 61 of this
Code of Ordinances, vehicular traffic, other than permitted cross traffic,
shall move only in the direction indicated on such signage.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[4])
CHAPTER 69
PARKING REGULATIONS
69.01 Parking Limited or Controlled 69.09 Persons With Disabilities Parking
69.02 Park Adjacent to Curb         69.10 No Parking Zones
69.03 Parking on One-Way Streets    69.11 All Night Parking Prohibited
69.04 Angle Parking                 69.12 Truck Parking Limited
69.05 Manner of Angle Parking       69.13 Snow Removal
69.06 Parking for Certain Purposes  69.14 Snow Emergency
Illegal
69.07 Designation of Parking Spaces 69.15 Snow Routes
69.08 Parking Prohibited            69.16 Fire Lanes
 
69.01   PARKING LIMITED OR CONTROLLED.
Parking of vehicles shall be controlled or limited where so indicated by
designated traffic control devices in accordance with Chapter 61 of this Code
of Ordinances. No person shall stop, park, or stand a vehicle in violation of
any such posted parking regulations unless in compliance with the directions of
a peace officer.
69.02   PARK ADJACENT TO CURB.
No person shall stand or park a vehicle in a roadway other than parallel with
the edge of the roadway headed in the direction of lawful traffic movement and
with the right-hand wheels of the vehicle within 18 inches of the curb or edge
of the roadway except as hereinafter provided in the case of angle parking and
vehicles parked on the left-hand side of one-way streets.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.361)
69.03   PARKING ON ONE-WAY STREETS.
No person shall stand or park a vehicle on the left-hand side of a one-way
street other than parallel with the edge of the roadway headed in the direction
of lawful traffic movement and with the left-hand wheels of the vehicle within
18 inches of the curb or edge of the roadway except as hereinafter provided in
the case of angle parking.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.361)
69.04   ANGLE PARKING.
Angle or diagonal parking is permitted only in the following locations:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.361)
   1.   3rd Avenue, on the west side between 8th Street and 10th Street.
   2.   3rd Avenue, on the east side between 10th Street and 11th Street.
   3.   4th Avenue, on the west side between 8th Street and 9th Street
   4.   4th Avenue, on the west side between 10th Street and the alley.
   5.   9th Street, on the south side between 2nd Avenue and 4th Avenue.
   6.   4th Avenue, on the east side between 6th Street and HWY 18.
   7.   6th Avenue, on the west side between 6th Street and HWY 18.
   8.   19th Avenue, on the east side by the swimming pool.
   9.   10th Street, on the north side between 3rd Avenue and 4th Avenue.
   10.   7th Street, on the north side between 6th Avenue and 7th Avenue.
69.05   MANNER OF ANGLE PARKING.
Upon those streets or portions of streets that have been signed or marked for
angle parking, no person shall park or stand a vehicle other than at an angle
to the curb or edge of the roadway or in the center of the roadway as indicated
by such signs and markings. No part of any vehicle or the load thereon, when
said vehicle is parked within a diagonal parking district, shall extend into
the roadway more than a distance of 16 feet when measured at right angles to
the adjacent curb or edge of roadway.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.361)
69.06   PARKING FOR CERTAIN PURPOSES ILLEGAL.
No person shall park a vehicle upon public property for more than 24 hours,
unless otherwise limited under the provisions of this chapter, or for any of
the following principal purposes:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[1])
   1.   Sale. Displaying such vehicle for sale.
   2.   Repairing. For lubricating, repairing or for commercial washing of such
vehicle except such repairs as are necessitated by an emergency.
   3.   Advertising. Displaying advertising.
   4.   Merchandise Sales. Selling merchandise from such vehicle except in a
duly established market place or when so authorized or licensed under this Code
of Ordinances.
69.07   DESIGNATION OF PARKING SPACES.
The Public Works Director, upon authorization of the Council, is hereby
directed to mark off individual parking spaces in the parking zones as
designated on the City streets, alleys, or City-owned public parking lots and
in such other zones as hereafter may be established. Such parking spaces shall
be designated by lines painted or durably marked on the curbing or the surface
of the street or on the surface of the City-owned public parking lots. It shall
be unlawful to park any vehicle in such a way that such vehicle shall not be
entirely within the limits of the designated parking space as marked.
69.08   PARKING PROHIBITED.
No one shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle except when necessary to avoid
conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a peace
officer or traffic control device, in any of the following places:
   1.   Crosswalk. On a crosswalk.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358[5])
   2.   Center Parkway. On the center parkway or dividing area of any divided
street.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[1])
   3.   Mailboxes. Within 20 feet on either side of a mailbox that is so placed
and so equipped as to permit the depositing of mail from vehicles on the
roadway.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[1])
   4.   Sidewalks. On or across a sidewalk.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358[1])
   5.   Driveway. In front of a public or private driveway.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358[2])
   6.   Intersection. Within an intersection or within 10 feet of an
intersection of any street or alley.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358[3])
   7.   Fire Hydrant. Within five feet of a fire hydrant.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358[4])
   8.   Stop Sign or Signal. Within 10 feet upon the approach to any flashing
beacon, stop or yield sign, or traffic control signal located at the side of a
roadway.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358[6])
   9.   Railroad Crossing. Within 50 feet of the nearest rail of a railroad
crossing, except when parked parallel with such rail and not exhibiting a red
light.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358[8])
   10.   Fire Station. Within 20 feet of the driveway entrance to any fire
station and on the side of a street opposite the entrance to any fire station
within 75 feet of said entrance when properly sign posted.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358[9])
   11.   Excavations. Alongside or opposite any street excavation or
obstruction when such stopping, standing or parking would obstruct traffic.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358[10])
   12.   Double Parking. On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked
at the edge or curb of a street.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358[11])
   13.   Hazardous Locations. When, because of restricted visibility or when
standing or parked vehicles would constitute a hazard to moving traffic, or
when other traffic conditions require, the Council may cause curbs to be
painted with a yellow color and erect no parking or standing signs.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358[13])
   14.   Churches, Nursing Homes, and Other Buildings. A space of 50 feet is
hereby reserved at the side of the street in front of any theatre, auditorium,
hotel having more than 25 sleeping rooms, hospital, nursing home, taxicab
stand, bus depot, church, or other building where large assemblages of people
are being held, within which space, when clearly marked as such, no motor
vehicle shall be left standing, parked or stopped except in taking on or
discharging passengers or freight, and then only for such length of time as is
necessary for such purpose.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.360)
   15.   Alleys. No person shall park a vehicle within an alley in such a
manner or under such conditions as to leave available less than 10 feet of the
width of the roadway for the free movement of vehicular traffic, and no person
shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle within an alley in such a position as to
block the driveway entrance to any abutting property. The provisions of this
subsection do not apply to a vehicle parked in any alley that is 18 feet wide
or less, provided that said vehicle is parked to deliver goods or services.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[1])
   16.   Ramps. In front of a curb cut or ramp which is located on public or
private property in a manner which blocks access to the curb cut or ramp.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358[15])
   17.   Area Between Lot Line and Curb Line. That area of the public way not
covered by sidewalk and lying between the lot line and the curb line, where
curbing has been installed.
   18.   In More Than One Space. In any designated parking space so that any
part of the vehicle occupies more than one such space or protrudes beyond the
markings designating such space.
   19.   Area Between Curb Line and Sidewalk. On that part of any street in the
City between the curb line, if there is a curb, and the sidewalk line of the
abutting property. No vehicle shall be parked on that part of any street not
having a curb between the edge of the traveled portion of said street and
sidewalk line of the abutting property unless the owner of the abutting
property has received a written permit from the City Manager to allow parking
between the traveled portion of said street and sidewalk. Such permit shall set
requirements and standards for allowing and maintaining such parking area. In
the event parking is allowed under this section, it shall not be deemed the
private parking area for any individual or owner of property.
   20.   34th Avenue. On any portion (including the paved roadway and the
unpaved areas immediately adjacent thereto) of the west lane of 34th Avenue,
from the intersection of 34th Avenue and Park Street (HWY 18) to the
termination of 34th Avenue.
   21.   Park Street (Highway 18). On any portion (including the paved roadway
and the unpaved areas immediately adjacent thereto) of Park Street (HWY 18),
from Western Avenue/McKinley Avenue to the east City limits.
   22.   Unpaved Surfaces. On any surface that is unpaved.
   23.   On Lawns. On front and or back lawns.
69.09   PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES PARKING.
The following regulations shall apply to the establishment and use of persons
with disabilities parking spaces:
   1.   Establishment. Persons with disabilities parking spaces shall be
established and designated in accordance with Chapter 321L of the Code of Iowa
and Iowa Administrative Code, 661-18. No unauthorized person shall establish
any on-street persons with disabilities parking space without first obtaining
Council approval.
   2.   Improper Use. The following uses of a persons with disabilities parking
space, located on either public or private property, constitute improper use of
a persons with disabilities parking permit, which is a violation of this Code
of Ordinances:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321L.4[2])
      A.   Use by an operator of a vehicle not displaying a persons with
disabilities parking permit.
      B.   Use by an operator of a vehicle displaying a persons with
disabilities parking permit but not being used by a person issued a permit or
being transported in accordance with Section 321L.2[1b] of the Code of Iowa.
      C.   Use by a vehicle in violation of the rules adopted under Section
321L.8 of the Code of Iowa.
   3.   Wheelchair Parking Cones. No person shall use or interfere with a
wheelchair parking cone in violation of the following:
      A.   A person issued a persons with disabilities parking permit must
comply with the requirements of Section 321L.2A[1] of the Code of Iowa when
utilizing a wheelchair parking cone.
      B.   A person shall not interfere with a wheelchair parking cone that is
properly placed under the provisions of Section 321L.2A[1] of the Code of Iowa.
69.10   NO PARKING ZONES.
No one shall stop, stand or park a vehicle in any of the following specifically
designated no parking zones except when necessary to avoid conflict with other
traffic or in compliance with the direction of a peace officer or traffic
control signal.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[1])
   1.   East 6th Street, on the north side from 19th Avenue to 23rd Avenue.
69.11   ALL NIGHT PARKING PROHIBITED.
No person, except physicians or other persons on emergency calls, shall park a
vehicle between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. on:
   1.   Any street from November 1 to April 1 of any year. (During the
remainder of the year, vehicles may be parked on any street not otherwise
restricted.)
   2.   9th Street, between 2nd Avenue and 5th Avenue on any day of any year.
   3.   3rd Avenue, between 8th Street and 10th Street on any day of any year.
   4.   4th Avenue, between 8th Street and 10th Street on any day of any year.
69.12   TRUCK PARKING LIMITED.
Except as otherwise provided herein, no person shall park a motor truck, semi-
trailer, bus, boats, horse trailers, farm implements, RV, travel trailers or
other motor vehicle with trailer attached on any street, avenue, alley, or
public place in the City, except for the purpose of loading and unloading, and
then only so long as is necessary for loading and unloading, and not to exceed
30 minutes at any one time, except that moving vans loading household goods for
transportation out of the City, or unloading household goods which have been
transported into the City, may remain parked for that purpose as long as is
reasonably necessary. When receiving or delivering merchandise or cargo, such
vehicles shall be stopped or parked in a manner which will not interfere with
other traffic.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, a person may park a motor truck, semi-trailer,
bus, or other motor vehicle with trailer attached that is over 16 feet in
length on the east lane of 34th Avenue, from the intersection of 34th Avenue
and Park Street (HWY 18) to the termination of 34th Avenue. Such parking shall
only be permitted within the paved roadway of the east half of the above-
described portion of 34th Avenue, shall not exceed 30 minutes at any one time,
and shall comply with all other parking regulations in this Code of Ordinances.
69.13   SNOW REMOVAL.
No person shall park, abandon, or leave unattended any vehicle on any public
street, alley, or City-owned off-street parking area in such a manner as to
interfere with the plowing or removal of snow or ice from such street, alley,
or parking area.
(Code of Iowa, 321.236[1])
69.14   SNOW EMERGENCY.
For the purpose of this section, the accumulation of snow on any streets or
areas sufficient for the application of emergency regulations herein shall be
any such accumulation of snow which hinders the safe movement of traffic
thereon or that impedes the ability of emergency vehicles and public
transportation vehicles to travel safely and expeditiously over such streets or
areas.
When it becomes necessary to plow or remove snow from streets which, because of
the accumulation of snow thereon causes such a hindrance to traffic as
constitutes an emergency unless the snow is promptly plowed or removed, the
Public Works Director, after consultation with the City Manager or Mayor, shall
by appropriate public media declare the beginning of an emergency and the
application of emergency snow parking regulations, which regulations shall
remain in force and effect until lifted by the Public Works Director, after
consultation with the City Manager or Mayor
The Public Works Director is hereby authorized and empowered to erect signs
prohibiting parking upon any street or alley in the City and upon any City-
owned parking lot upon which snow plowing or snow removal equipment is
operating and, upon the erection of such signs, parking thereon shall be
prohibited until such signs are removed at the direction of the Public Works
Director.
69.15   SNOW ROUTES.
The Council may designate certain streets in the City as snow routes. When
conditions of snow or ice exist on the traffic surface of a designated snow
route, it is unlawful for the driver of a vehicle to impede or block traffic.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[12])
69.16   FIRE LANES.
No person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle in a fire lane as provided
herein.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236)
   1.   Fire Lanes Established. The Fire Chief may designate fire lanes on any
private road or driveway where deemed necessary to assure access to property or
premises by authorized emergency vehicles.
   2.   Signs and Markings. Wherever a fire lane has been designated, the Fire
Chief shall cause appropriate signs and markings to be placed identifying such
fire lanes and the parking prohibition established by this section.
   3.   Exception. The provisions of this section do not apply to authorized
emergency vehicles.
CHAPTER 70
TRAFFIC CODE ENFORCEMENT PROCEDURES
 
70.01 Arrest or Citation   70.04 Parking Violations: Vehicle Unattended
70.02 Scheduled Violations 70.05 Presumption in Reference to Illegal Parking
70.03 Parking Violations   70.06 Impounding Vehicles
 
70.01   ARREST OR CITATION.
Whenever a peace officer has reasonable cause to believe that a person has
violated any provision of the Traffic Code, such officer may:
   1.   Immediate Arrest. Immediately arrest such person and take such person
before a local magistrate; or
   2.   Issue Citation. Without arresting the person, prepare in quintuplicate
a combined traffic citation and complaint as adopted by the Iowa Commissioner
of Public Safety, or issue a uniform citation and complaint utilizing a State-
approved computerized device.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 805.6 and 321.485)
70.02   SCHEDULED VIOLATIONS.
For violations of the Traffic Code that are designated by Section 805.8A of the
Code of Iowa to be scheduled violations, the scheduled fine for each of those
violations shall be as specified in Section 805.8A of the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 805.8 and 805.8A)
70.03   PARKING VIOLATIONS.
Uncontested violations of parking restrictions imposed by this Code of
Ordinances shall be charged upon a simple notice of a fine payable at the
office of the City Clerk. The fine for each violation charged under a simple
notice of a fine shall be in the amount of $15.00 for all violations except
snow route parking violations (See Section 69.15) and improper use of a persons
with disabilities parking permit (See Section 69.09). If such fine is not paid
within 30 days, it shall be increased to $20.00. The simple notice of a fine
for snow route parking violations is $25.00, and the fine for improper use of a
persons with disabilities parking permit is $100.00. Failure to pay the simple
notice of a fine shall be grounds for the filing of a complaint in District
Court. Failure to pay restitution owed for violations enumerated in this
chapter may also be grounds for denial of initial motor vehicle registration or
motor vehicle registration renewal.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[1b] and 321L.4[2])
70.04   PARKING VIOLATIONS: VEHICLE UNATTENDED.
When a vehicle is parked in violation of any provision of the Traffic Code, and
the driver is not present, the notice of fine or citation as herein provided
shall be attached to the vehicle in a conspicuous place.
70.05   PRESUMPTION IN REFERENCE TO ILLEGAL PARKING.
In any proceeding charging a standing or parking violation, a prima facie
presumption that the registered owner was the person who parked or placed such
vehicle at the point where, and for the time during which, such violation
occurred shall be raised by proof that:
   1.   Described Vehicle. The particular vehicle described in the information
was parked in violation of the Traffic Code; and
   2.   Registered Owner. The defendant named in the information was the
registered owner at the time in question.
70.06   IMPOUNDING VEHICLES.
A peace officer is hereby authorized to remove, or cause to be removed, a
vehicle from a street, public alley, public parking lot, or highway to the
nearest garage or other place of safety, or to a garage designated or
maintained by the City, under the circumstances hereinafter enumerated:
   1.   Disabled Vehicle. When a vehicle is so disabled as to constitute an
obstruction to traffic and the person or persons in charge of the vehicle are
by reason of physical injury incapacitated to such an extent as to be unable to
provide for its custody or removal.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[1])
   2.   Illegally Parked Vehicle. When any vehicle is left unattended and is so
illegally parked as to constitute a definite hazard or obstruction to the
normal movement of traffic.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[1])
   3.   Snow Removal. When any vehicle is left parked in violation of a ban on
parking during snow removal operations.
   4.   Parked Over Limited Time Period. When any vehicle is left parked for a
continuous period in violation of any limited parking time. If the owner can be
located, the owner shall be given an opportunity to remove the vehicle.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[1])
   5.   Costs. In addition to the standard penalties provided, the owner or
driver of any vehicle impounded for the violation of any of the provisions of
this chapter shall be required to pay the reasonable cost of towing and
storage.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[1])
CHAPTER 75
ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLES AND SNOWMOBILES
 
75.01 Purpose                  75.05 Operation of All-Terrain Vehicles
75.02 Definitions              75.06 Negligence
75.03 General Regulations      75.07 Accident Reports
75.04 Operation of Snowmobiles 75.08 Penalties
 
75.01   PURPOSE.
The purpose of this chapter is to regulate the operation of all-terrain
vehicles and snowmobiles within the City.
75.02   DEFINITIONS.
For use in this chapter the following terms are defined:
   1.   “All-terrain vehicle” or “ATV” means a motorized vehicle, with not less
than three and not more than six non-highway tires, that is limited in engine
displacement to less than 1,000 cubic centimeters and in total dry weight to
less than 1,200 pounds and that has a seat or saddle designed to be straddled
by the operator and handlebars for steering control.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321I.1)
   2.   “Off-road motorcycle” means a two-wheeled motor vehicle that has a seat
or saddle designed to be straddled by the operator and handlebars for steering
control and that is intended by the manufacturer for use on natural terrain.
“Off-road motorcycle” includes a motorcycle that was originally issued a
certificate of title and registered for highway use under Chapter 321 of the
Code of Iowa, but which contains design features that enable operation over
natural terrain. An operator of an off-road motorcycle is also subject to the
provisions of this chapter governing the operation of all-terrain vehicles.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321I.1)
   3.   “Off-road utility vehicle” or “UTV” means a motorized vehicle, with not
less than four and not more than eight non-highway tires or rubberized tracks,
that has a seat that is of bucket or bench design, not intended to be straddled
by the operator, and a steering wheel or control levers for control. “Off-road
utility vehicle” or “UTV” includes the following vehicles:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321I.1)
      A.   “Off-road utility vehicle – Type 1” includes vehicles with a total
dry weight of 1,200 pounds or less and a width of 50 inches or less.
      B.   “Off-road utility vehicle – Type 2” includes vehicles, other than
Type 1 vehicles, with a total dry weight of 2,000 pounds or less and a width of
65 inches or less.
      C.   “Off-road utility vehicle – Type 3” includes vehicles with a total
dry weight of more than 2,000 pounds or a width of more than 65 inches, or
both.
An operator of an UTV is also subject to the provisions of this chapter
governing the operation of ATVs.
   4.   “Snowmobile” means a motorized vehicle that weighs less than 1,000
pounds, that uses sled-type runners or skis, endless belt-type tread with a
width of 48 inches or less, or any combination of runners, skis, or tread, and
is designed for travel on snow or ice. “Snowmobile” does not include an all-
terrain vehicle that has been altered or equipped with runners, skis, belt-type
tracks, or treads.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321G.1)
75.03   GENERAL REGULATIONS.
No person shall operate an ATV, off-road motorcycle, or off-road utility
vehicle within the City in violation of Chapter 321I of the Code of Iowa or a
snowmobile within the City in violation of the provisions of Chapter 321G of
the Code of Iowa or in violation of rules established by the Natural Resource
Commission of the Department of Natural Resources governing their registration,
equipment, and manner of operation.
(Code of Iowa, Ch. 321G and Ch. 321I)
75.04   OPERATION OF SNOWMOBILES.
The operators of snowmobiles shall comply with the following restrictions as to
where and when snowmobiles may be operated within the City:
   1.   Streets. Snowmobiles shall be operated upon any public street or alley
in the City during the hours of 8:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m., from November 15 to
April 1 of the following year, except that operation is prohibited on the
following streets, alleys, or areas:
      A.   Any street having a ditch parallel to either side thereof.
      B.   All streets immediately adjacent to the Sanford Sheldon Medical
Center grounds.
      C.   All streets immediately adjacent to the Christian Retirement Home.
      D.   All streets immediately adjacent to any nursing home or home for the
elderly.
      E.   All streets adjacent to the public and private schools of the City
during school days from 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m.
      F.   Any street or alley in the Central Business District located inside
a perimeter bounded by 2nd Avenue on the west, 11th Street on the south, 5th
Avenue on the east, and 8th Street on the north.
      G.   HWY 18 and HWY 60 within the City limits, as prohibited by State
law.
   2.   Exceptions. Snowmobiles may be operated on prohibited streets, alleys,
or areas only under the following circumstances:
      A.   Emergencies. Snowmobiles may be operated on any street in an
emergency during the period of time when and at locations where snow upon the
roadway renders travel by conventional motor vehicles impractical.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321G.9[4c])
   3.   Direct Crossing. Snowmobiles may make a direct crossing of a prohibited
street provided all of the following occur:
      A.   The crossing is made at an angle of approximately 90 degrees to the
direction of the street and at a place where no obstruction prevents a quick
and safe crossing;
      B.   The snowmobile is brought to a complete stop before crossing the
street;
      C.   The driver yields the right-of-way to all on-coming traffic that
constitutes an immediate hazard; and
      D.   In crossing a divided street, the crossing is made only at an
intersection of such street with another street.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321G.9[2])
   4.   Trails. Snowmobiles shall not be operated on all-terrain vehicle trails
except where so designated.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321G.9[4f])
   5.   Railroad Right-of-Way. Snowmobiles shall not be operated on an
operating railroad right-of-way. A snowmobile may be driven directly across a
railroad right-of-way only at an established crossing and notwithstanding any
other provisions of law may, if necessary, use the improved portion of the
established crossing after yielding to all oncoming traffic.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321G.13[1h])
   6.   Parks and Other City Land. Snowmobiles shall not be operated in any
park, playground, or upon any other City-owned property without the express
permission of the City. A snowmobile shall not be operated on any City land
without a snow cover of at least one-tenth of one inch.
   7.   Sidewalk or Parking. Snowmobiles shall not be operated upon the public
sidewalk or that portion of the street located between the curb line and the
sidewalk or property line commonly referred to as the “parking” except for
purposes of crossing the same to a public street upon which operation is
authorized by this chapter.
   8.   Hours of Operation. No snowmobile shall be operated in the City between
the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m., except for emergency situations or for
loading or unloading from a transport trailer.
75.05   OPERATION OF ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLES.
The operators of ATVs must be at least 18 years of age and shall comply with
the following restrictions as to where and when ATVs may be operated within the
City:
   1.   Streets.
      A.   Streets. ATVs and UTVs may be operated on roadways or highways in
accordance with Section 321.234A of the Code of Iowa. A City may regulate the
operation of registered ATVs and UTVs and may designate streets under the
jurisdiction of the City within its corporate limits, and two-lane primary and
secondary road extensions in the City, which may be used for the operation of
such vehicles. In designating such streets, the City may authorize ATVs and
UTVs to stop at service stations or convenience stores along a designated
street.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321I.10[1 and 3])
      B.   ATV operators may operate ATVs upon the streets under jurisdiction
and within the corporate limits of the City. ATVs shall not be operated upon
any City street which is a primary road extension or State highway through the
City, to wit:
HWY 18 and HWY 60 (Bypass/Expressway)
      C.   ATVs may cross HWY 18 at lighted and controlled intersections;
specifically, ATVs may cross Western Avenue and HWY 18 at 6th Avenue,
Washington Avenue, and 19th Avenue.
   2.   Exceptions. ATVs may be operated on prohibited streets, alleys, or
areas only under the following circumstances:
      A.   Emergencies. ATVs may be operated on any street in an emergency
during the period of time when and at locations where snow upon the roadway
renders travel by conventional motor vehicles impractical.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321G.9[4c])
   3.   Direct Crossing. An ATV or UTV may make a direct crossing of a highway
that is not part of the interstate road system provided all of the following
occur:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321I.10[5])
      A.   The crossing is made at an angle of approximately 90 degrees to the
direction of the highway and at a place where no obstruction prevents a quick
and safe crossing.
      B.   The ATV or UTV is brought to a complete stop before crossing the
shoulder or main traveled way of the highway.
      C.   The driver yields the right-of-way to all oncoming traffic which
constitutes an immediate hazard.
      D.   In crossing a divided highway, the crossing is made only at an
intersection of such highway with another public street or highway.
      E.   The crossing is made from a street, roadway, or highway on which the
ATV or UTV is authorized to operate to a street, roadway, or highway on which
such vehicle is authorized to operate.
   4.   Trails. ATVs and UTVs shall not be operated on snowmobile trails except
where designated.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321I.10[4])
   5.   Railroad Right-of-Way. ATVs and UTVs shall not be operated on an
operating railroad right-of-way. An ATV or UTV may be driven directly across a
railroad right-of-way only at an established crossing and notwithstanding any
other provisions of law may, if necessary, use the improved portion of the
established crossing after yielding to all oncoming traffic.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321I.14[1h])
   6.   Parks and Other City Land. ATVs and UTVs shall not be operated in any
park, playground, or upon any other City-owned property without the express
permission of the City.
   7.   Sidewalk or Parking. ATVs and UTVs shall not be operated upon the
public sidewalk or that portion of the street located between the curb line and
the sidewalk or property line commonly referred to as the “parking.”
   8.   Private Property. ATVs may only be operated on private property with
the express consent of the owner.
   9.   License. No person shall operate an ATV on the public streets of the
City without a valid motor vehicle operator’s license.
   10.   Equipment. All ATVs shall be equipped according to the provisions of
Sections 321I.12 and 321I.13 of the Code of Iowa. This includes flags on ATVs.
There shall not be more passengers than there are seatbelts in the ATV.
   11.   Traffic Code Observed. Any operator of any ATV must observe all State
and local traffic control regulations and devices and shall not operate an ATV
at a speed in excess of that posted, nor at any time operate any ATV at a speed
greater than is reasonable and proper under the existing conditions.
   12.   Lights. No person shall operate an ATV without a lighted headlamp,
taillight, and turning signals when required for safety or by any State law or
ordinance for motor vehicles.
   13.   Unattended ATVs and Parking. No owner or operator of an ATV shall
leave an ATV unattended on public property while the motor is running or with
keys in the ignition switch. Owners and operators of ATVs must obey all parking
regulations in the City.
   14.   Registration. The owner or operator of an ATV must maintain current
vehicle registration as required by State law.
   15.   Hours of Operation. No ATV shall be operated in the City between
sunset and sunrise except for emergency situations or for loading or unloading
from a transport trailer, except that an ATV may be operated during prohibited
hours for snow removal purposes.
75.06   NEGLIGENCE.
The owner or operator of an ATV or snowmobile must maintain and provide current
proof of financial responsibility in accordance with Section 321.20B of the
Code of Iowa. The owner and operator of an ATV or snowmobile are liable for any
injury or damage occasioned by the negligent operation of the ATV or
snowmobile. The owner of an ATV or snowmobile shall be liable for any such
injury or damage only if the owner was the operator of the ATV or snowmobile at
the time the injury or damage occurred or if the operator had the owner’s
consent to operate the ATV or snowmobile at the time the injury or damage
occurred.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321G.18 and 321I.19)
75.07   ACCIDENT REPORTS.
Whenever an ATV or snowmobile is involved in an accident resulting in injury or
death to anyone or property damage amounting to $1,500.00 or more, either the
operator or someone acting for the operator shall immediately notify a law
enforcement officer and shall file an accident report, in accordance with State
law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321G.10 and 321I.11)
75.08   PENALTIES.
A violation of this chapter shall be a simple misdemeanor, or a municipal
infraction as set forth in Chapter 4. The offender may also be prosecuted
pursuant to Section 321I.36 of the Code of Iowa.
CHAPTER 76
BICYCLE REGULATIONS
76.01 Scope of Regulations             76.12 Riding on Right Near Curb Required
76.02 Definitions                      76.13 Turning; Starting; Stopping
76.03 Traffic Code Applies             76.14 Operation Upon Approach of
                                       Emergency Vehicles
76.04 Double Riding Restricted         76.15 Following Emergency Vehicles
76.05 Two Abreast Limit                76.16 Crossing Railroad Tracks
76.06 Speed                            76.17 Parking
76.07 Emerging From Alley or Driveways 76.18 Equipment Requirements
76.08 Carrying Articles                76.19 Mechanical Condition
76.09 Riding on Sidewalks              76.20 Use of Bicycle Without Consent of
                                       Owner
76.10 Towing                           76.21 Special Penalty
76.11 Improper Riding
 
76.01   SCOPE OF REGULATIONS.
These regulations shall apply whenever a bicycle is operated upon any street or
upon any public path set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles, subject to
those exceptions stated herein.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[10])
76.02   DEFINITIONS.
For use in this chapter, the following terms are defined.
   1.   “Bicycle” means a vehicle with two tandem wheels, neither of which is
less than 20 inches in diameter, with solid or pneumatic tires, having a
steering bar or wheel, a saddle seat, and propelled by human power. The term
bicycle also means and includes adult-sized tricycles.
   2.   “Business Commercial District” means and refers to the area bounded by
2nd Avenue on the west, 11th Street on the south, 5th Avenue on the east, and
8th Street on the north.
   3.   “Operate” means and refers to the use of, putting into action, or
causing to function a bicycle by a person mounted thereon.
76.03   TRAFFIC CODE APPLIES.
Every person riding a bicycle upon a roadway shall be granted all of the rights
and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to the driver of a vehicle
by the laws of the State declaring rules of the road applicable to vehicles or
by the Traffic Code of the City applicable to the driver of a vehicle, except
as to those provisions that by their nature can have no application. Whenever
such person dismounts from a bicycle, the person shall be subject to all
regulations applicable to pedestrians.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.234)
76.04   DOUBLE RIDING RESTRICTED.
A person propelling a bicycle shall not ride other than astride a permanent and
regular seat attached thereto. No bicycle shall be used to carry more persons
at one time than the number for which it is designed and equipped.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.234[3 and 4])
76.05   TWO ABREAST LIMIT.
Persons riding bicycles upon a roadway shall not ride more than two abreast
except on paths or parts of roadways set aside for the exclusive use of
bicycles. All bicycles ridden on the roadway shall be kept to the right and
shall be operated as near as practicable to the right-hand edge of the roadway.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[10])
76.06   SPEED.
No person shall operate a bicycle at a speed greater than is reasonable and
prudent under the conditions then existing.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[10])
76.07   EMERGING FROM ALLEY OR DRIVEWAY.
The operator of a bicycle emerging from an alley, driveway or building shall,
upon approaching a sidewalk or the sidewalk area extending across any alleyway,
yield the right-of-way to all pedestrians approaching on said sidewalk or
sidewalk area, and upon entering the roadway shall yield the right-of-way to
all vehicles approaching on said roadway.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[10])
76.08   CARRYING ARTICLES.
No person operating a bicycle shall carry any package, bundle, or article that
prevents the rider from keeping at least one hand upon the handlebars.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[10])
76.09   RIDING ON SIDEWALKS.
The following provisions apply to riding bicycles on sidewalks:
   1.   Central Business District. No person shall ride a bicycle upon a
sidewalk within the Central Business District.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[10])
   2.   Other Locations. When signs are erected on any sidewalk or roadway
prohibiting the riding of bicycles thereon by any person, no person shall
disobey the signs.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[10])
   3.   Yield Right-of-Way. Whenever any person is riding a bicycle upon a
sidewalk, such person shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian and shall
give audible signal before overtaking and passing.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[10])
76.10   TOWING.
It is unlawful for any person riding a bicycle to be towed or to tow any other
vehicle upon the streets of the City unless the vehicle is manufactured for
such use.
76.11   IMPROPER RIDING.
No person shall ride a bicycle in an irregular or reckless manner such as
zigzagging, stunting, speeding, or otherwise so as to disregard the safety of
the operator or others.
76.12   RIDING ON RIGHT NEAR CURB REQUIRED.
All bicycles, when operated on roadways, shall be kept to the right and shall
be operated as near as practicable to the right-hand edge of the roadway.
76.13   TURNING; STARTING; STOPPING.
The operator of a bicycle on a roadway, when making a right turn, shall follow
the right-hand edge of the roadway, and the operator of a bicycle on a roadway
when making a left turn shall approach the point of turning in the traffic lane
nearest the center of the roadway. No operator of a bicycle shall start, slow
down, or stop, or attempt to turn, without first indicating such movement as
provided by law.
76.14   OPERATION UPON APPROACH OF EMERGENCY VEHICLES.
When an ambulance, fire engine, or other emergency vehicle gives warning of its
approach, the operator of a bicycle shall pull to the right and stop until such
emergency vehicle has passed.
76.15   FOLLOWING EMERGENCY VEHICLES.
It is unlawful for the operator of a bicycle to follow an ambulance, fire
engine, or other emergency vehicle.
76.16   CROSSING RAILROAD TRACKS.
No operator of a bicycle shall cross any railroad track unless said person can
do so safely, and said operator shall stop within 50 feet from the nearest rail
of the track when any mechanical signaling device gives warning of an
approaching train, or whenever the operator can see any train approaching such
crossing.
76.17   PARKING.
No person shall park a bicycle upon a street other than upon the roadway
against the curb or upon the sidewalk in a rack to support the bicycle or
against a building or at the curb, in such a manner as to afford the least
obstruction to pedestrian traffic.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[10])
76.18   EQUIPMENT REQUIREMENTS.
Every person riding a bicycle shall be responsible for providing and using
equipment as provided herein:
   1.   Lamps Required. Every bicycle when in use at nighttime shall be
equipped with a lamp on the front emitting a white light visible from a
distance of at least 300 feet to the front and with a lamp on the rear
exhibiting a red light visible from a distance of 300 feet to the rear, except
that a red reflector on the rear, of a type that is visible from all distances
from 50 feet to 300 feet to the rear when directly in front of lawful upper
beams of headlamps on a motor vehicle, may be used in lieu of a rear light.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.397)
   2.   Brakes Required. Every bicycle shall be equipped with a brake that will
enable the operator to make the braked wheel skid on dry, level, clean
pavement.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[10])
76.19   MECHANICAL CONDITION.
No person shall operate a bicycle which is not in such mechanical condition so
that it can be safely operated.
76.20   USE OF BICYCLE WITHOUT CONSENT OF OWNER.
It is unlawful for any person to use or operate any bicycle within the City
without the consent of the owner.
76.21   SPECIAL PENALTY.
Any person violating the provisions of this chapter may, in lieu of the
scheduled fine for bicyclists or standard penalty provided for violations of
this Code of Ordinances, allow the person’s bicycle to be impounded by the City
for not less than five days for the first offense, 10 days for a second
offense, and 30 days for a third offense.
CHAPTER 80
ABANDONED VEHICLES
 
80.01 Definitions                       80.06 Disposal of Abandoned Vehicles
80.02 Authority to Take Possession of   80.07 Disposal of Totally Inoperable
Abandoned Vehicles                      Vehicles
80.03 Notice by Mail                    80.08 Proceeds from Sales
80.04 Reclamation of Abandoned Vehicles 80.09 Duties of Demolisher
80.05 Fees for Impoundment
 
80.01   DEFINITIONS.
For use in this chapter, the following terms are defined:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.89[1] and Sec. 321.90)
   1.   “Abandoned vehicle” means any of the following:
      A.   A vehicle that has been left unattended on public property for more
than 24 hours and lacks current registration plates or two or more wheels or
other parts which renders the vehicle totally inoperable.
      B.   A vehicle that has remained illegally on public property for more
than 24 hours.
      C.   A vehicle that has been unlawfully parked or placed on private
property without the consent of the owner or person in control of the property
for more than 24 hours.
      D.   A vehicle that has been legally impounded by order of a police
authority and has not been reclaimed for a period of 10 days. However, a police
authority may declare the vehicle abandoned within the 10-day period by
commencing the notification process.
      E.   Any vehicle parked on the highway determined by a police authority
to create a hazard to other vehicle traffic.
      F.   A vehicle that has been impounded pursuant to Section 321J.4B of the
Code of Iowa by order of the court and whose owner has not paid the impoundment
fees after notification by the person or agency responsible for carrying out
the impoundment order.
   2.   “Demolisher” means a person licensed under Chapter 321H of the Code of
Iowa whose business it is to convert a vehicle to junk, processed scrap, or
scrap metal, or otherwise to wreck, or dismantle vehicles.
   3.   “Garage keeper” means any operator of a parking place or establishment,
motor vehicle storage facility, or establishment for the servicing, repair, or
maintenance of motor vehicles.
   4.   “Police authority” means the Iowa State Patrol or any law enforcement
agency of a county or city.
80.02   AUTHORITY TO TAKE POSSESSION OF ABANDONED VEHICLES.
A police authority, upon the authority’s own initiative or upon the request of
any other authority having the duties of control of highways or traffic, shall
take into custody an abandoned vehicle on public property and may take into
custody any abandoned vehicle on private property. The police authority may
employ its own personnel, equipment, and facilities or hire a private entity,
equipment, and facilities for the purpose of removing, preserving, storing, or
disposing of abandoned vehicles. A property owner or other person in control of
private property may employ a private entity that is a garage keeper to dispose
of an abandoned vehicle, and the private entity may take into custody the
abandoned vehicle without a police authority’s initiative. If a police
authority employs a private entity to dispose of abandoned vehicles, the police
authority shall provide the private entity with the names and addresses of the
registered owners, all lienholders of record, and any other known claimant to
the vehicle or the personal property found in the vehicle.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.89[2])
80.03   NOTICE BY MAIL.
   1.   A police authority or private entity that takes into custody an
abandoned vehicle shall send notice by certified mail that the vehicle has been
taken into custody no more than 20 days after taking custody of the vehicle.
Notice shall be sent to the last known address of record of the last known
registered owner of the vehicle, all lienholders of record, and any other known
claimant to the vehicle.
   2.   Notice shall be deemed given when mailed. The notice shall include all
of the following:
      A.   A description of the year, make, model, and vehicle identification
number of the vehicle.
      B.   The location of the facility where the vehicle is being held.
      C.   Information for the persons receiving the notice of their right to
reclaim the vehicle and personal property contained therein within 10 days
after the effective date of the notice. Persons may reclaim the vehicle or
personal property upon payment of all towing, preservation, and storage charges
resulting from placing the vehicle in custody and upon payment of the costs of
the notice required pursuant to this section.
      D.   A statement that failure of the owner, lienholders, or claimants to
exercise their right to reclaim the vehicle or personal property within the
time provided shall be deemed a waiver by the owner, lienholders, and claimants
of all right, title, claim, and interest in the vehicle or personal property.
      E.   A statement that failure to reclaim the vehicle or personal property
is deemed consent for the police authority or private entity to sell the
vehicle at a public auction or dispose of the vehicle to a demolisher and to
dispose of the personal property by sale or destruction.
   3.   If the abandoned vehicle was taken into custody by a private entity
without a police authority’s initiative, the notice shall state that the
private entity may claim a garage keeper’s lien as described in Section 321.90,
Subsection 1, of the Code of Iowa, and may proceed to sell or dispose of the
vehicle.
   4.   If the abandoned vehicle was taken into custody by a police authority
or by a private entity hired by a police authority, the notice shall state that
any person claiming rightful possession of the vehicle or personal property who
disputes the planned disposition of the vehicle or personal property by the
police authority or private entity or of the assessment of fees and charges
provided by this section may ask for an evidentiary hearing before the police
authority to contest those matters.
   5.   If the persons receiving notice do not ask for a hearing or exercise
their right to reclaim the vehicle or personal property within the 10-day
reclaiming period, the owner, lienholders, or claimants shall no longer have
any right, title, claim, or interest in or to the vehicle or the personal
property.
   6.   A court in any case in law or equity shall not recognize any right,
title, claim, or interest of the owner, lienholders, or claimants after the
expiration of the 10-day reclaiming period.
   7.   If it is impossible to determine with reasonable certainty the
identities and addresses of the last registered owner and all lienholders,
notice by one publication in one newspaper of general circulation in the area
where the vehicle was abandoned shall be sufficient to meet all requirements of
notice under Subsection 2 of this section. The published notice may contain
multiple listings of abandoned vehicles but shall be published within the same
time requirements and contain the same information as prescribed for mailed
notice in Subsection 2 of this section.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.89[3])
80.04   RECLAMATION OF ABANDONED VEHICLES.  
Prior to driving an abandoned vehicle away from the premises, a person who
received or who is reclaiming the vehicle on behalf of a person who received
notice under Section 80.03 shall present to the police authority or private
entity, as applicable, the person’s valid driver’s license and proof of
financial liability coverage as provided in Section 321.20B of the Code of
Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.89[3a])
80.05   FEES FOR IMPOUNDMENT.
The owner, lienholder, or claimant shall pay all towing and storage fees as
established by the storage facility, whereupon the vehicle shall be released.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.89[3a])
80.06   DISPOSAL OF ABANDONED VEHICLES.
If an abandoned vehicle has not been reclaimed as provided herein, the police
authority or private entity shall make a determination as to whether or not the
motor vehicle should be sold for use upon the highways, and shall dispose of
the motor vehicle in accordance with State law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.89[4])
80.07   DISPOSAL OF TOTALLY INOPERABLE VEHICLES.
The City or any person upon whose property or in whose possession is found any
abandoned motor vehicle, or any person being the owner of a motor vehicle whose
title certificate is faulty, lost, or destroyed, may dispose of such motor
vehicle to a demolisher for junk, without a title and without notification
procedures, if such motor vehicle lacks an engine or two or more wheels or
other structural part which renders the vehicle totally inoperable. The police
authority shall give the applicant a certificate of authority. The applicant
shall then apply to the County Treasurer for a junking certificate and shall
surrender the certificate of authority in lieu of the certificate of title.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.90[2e])
80.08   PROCEEDS FROM SALES.
Proceeds from the sale of any abandoned vehicle shall be applied to the expense
of auction, cost of towing, preserving, storing, and notification required, in
accordance with State law. Any balance shall be held for the owner of the motor
vehicle or entitled lienholder for 90 days, and then shall be deposited in the
State Road Use Tax Fund. Where the sale of any vehicle fails to realize the
amount necessary to meet costs the police authority shall apply for
reimbursement from the Department of Transportation.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.89[4])
80.09   DUTIES OF DEMOLISHER.
Any demolisher who purchases or otherwise acquires an abandoned motor vehicle
for junk shall junk, scrap, wreck, dismantle, or otherwise demolish such motor
vehicle. A demolisher shall not junk, scrap, wreck, dismantle, or demolish a
vehicle until the demolisher has obtained the junking certificate issued for
the vehicle.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.90[3a])
CHAPTER 90
WATER SERVICE SYSTEM
90.01 Definitions                        90.12 Interior Valve
90.02 Superintendent’s Duties          90.13 Inspection and Approval
90.03 Mandatory Connections              90.14 Completion By the City
90.04 Abandoned Connections              90.15 Responsibility For Water Service
                                         Pipe
90.05 Fees                               90.16 Failure To Maintain
90.06 Compliance With Plumbing Code      90.17 Shutting Off Water Supply
90.07 Excavations                        90.18 Operation of Curb Valve
90.08 Specifications                     90.19 Fire Hydrants
90.09 Tapping Mains                      90.20 Private Wells Within the City
90.10 Installation of Water Service Pipe 90.21 Requirements For New Wells
90.11 Curb Valve
 
90.01   DEFINITIONS.
The following terms are defined for use in the chapters in this Code of
Ordinances pertaining to the Water Service System:
   1.   “Combined service account” means a customer service account for the
provision of two or more utility services.
   2.   “Customer” means, in addition to any person receiving water service
from the City, the owner of the property served, and as between such parties
the duties, responsibilities, liabilities, and obligations hereinafter imposed
shall be joint and several.
   3.   “Superintendent” means the Superintendent of the City water system or
any duly authorized assistant, agent, or representative.
   4.   “Water main” means a water supply pipe provided for public or community
use.
   5.   “Water service pipe” means the pipe from the water main to the building
served.
   6.   “Water system” or “water works” means all public facilities for
securing, collecting, storing, pumping, treating, and distributing water.
90.02   SUPERINTENDENT’S DUTIES.  
The Superintendent shall supervise the installation of water service pipes and
their connection to the water main and enforce all regulations pertaining to
water services in the City in accordance with this chapter. This chapter shall
apply to all replacements of existing water service pipes as well as to new
ones. The Superintendent shall make such rules, not in conflict with the
provisions of this chapter, as may be needed for the detailed operation of the
water system, subject to the approval of the Council. In the event of an
emergency the Superintendent may make temporary rules for the protection of the
system until due consideration by the Council may be had.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
90.03   MANDATORY CONNECTIONS.
All residences, business establishments, and other structures within the City
limits intended or used for human habitation, occupancy, or use shall be
connected to the public water system, if it is reasonably available and if the
building is not furnished with pure and wholesome water from some other source.
90.04   ABANDONED CONNECTIONS.
When an existing water service is abandoned or a service is renewed with a new
tap in the main, all abandoned connections with the mains shall be turned off
at the corporation stop and made absolutely watertight.
90.05   FEES.
Before any connection or reconnection is made, the person who makes the request
shall pay $25.00 to the Clerk to cover the connection or reconnection fee and
the cost of supervising, regulating, and inspecting the work. In addition,
there shall be an account processing fee for all new and reconnected accounts
in the amount of $10.00. A reactivation fee of $25.00 shall be charged to a
customer who continues to reside at the same address after the customer
requested to be deactivated from the City water service system.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84)
90.06   COMPLIANCE WITH PLUMBING CODE.
The installation of any water service pipe and any connection with the water
system shall comply with all pertinent and applicable provisions, whether
regulatory, procedural, or enforcement provisions, of the State Plumbing Code.
90.07   EXCAVATIONS.
All trench work, excavation, and backfilling required in making a connection
shall be performed in accordance with the provisions of the State Plumbing Code
and the provisions of Chapter 135 of this Code of Ordinances.
90.08   SPECIFICATIONS.  
All taps into water mains shall be made by, or under the direct supervision of,
the Superintendent and in accord with the following:
   1.   Service pipe from the main to the water meter must be of either:
      A.   Type K copper pipe; or
      B.   Polyethylene pipe that is ISP Class 200, AWWA C901.
   1.   All such service pipe, regardless of whether it is copper or
polyethylene, must have an inside diameter of not less than three-fourths of an
inch.
   2.   All polyethylene service pipe shall be installed with No. 12 solid
tracer wire. Such wire must start at the water main, surface at the curb stop,
and continue until the water meter.
   3.   Connections to the water main shall be made by the regular corporation
stop fitting with not less than a five-eighths inch tap into the main. Such
connections to copper service pipe shall be with brass connections, and such
connections to polyethylene service pipe shall be with brass compression-style
fittings with stainless steel insert stiffeners. All taps into the water main
must be at least 18 inches apart and, on the side, and near the top and not in
any case within 18 inches of a hub.
   4.   The curb stop shall be of the Minneapolis pattern and:
      A.   For copper service pipe, both the corporation and curb stops must be
of the quality of the Mueller make or its equal.
      B.   For polyethylene service pipe the corporation stops must be of the
quality of the Ford F1001 make or its equal, and the curb stops must be of the
quality of the Ford B66 make or its equal.
   5.   All service pipes must be laid at least five and one-half feet below
the surface of the ground. There shall be a curb stop in every service
connection to the main within the parking and near the sidewalk line and alley
within one foot of the alley line. The curb stop shall be of the style and
quality as specified above, and shall be provided with T-handles and be
approved by the Superintendent.
   6.   The curb stop shall be covered by a two- and one-half-inch extension
stop box of the Minneapolis pattern extending upward so as to be flush with the
top of the ground. In placing the curb stop in position, care must be exercised
by the installer so as to prevent settlement of the same. There shall be a
brass ball valve installed inside the building prior to the water meter on
every service pipe.
90.09   TAPPING MAINS.
All taps into water mains shall be made by or under the direct supervision of
the Superintendent and in accordance with the following:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
   1.   Independent Services. No more than one house, building, or premises
shall be supplied from one tap unless special written permission is obtained
from the Superintendent and unless provision is made so that each house,
building, or premises may be shut off independently of the other.
   2.   Sizes and Location of Taps. All mains six inches or less in diameter
shall receive no larger than a three-fourths inch tap. All mains of over six
inches in diameter shall receive no larger than a one-inch tap. Where a larger
connection than a one-inch tap is desired, two or more small taps or saddles
shall be used, as the Superintendent shall order. All taps in the mains shall
be made in the top half of the pipe, at least 18 inches apart. No main shall be
tapped nearer than two feet of the joint in the main.
   3.   Corporation Stop. A brass corporation stop, of the pattern and weight
approved by the Superintendent, shall be inserted in every tap in the main. The
corporation stop in the main shall be of the same size as the service pipe.
   4.   Location Record. An accurate and dimensional sketch showing the exact
location of the tap shall be filed with the Superintendent in such form as the
Superintendent shall require.
90.10   INSTALLATION OF WATER SERVICE PIPE.
Water service pipes from the main to the meter setting shall comply with
Section 90.08 of this chapter. The use of any other pipe material for the
service line shall first be approved by the Superintendent. Pipe must be laid
sufficiently waving, and to such depth, as to prevent rupture from settlement
or freezing.
90.11   CURB VALVE.
There shall be installed within the public right-of-way a main shut-off valve
on the water service pipe of a pattern approved by the Superintendent. The
shut-off valve shall be constructed to be visible and even with the pavement or
ground. Owners of premises having water service which do not have a separate
curb stop for each building or which otherwise do not conform to the
requirements in this chapter shall put in such curb stop or make such other
changes as necessary to conform to these requirements when so instructed by the
Water Department. If the Superintendent determines that it is not reasonable to
have a separate shut off, the City will install a radio-controlled meter at the
property owner’s expense.
90.12   INTERIOR VALVE.
There shall be installed a shut-off valve on every service pipe inside the
building as close to the entrance of the pipe within the building as possible
and so located that the water can be shut off conveniently. Where one service
pipe supplies more than one customer within the building, there shall be
separate valves for each such customer so that service may be shut off for one
without interfering with service to the others.
90.13   INSPECTION AND APPROVAL.
All water service pipes and their connections to the water system must be
inspected and approved in writing by the Superintendent before they are
covered, and the Superintendent shall keep a record of such approvals. If the
Superintendent refuses to approve the work, the plumber or property owner must
proceed immediately to correct the work. Every person who uses or intends to
use the municipal water system shall permit the Superintendent to enter the
premises to inspect or make necessary alterations or repairs at all reasonable
hours and on proof of authority.
90.14   COMPLETION BY THE CITY.
Should any excavation be left open or only partly refilled for 24 hours after
the water service pipe is installed and connected with the water system, or
should the work be improperly done, the City shall have the right to finish or
correct the work, and the Council shall assess the costs to the property owner
or the plumber. If the plumber is assessed, the plumber must pay the costs
before receiving another permit. If the property owner is assessed, such
assessment may be collected with and in the same manner as general property
taxes.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3a and h])
90.15   RESPONSIBILITY FOR WATER SERVICE PIPE.
All costs and expenses incident to the installation, connection, and
maintenance of the water service pipe from the main to the building served
shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the City from any loss
or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the installation or
maintenance of said water service pipe.
90.16   FAILURE TO MAINTAIN.
When any portion of the water service pipe that is the responsibility of the
property owner becomes defective or creates a nuisance, and the owner fails to
correct such nuisance, the City may do so and assess the costs thereof to the
property.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3a and h])
90.17   SHUTTING OFF WATER SUPPLY.
The Superintendent may shut off the supply of water to any customer because of
any violation of the regulations contained in these Water Service System
chapters that is not being contested in good faith. The supply shall not be
turned on again until all violations have been corrected and the Superintendent
has ordered the water to be turned on.
90.18   OPERATION OF CURB VALVE.
It is unlawful for any person except the Superintendent to turn water on at the
curb valve.
90.19   FIRE HYDRANTS.
No person, unless specifically authorized by the City, shall open or attempt to
draw water from any fire hydrant for any purpose whatsoever. No person shall
dump snow on any fire hydrant that renders said hydrant ineffective.
90.20   PRIVATE WELLS WITHIN THE CITY.
   1.   Scope. The provisions of this section shall apply to drinking and non-
drinking private water wells, other than monitoring wells used in connection
with soil and groundwater contamination, within the City limits of the City of
Sheldon.
   2.   Private Wells Prohibited. No person shall construct a private well
within the City limits after the effective date of the ordinance codified by
this section, and no private well shall be allowed in any contaminated area, as
determined by the City or the Iowa Department of Natural Resources. This
prohibition shall not apply to closed loop geothermal wells.
   3.   Registration of Pre-Existing Wells. Any person who owns property in the
City which has a water well as of the effective date of the ordinance codified
by this section, other than a monitoring well, shall register said well with
the City. There shall be no fee for the registration of a pre-existing well.
Registration shall include, but not be limited to, exact location, well
history, separation from public water supply, and vulnerability to
contaminants. Any pre-existing well located in a contaminated area shall be
plugged and sealed in accordance with the Iowa Department of Natural Resources
regulations at the owner’s cost. In addition, closed loop geothermal wells must
be registered with the City upon commencement of construction, the same as pre-
existing wells.
   4.   The digging of any well, private or municipal, for any reason within
1,000 feet of the real estate owned by the State of Iowa known as the Iowa
National Guard Armory, located at 920 Western Avenue, is prohibited.
90.21   REQUIREMENTS FOR NEW WELLS.
No wells may be constructed or drilled within the City limits without a permit.
Permits applications shall be obtained from and presented to the
Superintendent. The Superintendent shall present all applications to the
Council for consideration and grant or denial. The Superintendent shall make
recommendations to the Council regarding the grant or denial of any
application, but the final decision shall rest with the Council. In considering
the grant or denial of any application for construction or drilling of a well
within City limits, the Council shall consider whether the property is
furnished with pure and wholesome water, whether it is safe to construct or
drill a well on the premises, and other considerations which the Council deems
appropriate. If any person fails to comply with this section for more than 10
days after receiving written notice of the violation, the City may impose a
penalty and cause well abandonment to be performed and the expense to be
assessed as a special tax against the property. In addition, the Superintendent
may at any time revoke the permit for any violation of this Code of Ordinances
and may require that the work be stopped.
CHAPTER 91
WATER METERS
 
91.01 Purpose                           91.06 Meter Costs
91.02 Water Use Metered                 91.07 Meter Repairs
91.03 Fire Sprinkler Systems; Exception 91.08 Right of Entry
91.04 Location of Meters                91.09 Accuracy Test
91.05 Meter Setting
 
91.01   PURPOSE.
The purpose of this chapter is to encourage the conservation of water and
facilitate the equitable distribution of charges for water service among
customers.
91.02   WATER USE METERED.
All water furnished customers shall be measured through meters furnished by the
City and installed by a licensed plumber.
91.03   FIRE SPRINKLER SYSTEMS; EXCEPTION.
Fire sprinkler systems may be connected to water mains by direct connection
without meters under the direct supervision of the Superintendent. No other
open, unmetered connection shall be incorporated in the system, and there shall
be no valves except a main control valve at the entrance to the building which
must be sealed open.
91.04   LOCATION OF METERS.
All meters shall be so located that they are easily accessible to meter readers
and repairmen and protected from freezing.
91.05   METER SETTING.
The property owner shall provide all necessary piping and fittings for proper
setting of the meter including a valve on the discharge side of the meter.
Meter pits may be used only upon approval of the Superintendent and shall be of
a design and construction approved by the Superintendent.
91.06   METER COSTS.
The full cost of any meter larger than that required for a single-family
residence shall be paid to the City by the property owner or customer prior to
the installation of any such meter by the City, or, at the sole option of the
City, the property owner or customer may be required to purchase and install
such meter in accordance with requirements established by the City.
91.07   METER REPAIRS.
Whenever a water meter owned by the City is found to be out of order the
Superintendent shall have it repaired. If it is found that damage to the meter
has occurred due to the carelessness or negligence of the customer or property
owner, or the meter is not owned by the City, then the property owner shall be
liable for the cost of repairs.
91.08   RIGHT OF ENTRY.
The Superintendent shall be permitted to enter the premises of any customer at
any reasonable time to read, remove, or change a meter.
91.09   ACCURACY TEST.
The Superintendent shall make a test of the accuracy of any water meter at any
time when requested in writing, but not more often than once in six months.
   1.   If the meter is found to overrun to the extent of five percent or more,
the cost of the test shall be paid by the City and a refund shall be made to
the customer for overcharges collected since the last known date of accuracy
but not for longer than three months.
   2.   If the meter is found to be accurate or slow, or less than five percent
fast, the customer shall pay the cost of removal and testing.
CHAPTER 92
WATER RATES
 
92.01 Service Charges                      92.08 Billing For Water Service
92.02 Rates For Service                    92.09 Service Discontinued
92.03 Rates Outside the City               92.10 Lien For Nonpayment
92.04 Monthly Surcharge                    92.11 Lien Exemption
92.05 Multiple Units Connected To a Single 92.12 Lien Notice
Meter
92.06 Reserved                             92.13 Customer Deposits
92.07 Sales Tax                            92.14 Temporary Vacancy
 
92.01   SERVICE CHARGES.
Each customer shall pay for water service provided by the City based upon use
of water as determined by meters provided for in Chapter 91. Each location,
building, premises, or connection shall be considered a separate and distinct
customer whether owned or controlled by the same person or not. If a meter is
found to have stopped or failed to register, the current billing shall be based
on the volume of water used in a like month of the preceding year or an average
of the volume used during the preceding two months, whichever I more.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84)
92.02   RATES FOR SERVICE.
Water service shall be furnished at the following monthly rates within the
City:
Rates:   First 1,000 gallons used per month @ $21.50 (Minimum Bill).
Next 4,000 gallons used per month @ $4.75 per 1,000 gallons.
Next 95,000 gallons used per month @ $4.70 per 1,000 gallons.
All over 100,000 gallons used per month @ $4.60 per 1,000 gallons.
Minimum Charge. The minimum monthly service charge for service withing the City
is included in the row labeled First 1,000 stated above. This change shall
apply to all services, including vacant properties, unless the water has been
turned off at the curb stop.
(Section 92.02 – Ord. O25-3293 – Jun. 25 Supp.)
92.03   RATES OUTSIDE THE CITY.
Water service shall be provided to any customer located outside the corporate
limits of the City which the City has agreed to serve at rates one hundred
fifty percent (150%) of the rates plus tax (unless otherwise exempted) provided
in Section 92.02 as follows:
Rates:   First 1,000 gallons used per month @ $32.25 (Minimum Bill).
Next 4,000 gallons used per month @ $7.15 per 1,000 gallons.
Next 95,000 gallons used per month @ $7.05 per 1,000 gallons.
All over 100,000 gallons used per month @ $6.90 per 1,000 gallons.
Minimum Charge. The minimum monthly service charge outside the City is included
in the row labeled First 1,000 stated above. This charge shall apply to all
services, including vacant properties unless the water has been turned off at
the curb stop.
(Section 92.03 – Ord. O25-3293 – Jun. 25 Supp.)
92.04   MONTHLY SURCHARGE.  
There shall be a monthly surcharge added to each bill. Proceeds from this
surcharge will be designated by the City Clerk or the Lewis & Clark Rural Water
System Project. The monthly surcharge shall be $4.15.
(Section 92.04 – Ord. O25-3293 – Jun. 25 Supp.)
92.05   MULTIPLE UNITS CONNECTED TO A SINGLE METER.
Whenever a single water meter serves a self-sufficient residential apartment, a
self-sufficient multiple dwelling unit, a mobile home park or commercial
business establishment, the customer owning, operating or otherwise responsible
for water use in such dwellings or commercial establishments shall pay the
water service charge plus a flat fee of five dollars and five cents ($5.05)
plus tax each month for each self-sufficient residential apartment, self-
sufficient multiple dwelling unit, mobile home park or commercial business
establishment.
(Section 92.05 – Ord. O25-3293 – Jun. 25 Supp.)
92.06   RESERVED.
92.07   SALES TAX.
Applicable sales tax in effect at the time of the bill shall be applied to all
charges described in this chapter.
92.08   BILLING FOR WATER SERVICE.
Water service shall be billed as part of a combined service account, payable in
accordance with the following:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84)
   1.   Bills Issued. The Clerk shall prepare and issue bills for combined
service accounts on or before the last business day of each month.
   2.   Bills Payable. Bills for combined service accounts shall be due and
payable at the office of the Clerk within 22 days of the date of issuance.
   3.   Late Payment Penalty. Bills not paid when due shall be considered
delinquent. A late payment penalty of six percent of the amount due shall be
added to each delinquent bill. Each customer will be allowed one late payment
in a rolling 12-month period and the waiver of the accompanying late fee. The
request for a waiver of late payment must be made in writing prior to
discontinuation of service. This section shall not be interpreted as one late
payment waiver a year for each address in question, but rather, one late
payment in a 12-month period per addressee.
   4.   Adjustments To Bills. Any request for an adjustment to a customer's
water bill shall be submitted in writing. The City Manager shall make the final
determination as to any adjustment to a customer's water and sewer bill within
30 days of the customer's request and shall inform the Council of the final
determination. The customer shall have no further right to appeal the City
Manager's decision to the Council.
92.09   SERVICE DISCONTINUED.
   4.   Fees. A fee of $75.00 shall be charged before service is restored to a
delinquent customer. In addition, there shall be an account processing fee in
the amount of $25.00 charged to such delinquent customer. Water service will
only be restored from Monday to Friday from 7:30 a.m. to 4:00 p.m.
(Section 92.09 – Ord. O25-3293 – Jun. 25 Supp.)
92.10   LIEN FOR NONPAYMENT.
The owner of the premises served, and any lessee or tenant thereof shall, be
jointly and severally liable for water service charges to the premises. Water
service charges remaining unpaid, and delinquent, shall constitute a lien upon
the property or premises served and shall be certified by the Clerk to the
County Treasurer for collection in the same manner as property taxes.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84)
92.11   LIEN EXEMPTION.  
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84)
   1.   Water Service Exemption. The lien for nonpayment shall not apply to
charges for water service to a residential or commercial rental property where
water service is separately metered and the rates or charges for the water
service are paid directly to the City by the tenant, if the landlord gives
written notice to the City that the property is residential or commercial
rental property and that the tenant is liable for the rates or charges. The
City may require a deposit not exceeding the usual cost of 90 days of such
services to be paid to the City. When the tenant moves from the rental
property, the City shall refund the deposit if all service charges are paid in
full. The lien exemption does not apply to delinquent charges for repairs
related to any of the services.
   2.   Other Service Exemption. The lien for nonpayment shall also not apply
to the charges for any of the services of sewer systems, stormwater drainage
systems, sewage treatment, solid waste collection, and solid waste disposal for
a residential rental property where the charge is paid directly to the City by
the tenant, if the landlord gives written notice to the City that the property
is residential rental property and that the tenant is liable for the rates or
charges for such service. The City may require a deposit not exceeding the
usual cost of 90 days of such services to be paid to the City. When the tenant
moves from the rental property, the City shall refund the deposit if all
service charges are paid in full. The lien exemption does not apply to
delinquent charges for repairs related to any of the services.
   3.   Written Notice. The landlord’s written notice shall contain the name of
the tenant responsible for charges, the address of the residential or
commercial rental property that the tenant is to occupy, and the date that the
occupancy begins. Upon receipt, the City shall acknowledge the notice and
deposit. A change in tenant for a residential rental property shall require a
new written notice to be given to the City within 30 business days of the
change in tenant. A change in tenant for a commercial rental property shall
require a new written notice to be given to the City within 10 business days of
the change in tenant. A change in the ownership of the residential rental
property shall require written notice of such change to be given to the City
within 30 business days of the completion of the change of ownership. A change
in the ownership of the commercial rental property shall require written notice
of such change to be given to the City within 10 business days of the
completion of the change of ownership.
   4.   Mobile Homes, Modular Homes, and Manufactured Homes. A lien for
nonpayment of utility services described in Subsections 1 and 2 of this section
shall not be placed upon a premises that is a mobile home, modular home, or
manufactured home if the mobile home, modular home, or manufactured home is
owned by a tenant of and located in a mobile home park or manufactured home
community and the mobile home park or manufactured home community owner or
manager is the account holder, unless the lease agreement specifies that the
tenant is responsible for payment of a portion of the rates or charges billed
to the account holder.
92.12   LIEN NOTICE.
A lien for delinquent water service charges shall not be certified to the
County Treasurer unless prior written notice of intent to certify a lien is
given to the customer in whose name the delinquent charges were incurred. If
the customer is a tenant and if the owner or landlord of the property or
premises has made a written request for notice, the notice shall also be given
to the owner or landlord. The notice shall be sent to the appropriate persons
by ordinary mail not less than 30 days prior to certification of the lien to
the County Treasurer.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84)
92.13   CUSTOMER DEPOSITS.
A deposit of $150.00 shall be required from all residential, commercial, and
industrial customers making application for water service unless application is
for a transfer of water service within the City, provided the customer’s water
bill is current. In the event that one of the parties of a residence moves to a
new location within the City, a deposit may be required of that new resident
making application for water service. The deposit already on file with the City
shall remail with the current resident at the current location. The customer
deposit shall be refunded by the City at the time water service is discontinued
due to the customer moving outside the City limits. The deposit refund shall be
payable to the depositor named in the application, unless that customer no
longer resides at such location, less any amount owed to the City at the time
of discontinuance. In the event water service is discontinued pursuant to
Section
92.09 of this chapter, the fee for restoring service shall be in addition to
the customer deposit. Only one deposit will be required for any single account.
(Section 92.13 – Ord._O24-3286 – Sep. 24 Supp.)
92.14   TEMPORARY VACANCY.
A property owner may request water service to be discontinued and the water
shut off at the curb valve when the property is expected to be vacant. During
said period of service, discontinuance as provided for herein, there shall be
no monthly minimum service charge, if the length of time is at least five (5)
months. There will be a $75.00 charge for shutting off the water at the curb
valve and a charge of $75.00 will be made for reinstallation. The City will not
be responsible for the draining of pipes. In the event that the curb valve for
said property is inoperable, it shall be the responsibility of the property
owner to repair or replace the same with an operable curb valve before the
request for discontinuance of water service will be honored.
(Section 92.14 – Ord. O25-3293 – Jun. 25 Supp.)
CHAPTER 93
WATER CONSERVATION
 
93.01 Water Shortages         93.08 Base Allocation
93.02 Conditions              93.09 Appeal and Adjustment of the Base
                              Allocation
93.03 Water Watch             93.10 Premium Rate for Imprudent Consumption
93.04 Water Warning — Tier I93.11 Adjustment of Premium Rate Charges
93.05 Water Warning — Tier I93.12 Water Appeal Board
93.06 Water Emergency         93.13 Reduction in Flow of Water to Any Person
93.07 Penalties
 
93.01   WATER SHORTAGES.
A water shortage exists whenever, for reasons of drought conditions, consumer
demand, or treatment plant or distribution systems operation or maintenance,
water quantity and quality cannot be maintained at a level sufficient to meet
the demands of the customers using the system. Whenever, in the opinion of the
Public Works Director, conditions exist which create a water shortage, the
Public Works Director shall have the authority to declare a public Water Watch,
Water Warning, or Water Emergency, during which time the following measures and
provisions shall be in effect to produce an orderly and equitable reduction of
water consumption. Whenever the Public Works Director finds that the conditions
which gave rise to the Water Watch, Warning, or Emergency no longer exist, said
officer is authorized to either declare the termination of the Water Watch,
Warning, or Emergency or reduce the type of emergency conditions as set forth
in Section 93.02 hereof. The City Manager shall, at the next meeting of the
Council following the declaration of Water Watch, Warning, or Emergency,
present a resolution to the Council for its affirmation of such declaration and
the conditions thereunder.
93.02   CONDITIONS.
   1.   Water Watch. A Water Watch may be declared when a water shortage or
equipment failure poses a potential threat to the ability of the water system
to meet the needs of its customers currently or in the foreseeable future.
Indicators of the need to impose a Water Watch include:
      A.   System operating at 75 percent of pumping capacity.
      B.   Moderate decrease in the pumping water level of City wells or
moderate decrease in recovery rate of water level in City wells.
      C.   Moderate decrease in reservoir levels measured in number of feet
below spillway or number of feet above intake.
   2.   Water Warning. A Tier I or Tier II Water Warning may be declared when a
water shortage or equipment failure poses a serious threat to the ability of
the water system to meet the needs of its customers currently and in the
foreseeable future. Indicators of the need to impose a Tier I Water Warning
include:
      A.   System operating at 85 percent of pumping capacity.
      B.   Significant decrease in the pumping water level of City wells or
significant decrease in recovery rate of water level in City wells;
      C.   Significant decrease in reservoir levels measured in number of feet
below spillway or number of feet above intake.
Indicators of the need to impose a Tier II Water Warning include severe system
emergencies such as a chemical spill or major system failure in feeder mains or
treatment plant.
   3.   Water Emergency. A Water Emergency may be declared when a water
shortage or equipment failure poses a severe and immediate threat to the
ability of the water system to meet the needs of its customers. Indicators of
the need to impose a Water Emergency include:
      A.   System operating at 95 percent of pumping capacity.
      B.   Serious decrease in the recovery rate of water level in City wells.
      C.   Serious decrease in reservoir levels measured in number of feet
below spillway or number of feet above intake.
93.03   WATER WATCH.
Under a Water Watch, all customers of the municipal water service are
encouraged to limit or curtail all nonessential uses of water in order to
conserve precious water resources during the time of shortage. Customers may be
encouraged to comply with the following voluntary standards:
   1.   No watering of lawns, shrubs, or gardens between the hours of 8:00 a.m.
and 8:30 p.m.
   2.   No water should be used to fill private swimming pools, children’s
wading pools, reflecting pools, or any other outdoor pool or pond.
   3.   No water should be used to wash streets, parking lots, driveways,
sidewalks, or building exteriors.
   4.   No water should be used for nonessential cleaning of commercial and
industrial equipment, machinery, and interior spaces.
   5.   Water should be served at restaurants only upon the request of the
customer.
93.04   WATER WARNING — TIER I.
Under a Tier I Water Warning, no person shall use potable processed water of
the municipal water service in any manner contrary to the following:
   1.   Outdoor watering or irrigation of lawn is prohibited.
   2.   Outdoor watering of any kind is prohibited between the hours of 8:00
a.m. and 8:00 p.m. daily.
   3.   Watering or irrigation of flower and vegetable gardens, trees and
shrubs less than four years old, and new seedling or sod is permitted once per
week with an application not to exceed one inch.
   4.   Car washing is prohibited except in commercial establishments that
provide that service.
   5.   No water shall be used to fill private swimming pools, children’s
wading pools, reflecting pools, or any other outdoor pool or pond.
   6.   No water shall be used to wash streets, parking lots, driveways,
sidewalks, or building exteriors.
   7.   No water shall be used for nonessential cleaning of commercial and
industrial equipment, machinery, and interior spaces.
   8.   Water shall be served in restaurants only upon the request of the
customer.
   9.   Use of water-consuming comfort air conditioning equipment which
consumes in excess of five percent of the water circulating in such equipment
is prohibited.
   10.   Tank-load water sales may be curtailed or eliminated.
Water reclaimed or recycled after some other primary use, such as water that
has been used for washing or cooling, may be used without restriction.
Additionally, water derived from sources other than the City water utility,
such as water condensed from the atmosphere by air conditioners or collected
from rain or snow, may be used without restriction.
93.05   WATER WARNING — TIER II.
Under a Tier II Water Warning, no person shall use potable processed water of
the municipal water service in any manner contrary to the following:
   1.   All outside water use, except for domestic, sanitation, and fire, is
prohibited.
   2.   All commercial and industrial uses of water not essential in providing
products or services is prohibited.
   3.   Irrigation of agricultural crops is prohibited.
   4.   Recreational and leisure water use, including lawn and golf course
watering and other incidental or recreational uses, is prohibited.
   5.   Water use not necessary for the preservation of life or the general
welfare of the community is prohibited.
93.06   WATER EMERGENCY.
Under a Water Emergency, Tier II Water Warning use restrictions shall be in
effect and, in addition, each customer will be limited to a monthly base
allocation of water.
93.07   PENALTIES.
The following penalties shall apply for violation of Water Warning or Water
Emergency use restrictions imposed under this chapter.
   1.   First Violation. For a first violation, the utility shall issue a
written notice of violation to the water user violating the water use
restrictions imposed during a Water Warning or Water Emergency.
   2.   Second Violation. For a second violation within a 12-month period, a
surcharge shall be imposed in an amount equal to 16.7 percent of the customer’s
highest monthly bill during the last 12 months.
   3.   Subsequent Violations. For any subsequent violations within a 12-month
period, a surcharge shall be imposed in an amount equal to 33.4 percent of the
customer’s highest monthly bill during the last 12 months.
Any customer charged with a violation of the Water Warning or Water Emergency
use restrictions may request a hearing before the Water Appeal Board. The Water
Appeal Board may conclude that a violation did not occur or that the
circumstances under which the violation occurred warrant a complete or partial
mitigation of the penalty.
93.08   BASE ALLOCATION.
The base allocation of water for residential use shall be 3,000 gallons per
household per month. For commercial, industrial, or institutional use, the base
allocation shall be established by resolution as a percentage of the average
water used during the previous winter (November through April).
93.09   APPEAL AND ADJUSTMENT OF THE BASE ALLOCATION.
Any person may file an appeal with the Water Appeal Board to adjust the base
allocation amount. The Water Appeal Board may grant an adjustment to the
appellant based upon the following criteria:
   1.   For single-family residential use, the base allocation may be increased
by 1,000 gallons per person per month for all individuals residing at the
appellant’s residence for a period of more than 30 days.
   2.   For commercial, industrial, institutional, or other residential uses,
the base allocation may be increased based on factors appropriate to the
individual customer, such as usage, production, service, and occupancy data
provided by the customer.
93.10   PREMIUM RATE FOR IMPRUDENT CONSUMPTION.
In addition to the water rates duly enacted by the Council, all persons shall
pay a premium rate of $1.00 per 100 gallons of water consumed in excess of the
base allocation.
93.11   ADJUSTMENT OF PREMIUM RATE CHARGES.
Any person may file for adjustment of the premium rate charges for imprudent
water consumption with the Water Appeal Board. The Water Appeal Board may grant
an adjustment of the premium rate charges in accordance with the following
criteria:
   1.   Adjustments may be granted for overconsumption due to mechanical
failures such as broken or leaky pipes or fixtures, but not for overconsumption
due to human carelessness.
   2.   The applicant shall furnish proof that the mechanical failure was
repaired promptly. This should be in the form of a licensed plumber’s invoice
or statement, or a materials receipt.
   3.   The adjustment shall be granted only for the month prior to the
correction of the failure.
   4.   For those accounts granted an adjustment of the premium rate charges,
the minimum adjusted rate shall be 40 percent of the actual bill, which shall
include the premium rate charges and sales tax.
93.12   WATER APPEAL BOARD.
A Water Appeal Board shall be appointed during any Water Warning or Water
Emergency. The Water Appeal Board shall consist of the Mayor, the
Superintendent of the Water System, and three representatives of the community
who shall be appointed by the Mayor with the approval of the Council. The Water
Appeal Board shall hear appeals of any action taken pursuant to a Water Warning
or Water Emergency, except that, if a customer is charged with a municipal
infraction relating to this chapter, that proceeding shall be conducted
pursuant to Section 364.22 of the Code of Iowa.
93.13   REDUCTION IN FLOW OF WATER TO ANY PERSON.
The Superintendent is authorized, after giving notice and opportunity for
hearing before the Water Appeal Board, to reduce the flow of water to any
person determined to be using water in any manner not in accordance with this
chapter during a Water Warning or Water Emergency.
CHAPTER 95
SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM
 
95.01 Purpose                   95.06 Service Outside the City
95.02 Definitions               95.07 Right of Entry
95.03 Superintendent            95.08 Use of Easements
95.04 Prohibited Acts           95.09 Special Penalties
95.05 Sewer Connection Required
 
95.01   PURPOSE.
The purpose of the chapters of this Code of Ordinances pertaining to Sanitary
Sewers is to establish rules and regulations governing the treatment and
disposal of sanitary sewage within the City in order to protect the public
health, safety, and welfare.
95.02   DEFINITIONS.
For use in these chapters, unless the context specifically indicates otherwise,
the following terms are defined:
   1.   “B.O.D.” (denoting Biochemical Oxygen Demand) means the quantity of
oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard
laboratory procedure in five days at 20?, expressed in milligrams per liter or
parts per million.
   2.   “Building drain” means that part of the lowest horizontal piping of a
building drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste, and
other drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the
building sewer, beginning five feet (one and one-half meters) outside the inner
face of the building wall.
   3.   “Building sewer” means that part of the horizontal piping from the
building wall to its connection with the main sewer or the primary treatment
portion of an on-site wastewater treatment and disposal system conveying the
drainage of one building site.
   4.   “C.O.D.” (denoting Chemical Oxygen Demand) means the oxygen equivalent
of that portion of the organic and inorganic matter in a sample of waste water,
expressed in parts per million by weight, that can be oxidized by a strong
chemical oxidizing agent. The laboratory determinations shall be made in
accordance with procedures set forth in “Standard Methods.”
   5.   “Combined sewer” means a sewer receiving both surface run-off and
sewage.
   6.   “Compatible pollutant” means biochemical oxygen demand, suspended
solids, pH, and fecal coliform bacteria, plus additional pollutants identified
in the City NPDES permit, if the City treatment works is capable of removing
such pollutants and, in fact, does remove such pollutants to a substantial
degree. Examples of such additional pollutants may include: chemical oxygen
demand, total organic carbon, phosphorus, phosphorus compounds, nitrogen, or
nitrogen compounds.
   7.   “Customer” means any person responsible for the production of domestic,
commercial, or industrial waste that is directly or indirectly discharged into
the public sewer system.
   8.   “Easement” means an acquired legal right for the specific use of land
owned by others.
   9.   “Floatable oil” means oil, fat, or grease in a physical state such that
it will separate by gravity from waste water by treatment in an approved
pretreatment facility. A waste water shall be considered free of floatable fat
if it is properly pretreated and the waste water does not interfere with the
collection system.
   10.   “Garbage” means solid wastes from the domestic and commercial
preparation, cooking and dispensing of food, and from the handling, storage,
and sale of produce.
   11.   “Incompatible pollutant” means any pollutant which is not a compatible
pollutant.
   12.   “Industrial user” means:
      A.   Any nongovernmental user of publicly-owned treatment works which
discharges more than 25,000 gallons per day of sanitary waste, or a volume of
processed waste or combined processed and sanitary wastes equivalent to 25,000
gallons per day of sanitary waste. Sanitary wastes are the wastes discharged
from the average residential user in the City. The strength of the average
residential waste discharged in the City is as defined below in “normal
strength domestic waste water.” The concentrations shall be applied in
determining equivalent volume of processed waste; or
      B.   Any nongovernmental user of a publicly-owned treatment works which
discharges waste water to the treatment works which contains toxic or poisonous
solids, liquids, or gases of sufficient quantities, either singly or by
interaction with other wastes, to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment
process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, create a public nuisance, or
create any hazard in, or have an adverse effect on, the waters receiving any
discharge from the treatment works.
   13.   “Industrial wastes” means the liquid wastes from industrial
manufacturing processes, trade, or business as distinct from sanitary sewage.
   14.   “Inspector” means the person duly authorized by the Council to inspect
and approve the installation of building sewers and their connections to the
public sewer system; and to inspect such sewage as may be discharged therefrom.
   15.   “Major contributing industry” means any industrial user of the City’s
treatment works that falls into any of the following criteria:
      A.   Has a flow of 50,000 gallons or more per average workday.
      B.   Has a flow greater than five percent of the flow carried by the
treatment works receiving the waste.
      C.   Has in its waste a toxic pollutant in toxic amounts as defined in
standards issued under Section 307a of the Clean Water Act and adopted by
reference in Chapter 17 of the Iowa Administrative Code.
      D.   Is found by DEQ to have a significant impact, either singly or in
combination with other contributing industries, on the treatment works or upon
the quality of effluent from the treatment works.
   16.   “Natural outlet” means any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch,
lake, or other body of surface or groundwater.
   17.   “Normal strength domestic waste water” means normal strength waste
water for the City in which the average concentration of five-day B.O.D. is not
greater than 200 parts per million by weight. The average concentration of
suspended solids is not greater than 250 parts per million by weight. The
C.O.D. of normal strength domestic waste water shall not exceed 400 parts per
million by weight. Such waste water does not include infiltration or inflow,
and is composed of domestic waste water.
   18.   “NPDES permit” means the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination
System permit held by the City. This permit, which establishes limits on
quality and quantity of discharges from the City treatment works, was issued by
the State and federal governments in accordance with the provisions of the
Federal Water Pollution Control Act, as amended (33 U.S.C. 1251, et seq., the
“Act”).
   19.   “On-site wastewater treatment and disposal system” means all equipment
and devices necessary for proper conduction, collection, storage, treatment,
and disposal of wastewater from four or fewer dwelling units or other
facilities serving the equivalent of 15 persons (1,500 gpd) or less.
   20.   “Operation and maintenance cost” means annual expenditures made by the
City in the operation and maintenance of its sewage works, consisting of, but
not limited to, the sums spent for each and all of the following purposes for
the 12-month period of record prior to computing the industrial service charge:
      A.   Wages and salaries of all operating, maintenance, administrative,
and supervisory personnel, together with all premiums paid on such wages and
salaries (State of Iowa worker’s compensation coverage, for example).
      B.   Actual sums paid for electricity (for light and power) used for
wastewater collection and treatment facilities.
      C.   Actual sums paid for chemicals, fuel, and other operating supplies.
      D.   Actual sums paid for repairs to, and maintenance of, wastewater
collection and treatment facilities and the equipment associated therewith.
      E.   Actual sums paid as premiums for hazard insurance carried on sewage
works.
      F.   Actual sums paid as premiums for insurance providing coverage
against liability imposed by law for the injury to persons or property
(including death) of any person or persons resulting from the use and
maintenance of said sewage works.
      G.   Actual sums paid for replacement of equipment within the useful life
of wastewater treatment facilities (e.g., the cost to replace an electric motor
or pump that fails, or a broken part in a pump).
      H.   Actual sums set aside in a sinking fund established to provide a
future capital amount for replacement of sewage works equipment.
   21.   “pH” means the logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen
ions in grams per liter of solution.
   22.   “Parts per million” or “ppm” means a weight-to-weight ratio; the parts
per million value multiplied by the factor 8.345 is equivalent to pounds per
million gallons of water. Parts per million and milligrams per liter are
synonymous terms.
   23.   “Public sewer” means a sewer in which all owners of abutting
properties have equal rights, and is controlled by public authority.
   24.   “Sanitary sewage” means sewage discharging from the sanitary
conveniences of dwellings (including apartment houses and hotels), office
buildings, factories, or institutions, and free from storm, surface water, and
industrial waste.
   25.   “Sanitary sewer” means a sewer that carries sewage and to which storm,
surface, and ground waters are not intentionally admitted.
   26.   “Semi-public sewage disposal system” means a system for the treatment
or disposal of domestic sewage which is not a private sewage disposal system,
and which is not owned by a city, a sanitary sewer district, or a designated
and approved management agency under the Federal Water Pollution Control Act.
   27.   “Sewage” means a combination of the water-carried wastes from
residences, business buildings, institutions, and industrial establishments,
together with such ground, surface, and stormwaters as may be present.
   28.   “Sewage treatment plant” means any arrangement of devices and
structures used for treating sewage.
   29.   “Sewage works” or “sewage system” means all facilities for collecting,
pumping, treating, and disposing of sewage.
   30.   “Sewer” means a pipe or conduit for carrying sewage.
   31.   “Sewer rental” means any and all charges, rates, fees, or rentals
levied against and payable by customers as consideration for the servicing of
said customers by said sewer system.
   32.   “Sewer service charges” means any and all charges, rates or fees
levied against and payable by customers, as consideration for the servicing of
said customers by said sewer system.
   33.   “Slug” means any discharge of water, sewage, or industrial waste that
in concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds for
any period of duration longer than 15 minutes more than five times the average
24-hour concentration or flows during normal operation.
   34.   “Storm drain” or “storm sewer” means a sewer that carries storm and
surface waters and drainage but excludes sewage and industrial wastes, other
than unpolluted cooling water.
   35.   “Superintendent” means the Superintendent of sewage works and/or of
water pollution control of the City or any authorized deputy, agent, or
representative.
   36.   “Suspended solids” means solids that either float on the surface of,
or are in suspension in water, sewage, or other liquids, and that are removable
by laboratory filtering.
   37.   “Unpolluted water” means water of quality equal to, or better than,
the effluent criteria in effect or, water that would not cause violation of
receiving water quality standards and would not be benefited by discharge to
the sanitary sewers and wastewater treatment facilities provided.
   38.   “Watercourse” means a channel in which a flow of water occurs, either
continuously or intermittently.
95.03   SUPERINTENDENT.
The Superintendent shall exercise the following powers and duties:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
   1.   Operation and Maintenance. Operate and maintain the City sewage system.
   2.   Inspection and Tests. Conduct necessary inspections and tests to assure
compliance with the provisions of these Sanitary Sewer chapters.
   3.   Records. Maintain a complete and accurate record of all sewers, sewage
connections, and manholes constructed showing the location and grades thereof.
95.04   PROHIBITED ACTS.
No person shall do, or allow, any of the following:
   1.   Damage Sewer System. Maliciously, willfully, or negligently break,
damage, destroy, uncover, deface, or tamper with any structure, appurtenance,
or equipment that is a part of the sewer system.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.1)
   2.   Surface Run-Off or Groundwater. Connect a roof downspout, sump pump,
exterior foundation drain, areaway drain, or other source of surface run-off or
groundwater to a building sewer or building drain that is connected directly or
indirectly to a public sanitary sewer.
   3.   Manholes. Open or enter any manhole of the sewer system, except by
authority of the Superintendent.
   4.   Objectionable Wastes. Place or deposit in any unsanitary manner on
public or private property within the City, or in any area under the
jurisdiction of the City, any human or animal excrement, garbage, or other
objectionable waste.
   5.   Septic Tanks. Construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic
tank, cesspool, or other facility intended or used for the disposal of sewage
except as provided in these chapters.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3f])
   6.   Untreated Discharge. Discharge to any natural outlet within the City,
or in any area under its jurisdiction, any sanitary sewage, industrial wastes,
or other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in
accordance with subsequent provisions of these chapters.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3f])
95.05   SEWER CONNECTION REQUIRED.
The owners of any houses, buildings, or properties used for human occupancy,
employment, recreation or other purposes, situated within the City and abutting
on any street, alley or right-of-way in which there is now located, or may in
the future be located, a public sanitary or combined sewer, are hereby required
to install, at such owner’s expense, suitable toilet facilities therein and a
building sewer connecting such facilities directly with the proper public
sewer, and to maintain the same all in accordance with the provisions of these
Sanitary Sewer chapters, such compliance to be completed within 90 days after
date of official notice from the City to do so provided that said public sewer
is located within 200 feet of the property line of such owner and is of such
design as to receive and convey by gravity such sewage as may be conveyed to
it. Billing for sanitary sewer service will begin on the date of official
notice to connect to the public sewer.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3f])
(567 IAC 69.1[3])
95.06   SERVICE OUTSIDE THE CITY.
The owners of property outside the corporate limits of the City so situated
that it may be served by the City sewer system may apply to the Council for
permission to connect to the public sewer upon the terms and conditions
stipulated by resolution of the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.4[2 and 3])
95.07   RIGHT OF ENTRY.
The Superintendent and other duly authorized employees of the City bearing
proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all
properties for the purposes of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling,
and testing in accordance with the provisions of these Sanitary Sewer chapters.
The Superintendent or representatives shall have no authority to inquire into
any processes including metallurgical, chemical, oil refining, ceramic, paper,
or other industries beyond that point having a direct bearing on the kind and
source of discharge to the sewers or waterways or facilities for waste
treatment.
95.08   USE OF EASEMENTS.
The Superintendent and other duly authorized employees of the City bearing
proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all private
properties through which the City holds a duly negotiated easement for the
purposes of, but not limited to, inspection, observation, measurement,
sampling, repair, and maintenance of any portion of the sewage works lying
within said easement. All entry and subsequent work, if any, on said easement,
shall be done in full accordance with the terms of the duly negotiated easement
pertaining to the private property involved.
95.09   SPECIAL PENALTIES.
The following special penalty provisions shall apply to violations of these
Sanitary Sewer chapters:
   1.   Notice of Violation. Any person found to be violating any provision of
these chapters except Subsections 1, 3, and 4 of Section 95.04, shall be served
by the City with written notice stating the nature of the violation and
providing a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory correction thereof. The
offender shall, within the period of time stated in such notice, permanently
cease all violations.
   2.   Continuing Violations. Any person who shall continue any violation
beyond the time limit provided for in Subsection 1 hereof shall be in violation
of this Code of Ordinances. Each day in which any such violation shall continue
shall be deemed a separate offense.
   3.   Liability Imposed. Any person violating any of the provisions of these
chapters shall become liable to the City for any expense, loss, or damage
occasioned the City by reason of such violation.
CHAPTER 96
BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS
 
96.01 Permit                           96.06 Interceptors Required
96.02 Permit Fee and Connection Charge 96.07 Sewer Tap
96.03 Plumber Required                 96.08 Inspection Required
96.04 Excavations                      96.09 Property Owner’s Responsibility
96.05 Connection Requirements          96.10 Abatement of Violations
 
96.01   PERMIT.
No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connection with or opening into,
use, alter, or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof without first
obtaining a written permit from the City. The application for the permit shall
set forth the location and description of the property to be connected with the
sewer system and the purpose for which the sewer is to be used, and shall be
supplemented by any plans, specifications, or other information considered
pertinent. The permit shall require the owner to complete construction and
connection of the building sewer to the public sewer within 60 days after the
issuance of the permit, except that when a property owner makes sufficient
showing that due to conditions beyond the owner’s control or peculiar hardship,
such time period is inequitable or unfair, an extension of time within which to
comply with the provisions herein may be granted. Any sewer connection permit
may be revoked at any time for a violation of these chapters.
96.02   PERMIT FEE AND CONNECTION CHARGE.
The person who makes the application shall pay a fee in the amount of $25.00 to
the Clerk to cover the cost of issuing the permit and supervising, regulating,
and inspecting the work. In addition, there shall be a connection charge in the
amount of $25.00 paid to reimburse the City for costs borne by the City in
making sewer service available to the property served. In addition to the
aforementioned charges:
   1.   A sewer hook-up fee of $500.00 shall be charged for any application for
a sewer connection to the main trunk line of the North Side Lift Station
Improvement Sewer System.
   2.   A sewer hook-up fee of $250.00 shall be charged for each user utilizing
a sewer connection to the North Side Lift Station Improvement Sewer System
other than to the trunk line.
As used in this subsection, the term user means each separate residence,
individual apartment, separate dwelling unit, separate business, or enterprise
which utilizes the North Side Lift Station Improvement Sewer System. A map
shall be maintained in the Clerk’s office designating the area which the North
Side Lift Station Improvement Sewer System serves and what users are affected
by this subsection.
96.03   PLUMBER REQUIRED.
All installations of building sewers and connections to the public sewer shall
be made by a State-licensed plumber.
96.04   EXCAVATIONS.
All trench work, excavation, and backfilling required for the installation of a
building sewer shall be performed in accordance with the provisions of the
State Plumbing Code and the provisions of Chapter 135 of this Code of
Ordinances.
96.05   CONNECTION REQUIREMENTS.
Any connection with a public sanitary sewer must be made under the direct
supervision of the Superintendent and in accordance with the following:
   1.   Old Building Sewers. Old building sewers may be used in connection with
new buildings only when they are found, on examination and test conducted by
the owner and observed by the Superintendent, to meet all requirements of this
chapter.
   2.   Separate Building Sewers. A separate and independent building sewer
shall be provided for every occupied building; except where one building stands
at the rear of another on an interior lot and no private sewer is available or
can be constructed to the rear building through an adjoining alley, court,
yard, or driveway. In such cases the building sewer from the front building may
be extended to the rear building and the whole considered as one building
sewer.
   3.   Installation. The installation and connection of the building sewer to
the public sewer shall conform to the requirements of the State Plumbing Code
and applicable rules and regulations of the City. All such connections shall be
made gastight and watertight. Any deviation from the prescribed procedures and
materials must be approved by the Superintendent before installation.
   4.   Water Lines. When possible, building sewers should be laid at least 10
feet horizontally from a water service. The horizontal separation may be less,
provided the water service line is located at one side and at least 12 inches
above the top of the building sewer.
   5.   Size. Building sewers shall be sized for the peak expected sewage flow
from the building with a minimum building sewer size of four inches.
   6.   Alignment and Grade. All building sewers shall be laid to a straight
line to meet the following:
      A.   Recommended grade at one-fourth inch per foot.
      B.   Minimum grade of one-eighth inch per foot.
      C.   Minimum velocity of two feet per second with the sewer half full.
      D.   Any deviation in alignment or grade shall be made only with the
written approval of the Superintendent and shall be made only with approved
fittings.
   7.   Depth. Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the
building at an elevation below the basement floor. The depth of cover above the
sewer shall be sufficient to afford protection from frost.
   8.   Sewage Lifts. In all buildings in which any building drain is too low
to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage carried by such
drain shall be lifted by approved artificial means and discharged to the
building sewer.
   9.   Pipe Specifications. Building sewer pipe shall be free from flaws,
splits, or breaks. Materials shall be as specified in the State Plumbing Code
except that the building sewer pipe, from the property line to the public
sewer, shall comply with the current edition of one of the following:
      A.   Clay sewer pipe – A.S.T.M. C-700 (extra strength).
      B.   Extra heavy cast iron soil pipe – A.S.T.M. A-74.
      C.   Ductile iron water pipe – A.W.W.A. C-151.
      D.   P.V.C. – SDR26 – A.S.T.M. D-3034.
   10.   Bearing Walls. No building sewer shall be laid parallel to or within
three feet of any bearing wall that might thereby be weakened.
   11.   Jointing. Fittings, type of joint and jointing material shall be
compatible with the type of pipe used, subject to the approval of the
Superintendent. Solvent-welded joints are not permitted.
   12.   Unstable Soil. No sewer connection shall be laid so that it is exposed
when crossing any watercourse. Where an old watercourse must of necessity be
crossed or where there is any danger of undermining or settlement, cast iron
soil pipe or vitrified clay sewer pipe thoroughly encased in concrete shall be
required for such crossings. Such encasement shall extend at least six inches
on all sides of the pipe. The cast iron pipe or encased clay pipe shall rest on
firm, solid material at either end.
   13.   Preparation of Basement or Crawl Space. No connection for any
residence, business or other structure with any sanitary sewer shall be made
unless the basement floor is poured, or in the case of a building with a slab
or crawl space, unless the ground floor is installed with the area adjacent to
the foundation of such building cleared of debris and backfilled. The backfill
shall be well compacted and graded so that the drainage is away from the
foundation. Prior to the time the basement floor is poured, or the first floor
is installed in buildings without basements, the sewer shall be plugged and the
plug shall be sealed by the Superintendent. Any accumulation of water in any
excavation or basement during construction and prior to connection to the
sanitary sewer shall be removed by means other than draining into the sanitary
sewer.
96.06   INTERCEPTORS REQUIRED.
Grease, oil, sludge, and sand interceptors shall be provided by gas and service
stations, convenience stores, car washes, garages, and other facilities when,
in the opinion of the Superintendent, they are necessary for the proper
handling of such wastes that contain grease in excessive amounts or any
flammable waste, sand, or other harmful ingredients. Such interceptors shall
not be required for private living quarters or dwelling units. When required,
such interceptors shall be installed in accordance with the following:
   1.   Design and Location. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity
as specified in the State Plumbing Code, to be approved by the Superintendent,
and shall be located so as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and
inspection.
   2.   Construction Standards. The interceptors shall be constructed of
impervious material capable of withstanding abrupt and extreme changes in
temperature. They shall be of substantial construction, watertight and equipped
with easily removable covers that shall be gastight and watertight.
   3.   Maintenance. All such interceptors shall be maintained by the owner at
the owner’s expense and shall be kept in continuously efficient operations at
all times.
96.07   SEWER TAP.
Connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall be made at the “Y”
branch, if such branch is available at a suitable location. If no properly
located “Y” branch is available, a saddle “Y” shall be installed at the
location specified by the Superintendent. The public sewer shall be tapped with
a tapping machine and a saddle appropriate to the type of public sewer shall be
glued or attached with a gasket and stainless steel clamps to the sewer. At no
time shall a building sewer be constructed so as to enter a manhole unless
special written permission is received from the Superintendent and in
accordance with the Superintendent’s direction if such connection is approved.
96.08   INSPECTION REQUIRED.
All connections with the sanitary sewer system before being covered shall be
inspected and approved, in writing, by the Superintendent. As soon as all pipe
work from the public sewer to inside the building has been completed, and
before any backfilling is done, the Superintendent shall be notified and the
Superintendent shall inspect and test the work as to workmanship and material;
no sewer pipe laid underground shall be covered or trenches filled until after
the sewer has been so inspected and approved. If the Superintendent refuses to
approve the work, the plumber or owner must proceed immediately to correct the
work.
96.09   PROPERTY OWNER’S RESPONSIBILITY.
All costs and expenses incident to the installation, connection, and
maintenance of the building sewer from the main to the building served shall be
borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the City from any loss or damage
that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the
building sewer.
96.10   ABATEMENT OF VIOLATIONS.
Construction or maintenance of building sewer lines, whether located upon the
private property of any owner or in the public right-of-way, which construction
or maintenance is in violation of any of the requirements of this chapter,
shall be corrected, at the owner’s expense, within 30 days after date of
official notice from the Council of such violation. If not made within such
time, the Council shall, in addition to the other penalties herein provided,
have the right to finish and correct the work and assess the cost thereof to
the property owner. Such assessment shall be collected with and in the same
manner as general property taxes.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3])
CHAPTER 97
USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS
 
97.01 Stormwater                       97.06 Special Facilities
97.02 Surface Waters Exception         97.07 Metering and Sampling Station
97.03 Prohibited Discharges            97.08 Control Manholes
97.04 Restricted Discharges            97.09 Testing of Wastes
97.05 Restricted Discharges; Powers of
Superintendent
 
97.01   STORMWATER.
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any stormwater, surface
water, groundwater, roof run-off, sub-surface drainage, uncontaminated cooling
water, or unpolluted industrial process waters to any sanitary sewer.
Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to such sewers
that are specifically designated as combined sewers or storm sewers or to a
natural outlet approved by the Superintendent. Industrial cooling water or
unpolluted process waters may be discharged on approval of the Superintendent,
to a storm sewer, combined sewer, or natural outlet.
97.02   SURFACE WATERS EXCEPTION.
Special permits for discharging surface waters to a public sanitary sewer may
be issued by the Council upon recommendation of the Superintendent where such
discharge is deemed necessary or advisable for purposes of flushing, but any
permit so issued shall be subject to revocation at any time when deemed to be
in the best interests of the sewer system.
97.03   PROHIBITED DISCHARGES.
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the following
described waters or wastes to any public sewers:
   1.   Flammable or Explosive Material. Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel
oil, or other flammable or explosive liquid, solid, or gas.
   2.   Toxic or Poisonous Materials. Any waters or wastes containing toxic or
poisonous solids, liquids, or gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by
interaction with other wastes, to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment
process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, create a public nuisance, or
create any hazard in the receiving waters of the sewage treatment plant,
including but not limited to cyanides (CN) in excess of two milligrams per
liter as CN in the wastes as discharged to the public sewer.
   3.   Corrosive Wastes. Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5 or
having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to
structures, equipment, and personnel of the sewage works.
   4.   Solid or Viscous Substances. Solid or viscous substances in quantities
or of such size capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers, or other
interference with the proper operation of the sewage works such as, but not
limited to, ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags,
feathers, tar, plastics, wood, unground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure,
hair and fleshings, entrails and paper dishes, cups, milk containers, etc.,
either whole or ground by garbage grinders.
   5.   Excessive B.O.D., Solids or Flow.
      A.   Any waters or wastes: (i) having a five-day biochemical oxygen
demand greater than 300 parts per million by weight; or (ii) containing more
than 350 parts per million by weight of suspended solids; or (iii) having an
average daily flow greater than two percent of the average sewage flow of the
City, shall be subject to the review of the Superintendent.
      B.   Where necessary in the opinion of the Superintendent, the owner
shall provide, at the owner’s expense, such preliminary treatment as may be
necessary to: (i) reduce the biochemical oxygen demand to 300 parts per million
by weight; or (ii) reduce the suspended solids to 350 parts per million by
weight; or (iii) control the quantities and rates of discharge of such waters
or wastes. Plans, specifications, and any other pertinent information relating
to proposed preliminary treatment facilities shall be submitted for the
approval of the Superintendent, and no construction of such facilities shall be
commenced until said approvals are obtained in writing.
97.04   RESTRICTED DISCHARGES.
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged the following described
substances, materials, waters, or wastes if it appears likely in the opinion of
the Superintendent that such wastes can harm either the sewers, sewage
treatment process, or equipment, have an adverse effect on the receiving stream
or can otherwise endanger life, limb, public property, or constitute a
nuisance. In forming an opinion as to the acceptability of these wastes, the
Superintendent will give consideration to such factors as the quantities of
subject wastes in relation to flows and velocities in the sewers, materials of
construction of the sewers, nature of the sewage treatment process, capacity of
the sewage treatment plant, degree of treatability of wastes in the sewage
treatment plant, and other pertinent factors. The substances restricted are:
   1.   High Temperature. Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than
150? (65?).
   2.   Fat, Oil, Grease. Any water or waste containing fats, wax, grease, or
oils, whether emulsified or not, in excess of 100 milligrams per liter or 600
milligrams per liter of dispersed or other soluble matter.
   3.   Viscous Substances. Water or wastes containing substances that may
solidify or become viscous at temperatures between 32? and 150? (0? to 65?).
   4.   Garbage. Any garbage that has not been properly shredded, that is, to
such a degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow
conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than
one-half inch in any dimension.
   5.   Acids. Any waters or wastes containing strong acid iron pickling
wastes, or concentrated plating solution, whether neutralized or not.
   6.   Toxic or Objectionable Wastes. Any waters or wastes containing iron,
chromium, copper, zinc, and similar objectionable or toxic substances; or
wastes exerting an excessive chlorine requirement, to such degree that any such
material received in the composite sewage at the sewage treatment works exceeds
the limits established by the Superintendent for such materials.
   7.   Odor or Taste. Any waters or wastes containing phenols or other taste
or odor producing substances, in such concentrations exceeding limits that may
be established by the Superintendent as necessary, after treatment of the
composite sewage, to meet the requirements of State, federal, or other public
agencies of jurisdiction for such discharge to the receiving waters.
   8.   Radioactive Wastes. Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-
life or concentration as may exceed limits established by the Superintendent in
compliance with applicable State or federal regulations.
   9.   Excess Alkalinity. Any waters or wastes having a pH in excess of 9.5.
   10.   Unusual Wastes. Materials that exert or cause:
      A.   Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids (such as, but not
limited to, Fullers earth, lime slurries, and lime residues) or of dissolved
solids (such as, but not limited to, sodium chloride and sodium sulfate).
      B.   Excessive discoloration (such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and
vegetable tanning solutions).
      C.   Unusual B.O.D., chemical oxygen demand, or chlorine requirements in
such quantities as to constitute a significant load on the sewage treatment
works.
      D.   Unusual volume of flow or concentration of wastes constituting
“slugs” as defined herein.
   11.   Noxious or Malodorous Gases. Any noxious or malodorous gas or other
substance that, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, is capable
of creating a public nuisance or hazard to life or of preventing entry into
sewers for their maintenance and repair.
   12.   Damaging Substances. Any waters, wastes, materials, or substances that
react with water or wastes in the sewer system to release noxious gases,
develop color of undesirable intensity, form suspended solids in objectionable
concentration, or create any other condition deleterious to structures and
treatment processes.
   13.   Untreatable Wastes. Waters or wastes containing substances that are
not amenable to treatment or reduction by the sewage treatment processes
employed, or are amenable to treatment only to such degree that the sewage
treatment plant effluent cannot meet the requirements of other agencies having
jurisdiction over discharge to the receiving waters.
97.05   RESTRICTED DISCHARGES; POWERS OF SUPERINTENDENT.
If any waters or wastes are discharged or are proposed to be discharged to the
public sewers, which waters contain the substances or possess the
characteristics enumerated in Section 97.04 and which in the judgment of the
Superintendent may have a deleterious effect upon the sewage works, processes,
equipment, or receiving waters, or which otherwise create a hazard to life or
constitute a public nuisance, the Superintendent may:
   1.   Rejection. Reject the wastes by requiring disconnection from the public
sewage system;
   2.   Pretreatment. Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for
discharge to the public sewers;
   3.   Controls Imposed. Require control over the quantities and rates of
discharge; and/or
   4.   Special Charges. Require payment to cover the added cost of handling
and treating the wastes not covered by existing taxes or sewer charges under
the provisions of Chapter 99.
97.06   SPECIAL FACILITIES.
If the Superintendent permits the pretreatment or equalization of waste flows,
the design and installation of the plants and equipment shall be subject to the
review and approval of the Superintendent and subject to the requirements of
all applicable codes, ordinances, and laws. Where preliminary treatment or
flow-equalizing facilities are provided for any waters or wastes, they shall be
maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operation by the owner at
the owner’s expense.
97.07   METERING AND SAMPLING STATION.
All customers who contribute five percent or more of the total flow, BOD, or
suspended solids treated by the treatment facilities, and any customer that
contributes wastewater above normal strength, may be required to install
metering and sampling equipment. Said metering and sampling equipment shall be
installed and maintained at the customer’s expense. The City Engineer shall
review and approve the installation of all metering and sampling equipment and
placement thereof.
97.08   CONTROL MANHOLES.
When required by the Superintendent, the owner of any property serviced by a
building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable control
manhole together with such necessary meters and other appurtenances in the
building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling, and measurement of the
wastes. Such manhole, when required, shall be accessibly and safely located,
and shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the
Superintendent. The manhole shall be installed by the owner at the owner’s
expense, and shall be maintained by the owner so as to be safe and accessible
at all times.
97.09   TESTING OF WASTES.
All measurements, tests, and analyses of the characteristics of waters and
wastes to which reference is made in this chapter shall be determined in
accordance with the latest edition of Standard Methods for the Examination of
Water and Wastewater, published by the American Public Health Association, and
shall be determined at the control manhole provided, or upon suitable samples
taken at said control manhole. In the event that no special manhole has been
required, the control manhole shall be considered to be the nearest downstream
manhole in the public sewer to the point at which the building sewer is
connected. Sampling shall be carried out by customarily accepted methods to
reflect the effect of constituents upon the sewage works and to determine the
existence of hazards to life, limb, and property. (The particular analyses
involved will determine whether a 24-hour composite of all outfalls of a
premises is appropriate or whether a grab sample or samples should be taken.
Normally, but not always, B.O.D. and suspended solids analyses are obtained
from 24-hour composites of all outfalls whereas pH’s are determined from
periodic grab samples.)
CHAPTER 98
ON-SITE WASTEWATER SYSTEMS
 
98.01 When Prohibited             98.06 Maintenance of System
98.02 When Required               98.07 Systems Abandoned
98.03 Compliance with Regulations 98.08 Disposal of Septage
98.04 Permit Required             98.09 Minimum Lot Area
98.05 Discharge Restrictions
 
98.01   WHEN PROHIBITED.
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, it is unlawful to construct or
maintain any on-site wastewater treatment and disposal system or other facility
intended or used for the disposal of sewage.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3f])
98.02   WHEN REQUIRED.
When a public sanitary sewer is not available under the provisions of Section
95.05, every building wherein persons reside, congregate or are employed shall
be provided with an approved on-site wastewater treatment and disposal system
complying with the provisions of this chapter.
(567 IAC 69.1[3])
98.03   COMPLIANCE WITH REGULATIONS.
The type, capacity, location, and layout of a private on-site wastewater
treatment and disposal system shall comply with the specifications and
requirements set forth by the Iowa Administrative Code 567, Chapter 69, and
with such additional requirements as are prescribed by the regulations of the
County Board of Health.
(567 IAC 69.1[3 and 4])
98.04   PERMIT REQUIRED.
No person shall install or alter an on-site wastewater treatment and disposal
system without first obtaining a permit from the County Board of Health.
98.05   DISCHARGE RESTRICTIONS.
It is unlawful to discharge any wastewater from an on-site wastewater treatment
and disposal system (except under an NPDES permit) to any ditch, stream, pond,
lake, natural or artificial waterway, drain tile or to the surface of the
ground.
(567 IAC 69.1[3])
98.06   MAINTENANCE OF SYSTEM.
The owner of an on-site wastewater treatment and disposal system shall operate
and maintain the system in a sanitary manner at all times and at no expense to
the City.
98.07   SYSTEMS ABANDONED.
At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a property served by an on-
site wastewater treatment and disposal system, as provided in Section 95.05, a
direct connection shall be made to the public sewer in compliance with these
Sanitary Sewer chapters and the on-site wastewater treatment and disposal
system shall be abandoned and filled with suitable material.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3f])
98.08   DISPOSAL OF SEPTAGE.
No person shall dispose of septage from an on-site treatment system at any
location except an approved disposal site.
98.09   MINIMUM LOT AREA.
No permit shall be issued for any on-site wastewater treatment and disposal
system employing sub-surface soil absorption facilities where the area of the
lot is less than 20,000 square feet.
CHAPTER 99
SEWER SERVICE CHARGES
 
99.01 Sewer Service Charges Required 99.06 Exemption For Water Not Discharged
                                     to System
99.02 Elements of Charge             99.07 Payment of Bills
99.03 Computation Formula            99.08 Lien For Nonpayment
99.04 Basis of Costs                 99.09 Special Agreements Permitted
99.05 Service Charges
 
99.01   SEWER SERVICE CHARGES REQUIRED.
Every customer shall pay to the City sewer service charges as hereinafter
provided.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84[1])
99.02   ELEMENTS OF CHARGE.
Industrial users shall be billed quarterly on the basis of three (3) cost
causative elements: flow, BOD and suspended solids. Revenue generated by
service charges will be used for purposes of retiring debt, operating,
maintaining and replacing the City waste water treatment facilities.   
(Section 99.02 – Ord._O25-3294 – Jun. 25 Supp.)
99.03   COMPUTATION FORMULA.
As an equitable share of the expenses incurred by the City in the construction,
operation, maintenance, and replacement of the wastewater treatment facilities,
each user will pay to the City an annual sum equal to the amount computed by
the application of the following formula:
A = C + (f)(F) + (b)(B) + (ss)(S)
Where:
A = charge to user; dollars per year
C = base charge per connection, cost for administration, billing, and
collection per quarter or per month
f = average City unit cost of wastewater treatment chargeable to flow, dollars
per 1,000 gallons of flow per year
F = volume of wastewater from user, 1,000 gallons per year
b = average City unit costs of wastewater treatment chargeable to BOD, dollars
per pound of BOD
B = weight of BOD contributed by user, pounds of BOD per year
ss = average City unit cost of wastewater treatment chargeable to suspended
solids, dollars per pound of suspended solids
S = weight of suspended solids contributed per user, pounds of suspended solids
per year
99.04   BASIS OF COSTS.
   1.   Unit Costs Computed Annually. Average City unit costs will be reviewed
annually and shall include operation and maintenance costs, annual construction
costs and replacement costs.
   2.   Unit Cost Figures. The City, or its engineer, will determine the
average total suspended solids (SS) and five-day biochemical oxygen demand
(BOD) daily loading for the average residential user or in lieu of such a
determination will consider the average residential strength wastes to be two
hundred (200) mg/l BOD and two hundred fifty (250) mg/l SS. Unit cost figures
for the industrial user charge will be:
   C =    $190.00 per sewer connection per quarter
   f =   $1.45 per 1,000 gallons
   b =   $1.00 per lb. of BOD
   ss =   $0.50 per lb. of suspended solids
Sampling and testing (when required by Council directive) shall be $615.00 per
quarter per sampling device.
(Section 99.04 – Ord._O25-3294 – Jun. 25 Supp.)
99.05   SERVICE CHARGES.
   1.   Residential Users. Residential users discharging normal strength
domestic waste water shall be billed monthly based upon the metered water usage
at a rate of twenty-seven dollars and seventy-five cents ($27.75) per month per
sewer connection plus six dollars and eighty cents ($6.80) per one thousand
(1,000) gallons of water used. The minimum charge per month is thirty-four
dollars and fifty-five cents ($34.55) plus tax, (minimum usage of 1,000
gallons).
   2.   Commercial, Institutional and Multifamily Dwellings. Commercial,
institutional and multifamily dwellings discharging normal strength waste water
shall be billed monthly based upon the metered water usage at a rate of twenty-
seven dollars and seventy-five cents ($27.75) per month per sewer connection
plus six dollars and eighty cents ($6.80) per one thousand (1,000) gallons of
water used. The minimum charge per month is thirty-four dollars and fifty-five
cents ($34.55) plus tax, (minimum usage of 1,000 gallons).
   3.   Surcharge for Discharge Above Normal Strength. All users which
discharge waste water above the normal strength of domestic water shall be
surcharged for the strength above domestic waste water at the rates shown in
the unit cost figures in Section 99.04(2).
   4.   Industrial Users. Industrial users shall be billed quarterly based upon
the volume of waste water, the pounds of BOD, and the pounds of suspended
solids discharged. In no case will an industrial user’s quarterly bill be less
than two hundred dollars ($200.00) per quarter.
   5.   Multiple Units Hooked to One Meter. Whenever a single water meter
serves a self-sufficient residential apartment, the customer owning, operating
or otherwise responsible for water and sewer use in such dwelling shall pay the
sewer connection charge plus a flat fee of eighteen dollars and fifty cents
($18.50) each month; whenever a single water meter serves a self-sufficient
multiple dwelling unit, a mobile home park or commercial business
establishment, the customer owning, operating or otherwise responsible for
water and sewer use in such dwellings or commercial establishments shall pay
the sewer connection charge plus a flat fee of eighteen dollars and fifty cents
($18.50) plus tax each month for each self-sufficient multiple dwelling unit,
mobile home park, or commercial business establishment.
   6.   Flat Fee for Sewer Use Only. For any user discharging waste water only
and are not users of City water, a flat service charge fee of fifty-five
dollars and twenty-five cents ($55.25) per month shall be charged to such user.
(Section 99.05 – Ord._O25-3294 – Jun. 25 Supp.)
99.06   EXEMPTION FOR WATER NOT DISCHARGED TO SYSTEM.
All users of City water that is not discharged to the City sanitary sewer
system may install a separate water system and meter, at the user’s expense, to
isolate such water for which no sewer charge is required. If at any time after
this independent system is installed, water from this system enters the
sanitary sewer system, the user will be subject to the penalties of Section
95.09 and shall be ordered to eliminate the independent system if the violation
continues.
99.07   PAYMENT OF BILLS.
All sewer service charges are due and payable under the same terms and
conditions provided for payment of a combined service account as contained in
Section 92.08 of this Code of Ordinances. Sewer service may be discontinued or
disconnected in accordance with the provisions contained in Section 92.09 if
the combined service account becomes delinquent, and the provisions contained
in Section 92.12 relating to lien notices shall also apply in the event of a
delinquent account.
99.08   LIEN FOR NONPAYMENT.
Except as provided for in Section 92.11 of this Code of Ordinances, the owner
of the premises served, and any lessee or tenant thereof shall be jointly and
severally liable for sewer service charges to the premises. Sewer service
charges remaining unpaid and delinquent shall constitute a lien upon the
property or premises served and shall be certified by the Clerk to the County
Treasurer for collection in the same manner as property taxes.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84)
99.09   SPECIAL AGREEMENTS PERMITTED.
No statement in these chapters shall be construed as preventing a special
agreement, arrangement, or contract between the Council, and any industrial
concern whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character may be
accepted subject to special conditions, rate, and cost as established by the
Council.
CHAPTER 100
STORMWATER UTILITY
 
100.01 Purpose                             100.04 Rates
100.02 Definitions                         100.05 Payment of Bills
100.03 Stormwater Drainage System District 100.06 Lien for Nonpayment
Established
 
100.01   PURPOSE.
The purpose of this chapter is to establish a Stormwater Utility and provide a
means of funding the construction, operation, and maintenance of stormwater
management facilities, including, but not limited to, detention and retention
basins, stormwater sewers, inlets, ditches, and drains, and cleaning of
streets. The Council finds that the construction, operation, and maintenance of
the City’s storm and surface water drainage system should be funded through
charging users of property that may connect or discharge, directly or
indirectly, into the storm and surface water drainage system.
100.02   DEFINITIONS.
For use on this chapter, unless the context specifically indicates otherwise,
the following terms are defined:
   1.   “Connection” means the physical act or process of tapping a public
stormwater sewer or drainage line, or joining onto an existing side sewer, for
the purpose of connecting private impervious surface or other storm and surface
water sources or systems to the public storm and surface water system. It also
includes creation or maintenance of impervious surface that causes or is likely
to cause an increase in the quantity or decrease in quality or both from
natural state of stormwater runoff, and which drains, directly or indirectly,
to the storm and surface water system.
   2.   “Customer” means, in addition to any person receiving stormwater
service from the City, the owner of the property served, and as between such
parties the duties, responsibilities, liabilities and obligations hereinafter
imposed shall be joint and several.
   3.   “Storm and surface water drainage system” means any combination of
publicly owned storm and surface water quantity and quality facilities,
pumping, or lift facilities, storm and secondary drain pipes and culverts, open
channels, creeks and ditches, force mains, laterals, manholes, catch basins and
inlets, including the grates and covers thereof, detention and retention
facilities, laboratory facilities and equipment, and other publicly owned
facilities for the collection, conveyance, treatment and disposal of storm and
surface water system within the City, to which sanitary sewage flows are not
intentionally admitted.
   4.   “User” means any person who uses property that maintains connection to,
discharges to, or otherwise receives services from the City for stormwater
management. The occupant of an occupied premises is deemed the user. If the
property is not occupied, the person who has the right to occupy it shall be
deemed the user.
100.03   STORMWATER DRAINAGE SYSTEM DISTRICT ESTABLISHED.
Pursuant to the authority of Section 384.84(5) of the Code of Iowa, the entire
City is hereby declared a Stormwater Drainage System District for the purpose
of establishing, imposing, adjusting, and providing for the collection of rates
for the operation and maintenance of stormwater management facilities. The
entire City, as increased from time to time by annexation, shall constitute a
single Stormwater Drainage System District.
100.04   RATES.
Each customer shall pay for storm and surface water drainage system service
provided by the City. The rates for the operation and maintenance of the
stormwater management facilities shall be collected by imposing a monthly rate
on each residential, commercial, and industrial customer within the City. The
monthly rate will be based on the size of the water meter. Non-metered accounts
will also be charged a monthly fee. The following fees shall be charged to each
utility customer each month:
Meter Size  Monthly Rate
5/8"        $3.00
3/4"        $3.00
1"          $5.00
1 1/4"      $5.00
1 1/2"      $10.00
2"          $15.00
3"          $20.00
4"          $25.00
6"          $30.00
Non-Metered $12.00
 
100.05   PAYMENT OF BILLS.
All Stormwater Drainage System District charges shall be due and payable under
the same terms and conditions provided for payment of all combined service
accounts as contained in Section
92.08 of this Code. All City services may be discontinued in accordance with
the provisions contained in Section
92.09 if the combined service account becomes delinquent, and the provisions
contained in Section
92.10 and
92.11 relating to lien exemptions and lien notices shall also apply in the
event of a delinquent account.
100.06   LIEN FOR NONPAYMENT.
Except as provided for in Section
92.09 of this Code, the owner of the premises served and any lessee or tenant
thereof shall be jointly and severally liabile for charges for the operation
and maintenance of the stormwater maintenance facilities. Any such charges
remaining unpaid and delinquent shall constitute a lien upon the premises
served and shall be certified by the Clerk to the County Treasurer for
collection in the same manner as property taxes.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84)
(Chapter 100 – Ord. O25-3295 – Jul. 25 Supp.)
CHAPTER 105
SOLID WASTE CONTROL
 
105.01 Purpose                           105.07 Littering Prohibited
105.02 Definitions                       105.08 Toxic and Hazardous Waste
105.03 Sanitary Disposal Required        105.09 Waste Storage Containers
105.04 Health and Fire Hazard            105.10 Prohibited Practices
105.05 Open Burning Restricted           105.11 Sanitary Disposal Project
                                         Designated
105.06 Separation of Yard Waste Required
 
105.01   PURPOSE.
The purpose of the chapters in this Code of Ordinances pertaining to Solid
Waste Control and Collection is to provide for the sanitary storage,
collection, and disposal of solid waste and, thereby, to protect the citizens
of the City from such hazards to their health, safety, and welfare as may
result from the uncontrolled disposal of solid waste.
105.02   DEFINITIONS.
For use in these chapters the following terms are defined:
   1.   “Collector” means any person authorized to gather solid waste from
public and private places.
   2.   “Discard” means to place, cause to be placed, throw, deposit, or drop.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 455B.361[1])
   3.   “Dwelling unit” means any room or group of rooms located within a
structure and forming a single habitable unit with facilities that are used or
are intended to be used for living, sleeping, cooking, and eating.
   4.   “Garbage” means all solid and semisolid, putrescible animal and
vegetable waste resulting from the handling, preparing, cooking, storing,
serving, and consuming of food or of material intended for use as food, and all
offal, excluding useful industrial by-products, and includes all such
substances from all public and private establishments and from all residences.
(567 IAC 100.2)
   5.   “Landscape waste” means any vegetable or plant waste except garbage.
The term includes trees, tree trimmings, branches, stumps, brush, weeds,
leaves, grass, shrubbery, and yard trimmings.
(567 IAC 20.2)
   6.   “Litter” means any garbage, rubbish, trash, refuse, waste materials, or
debris not exceeding 10 pounds in weight or 15 cubic feet in volume. Litter
includes but is not limited to empty beverage containers, cigarette butts, food
waste packaging, other food or candy wrappers, handbills, empty cartons, or
boxes.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 455B.361[2])
   7.   “Owner” means, in addition to the record titleholder, any person
residing in, renting, leasing, occupying, operating, or transacting business in
any premises, and as between such parties the duties, responsibilities,
liabilities, and obligations hereinafter imposed shall be joint and several.
   8.   “Refuse” means putrescible and non-putrescible waste, including but not
limited to garbage, rubbish, ashes, incinerator residues, street cleanings,
market and industrial solid waste, and sewage treatment waste in dry or
semisolid form.
(567 IAC 100.2)
   9.   “Residential premises” means a single-family dwelling and any multiple
family dwelling up to and including two separate dwelling units.
   10.   “Residential waste” means any refuse generated on the premises as a
result of residential activities. The term includes landscape waste grown on
the premises or deposited thereon by the elements, but excludes garbage, tires,
trade wastes, and any locally recyclable goods or plastics.
(567 IAC 20.2)
   11.   “Rubbish” means non-putrescible solid waste consisting of combustible
and non-combustible waste, such as ashes, paper, cardboard, tin cans, yard
clippings, wood, glass, bedding, crockery, or litter of any kind.
(567 IAC 100.2)
   12.   “Sanitary disposal” means a method of treating solid waste so that it
does not produce a hazard to the public health or safety or create a nuisance.
(567 IAC 100.2)
   13.   “Sanitary disposal project” means all facilities and appurtenances
(including all real and personal property connected with such facilities) that
are acquired, purchased, constructed, reconstructed, equipped, improved,
extended, maintained, or operated to facilitate the final disposition of solid
waste without creating a significant hazard to the public health or safety, and
which are approved by the Director of the State Department of Natural
Resources. “Sanitary disposal project” does not include a pyrolysis or
gasification facility as defined in Section 455B.301 of the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 455B.301)
   14.   “Solid waste” means garbage, refuse, rubbish, and other similar
discarded solid or semisolid materials, including but not limited to such
materials resulting from industrial, commercial, agricultural, and domestic
activities. Solid waste may include vehicles, as defined by Section 321.1 of
the Code of Iowa. Solid waste does not include any of the following:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 455B.301)
      A.   Hazardous waste regulated under the Federal Resource Conservation
and Recovery Act, 42 U.S.C. § 6921-6934.
      B.   Hazardous waste as defined in Section 455B.411 of the Code of Iowa,
except to the extent that rules allowing for the disposal of specific wastes
have been adopted by the State Environmental Protection Commission.
      C.   Source, special nuclear, or by-product material as defined in the
Atomic Energy Act of 1954, as amended to January 1, 1979.
      D.   Petroleum contaminated soil that has been remediated to acceptable
State or federal standards.
      E.   Steel slag which is a product resulting from the steel manufacturing
process and is managed as an item of value in a controlled manner and not as a
discarded material.
      F.   Material that is legitimately recycled pursuant to Section 455D.4A
of the Code of Iowa.
      G.   Post-use polymers or recoverable feedstocks that are any of the
following:
         (1)   Processed at a pyrolysis or gasification facility.
         (2)   Held at a pyrolysis or gasification facility prior to processing
to ensure production is not interrupted.
   15.   “Toxic and hazardous waste” means waste materials, including (but not
limited to) poisons, pesticides, herbicides, acids, caustics, pathological
waste, flammable or explosive materials, and similar harmful waste that
requires special handling and that must be disposed of in such a manner as to
conserve the environment and protect the public health and safety.
   16.   “Yard waste” means any debris such as grass clippings, leaves, garden
waste, brush, and trees. Yard waste does not include tree stumps.
105.03   SANITARY DISPOSAL REQUIRED.
It is the duty of each owner to provide for the sanitary disposal of all refuse
accumulating on the owner’s premises before it becomes a nuisance. Any such
accumulation remaining on any premises for a period of more than 30 days shall
be deemed a nuisance and the City may proceed to abate such nuisances in
accordance with the provisions of Chapter 50 or by initiating proper action in
district court.
(Code of Iowa, Ch. 657)
105.04   HEALTH AND FIRE HAZARD.
It is unlawful for any person to permit to accumulate on any premises, improved
or vacant, or on any public place, such quantities of solid waste that
constitute a health, sanitation, or fire hazard.
105.05   OPEN BURNING RESTRICTED.
No person shall allow, cause, or permit open burning of combustible materials
where the products of combustion are emitted into the open air without passing
through a chimney or stack, except that open burning is permitted in the
following circumstances, upon approval by the Fire Chief:
(567 IAC 23.2 and 100.2)
   1.   Disaster Rubbish. The open burning of rubbish, including landscape
waste, for the duration of the community disaster period in cases where an
officially declared emergency condition exists, provided that the burning of
any structures or demolished structures is conducted in accordance with 40 CFR
Section 61.145.
(567 IAC 23.2[3]“a”)
   2.   Trees and Tree Trimmings. The open burning of trees and tree trimmings
at a City-operated burning site, provided such burning is conducted in
compliance with the rules established by the State Department of Natural
Resources.
(567 IAC 23.2[3]“b”)
   3.   Flare Stacks. The open burning or flaring of waste gases, provided such
open burning or flaring is conducted in compliance with applicable rules of the
State Department of Natural Resources.
(567 IAC 23.2[3]“c”)
   4.   Landscape Waste. The disposal by open burning of landscape waste
originating on the premises. However, the burning of landscape waste produced
in clearing, grubbing, and construction operations shall be limited to areas
located at least one-fourth mile from any building inhabited by other than the
landowner or tenant conducting the open burning. Rubber tires shall not be used
to ignite landscape waste. The Fire Chief, at the discretion of the Council,
may at any time limit open burning due to dry conditions that would create a
fire hazard. Notice of such prohibition shall be broadcast on a local radio
station and public notice shall be published in an official newspaper.
(567 IAC 23.2[3]“d”)
   5.   Recreational Fires. Open fires for cooking, heating, recreation, and
ceremonies, provided they comply with the limits for emission of visible air
contaminants established by the State Department of Natural Resources. Rubber
tires shall not be burned in a recreational fire.
(567 IAC 23.2[3]“e”)
   6.   Residential Waste. Backyard burning of residential waste at dwellings
of four-family units or less.
(567 IAC 23.2[3]“f”)
   7.   Training Fires. Fires set for the purpose of conducting bona fide
training of public or industrial employees in firefighting methods, provided
that the training fires are conducted in compliance with rules established by
the State Department of Natural Resources.
(567 IAC 23.2[3]“g”)
   8.   Pesticide Containers and Seed Corn Bags. The disposal by open burning
of paper or plastic pesticide containers (except those formerly containing
organic forms of beryllium, selenium, mercury, lead, cadmium, or arsenic) and
seed corn bags resulting from farming activities occurring on the premises if
burned in accordance with rules established by the State Department of Natural
Resources.
(567 IAC 23.2[3]“h”)
   9.   Agricultural Structures. The open burning of agricultural structures if
in accordance with rules and limitations established by the State Department of
Natural Resources.
(567 IAC 23.2[3]“i”])
   10.   Controlled Burning of a Demolished Building. The controlled burning of
a demolished building by the City, subject to approval of the Council, provided
that the controlled burning is conducted in accordance with rules and
limitations established by the State Department of Natural Resources.
(567 IAC 23.2[3]“j”)
   11.   Variance. Any person wishing to conduct open burning of materials not
permitted herein may make application for a variance to the Director of the
State Department of Natural Resources.
(567 IAC 23.2[2])
105.06   SEPARATION OF YARD WASTE REQUIRED.
All yard waste shall be separated by the owner or occupant from all other solid
waste accumulated on the premises and shall be composted or disposed of at the
City’s designated disposal sites.
105.07   LITTERING PROHIBITED.
No person shall discard any litter onto or in any water or land, except that
nothing in this section shall be construed to affect the authorized collection
and discarding of such litter in or on areas or receptacles provided for such
purpose. When litter is discarded from a motor vehicle, the driver of the motor
vehicle shall be responsible for the act in any case where doubt exists as to
which occupant of the motor vehicle actually discarded the litter.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 455B.363)
105.08   TOXIC AND HAZARDOUS WASTE.
No person shall deposit in a solid waste container or otherwise offer for
collection any toxic or hazardous waste. Such materials shall be transported
and disposed of as prescribed by the Director of the State Department of
Natural Resources.
(567 IAC 100.2)
(567 IAC 102.13[2] and 400 IAC 27.14[2])
105.09   WASTE STORAGE CONTAINERS.
Every person owning, managing, operating, leasing, or renting any premises,
dwelling unit or any place where refuse accumulates shall provide and at all
times maintain in good order and repair portable containers for refuse in
accordance with the following:
   1.   Container Specifications. Waste storage containers for garbage and
recycling shall comply with the following specifications:
      A.   Residential Garbage. Residential garbage containers must be hauler-
approved for curbside garbage pick-up service. Each such container must, at a
minimum, have a hinged lid, be 35 gallons or 65 gallons in size, be waterproof,
and be compatible with the hauler’s automated collection system.
      B.   Residential Recycling. Residential recycling containers must be
reusable, portable containers for curbside recycling pick-up service. Each such
container must, at a minimum, have a lid that must be secured on the container
when it is awaiting collection, be waterproof, be lightweight but of sturdy
construction, and have handles suitable for manual lifting.
      C.   Commercial. Every person owning, managing, operating, leasing, or
renting any commercial premises where an excessive amount of refuse accumulates
and where its storage in portable containers as required above is impractical,
shall maintain metal bulk storage containers approved by the City.
   2.   Storage of Containers. Residential solid waste containers shall be
stored upon the residential premises. Commercial solid waste containers shall
be stored upon private property, unless the owner has been granted written
permission from the City to use public property for such purposes. The storage
site shall be well-drained and fully accessible to collection equipment, public
health personnel, and fire inspection personnel. All owners of residential and
commercial premises shall be responsible for proper storage of all garbage and
yard waste to prevent materials from being blown or scattered around
neighboring yards and streets.
   3.   Location of Containers for Collection. Containers for the storage of
solid waste and other materials awaiting collection shall be placed at or near
the curbside for convenient pick-up. Any person who desires to have containers
picked up from private premises (i.e., garage, at the door, etc.) or have
additional pick-up service, must make arrangements directly with the collector.
Containers shall be promptly removed from the City right-of-way (curbside)
following collection.
   4.   Nonconforming Containers. Solid waste placed in containers that are not
adequate will be collected together with their contents and disposed of after
due notice to the owner.
105.10   PROHIBITED PRACTICES.
It is unlawful for any person to:
   1.   Unlawful Use of Containers. Deposit refuse in any solid waste
containers not owned by such person without the written consent of the owner of
such containers.
   2.   Interfere with Collectors. Interfere in any manner with solid waste
collection equipment or with solid waste collectors in the lawful performance
of their duties as such, whether such equipment or collectors be those of the
City, or those of any other authorized waste collection service.
   3.   Incinerators. Burn rubbish or garbage except in incinerators designed
for high temperature operation, in which solid, semisolid, liquid, or gaseous
combustible refuse is ignited and burned efficiently, and from which the solid
residues contain little or no combustible material, as acceptable to the
Environmental Protection Commission.
   4.   Scavenging. Take or collect any solid waste that has been placed out
for collection on any premises, unless such person is an authorized solid waste
collector or a peace officer acting in such capacity.
105.11   SANITARY DISPOSAL PROJECT DESIGNATED.
The Council shall designate by resolution the official “Public Sanitary
Disposal Project” for the disposal of solid waste produced or originating
within the City.
CHAPTER 106
COLLECTION OF SOLID WASTE
 
106.01 Collection Service      106.07 Mandatory Collection
106.02 Collection Vehicles     106.08 Landfill Specifications
106.03 Loading                 106.09 Recycling Container Fee
106.04 Frequency of Collection 106.10 Unit-Based Pricing
106.05 Bulky Rubbish           106.11 Contract Requirements
106.06 Right of Entry
 
106.01   COLLECTION SERVICE.
The collection of solid waste within the City shall be by private contract with
collectors.
106.02   COLLECTION VEHICLES.
Vehicles or containers used for the collection and transportation of garbage
and similar putrescible waste or solid waste containing such materials shall be
leak-proof, durable, and of easily cleanable construction. They shall be
cleaned to prevent nuisances, pollution, or insect breeding and shall be
maintained in good repair.
(567 IAC 104.9)
106.03   LOADING.
Vehicles or containers used for the collection and transportation of any solid
waste shall be loaded and moved in such a manner that the contents will not
fall, leak, or spill therefrom, and shall be covered to prevent blowing or loss
of material. Where spillage does occur, the material shall be picked up
immediately by the collector or transporter and returned to the vehicle or
container and the area properly cleaned.
106.04   FREQUENCY OF COLLECTION.
Except as stated otherwise in this chapter, all solid waste shall be collected
from residential premises at least once each week and from commercial,
industrial, and institutional premises as frequently as may be necessary.
Recycling shall be collected from residential premises at least every other
week.
106.05   BULKY RUBBISH.
Bulky rubbish that is too large or heavy to be collected in the normal manner
of other solid waste may be collected by the collector upon request in
accordance with procedures established by the Council.
106.06   RIGHT OF ENTRY.
Solid waste collectors are hereby authorized to enter upon private property for
the purpose of collecting solid waste, as required by this chapter; however,
solid waste collectors shall not enter dwelling units or other residential
buildings.
106.07   MANDATORY COLLECTION.
The collection of residential solid waste in the City is mandatory. At least
once each year the City will provide collectors with a detailed listing of all
residential addresses and the collectors shall compare routes, check off, and
report back to the City any and all residences not participating in the
collection program. Water service shall be discontinued to any residence not
participating in the collection program.
106.08   LANDFILL SPECIFICATIONS.
All collected solid waste and recycling materials must meet the specifications
and guidelines as established by the Board of Directors of the Northwest Iowa
Area Solid Waste Agency.
106.09   RECYCLING CONTAINER FEE.
The fee for the initial recycling container shall be divided equally between
the City and the residential customer, and the container shall be only the
type, size, and color approved by the City. By reason of the City’s
participation in the cost of the initial container, said container must remain
with the premises (i.e.: resident moves but container stays with premises). In
such case where a customer needs to replace the container as a result of theft,
destruction, etc., or desires an additional container, the replacement
container or additional container shall be the sole cost of the customer. Any
replacement or additional container must also be of the type, size, and color
as specified by the City. The customer’s container fee shall be collected in
the same manner as water and sewer service charges as part of a combined
service account.
106.10   UNIT-BASED PRICING.
   1.   Container Specification.
      A.   Residential waste containers shall be made of galvanized metal,
rubber, fiberglass, or plastic, which does not become brittle in cold weather.
      B.   Disposable containers (e.g., bags) and containers approved by the
City and garbage hauler may be used.
      C.   Residential non-disposable waste containers may have a maximum
capacity of not more than 65 gallons. They shall be of lightweight and sturdy
construction, with the total weight of any 32-gallon container, fully loaded,
not to exceed 65 pounds. They shall be of the type manufactured for storage of
residential wastes with tapered sides for easy emptying and suitable lifting
devices such as handles or bails. They shall be waterproof and leakproof.
Containers shall be fitted with a fly-tight lid, which shall remain in place
except for the deposit or removal of wastes.
      D.   Any 65-gallon containers purchased must be capable of being
hydraulically lifted into the garbage truck.
   2.   Unit Based Pricing. No more than one 65-gallon container or more than
two 32-gallon containers, as described in Subsection 1 above, per residential
unit shall be collected at the normal rate of charge for collection. All
additional containers, piles, etc., placed for collection will be charged an
additional fee by the private hauler. Private hauler will use their discretion
in assessing additional charges.
   3.   Container Removal. Waste containers shall not be allowed to remain at
the site pick up area. Waste containers shall be removed from the curb,
driveway end, parking, etc. the same day refuse is picked up.
106.11   CONTRACT REQUIREMENTS.
No person shall engage in the business of collecting, transporting, processing,
or disposing of solid waste for the City without first entering into a contract
with the City. This section does not prohibit an owner from transporting solid
waste accumulating upon premises owned, occupied, or used by such owner,
provided such refuse is disposed of properly in an approved sanitary disposal
project. Furthermore, a contract is not required for the removal, hauling, or
disposal of earth and rock material from grading or excavation activities,
provided that all such materials are conveyed in tight vehicles, trucks, or
receptacles so constructed and maintained that none of the material being
transported is spilled upon any public right-of-way.
CHAPTER 110
NATURAL GAS FRANCHISE
[RESERVED FOR FUTURE USE]
CHAPTER 111
ELECTRIC FRANCHISE
[RESERVED FOR FUTURE USE]
CHAPTER 112
CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE
112.01 Regulatory Authority          112.11 Police Power
112.02 Grant of Franchise            112.12 Force Majeure
112.03 Term and Renewal              112.13 Assignment or Transfer
112.04 Franchise Fee                 112.14 Reporting Requirements; Access to
                                     Records
112.05 Nonexclusive Franchise        112.15 Confidentiality
112.06 Construction and Installation 112.16 Third Party Liability
112.07 Service Extensions            112.17 Service to Public Buildings
112.08 Ownership and Removal         112.18 Public, Educational, and Government
                                     Access
112.09 Legal Compliance              112.19 Right of First Refusal
112.10 Scope of Regulation
 
112.01   REGULATORY AUTHORITY.
The operation of a cable television system (the “System”) within the public
rights-of-way and compatible easements of the City of Sheldon, Iowa (the
“City”), by Hospers Telephone Exchange, d/b/a HTC Communications (the
“Company”), shall be governed by this chapter only to the extent that the City
is permitted to exercise its power as a local franchising authority with
respect to the Company’s multichannel video programming service under Iowa and
federal law. Without limiting the City’s otherwise lawful authority under other
applicable City codes and ordinances, this chapter shall regulate the Company’s
use and occupancy of the public rights-of-way within the City for the purpose
of providing multichannel video service to subscribers served by the System.
112.02   GRANT OF FRANCHISE.
The Company is granted the nonexclusive right, license and authority (the
“Franchise”) to locate and operate the System in the City for the purpose of
providing video programming services to end-user subscribers located within the
corporate boundaries of the City, including any areas annexed to the City in
the future. The Franchise includes the right of the Company to construct,
install, maintain, operate, repair, replace, and remove facilities and
equipment comprising the System in the public rights-of-way and through
easements dedicated for compatible uses throughout the corporate limits of the
City.
112.03   TERM AND RENEWAL.
The first renewal of the Franchise shall be 10 years from the Company’s
acceptance of the Franchise.† 6  At the end of the first renewal term, the
Company may apply for further renewal of the Franchise by giving written notice
to the City not less than 180 days prior to the expiration of the Franchise. In
determining whether to grant further renewals, the City shall consider those
factors prescribed by federal law, including (i) whether the Company has
substantially complied with the material terms of the Franchise and with
applicable laws; (ii) the extent and quality of the Company’s video programming
service; (iii) whether the Company remains financially, legally, and
technically qualified to provide video service; and (iv) whether renewal of the
Franchise promotes the video-related community needs and interests.
 
Notes
  † EDITOR’S NOTE: Ordinance No. O17-3224, adopting a cable television franchise for
6 the City, was passed and adopted on January 4, 2017.
   
112.04   FRANCHISE FEE.
For the term of the Franchise, the Company shall pay to the City an annual
franchise fee equal to five percent of the Company’s annual gross revenues
derived from the operation of the System to provide multichannel video
programming services to subscribers within the corporate boundaries of the
City. For purposes of calculating the franchise fee, the Company’s gross
revenues shall be calculated as defined in Section 477A.1(9)(a) of the Code of
Iowa, as the same may be amended from time to time. The franchise fee shall be
payable quarterly at the Clerk’s office, or as otherwise agreed by the City and
the Company. Any franchise fees collected and paid under this section may be
credited to the City’s general fund and used for the City’s lawful general fund
purposes. The Company may identify the franchise fee collected and paid under
this section as a separate line item on the regular bill of each subscriber.
Upon reasonable request by the City, the Company shall provide the City with
its business records supporting its calculation of the franchise fee for any
identified period; provided that the Company shall not be required to maintain
such business records in excess of 24 months.
112.05   NONEXCLUSIVE FRANCHISE.
The Franchise is nonexclusive and shall in no way prevent the City from
granting or renewing any other cable television or video service franchise. If
the City grants or renews an additional cable television or video service
franchise, the material terms and conditions of the additional franchise shall
not provide a competitive preference or advantage to the franchisee under that
franchise.
112.06   CONSTRUCTION AND INSTALLATION.
The Company shall construct, install, maintain, operate, repair, replace, and
remove the System in a manner consistent with accepted technical and
engineering standards and in accordance with all applicable safety rules and
regulations. All facilities and equipment comprising the System and located in
the public rights-of-way shall be located so as to cause minimum interference
with the proper use of the public rights-of-way and to cause minimum
interference with the rights or reasonable convenience of property owners who
adjoin any public right-of-way. In case of any facilities or equipment causing
interference with the public right-of-way, the Company shall, at its own cost
and expense and in a commercially reasonable manner, modify, remove, or
relocate such facilities or equipment. In the event that at any time during the
term of the Franchise the City lawfully elects to alter or change any street,
alley, or other public right-of-way, the Company shall, if necessary and upon
reasonable notice from the City, modify, remove, or relocate any facilities or
equipment at its own cost and expense and in a commercially reasonable manner.
The Company shall have the authority, at its own cost and expense and in a
commercially reasonable manner, to trim trees upon and overhanging the public
rights-of-way so as to prevent the branches of such trees from coming in
contact with the facilities and equipment of the Company. In case of any
disturbance or damage to a public right-of-way, the Company shall, at its own
cost and expense and in a commercially reasonable manner approved by the City,
replace and restore such right-of-way to as good a condition as before the
Company’s activities were commenced. In the event that the Company does not
timely comply with its obligations under this section, the City may perform the
work and recover its actual, verified cost from the Company. At the request of
the City, the Company shall provide to the City Engineer or applicable City
department accurate maps of the System, including the location of all
facilities and equipment in the public rights-of-way.
In those areas of the service area where all of the transmission or
distribution facilities of the respective utilities providing telephone
communications and electric services are underground, the Company shall
likewise construct, operate, and maintain all of its transmission and
distribution facilities underground, provided that such facilities are actually
capable of receiving the System’s signal quality. In those areas where
utilities are both aerial and underground, the Company shall have the
discretion of placing its cable as aerial or underground. If at such time other
utilities transfer aerial systems to underground placement, the Company shall
make provisions to do likewise. At no time, unless with the City’s consent or
under emergency circumstances, will the Company allow its facilities to lay on
ground for more than its initial construction period.
112.07   SERVICE EXTENSIONS.
The Company shall provide service to residents on a nondiscriminatory basis,
and shall not deny access to video service to any resident or neighborhood on
the basis of income. The Company shall serve all residents of the City, except
to the extent that population density, adverse terrain, or other factors render
providing service commercially impracticable or technically infeasible. In the
event the requirements of this section are not met, extensions of service shall
be required only on a basis which is commercially reasonable. Nothing in the
preceding shall prohibit the Company from offering video service in any area
not meeting the preceding density requirements on terms acceptable to the
Company.
112.08   OWNERSHIP AND REMOVAL.
The System shall be and remain the exclusive property of the Company at all
times and for all purposes. Any costs, expenses, taxes, or other assessments
arising from, or related to, the construction, installation, maintenance,
operation, repair, replacement, and removal of the System shall be the sole
responsibility of the Company. Upon expiration or termination of the Franchise
in accordance with this chapter, the Company shall, at its own cost and expense
and within a commercially reasonable time under the circumstances, remove all
facilities and equipment comprising the System and restore the public rights-
of-way to as good a condition as before the Company’s activities were
commenced.
112.09   LEGAL COMPLIANCE.
The rights and obligations of the Company under the Franchise are subject at
all times to compliance with Iowa and federal law and all applicable
requirements, specifications, rules, and orders of the Federal Communications
Commission (the “FCC”). Any condition or provision of this chapter that is
inconsistent with Iowa or federal law or applicable FCC regulations shall be
deemed preempted and superseded.
112.10   SCOPE OF REGULATION.
Nothing in this chapter shall be interpreted or construed to impose any
requirement that has the purpose or effect of prohibiting, limiting,
restricting, or conditioning the provision of telecommunications services or
other communications or information services by the Company or any of its
affiliates.
112.11   POLICE POWER.
The Company shall at all times during the term of the Franchise be subject to
all lawful exercise of the City’s police power. The City reserves the right to
adopt from time to time such ordinances as may be necessary to exercise the
City’s police power as it may relate to the Franchise. In the case of emergency
or disaster, the Company shall, upon request by the City, make available its
facilities for the City to provide emergency information and instructions. An
emergency override shall be instituted via telephone access overriding all
channels in the System. The Company shall provide explicit instructions in
writing to the Mayor, City Manager, and Chief of Police for such an event. The
City agrees that such an emergency override system shall not be used as a
general paging or messaging service. The City shall hold the Company harmless
from any claims arising from the use or dissemination or content of the
information or instructions including, but not limited to, reasonable
attorney’s fees and costs.
112.12   FORCE MAJEURE.
The Company shall not be liable for any delay or failure in performance of any
part of its obligations under this chapter from any cause beyond its control
and without its fault or negligence, including acts of God, acts of civil or
military authority, government regulations, adverse judicial proceedings,
embargoes, epidemics, war, terrorist acts, riots, insurrections, fires,
explosions, earthquakes, nuclear accidents, floods, strikes, power blackouts,
major environmental disturbances, unusually severe weather conditions,
inability to secure products or services of other person or transportation
facilities, or acts or omissions of transportation common carriers.
112.13   ASSIGNMENT OR TRANSFER.
The Company shall not assign or transfer any right granted under this chapter
to any other individual or entity without the prior written consent of the
City, provided that such prior written consent shall not be unreasonably
withheld or delayed if the proposed assignee or transferee agrees in writing to
assume the Company’s obligations as franchisee, including compliance with the
terms and conditions of this chapter. Notwithstanding the preceding or anything
in this chapter to the contrary, no restrictions or special rights with respect
to assignment or transfer of the Franchise or the System shall apply to
transfers from the Company to any affiliate directly or indirectly controlling,
controlled by, or under common control with the Company.† 7
 
Notes
  † EDITOR’S NOTE: Control of Hospers Telephone Exchange, d/b/a HTC
7 Communications, was transferred to Mutual Telephone Company of Sioux Center,
  Iowa, d/b/a Premier Communications, on August 8, 2018.
   
112.14   REPORTING REQUIREMENTS; ACCESS TO RECORDS.
Upon reasonable request by the City, the Company shall provide the City annual
reports or equivalent reports or information as identified in Section 114.03 of
this Code of Ordinances, if and to the extent that such reports are applicable
to the Company’s operation of the System within the City. Upon reasonable
request by the City, the City may review the Company’s books and records
pertaining to the Franchise, during normal business hours and on a non-
disruptive basis, as are reasonably necessary to monitor the Company’s
compliance with the terms of this Franchise.
112.15   CONFIDENTIALITY.
The City shall keep confidential all information and data pertaining to the
Company or its business and customers of a confidential or proprietary nature,
and shall not disclose any such information to any other person, firm, or
entity (except to a governmental or regulatory body in response to a subpoena)
and shall use such information only for purposes within the scope of the City’s
authority under this chapter. The City agrees that any confidential and
proprietary information received pursuant to this chapter shall be disclosed
only to those employees and other persons who have a proper need for its use.
Upon expiration or termination of the Franchise, the City shall, at the
direction of the Company, return or destroy all confidential or proprietary
information provided by the Company along with any and all copies of such
information. The obligations of the City under this section shall survive the
expiration or termination of the Franchise. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the
Company acknowledges that the obligations of the City under this section are
subject to compliance with applicable open meeting or public records laws of
the State of Iowa. The City shall not be liable for any disclosure required to
be made in compliance with applicable open meeting or public records laws,
provided such disclosure is made in good faith and in consultation with, and
reliance upon, the advice of the City’s legal counsel, and provided that prior
written notice of the required disclosure is provided to the Company and its
legal counsel.
112.16   THIRD PARTY LIABILITY.
Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to create civil liability by one party
for actions, omissions, or negligence of the other party, or of the other
party’s agents, employees, officers, or assigns. This chapter shall not be
interpreted or construed to provide any third parties (including, but not
limited to the Company’s customer) with any remedy, claim, liability,
reimbursement, cause of action, or any other right as against the Company or
the City. Each of the Company and the City shall bear responsibility for its
own actions, omissions, and negligence. Without limiting the preceding, the
Company shall hold the City harmless from any claim, liability, or damage
arising from, or caused by, the Company’s activities under the Franchise.
112.17   SERVICE TO PUBLIC BUILDINGS.
The Company shall provide without charge, three outlets of full service
(excluding premium channels) to the City’s office buildings, fire stations,
police stations, public library, Crossroads Pavilion, and all public and
private school buildings, at their request. The outlets of cable service shall
not be used to sell services in or throughout such buildings and shall be for
the viewing and use of its employees and not for general public audiences.
Users of such service shall hold the Company harmless from any and all
liability or claims arising out of their use of such outlets, including but not
limited to, those arising from copyright liability.
112.18   PUBLIC, EDUCATIONAL, AND GOVERNMENT ACCESS.
During the term of the franchise, the Company will ensure that the system has
the capacity to afford the City a channel to be used for public, educational,
and government access. During those times that the channel is not being used by
the City, the Company may use said channel for commercial or non-commercial
programming use as the Company deems necessary. During the term of the
Franchise, the Company shall carry the Iowa Public Television channel.
112.19   RIGHT OF FIRST REFUSAL.
If at any time during the term of this Franchise, or upon any expiration or
termination hereof, the Company elects to abandon multichannel video
programming services and terminate use of the System, and is not using the
facilities or any upgraded facilities to provide other communications services
to customers, the City, at its election and upon the tender of payment as
herein provided to the Company, shall have the right to purchase and take over
System in its entirety. Upon the exercise of this option by the City and its
service of an official notice of such action upon the Company together with the
payment of the purchase price as provided herein, the Company shall immediately
transfer to the City possession and title to all facilities and property, real
and personal, of the CATV business, free from any and all liens and
encumbrances which the City does not agree to assume in lieu of some portion of
the purchase price as determined herein; and the Company shall execute such
warranty deed or other instruments of conveyance to the City as shall be
necessary for this purpose. The purchase price to be paid by the City to the
Company upon the exercise of the option as herein provided shall be determined
as the fair market value of the business and underlying System as an ongoing
business and operation of the Company, as determined by three appraisers
chosen, one by the City, one by the Company, and the remaining appraiser to be
chosen by the two as designated by the City and the Company. Such appraisers
shall be chosen from experts within the cable television industry and shall
possess the expertise and qualifications necessary to make these determinations
and evaluations in order to be qualified as an appraiser. The fair market value
of the system shall not include, and the City shall not be entitled to receive
anything for, the evaluation of any right or privilege appertaining to it under
this Franchise. For the avoidance of doubt, the City’s right of first refusal
under this section shall not be triggered by any assignment or transfer of this
Franchise in accordance with Section 112.13, provided that the assignee or
transferee will continue to use the System to provide multichannel video
programming services or other communications services to customers following
the assignment or transfer.
CHAPTER 113
CABLE TELEVISION RATES
 
113.01 Initial Review of Basic Cable Rates 113.04 Notice of Rate Change in Non-
                                           regulated Tiers and Services
113.02 Decision                            113.05 Cable Operator Information
113.03 Review of Request for Increase in
Basic Cable Rates
 
113.01   INITIAL REVIEW OF BASIC CABLE RATES.
   1.   Notice. Upon certification of the City by the FCC, the City shall
immediately notify any Cable Operator that may obtain a cable television
franchise, by certified mail, return receipt requested, that the City intends
to regulate subscriber rates charged for the basic service tier and associated
equipment as authorized by the Cable Act of 1992.
   2.   Cable Operator Response. Within 30 days of receiving notice from the
City, a Cable Operator shall file with the City its current rates for the basic
service tier and associated equipment and any supporting material concerning
the reasonableness of its rates.
   3.   Rate Regulation Proceedings and Public Hearing. Any rate regulation
proceedings conducted under this chapter shall provide a reasonable opportunity
for consideration of the views of any interested party, including but not
limited to the City or its designee, the Cable Operator, subscribers, and
residents of the franchise area. In addition to all other provisions required
by the laws of the State and the City for such proceedings, and in order to
provide for such opportunity for consideration of the views of any interested
party, the City shall take the following actions:
      A.   The City shall publish in a local newspaper, post in a public
building, and mail, by certified mail, to the Cable Operator a public notice of
the intent to conduct a public proceeding on basic service tier rates or
charges for equipment to receive such basic service tier, as defined by the
FCC.
      B.   The public notice shall state, among other things, that cable
television rates are subject to municipal review and explain the nature of the
rate review in question; that any interested party has a right to participate
in the proceeding; that public views may be submitted in the proceedings,
explaining how they are to be submitted and the deadline for submitting any
such views; that a decision concerning the reasonableness of the cable
television rates in question will be governed by the rules and regulations of
the FCC and that the decision of the City is subject to review by the FCC.
      C.   The City shall conduct a public proceeding to determine whether or
not the rates or proposed rate increase are reasonable. The Council may
delegate the responsibility to conduct the proceedings to any duly qualified
and eligible person. If the Council or its designee cannot determine the
reasonableness of a proposed rate increase within the time period permitted by
the FCC rules and regulations, it may postpone the effective date of the
proposed rates for an additional period of time as permitted by the FCC rules
and regulations and issue any other necessary or appropriate order and give
public notice accordingly.
113.02   DECISION.
   1.   By Formal Resolution. After completion of its review of the Cable
Operator’s proposed rates, the Council shall adopt its decision by formal
resolution. The decision shall include one of the following:
      A.   If the proposal is within the FCC’s reasonable rate standard or is
justified by a cost-of-service analysis, the Council shall approve the initial
base cable rates proposed by the Cable Operator; or
      B.   If the proposal is not within the FCC’s reasonable rate standard and
the cost-of-service analysis, if any, does not justify the proposed rates, the
Council shall establish initial basic cable rates that are within the FCC’s
reasonable rate standard or that are justified by a cost-of-service analysis.
   2.   Rollbacks and Refunds. If the Council determines that the initial basic
cable rates as submitted exceed the reasonable rate standard or that the Cable
Operator’s cost-of-service justifies lower rates, the Council may order the
rates reduced in accordance with the benchmark analysis or cost-of-service
showing, as applicable. In addition, the Council may order the Cable Operator
to pay to subscribers refunds of the excessive portion of the rates with
interest (computed at applicable rates published by the Internal Revenue
Service for tax refunds and additional tax payments), retroactive to September
1, 1993. The method for paying any refund and the interest rate will be in
accordance with FCC regulations as directed in the Council’s decision
resolution.
   3.   Statement of Reasons for Decision and Public Notice. If rates proposed
by a Cable Operator are disapproved in whole or in part, or if there were
objections made by other parties to the proposed rates, the resolution must
state the reasons for the decision and the Council must give public notice of
its decision.
   4.   Appeal. The Council’s decision concerning rates for the basic service
tier or associated equipment may be appealed to the FCC in accordance with
applicable federal regulations.
113.03   REVIEW OF REQUEST FOR INCREASE IN BASIC CABLE RATES.
A Cable Operator in the City who wishes to increase the rates for the basic
service tier or associated equipment shall file a request with the City and
notify all subscribers at least 30 days before the Cable Operator desires the
increase to take effect. This notice may not be given more often than annually
and not until at least one year after the determination of the initial basic
cable rates. The Council shall administer and enforce all proceedings as
permitted under the Rules and Regulations of the FCC concerning cable rate
regulations as they currently read and hereafter may be amended, which are
herewith incorporated by reference.
113.04   NOTICE OF RATE CHANGE IN NON-REGULATED TIERS AND SERVICES.
With regard to the cable programming service tier, as defined by the
Communications Act of 1984, as amended, and the FCC rules and regulations, and
over which the City is not empowered to exercise rate regulation, the Cable
Operator shall give notice to the City of any change in rates for the cable
programming service tier or tiers, any change in the charge for equipment
required to receive the tier or tiers, and any changes in the nature of the
services provided, including the program services included in the tier or
tiers. Said notice shall be provided within five business days after the change
becomes effective.
113.05   CABLE OPERATOR INFORMATION.
   1.   City May Require. In those cases when the Cable Operator has submitted
initial rates or proposed an increase that exceeds the reasonable rate
standard, the Council may require the Cable Operator to produce information in
addition to that submitted, including proprietary information, if needed to
make a rate determination. In these cases, a Cable Operator may request the
information be kept confidential in accordance with this section. In cases
where initial or proposed rates comply with the reasonable rate standard, the
Council may request additional information only in order to document that the
Cable Operator’s rates are in accord with the standard.
   2.   Request for Confidentiality. A Cable Operator submitting information to
the Council may request in writing that the information not be made routinely
available for public inspection. A copy of the request shall be attached to and
cover all of the information and all copies of the information to which it
applies. If feasible, the information to which the request applies shall be
physically separated from any information to which the request does not apply.
If this is not feasible, the portion of the information to which the request
applies shall be identified. Each request shall contain a statement of the
reasons for withholding inspection and a statement of the facts upon which
those reasons are based. Casual requests which do not comply with the
requirements of this subsection shall not be considered.
   3.   Council Action. Requests which comply with the requirements of
Subsection 2 will be acted upon by the Council. The Council will grant the
request if the Cable Operator presents by a preponderance of the evidence a
case for nondisclosure consistent with applicable federal regulations. If the
request is granted, the ruling will be placed in a public file in lieu of the
information withheld from public inspection. If the request does not present a
case for nondisclosure and the Council denies the request, the Council shall
take one of the following actions:
      A.   If the information has been submitted voluntarily without any
direction from the City, the Cable Operator may request that the City return
the information without considering it. Ordinarily, the City will comply with
this request. Only in the unusual instance that the public interest so requires
will the information be made available for public inspection.
      B.   If the information was required by the Council to be submitted, the
information will be made available for public inspection.
   4.   Appeal. If the Council denies the request for confidentiality, the
Cable Operator may seek review of that decision from the FCC within five
working days of the Council’s decision and the release of the information will
be stayed pending review.
CHAPTER 114
AMENDING FRANCHISE ORDINANCES
 
114.01 Requirements for Adoption and Amendment 114.03 Reporting Requirements
114.02 Publication of Notice
 
114.01   REQUIREMENTS FOR ADOPTION AND AMENDMENT.
Ordinances granting utility franchises, and ordinances amending franchises, and
franchise regulation ordinances shall, before being adopted by the Council and
submitted to the voters:
   1.   Specifically repeal the section or subsection to be amended and must
set forth in full the sections and subsections as amended;
   2.   Be considered and voted on for passage by the Council at two public
hearings, not less than 15 calendar days apart, and prior to the meeting at
which it is finally passed; and
   3.   Be preceded by notice, published as provided in Section 114.02, in the
form to be considered, prior to each public hearing at which it is to be
considered.
None of these requirements may be suspended or waived by the Council.
114.02   PUBLICATION OF NOTICE.
The notices of public hearing must be published twice before each hearing, not
less than seven days apart, the last of which shall be not less than four or
more than 14 days before the date of hearing, in a newspaper published weekly
and having general circulation in the City. Each publication must set forth in
full the sections and subsections proposed for adoption and the provision they
are replacing as:
   1.   Existing in law at the time of consideration;
   2.   Existed in the last preceding franchise for the same type of utility;
or
   3.   Proposed by the previous notice for an ordinance under consideration.
114.03   REPORTING REQUIREMENTS.
Ordinances granting utility franchises must, in addition, require the chief
executive officer of a company granted a franchise to provide the following
information to the City on an annual basis:
   1.   Report of revenues for each rate class served within the City limits,
including the following:
      A.   Number of consumers;
      B.   Number of units sold;
      C.   Revenue per filed rate schedule;
      D.   Revenue for surcharges (e.g., energy adjustment clause);
      E.   Rents and other income (e.g., late payment fees).
   1.   2.   Annual reports filed with federal regulatory agencies (e.g., FERC
Form 1).
   3.   Annual reports filed with State regulatory agencies.
   4.   Company annual report to stockholders.
   5.   Rate filings with federal or State regulatory agencies which set rates
applicable to customers within the City limits. This should include current
rate schedules and most recent cost-of-service studies. Cost-of-service studies
should show, by rate class, the cost of providing service specifically to
residents of the City.
   6.   A detailed map of the utility system, including a description of
facilities and customer locations.
   7.   Continuing property records for the utility facilities within the City
limits showing units of property in service, dates installed, and original cost
and depreciation. The annual updates should indicate units added and retired,
including the value thereof.
CHAPTER 115
CEMETERY
 
115.01 Definition                       115.07 Consent of Sexton Required
115.02 Sale of Lots: Plat and Records   115.08 Grading of Lots Restricted
115.03 Sale of Lots: Warranty Deed      115.09 Burials
115.04 Rate Schedule                    115.10 Veteran Landowners or Residents
115.05 Placement of Monuments, Markers, 115.11 Appeals
or Memorials
115.06 Required Permits
 
115.01   DEFINITION.
The term “cemetery” means the East Lawn Cemetery, which is a municipal cemetery
under the provisions of Chapter 523I of the Code of Iowa and which shall be
operated under the provisions of Chapter 523I of the Code of Iowa and this
chapter.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 523I.501)
115.02   SALE OF LOTS: PLAT AND RECORDS.
A plat of the cemetery shall be kept by the Clerk, together with a record of
all lots sold and burial permits granted. The Clerk has authority to sell such
lots in the cemetery in accordance with the prices and regulations provided in
this chapter. The area reserved as chapel site under previous ordinances is
hereby diverted to regular burial plot purposes, and the Clerk is authorized
and directed to sell and transfer the same by cemetery lot deeds; and all past
conveyances from such area are hereby recognized and fully legalized.
115.03   SALE OF LOTS: WARRANTY DEED.
In case of the sale of any of the lots in the cemetery by the Clerk, the Mayor
and Clerk shall issue a warranty deed to such lot and shall deliver the same to
the purchaser thereof, when payment for such lot is made.
115.04   RATE SCHEDULE.
   1.   The sale prices of burial sites (locations) in the following sections
of the cemetery are as follows:
      A.   Babyland Burial Location (one year old or less)       $ 100.00
      B.   Regular Burial Location                $ 500.00
   2.   Prices for grave openings in the following sections of the cemetery are
as follows:
      A.   Babyland                      $ 200.00
      B.   Cremation (including public & private columbariums)    $ 350.00
      C.   All other grave openings               $ 600.00
      D.   Weekend/holiday burials will be an additional       $ 400.00
   3.   Holidays are defined as the holidays recognized in the City of
Sheldon’s employee personnel manual.
   4.   The basic charge for any grave opening outside of East Lawn Cemetery
done by City employees using City equipment is $600.00. Each cemetery will sign
a hold harmless agreement indemnifying the City against all claims for damages
or injury to persons or property.
   5.   The City will purchase any cemetery gravesite in the cemetery from its
lawful owners at the rate of $50.00 per gravesite. A higher rate may be allowed
up to the price of a regular burial location elsewhere in this schedule upon
approval by the Sheldon Cemetery Board.
   6.   Fee for disinterment is $900 for a regular burial location, and $450
for Babyland or cremations. In the event there are multiple burials in one
gravesite, there shall be charged two fees, even if two disinterments are not
being sought. Disinterment is weather dependent, and is to only occur on
weekdays between May 1 and October 1. Exceptions to the timeframe or the rest
of this section may be considered by the Public Works Director or the Cemetery
Board.
   7.   Transfer of deeds shall cost $50.
   8.   Certified copies of lost deeds shall cost $25.
   9.   Regarding lot sales in Babyland, these lots are for ages 1 year old
(365 days old) or less, unless approved by the Cemetery Board. Lots in Babyland
are sold “as the next in line” only. There will not be the opportunity granted
to choose lots elsewhere in Babyland, unless approved by the Cemetery Board.
(Section 115.04 – Ord. O24-3290 – Dec. 24 Supp.)
115.05   PLACEMENT OF MONUMENTS, MARKERS, OR MEMORIALS.
   1.   Each monument, marker, or memorial shall be placed on a concrete
foundation of sufficient size and depth to properly carry the weight of the
monument, and all foundations will be at least 12 inches deep and of concrete
4,000 pounds test strength. Pier type foundations or a four-inch prestressed
concrete foundation set in concrete footing of at least 4,000 pounds test
strength and not less than eight inches in depth may be used, totaling 12
inches.
   2.   All monuments, markers, or memorials shall be set with a minimum wash
of not less than six inches.
   3.   All monuments, markers, or memorials shall be placed within the
confines of the lot measurement, and all monuments and markers shall be placed
on the head end, or west end, of the designated lot.
   4.   Monuments, markers, and memorials may be upright or flush in type.
   5.   It is the responsibility of the registered lot owner or owners and
heirs to keep monuments, markers, and memorials in good and safe repair. The
cost of these repairs and all other gravesite repairs deemed required by the
Sexton shall be assessed against the owners of the lot or heirs. Uncollectible
repair expenses shall be paid from a maintenance fund to be established for
said purpose by the Clerk, depositing 25 percent of the future lot sales, up to
a total of $5,000.00 in a special maintenance fund. Expenditures from the
maintenance fund will be replaced by allocating 25 percent of future occurring
lot sales to re-establish a $5,000.00 maximum limit in the maintenance fund.
The maintenance fund will be in the custody of the Clerk, and funds will be
released only upon the request of the Sexton, with approval from the Director
of Public Works.
115.06   REQUIRED PERMITS.  
It is unlawful for any person to dig a grave in the cemetery, or to place a
monument or grave marker in such cemetery, without first securing from the
Clerk a permit to do so, and, when such permit is granted, such grave shall be
dug, or such monument or grave marker placed in strict compliance with the
provisions and specifications in this chapter.
115.07   CONSENT OF SEXTON REQUIRED.
Any work being contemplated within the cemetery, including monument work, must
be approved by the Sexton. No shrubs or trees shall be planted except at the
direction of the Sexton. Also, the Sexton shall have sole discretion in
determining the location of living plants or flowers, whether planted directly
in the soil or maintained in planters. All live flowers and plants, artificial
flowers and plants, and grave adornments shall be removed by the cemetery
Sexton on October 30 and April 1 of each year.
115.08   GRADING OF LOTS RESTRICTED.  
No owner of any lot or gravesite or any other person shall change the grade or
elevation of any lot in the City cemetery.
115.09   BURIALS.
   1.   No burials are permitted unless a grave permit has been issued by the
Clerk’s office.
   2.   Minimum cover shall not be less than three feet.
   3.   Precast concrete or metal vaults shall be used for all burials, except
in the area designated as Babyland.
   4.   Cremation remains must be buried in approved containers.
   5.   An infant and a relative may be buried in one gravesite outside of
Babyland if the infant was buried prior to January 1, 1994. After January 1,
1994, each gravesite shall be the burial site for only one burial. An exception
to this shall be granted to cremation burials. If the first and only burial on
a burial site is a cremation burial, no other burials may take place except
cremation burials on that same burial site. Cremation burials may only occur on
a burial site previously occupied by another burial. Each gravesite shall be
the burial site for a maximum of two burials, including cremations. All
multiple burials on the same burial site shall comply with Section 115.05.
   6.   A maximum of one monument or marker shall be allowed per burial
location.
   7.   Scattering of cremation ashes is prohibited in any portion of the
cemetery.
115.10   VETERAN LANDOWNERS OR RESIDENTS.  
Any veteran who is a landowner within the City or lives within the City is
allowed to purchase an interment space at, and to be interred within, the East
Lawn Cemetery.
115.11   APPEALS.
Appeals concerning the rulings of the Sexton or interpretation of the East Lawn
Cemetery rules and regulations will be heard at two levels: (i) with the Public
Works Director providing the first appeal hearing and (ii) the second level
provided by a City Cemetery Board consisting of not more than five people
appointed by the Mayor for overlapping five-year terms and confirmed by the
Council. The Board shall adopt bylaws and operating procedures for the conduct
of business including, but not limited to, election of officers and meeting
times and places. The bylaws shall be subject to review and approval by the
Council.
CHAPTER 120
LIQUOR LICENSES AND WINE AND BEER PERMITS
 
120.01 License or Permit Required 120.04 Action by Council
120.02 General Prohibition        120.05 Prohibited Sales and Acts
120.03 Investigation              120.06 Amusement Devices
 
120.01   LICENSE OR PERMIT REQUIRED.
No person shall manufacture for sale, import, sell, or offer or keep for sale,
alcoholic liquor, wine, or beer without first securing a liquor control
license, wine permit, or beer permit in accordance with the provisions of
Chapter 123 of the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.22, 123.122, and 123.171)
120.02   GENERAL PROHIBITION.
It is unlawful to manufacture for sale, sell, offer, or keep for sale, possess,
or transport alcoholic liquor, wine, or beer except upon the terms, conditions,
limitations, and restrictions enumerated in Chapter 123 of the Code of Iowa,
and a license or permit may be suspended or revoked or a civil penalty may be
imposed for a violation thereof.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.2, 123.39, and 123.50)
120.03   INVESTIGATION.
Upon receipt of an application for a retail alcohol license, the Clerk may
forward it to the Police Chief, who shall then conduct an investigation and
submit a written report as to the truth of the facts averred in the
application. The Fire Chief may also inspect the premises to determine if they
conform to the requirements of the City. The Council shall not approve an
application for a license for any premises that does not conform to the
applicable law and ordinances, resolutions, and regulations of the City.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.30)
120.04   ACTION BY COUNCIL.
The Council shall either approve or disapprove the issuance of a retail alcohol
license, shall endorse its approval or disapproval on the application, and
shall forward the application with the necessary fee and bond, if required, to
the Iowa Department of Revenue.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.32[2])
120.05   PROHIBITED SALES AND ACTS.
A person holding a retail alcohol license and the person’s agents or employees
shall not do any of the following:
   1.   Sell, dispense, or give to any intoxicated person, or one simulating
intoxication, any alcoholic beverage.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49[1])
   2.   Sell or dispense any alcoholic beverage on the premises covered by the
license or permit its consumption thereon between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:
00 a.m. on any day of the week.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49[2b])
   3.   Sell alcoholic beverages to any person on credit, except with a bona
fide credit card. This provision does not apply to sales by a club to its
members, to sales by a hotel or motel to bona fide registered guests, or to
retail sales by the managing entity of a convention center, civic center, or
events center.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49[2c])
   4.   Employ a person under 18 years of age in the sale or serving of
alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises where sold, except as
follows:
      A.   Definitions. For use in this subsection the following terms are
defined as follows:
         (1)   “Bar” means an establishment where one may purchase alcoholic
beverages for consumption on the premises and in which the serving of food is
only incidental to the consumption of those beverages.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 142D.2[1])
         (2)   “Restaurant” means eating establishments, including private and
public school cafeterias, which offer food to the public, guests, or employees,
including the kitchen and catering facilities in which food is prepared on the
premises for serving elsewhere, and including a bar area within a restaurant.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 142D.2[17])
      B.   This subsection shall not apply if the employer has, on file,
written permission from the parent, guardian, or legal custodian of a person 16
or 17 years of age for the person to sell or serve alcoholic beverages for
consumption on the premises where sold. However, a person 16 or 17 years of age
shall not work in a bar as defined in Paragraph A.
         (1)   The employer shall keep a copy of the written permission on file
until the person is either 18 years of age or no longer engaged in the sale of
or serving alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises where sold.
         (2)   If written permission is on file in accordance with Paragraph B,
a person 16 or 17 years of age may sell or serve alcoholic beverages in a
restaurant as defined above in Paragraph A during the hours in which the
restaurant serves food.
      C.   A person 16 or 17 years of age shall not sell or serve alcoholic
beverages under this subsection unless at least two employees 18 years of age
or older are physically present in the area where alcoholic beverages are sold
or served.
      D.   If a person employed under this subsection reports an incident of
workplace harassment to the employer or if the employer otherwise becomes aware
of such an incident, the employer shall report the incident to the employee’s
parent, guardian, or legal custodian and to the Iowa Civil Rights Commission,
which shall determine if any action is necessary or appropriate under Chapter
216 of the Code of Iowa.
      E.   An employer that employs a person under this subsection shall
require the person to attend training on prevention and response to sexual
harassment upon commencing employment.
      F.   Prior to a person commencing employment under this subsection, the
employer shall notify the employer’s dramshop liability insurer, in a form and
time period prescribed by the Director, that the employer is employing a person
under this subsection.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49[2f])
   5.   In the case of a retail wine or beer permittee, knowingly allow the
mixing or adding of alcohol or any alcoholic beverage to wine, beer, or any
other beverage in or about the permittee’s place of business.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49[2i])
   6.   Knowingly permit any gambling, except in accordance with Iowa law, or
knowingly permit any solicitation for immoral purposes, or immoral or
disorderly conduct on the premises covered by the license.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49[2a])
   7.   Knowingly permit or engage in any criminal activity on the premises
covered by the license.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49[2j])
   8.   Keep on premises covered by a retail alcohol license any alcoholic
liquor in any container except the original package purchased from the Iowa
Department of Revenue and except mixed drinks or cocktails mixed on the
premises for immediate consumption on the licensed premises or as otherwise
provided by this subsection. However, mixed drinks or cocktails that are mixed
on the premises and are not for immediate consumption may be consumed on the
licensed premises, subject to Section 123.49, Subsection 2, Paragraph D,
Subparagraphs (2), (3), and (4) of the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49(2)(d)(2), (3), and (4))
(Subsection 8 – Ord._O25-3297 – Oct. 25 Supp.)
   9.   Reuse for packaging alcoholic liquor or wine any container or
receptacle used originally for packaging alcoholic liquor or wine; or
adulterate, by the addition of any substance, the contents or remaining
contents of an original package of an alcoholic liquor or wine; or knowingly
possess any original package that has been reused or adulterated.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49[2e])
   10.   Allow any person other than the licensee or employees of the licensee
to use or keep on the licensed premises any alcoholic liquor in any bottle or
other container that is designed for the transporting of such beverages, except
as allowed by State law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49[2g])
   11.   Sell, give, possess, or otherwise supply a machine that is used to
vaporize an alcoholic beverage for the purpose of being consumed in a vaporized
form.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49[2k])
   12.   Permit or allow any person under 21 years of age to remain upon
licensed premises unless over 50 percent of the dollar volume of the business
establishment comes from the sale and serving of prepared foods. This provision
does not apply to holders of a Class “B” beer permit or an establishment
employee when employed in compliance with State law.
120.06   AMUSEMENT DEVICES.
The following provisions pertain to electrical or mechanical amusement devices
possessed and used in accordance with Chapter 99B of the Code of Iowa. (Said
devices are allowed only in premises with a retail liquor license or beer
permit, as specifically authorized in said Chapter 99B.)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 99B.57)
   1.   As used in this section, “registered electrical or mechanical amusement
device” means an electrical or mechanical device required to be registered with
the Iowa Department of Inspection and Appeals, as provided in Section 99B.53 of
the Code of Iowa.
   2.   It is unlawful for any person under the age of 21 to participate in the
operation of a registered electrical or mechanical amusement device.
   3.   It is unlawful for any person owning or leasing a registered electrical
or mechanical amusement device, or an employee of a person owning or leasing a
registered electrical or mechanical amusement device, to knowingly allow a
person under the age of 21 to participate in the operation of a registered
electrical or mechanical amusement device.
   4.   It is unlawful for any person to knowingly participate in the operation
of a registered electrical or mechanical amusement device with a person under
the age of 21.
CHAPTER 121
CIGARETTE AND TOBACCO PERMITS
 
121.01 Definitions             121.06 Refunds
121.02 Permit Required         121.07 Persons Under Legal Age
121.03 Application             121.08 Self-Service Sales Prohibited
121.04 Fees                    121.09 Permit Revocation
121.05 Issuance and Expiration
 
121.01   DEFINITIONS.
For use in this chapter the following terms are defined:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 453A.1)
   1.   “Alternative nicotine product” means a product, not consisting of or
containing tobacco, that provides for the ingestion into the body of nicotine,
whether by chewing, absorbing, dissolving, inhaling, snorting, or sniffing, or
by any other means. “Alternative nicotine product” does not include cigarettes,
tobacco products, or vapor products, or a product that is regulated as a drug
or device by the United States Food and Drug Administration under Chapter V of
the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act.
   2.   “Cigarette” means any roll for smoking made wholly or in part of
tobacco, or any substitute for tobacco, irrespective of size or shape and
irrespective of tobacco or any substitute for tobacco being flavored,
adulterated, or mixed with any other ingredient, where such roll has a wrapper
or cover made of paper or any other material. However, cigarette shall not be
construed to include cigars.
   3.   “Place of business” means any place where cigarettes, tobacco products,
alternative nicotine products, or vapor products are sold, stored, or kept for
the purpose of sale or consumption by a retailer.
   4.   “Retailer” means every person who sells, distributes, or offers for
sale for consumption, or possesses for the purpose of sale for consumption,
cigarettes, alternative nicotine products, or vapor products, irrespective of
the quantity or amount or the number of sales, or who engages in the business
of selling tobacco, tobacco products, alternative nicotine products, or vapor
products to ultimate consumers.
   5.   “Self-service display” means any manner of product display, placement,
or storage from which a person purchasing the product may take possession of
the product, prior to purchase, without assistance from the retailer or
employee of the retailer, in removing the product from a restricted access
location.
   6.   “Tobacco products” means the following: cigars; little cigars;
cheroots; stogies; periques; granulated, plug cut, crimp cut, ready rubbed, and
other smoking tobacco; snuff; cavendish; plug and twist tobacco; fine-cut and
other chewing tobaccos; shorts or refuse scraps, clippings, cuttings, and
sweepings of tobacco; and other kinds and forms of tobacco prepared in such
manner as to be suitable for chewing or smoking in a pipe or otherwise, or for
both chewing and smoking, but does not mean cigarettes.
   7.   “Vapor product” means any noncombustible product, which may or may not
contain nicotine, that employs a heating element, power source, electronic
circuit, or other electronic, chemical, or mechanical means, regardless of
shape or size, that can be used to produce vapor from a solution or other
substance. “Vapor product” includes an electronic cigarette, electronic cigar,
electronic cigarillo, electronic pipe, or similar product or device, and any
cartridge or other container of a solution or other substance, which may or may
not contain nicotine, that is intended to be used with or in an electronic
cigarette, electronic cigar, electronic cigarillo, electronic pipe, or similar
product or device. “Vapor product” does not include a product regulated as a
drug or device by the United States Food and Drug Administration under Chapter
V of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act.
121.02   PERMIT REQUIRED.
   1.   Retail Cigarette Permits. It is unlawful for any person, other than a
holder of a retail permit, to sell cigarettes, alternative nicotine products,
or vapor products at retail and no retailer shall distribute, sell, or solicit
the sale of any cigarettes, alternative nicotine products, or vapor products
within the City without a valid permit for each place of business. The permit
shall, at all times, be publicly displayed at the place of business so as to be
easily seen by the public and the persons authorized to inspect the place of
business.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 453A.13)
   2.   Retail Tobacco Permits. It is unlawful for any person to engage in the
business of a retailer of tobacco, tobacco products, alternative nicotine
products, or vapor products at any place of business without first having
received a permit as a retailer for each place of business owned or operated by
the retailer.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 453A.47A)
A retailer who holds a retail cigarette permit is not required to also obtain a
retail tobacco permit. However, if a retailer only holds a retail cigarette
permit and that permit is suspended, revoked, or expired, the retailer shall
not sell any tobacco, tobacco products, alternative nicotine products, or vapor
products, during such time.
121.03   APPLICATION.
A completed application on forms furnished by the State Department of Revenue
or on forms made available or approved by the Department and accompanied by the
required fee shall be filed with the Clerk. Renewal applications shall be filed
at least five days prior to the last regular meeting of the Council in June. If
a renewal application is not timely filed, and a special Council meeting is
called to act on the application, the costs of such special meeting shall be
paid by the applicant.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 453A.13 and 453A.47A)
121.04   FEES.
The fee for a retail cigarette or tobacco permit shall be as follows:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 453A.13 and 453A.47A)
 
FOR PERMITS GRANTED DURING:    FEE:
July, August, or September     $ 75.00
October, November, or December $ 56.25
January, February, or March    $ 37.50
April, May, or June            $ 18.75
 
121.05   ISSUANCE AND EXPIRATION.
Upon proper application and payment of the required fee, a permit shall be
issued. Each permit issued shall describe clearly the place of business for
which it is issued and shall be nonassignable. All permits expire on June 30 of
each year. The Clerk shall submit a duplicate of any application for a permit
to the Iowa Department of Revenue within 30 days of issuance of a permit.
121.06   REFUNDS.
A retailer may surrender an unrevoked permit and receive a refund from the
City, except during April, May, or June, in accordance with the schedule of
refunds as provided in Section 453A.13 or 453A.47A of the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, 453A.13 and 453A.47A)
121.07   PERSONS UNDER LEGAL AGE.
A person shall not sell, give, or otherwise supply any tobacco, tobacco
products, alternative nicotine products, vapor products, or cigarettes to any
person under 21 years of age. The provision of this section includes
prohibiting a person under 21 years of age from purchasing tobacco, tobacco
products, alternative nicotine products, vapor products, and cigarettes from a
vending machine. If a retailer or employee of a retailer violates the
provisions of this section, the Council shall, after written notice and
hearing, and in addition to the other penalties fixed for such violation,
assess the following:
   1.   For a first violation, the retailer shall be assessed a civil penalty
in the amount of $300.00. Failure to pay the civil penalty as ordered under
this subsection shall result in automatic suspension of the permit for a period
of 14 days.
   2.   For a second violation within a period of two years, the retailer shall
be assessed a civil penalty in the amount of $1,500.00 or the retailer’s permit
shall be suspended for a period of 30 days. The retailer may select its
preference in the penalty to be applied under this subsection.
   3.   For a third violation within a period of three years, the retailer
shall be assessed a civil penalty in the amount of $1,500.00 and the retailer’s
permit shall be suspended for a period of 30 days.
   4.   For a fourth violation within a period of three years, the retailer
shall be assessed a civil penalty in the amount of $1,500.00 and the retailer’s
permit shall be suspended for a period of 60 days.
   5.   For a fifth violation within a period of four years, the retailer’s
permit shall be revoked.
The Clerk shall give 10 days’ written notice to the retailer by mailing a copy
of the notice to the place of business as it appears on the application for a
permit. The notice shall state the reason for the contemplated action and the
time and place at which the retailer may appear and be heard.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 453A.2, 453A.22, and 453A.36[6])
121.08   SELF-SERVICE SALES PROHIBITED.
Except for the sale of cigarettes through a cigarette vending machine as
provided in Section 453A.36[6] of the Code of Iowa, a retailer shall not sell
or offer for sale tobacco, tobacco products, alternative nicotine products,
vapor products, or cigarettes through the use of a self-service display.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 453A.36A)
121.09   PERMIT REVOCATION.
Following a written notice and an opportunity for a hearing, as provided by the
Code of Iowa, the Council may also revoke a permit issued pursuant to this
chapter for a violation of Division I of Chapter 453A of the Code of Iowa or
any rule adopted thereunder. If a permit is revoked, a new permit shall not be
issued to the permit holder for any place of business, or to any other person
for the place of business at which the violation occurred, until one year has
expired from the date of revocation, unless good cause to the contrary is shown
to the Council. The Clerk shall report the revocation or suspension of a retail
permit to the Alcoholic Beverages Division of the Department of Commerce within
30 days of the revocation or suspension.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 453A.22)
CHAPTER 122
PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS, AND TRANSIENT MERCHANTS
122.01 Purpose                  122.11 Revocation of License
122.02 Definitions              122.12 Hearing
122.03 License Required         122.13 Record and Determination
122.04 Application for License  122.14 Appeal
122.05 License Fees             122.15 Effect of Revocation
122.06 Bond Required            122.16 Rebates
122.07 License Issued           122.17 License Exemptions
122.08 Display of License       122.18 Charitable and Nonprofit Organizations
122.09 License Not Transferable 122.19 Mobile Food and Beverage Vendors
122.10 Time Restriction
 
122.01   PURPOSE.
The purpose of this chapter is to protect residents of the City against fraud,
unfair competition, and intrusion into the privacy of their homes by licensing
and regulating peddlers, solicitors, and transient merchants.
122.02   DEFINITIONS.
For use in this chapter the following terms are defined:
   1.   “Fundraiser” means a person who solicits funds for any organization or
putative organization (unless the organization, for more than one year
preceding the commencement of the fundraising activity, has had an established
office within the City) and who initiates or attempts to initiate personal
contact with another person, without invitation by such other person:
      A.   At or near a residence, including any private driveway and parking
area for any such residence; or
      B.   Upon a public right-of-way, a public sidewalk, or any other public
property, in an effort or apparent effort to solicit funds for an organization
or putative organization.
   2.   “Peddler” means any person carrying goods or merchandise who sells or
offers for sale for immediate delivery such goods or merchandise from house to
house or upon the public street.
   3.   “Solicitor” means any person who solicits or attempts to solicit from
house to house or upon the public street any contribution or donation or any
order for goods, services, subscriptions, or merchandise to be delivered at a
future date.
   4.   “Transient merchant” means any person who engages in a temporary or
itinerant merchandising business and in the course of such business hires,
leases, or occupies any building or structure whatsoever, or who operates out
of a vehicle that is parked anywhere within the City limits. Temporary
association with a local merchant, dealer, trader, or auctioneer, or conduct of
such transient business in connection with, as a part of, or in the name of any
local merchant, dealer, trader, or auctioneer does not exempt any person from
being considered a transient merchant.
122.03   LICENSE REQUIRED.
Any person engaging in peddling, soliciting, or in the business of a transient
merchant in the City without first obtaining a license as herein provided is in
violation of this chapter.
122.04   APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.
An application in writing shall be filed with the Clerk for a license under
this chapter. Such application shall set forth the applicant’s name, permanent
and local address, and business address, if any. The application shall also set
forth the applicant’s employer, if any, and the employer’s address, the nature
of the applicant’s business, the last three places of such business, and the
length of time sought to be covered by the license. Applications must be
submitted not less than 10 business days prior to the proposed start date of
the activity. The City reserves the right to reject any applications that have
not been timely submitted to the City. The City shall have the discretionary
right to accept an application made less than 10 business days prior to the
desired start date.
An application fee of $10.00 shall be paid at the time of filing such
application to cover the cost of investigating the facts stated therein.
122.05   LICENSE FEES.
The following license fees shall be paid to the Clerk prior to the issuance of
any license.
   1.   For one day                      $25.00
   2.   For more than one day, less than one week         $100.00
   3.   For more than one week, up to six months         $200.00
   4.   For one year or more than six months            $350.00
   5.   For the purposes of this section, the amounts in Subsections 1, 2, and
3 reset after one year from the date of issuance of the first license (i.e. if
a vendor seeks a one day license for $25.00 and comes in four months later for
a second one day permit, they will instead be required to purchase a one week
permit). If there is not enough time in the next tier, the applicant shall pay
for the next shortest tier (i.e. if a vendor seeks a one week license in
January, and comes in September for another license, they shall pay for another
one week license since there is less than six months before the anniversary
date of the first permit).
122.06   BOND REQUIRED.
Before a license under this chapter is issued to a transient merchant, an
applicant shall provide to the Clerk evidence that the applicant has filed a
bond with the Secretary of State in accordance with Chapter 9C of the Code of
Iowa.
122.07   LICENSE ISSUED.
If the Clerk finds the application is completed in conformance with the
requirements of this chapter, the facts stated therein are found to be correct,
and the license fee paid, a license shall be issued immediately.
122.08   DISPLAY OF LICENSE.
Each solicitor or peddler shall keep such license in possession at all times
while doing business in the City and shall, upon the request of prospective
customers, exhibit the license as evidence of compliance with all requirements
of this chapter. Each transient merchant shall display publicly such merchant’s
license in the merchant’s place of business.
122.09   LICENSE NOT TRANSFERABLE.
Licenses issued under the provisions of this chapter are not transferable in
any situation and are to be applicable only to the person filing the
application.
122.10   TIME RESTRICTION.
All peddler’s and solicitor’s licenses shall provide that said licenses are in
force and effect only between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. Exceptions
may be granted by Council resolution, and if it is not practical based on
timing to bring the request to the Council, the City Clerk or City Manager are
authorized to grant the exception, and shall therefore report the exception, in
writing, to the Council at the next regularly scheduled Council meeting.
122.11   REVOCATION OF LICENSE.
Following a written notice and an opportunity for a hearing, the Council may
revoke any license issued pursuant to this chapter for the following reasons:
   1.   Fraudulent Statements. The licensee has made fraudulent statements in
the application for the license or in the conduct of the business.
   2.   Violation of Law. The licensee has violated this chapter or has
otherwise conducted the business in an unlawful manner.
   3.   Endangered Public Welfare, Health, or Safety. The licensee has
conducted the business in such manner as to endanger the public welfare,
safety, order, or morals.
The Clerk shall send the written notice to the licensee at the licensee’s local
address. The notice shall contain particulars of the complaints against the
licensee, the ordinance provisions or State statutes allegedly violated, and
the date, time, and place for hearing on the matter.
122.12   HEARING.
The Council shall conduct a hearing at which both the licensee and any
complainants shall be present to determine the truth of the facts alleged in
the complaint and notice. Should the licensee, or authorized representative,
fail to appear without good cause, the Council may proceed to a determination
of the complaint.
122.13   RECORD AND DETERMINATION.
The Council shall make and record findings of fact and conclusions of law, and
shall revoke a license only when upon review of the entire record the Council
finds clear and convincing evidence of substantial violation of this chapter or
State law.
122.14   APPEAL.
If the Clerk revokes or refuses to issue a license, the Clerk shall make a part
of the record the reasons for such revocation or refusal. The licensee, or the
applicant, shall have a right to a hearing before the Council at its next
regular meeting. The Council may reverse, modify, or affirm the decision of the
Clerk by a majority vote of the Council members present and the Clerk shall
carry out the decision of the Council.
122.15   EFFECT OF REVOCATION.
Revocation of any license shall bar the licensee from being eligible for any
license under this chapter for a period of one year from the date of the
revocation.
122.16   REBATES.
Any licensee, except in the case of a revoked license, shall be entitled to a
rebate of part of the fee paid if the license is surrendered before it expires.
The amount of the rebate shall be determined by dividing the total license fee
by the number of days for which the license was issued and then multiplying the
result by the number of full days not expired. In all cases, at least $5.00 of
the original fee shall be retained by the City to cover administrative costs.
122.17   LICENSE EXEMPTIONS.
The following are excluded from the application of this chapter. This section
does not constitute authorization to sell in the public right of way or City
parks, unless by City Council resolution or listed below.
   1.   Newspapers. Persons delivering, collecting for, or selling
subscriptions to newspapers.
   2.   Club Members. Members of local civic and service clubs, Boy Scout, Girl
Scout, 4-H Clubs, Future Farmers of America, and similar organizations.
   3.   Local Residents and Farmers. Local residents and farmers who offer for
sale their own products.
   4.   Students. Students representing the Sheldon School District and local
parochial schools conducting projects sponsored by organizations recognized by
the school.
   5.   Religious Groups. Local religious groups and churches.
   6.   Route Sales. Route delivery persons who only incidentally solicit
additional business or make special sales.
   7.   Resale or Institutional Use. Persons customarily calling on businesses
or institutions for the purposes of selling products for resale or
institutional use.
   8.   Minor Businesses. An on-site transactional business traditionally
operated exclusively by a person under the age of 18, operated on an occasional
basis for no more than 89 calendar days in a calendar year.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.3[13])
   9.   Fire Fighters, Emergency Management, Ambulance Team, and Police. Paid
and volunteer members of the Sheldon Fire Department, Sheldon Community
Ambulance Team, Sheldon Emergency Management Agency, and the Sheldon Police
Department.
   10.   Annual Celebrations. The annual Sheldon Celebration Days (under the
supervision of the Sheldon Chamber of Commerce and Economic Development
Corporation and the City), the City’s annual fireworks celebration, and other
community events as directed by resolution of the Council.
   11.   School Events. Transient merchants set up on school grounds at any of
the City’s established public or private schools with classroom in the City
(currently but not limited to NW Iowa Community College, St. Patrick’s
Elementary, Sheldon Christian School, and any school with Sheldon Community
School District does not need a permit if operating with written permission on
school grounds (excluding public rights of way) for school sponsored event and
if such written permission is on visible display and can clearly be seen by
customers. The City and Sheldon Polic Department to no provide background
screening services for organizations or applicants.
122.18   CHARITABLE AND NONPROFIT ORGANIZATIONS.
Authorized representatives of charitable or nonprofit organizations operating
under the provisions of Chapter 504 of the Code of Iowa desiring to solicit
money or to distribute literature are exempt from the operation of Sections
122.04 and 122.05. All such organizations are required to submit in writing to
the Clerk the name and purpose of the cause for which such activities are
sought, names and addresses of the officers and directors of the organization,
the period during which such activities are to be carried on, and whether any
commissions, fees, or wages are to be charged by the solicitor and the amount
thereof. If the Clerk finds that the organization is a bona fide charity or
nonprofit organization, the Clerk shall issue, free of charge, a license
containing the above information to the applicant. In the event the Clerk
denies the exemption, the authorized representatives of the organization may
appeal the decision to the Council, as provided in Section 122.14 of this
chapter.
122.19   MOBILE FOOD AND BEVERAGE VENDORS.
   1.   Mobile Food Unit Licensing. It is unlawful for any person to engage in
the sale of food or beverages to the public from a temporary or mobile facility
within the corporate limits of the City without first obtaining a mobile food
unit license from the City, in addition to any other State, federal, or County
permits, certifications and licenses.
      A.   A mobile food unit license is an annual license that expires on
April 15 each year and must be renewed prior to the first event after that
date.
      B.   Each mobile food unit shall be licensed separately. No license
transfer is allowed.
      C.   Although certain activities may be exempt from the licensing
requirements of this section, any food service to the public in the City is
expected to comply with all other local, County, and State requirements for
health inspections, licensing, safety and Fire Code requirements.
      D.   The following shall be exempt from this requirement:
         (1)   Catering businesses.
         (2)   Grilling and food preparation activities of brick and mortar
establishments on the establishments' premises for immediate consumption by
patrons or employees.
         (3)   Concession stands associated with sports, recreational, Chamber
of Commerce, and religious assembly venues that have been approved as part of a
site plan.
   2.   License Fee. At the time of the submittal of a license application, the
applicant shall pay to the Clerk the applicable license and permit fees in
addition to any application fees.
      A.   The Council shall establish the amount of the license fee by
resolution.
      B.   Any licensee who surrenders his or her license prior to the date of
expiration shall not be entitled to a refund of any portion of the fee.
   3.   Mobile Food Unit Vendor Licensing Application.
      A.   License Required. All mobile food vendors operating within the City
must obtain a mobile food vendor license from the City. An exception to this
requirement is a community event sponsored by the Chamber of Commerce or
approved by the Council.
      B.   Application Requests. Application requests shall be filed with the
Clerk on the form provided by the City. No application request shall be
accepted for filing and processing unless it conforms to the requirements of
this chapter. This would include a complete and true application and all of the
required materials and information prescribed, accompanied by the appropriate
fees.
      C.   Submission Time Frame. Applications must be submitted not less than
10 business days prior to the proposed start date of the mobile food unit
activities. The City reserves the right to reject any applications that have
not been timely submitted to the City. The Clerk shall have the discretionary
right to accept an application made less than 10 business days prior to the
desired start date.
      D.   Additional Approvals. Receiving approval of a mobile food unit
license from the City shall not preclude, supersede, circumvent, or waive the
applicant’s responsibility to obtain any additional permits, licenses, and
approvals for other applicable local, State, and federal regulations.
      E.   Application Contents. Application shall be made on a form provided
by the City and shall include:
         (1)   Full name of the applicant.
         (2)   Applicant’s contact information including mailing address, phone
numbers and e-mail address.
         (3)   State health inspection certificate with the classification
level of the state license identified.
         (4)   Description of the kitchen facilities, cooking facilities,
preparation area, safety features (suppression system, etc.) of the mobile food
unit.
         (5)   Photographs of the mobile food unit.
         (6)   Make, model, and year of vehicle to be used.
         (7)   County, State, and license plate number.
         (8)   Overall size of the vehicle; length and width.
         (9)   Application and license fees.
      F.   Applications Deemed Withdrawn. Any application received shall be
deemed withdrawn if it has been held in abeyance, awaiting the submittal of
additional requested information from the applicant, and if the applicant has
not communicated in writing with the City and made reasonable progress within
30 days from the last written notification from the City to the applicant. The
application fee is nonrefundable. Any application deemed withdrawn shall
require submission of a new application and fees to begin a new review and
approval process.
      G.   Issuance of License. Upon completion of the review process and a
determination of compliance with the applicable regulations, the Clerk will
issue a mobile food unit license. The license shall be placed in the upper left
(passenger side) of the front windshield or the left front side of a trailer or
cart to aid in the visual verification of the licensing for that year.
      H.   Modification of License After Issuance. Should the mobile food
vendor change the food or beverage being offered during the term of an issued
license that would change the designation of the mobile food unit to a higher
State licensing level classification, a new application and fire inspection
shall be required.
   5.   Mobile Food Units on Public Property. No mobile food unit may be
operated on public property except as part of an event approved under a special
event permit by the Clerk’s office or as authorized by the Parks and Recreation
Commission, within a City park.
   6.   Unattended Mobile Food Unit. No mobile food unit shall be left
unattended on any site overnight, unless that property is under the ownership
of the operator of the unit and in compliance with all other Code requirements.
No mobile food unit shall be allowed to be stored on a site that is not zoned
appropriately for storage and warehousing, screened in accordance with Code
requirements, and/or having received prior Council approval through an
entitlement process. Any mobile food unit found unattended shall be considered
in violation of these regulations and subject to license revocation, municipal
infraction, towing, or any other action legally allowed.
   7.   Music and Sound-Making Devices. The use of music or sound-making
devices as a part of a mobile food unit are prohibited, unless expressly
allowed as part of an approved event.
   8.   Mobile Food Unit Performance Standards. Persons conducting business
from a mobile food unit must do so in compliance with the following standards:
      A.   The mobile food vendor must obtain expressed written consent of the
property owner to use the business property on which they propose to operate.
The written consent must be kept in the unit at all times that the unit is on
the property.
      B.   The operator of the mobile food unit shall display their City
license in full view of the public in the unit.
      C.   Mobile food units shall only be allowed on nonresidential
properties.
      D.   Mobile food units within 300 feet of a residential use or
residentially zoned property, shall be limited to hours of operation between 7:
00 a.m. and 10:30 p.m.
      E.   Mobile food units shall be limited to a maximum duration of eight
hours per day on any site, unless part of an approved event permit. A mobile
food unit shall be at one location a maximum of five consecutive days per week.
      F.   Only one mobile food unit shall be allowed on a property, unless
part of an approved event or the property has received a multiple vendor
permit. Mobile food units not under a multiple vendor permit and on adjacent
properties must maintain a minimum separation between units of 50 feet.
      G.   Mobile food units shall serve patrons which are on foot only; no
drive-up service to the mobile food unit itself shall be provided or allowed.
      H.   The mobile food unit must be located on a paved surface, unless
approved as part of an event permit.
      I.   No mobile food unit may be located on a vacant property or lot with
a vacant building.
      J.   No mobile food unit may operate within 200 feet of a permanent
restaurant or business offering food or beverage services.
      K.   No alcoholic beverages may be sold as a part of a mobile food unit.
      L.   Any mobile food unit shall maintain a minimum 15-foot separation
from a building as measured to the closest building element including awnings
or canopies, tents, or membrane structures. Location of the mobile food unit
shall not impede pedestrians entering or exiting of a building.
      M.   Mobile food vendors shall be placed no closer than 15 feet from a
front property line.
      N.   Signs are limited to those that are attached to the exterior of the
mobile unit and must be mounted flat against the unit and not project more than
six inches from the exterior of the unit. No freestanding signs, banners,
flags, etc., are allowed. Off premises signs directing patrons to the mobile
food unit are prohibited.
      O.   During business hours, the mobile food vendor shall provide a trash
receptacle for use by customers.
      P.   The mobile food vendor shall keep the area around the mobile food
unit clear of litter and debris at all times.
      Q.   All mobile food units shall be located in such a manner as to not
create a safety hazard, such as blocking emergency access to buildings and the
site, obstructing access to fire hydrants and Fire Department connections,
impeding entering and exiting from a building, creating a visual impediment for
the motoring public at drive entrances, intersections, pedestrian crossings,
etc.
      R.   No mobile food unit shall be parked in or otherwise impact access
to/from ADA parking stalls.
   9.   Property Owner Responsibility. By allowing the mobile food unit on
their property, property owners share in the responsibility of ensuring that
the performance standards listed above and the safety of pedestrians and access
of emergency vehicles to and around the site are maintained. Failure to do so
could result in the property owners being party to any enforcement actions or
penalties allowed by law, including, but not limited to, the alteration or
revocation of a multiple vendor permit.
   10.   Other Licenses and Permits to Be Maintained. Failure of any applicant
to maintain the appropriate County, State, and federal licenses and permits,
during the term of the local license or permits shall be considered an unlawful
act and subject to revocation or any other penalties available to the City.
   11.   Suspension or Revocation of License. Any license issued under the
provisions of this chapter may be suspended or revoked by the City as follows:
      A.   Grounds. The Clerk may suspend any license issued under this
chapter, pending the outcome of an administrative hearing, for any of the
following reasons:
         (1)   The licensee has made fraudulent statements in their application
for the license or in the conduct of their business.
         (2)   The licensee has violated this chapter or any other chapter of
this code or has otherwise conducted their business in an unlawful manner.
         (3)   The licensee has conducted his/her business in such manner as to
endanger the public welfare, safety, order, or morals.
         (4)   The Clerk has received and investigated three or more found
complaints during the licensed period related to the manner in which the
licensee is conducting business.
      B.   Notice. The Clerk shall have the licensee served with notice either
in person or by regular mail to the licensee’s address shown on the license
application notifying them of the license suspension, the specific reasons for
such action, and date and time of hearing with the Clerk to review the
particulars of the suspension. The licensee shall be prohibited from any
further activities covered by the license until such time that the hearing has
been held and a determination of suspension and revocation resolved.
      C.   Hearing. A hearing shall be conducted by the Council not more than
five business days after the suspension of a license. The licensee and any
complainants may be present to determine the truth of the alleged violation of
this chapter. Should the licensee or their authorized representative fail to
appear without good cause, the Council may proceed with the hearing and make
their findings.
      D.   Revocation. After the Council has reviewed the facts, they shall
revoke a license if they find by the preponderance of the evidence that a
violation has occurred. The revocation shall be effective immediately.
      E.   Appeal. If the Clerk revokes or refuses to issue a license, the
licensee or the applicant shall have a right to a hearing before the Council as
provided in Section 122.14 of this chapter. The Council may reverse, modify, or
affirm the decision of the Clerk.
      F.   Effect of Revocation. Revocation or denial of any license shall bar
the licensee or applicant from being eligible for any license under this
chapter for a period of one year from the date of the revocation or denial.
There shall be no refund of any fees for any revocation.
   12.   Penalty. Unless another penalty is expressly provided by this chapter
for any particular provision or section, violations of this chapter are simple
misdemeanors subject to a fine of not more than $855.00 and may also be
punishable as municipal infractions subject to a civil penalty as set forth in
this Code of Ordinances. Each day a municipal infraction occurs and/or is
permitted to exist constitutes a separate offense. Police officers, code
enforcement officers and the Police Chief’s designees shall have the authority
to issue citations for violations of this chapter and shall have the discretion
to enforce this chapter as either a simple misdemeanor or municipal infraction.
CHAPTER 123
HOUSE MOVERS
 
123.01 House Mover Defined 123.07 Permit Issued
123.02 Permit Required     123.08 Public Safety
123.03 Application         123.09 Time Limit
123.04 Bond Required       123.10 Removal by City
123.05 Insurance Required  123.11 Protect Pavement
123.06 Permit Fee          123.12 Overhead Wires
 
123.01   HOUSE MOVER DEFINED.
A “house mover” means any person who undertakes to move a building or similar
structure upon, over or across public streets or property when the building or
structure is of such size that it requires the use of skids, jacks, dollies, or
any other specialized moving equipment.
123.02   PERMIT REQUIRED.
It is unlawful for any person to engage in the activity of house mover as
herein defined without a valid permit from the City for each house, building,
or similar structure to be moved. Buildings of less than 120 square feet are
exempt from the provisions of this chapter. Any structure that is moved shall
comply with the City’s zoning regulations.
123.03   APPLICATION.
Application for a house mover’s permit shall be made in writing to the Clerk.
The application shall include:
   1.   Name and Address. The applicant’s full name and address and, if a
corporation, the names and addresses of its principal officers.
   2.   Building Location. An accurate description of the present location and
future site of the building or similar structure to be moved.
   3.   Routing Plan. A routing plan approved by the Public Works Director,
street superintendent, and public utility officials. The route approved shall
be the shortest route compatible with the greatest public convenience and
safety.
123.04   BOND REQUIRED.
The applicant shall post with the Clerk a penal bond in the minimum sum of
$5,000.00 issued by a surety company authorized to issue such bonds in the
State. The bond shall guarantee the permittee’s payment for any damage done to
the City or to public property, and payment of all costs incurred by the City
in the course of moving the building or structure.
123.05   INSURANCE REQUIRED.
Each applicant shall also file a certificate of insurance indicating that the
applicant is carrying public liability insurance in effect for the duration of
the permit covering the applicant and all agents and employees for the
following minimum amounts:
   1.   Bodily Injury – $50,000.00 per person; $100,000.00 per accident.
   2.   Property Damage – $50,000.00 per accident.
123.06   PERMIT FEE.
A permit fee, as set by resolution of the Council, shall be payable at the time
of filing the application with the Clerk. A separate permit shall be required
for each house, building or similar structure to be moved.
123.07   PERMIT ISSUED.
Upon approval of the application, filing of bond and insurance certificate, and
payment of the required fee, the Zoning Official or Public Works Director may
issue a permit. Trailer parks in the mobile home zoning district of the City
are exempt from the moving permit requirement if the trailer being moved is
less than 30 years old at the time of the move. A zoning permit will still be
required.
123.08   PUBLIC SAFETY.
At all times when a building or similar structure is in motion upon any street,
alley, sidewalk, or public property, the permittee shall maintain flag persons
at the closest intersections or other possible channels of traffic to the
sides, behind, and ahead of the building or structure. At all times when the
building or structure is at rest upon any street, alley, sidewalk, or public
property the permittee shall maintain adequate warning signs or lights at the
intersections or channels of traffic to the sides, behind, and ahead of the
building or structure.
123.09   TIME LIMIT.
No house mover shall permit or allow a building or similar structure to remain
upon any street or other public way for a period of more than 12 hours without
having first secured the written approval of the City.
123.10   REMOVAL BY CITY.
In the event any building or similar structure is found to be in violation of
Section 123.09, the City is authorized to remove such building or structure and
assess the costs thereof against the permit holder and the surety on the permit
holder’s bond.
123.11   PROTECT PAVEMENT.
It is unlawful to move any house or building of any kind over any pavement,
unless the wheels or rollers upon which the house or building is moved are at
least one inch in width for each 1,000 pounds of weight of such building. If
there is any question as to the weight of a house or building, the estimate of
the City as to such weight shall be final.
123.12   OVERHEAD WIRES.
The holder of any permit to move a building shall see that all telephone, cable
television, and electric wires and poles are removed when necessary and
replaced in good order, and shall be liable for the costs of the same.
CHAPTER 135
STREET USE AND MAINTENANCE
 
135.01 Removal of Warning Devices 135.08 Burning Prohibited
135.02 Obstructing or Defacing    135.09 Excavations
135.03 Placing Debris On          135.10 Property Owner’s Responsibility for
                                  Maintenance
135.04 Playing In                 135.11 Failure to Maintain
135.05 Traveling On Barricaded    135.12 Dumping of Snow
Street or Alley
135.06 Use for Business Purposes  135.13 Driveways and Parking Areas
135.07 Washing Vehicles
 
135.01   REMOVAL OF WARNING DEVICES.
It is unlawful for a person to willfully remove, throw down, destroy, or carry
away from any street or alley any lamp, obstruction, guard, or other article or
things, or extinguish any lamp or other light, erected, or placed thereupon for
the purpose of guarding or enclosing unsafe or dangerous places in said street
or alley without the consent of the person in control thereof.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.1)
135.02   OBSTRUCTING OR DEFACING.
It is unlawful for any person to obstruct, deface or injure any street or alley
in any manner.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.1)
135.03   PLACING DEBRIS ON.
It is unlawful for any person to throw or deposit on any street or alley any
glass, glass bottle, nails, tacks, wire, cans, trash, garbage, rubbish, litter,
offal, leaves, grass, or any other debris likely to be washed into the storm
sewer and clog the storm sewer, or any substance likely to injure any person,
animal, or vehicle.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.369)
135.04   PLAYING IN.
It is unlawful for any person to coast, sled, or play games on streets or
alleys, except in the areas blocked off by the City for such purposes.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[2])
135.05   TRAVELING ON BARRICADED STREET OR ALLEY.
It is unlawful for any person to travel or operate any vehicle on any street or
alley temporarily closed by barricades, lights, signs, or flares placed thereon
by the authority or permission of any City official, police officer, or member
of the Fire Department. Additionally, parking at the edge of the alley is
prohibited.
135.06   USE FOR BUSINESS PURPOSES.
It is unlawful to park, store or place, temporarily or permanently, any
machinery or junk or any other goods, wares, and merchandise of any kind upon
any street or alley for the purpose of storage, exhibition, sale, or offering
same for sale, without permission of the Council.
135.07   WASHING VEHICLES.
It is unlawful for any person to use any public sidewalk, street, or alley for
the purpose of washing or cleaning any automobile, truck equipment, or any
vehicle of any kind when such work is done for hire or as a business. This does
not prevent any person from washing or cleaning his or her own vehicle or
equipment when it is lawfully parked in the street or alley.
135.08   BURNING PROHIBITED.
No person shall burn any trash, leaves, rubbish, or other combustible material
in any curb and gutter or on any paved or surfaced street or alley.
135.09   EXCAVATIONS.
No person shall dig, excavate, or in any manner disturb any street, parking, or
alley except in accordance with the following:
   1.   Permit Required. No excavation shall be commenced without first
obtaining a permit. A written application for such permit shall be filed with
the City and shall contain the following:
      A.   An exact description of the property, by lot and street number, in
front of or along which it is desired to excavate;
      B.   A statement of the purpose, for whom and by whom the excavation is
to be made;
      C.   The person responsible for the refilling of said excavation and
restoration of the street or alley surface; and
      D.   Date of commencement of the work and estimated completion date.
   2.   Public Convenience. Streets and alleys shall be opened in the manner
that will cause the least inconvenience to the public and admit the
uninterrupted passage of water along the gutter on the street.
   3.   Barricades, Fencing, and Lighting. Adequate barricades, fencing, and
warning lights meeting standards specified by the City shall be so placed as to
protect the public from hazard. Any costs incurred by the City in providing or
maintaining adequate barricades, fencing, or warning lights shall be paid to
the City by the permit holder/property owner.
   4.   Bond Required. The applicant shall post with the City a penal bond in
the minimum sum of $1,000.00 issued by a surety company authorized to issue
such bonds in the State. The bond shall guarantee the permittee’s payment for
any damage done to the City or to public property, and payment of all costs
incurred by the City in the course of administration of this section. In lieu
of a surety bond, a cash deposit of $1,000.00 may be filed with the City.
   5.   Insurance Required. Each applicant shall also file a certificate of
insurance indicating that the applicant is carrying public liability insurance
in effect for the duration of the permit covering the applicant and all agents
and employees for the following minimum amounts:
      A.   Bodily Injury - $50,000.00 per person; $100,000.00 per accident.
      B.   Property Damage - $50,000.00 per accident.
   6.   Restoration of Public Property. Streets, sidewalks, alleys, and other
public property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored to the
condition of the property prior to the commencement of the work, or in a manner
satisfactory to the City, at the expense of the permit holder/property owner.
   7.   Inspection. All work shall be subject to inspection by the City.
Backfill shall not be deemed completed, and no resurfacing of any improved
street or alley surface shall begin, until such backfill is inspected and
approved by the City. The permit holder/property owner shall provide the City
with notice at least 24 hours prior to the time when inspection of backfill is
desired.
   8.   Completion by the City. Should any excavation in any street or alley be
discontinued or left open and unfinished for a period of 24 hours after the
approved completion date, or in the event the work is improperly done, the City
has the right to finish or correct the excavation work and charge any expenses
for such work to the permit holder/property owner.
   9.   Responsibility for Costs. All costs and expenses incident to the
excavation shall be borne by the permit holder and/or property owner. The
permit holder and owner shall indemnify the City from any loss or damage that
may directly or indirectly be occasioned by such excavation.
   10.   Notification. At least 48 hours prior to the commencement of the
excavation, excluding Saturdays, Sundays, and legal holidays, the person
performing the excavation shall contact the Statewide Notification Center and
provide the center with the information required under Section 480.4 of the
Code of Iowa.
   11.   Permit Fee. A permit fee of $25.00 shall be payable at the time of
filing the application with the City. A separate permit shall be required for
each excavation.
   12.   Permit Issued. Upon approval of the application, filing of bond and
insurance certificate, and payment of any required fees, a permit shall be
issued.
   13.   Permit Exemption. Utility companies are exempt from the permit
application requirement of this section. They shall, however, comply with all
other pertinent provisions and shall post with the City a yearly bond in the
amount of $15,000 to guarantee such compliance. In addition, persons under
contract with the City to perform excavation work are exempt from the permit
application requirement of this section. Contracts with such persons shall
require substantial compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
   14.   Failure To Comply. Any person who fails to comply with the terms and
conditions of the permit authorized in this section, or who violates the terms
of this chapter, shall not thereafter be granted another permit without the
prior approval of the Council.
135.10   PROPERTY OWNER’S RESPONSIBILITY FOR MAINTENANCE.
The abutting property owner shall maintain all property outside the lot and
property lines and inside the curb lines upon public streets and shall keep
such area in a safe condition, free from nuisances, obstructions, and hazards.
In the absence of a curb, such property shall extend from the property line to
that portion of the public street used or improved for vehicular purposes. The
abutting property owner shall not be required to remove diseased trees or dead
wood on the publicly owned property or right-of-way. Maintenance includes, but
is not limited to, timely mowing, trimming trees and shrubs, and picking up
litter and debris. The abutting property owner may be liable for damages caused
by failure to maintain the publicly owned property or right-of-way.† 8
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[2c])
 
Notes
8 † EDITOR’S NOTE: See also Section 136.04 relating to property owner’s
  responsibility for maintenance of sidewalks.
135.11   FAILURE TO MAINTAIN.
If the abutting property owner does not perform an action required under the
above section within a reasonable time, the City may perform the required
action and assess the cost against the abutting property for collection in the
same manner as a property tax.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[2e])
135.12   DUMPING OF SNOW.
It is unlawful for any person to throw, push, or place or cause to be thrown,
pushed or placed, any ice or snow from private property, sidewalks, or
driveways onto the traveled way of a street or alley so as to obstruct gutters,
or impede the passage of vehicles upon the street or alley or to create a
hazardous condition therein; except where, in the cleaning of large commercial
drives in the Business District it is absolutely necessary to move the snow
onto the street or alley temporarily, such accumulation shall be removed
promptly by the property owner or agent. Arrangements for the prompt removal of
such accumulations shall be made prior to moving the snow.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[2])
135.13   DRIVEWAYS AND PARKING AREAS.
The property owner shall, at the owner’s expense, install any culvert deemed
necessary under any driveway or any other access to the owner’s property.
Further, before installing a culvert, access point to a City street, roadway or
alley, or expansion of an access point or driveway, or creation or expansion of
a parking area into the right-of-way, permission must first be obtained from
the City. Further, Iowa Statewide Urban Design Specifications (SUDAS) shall be
followed unless an exception is granted by the City. In the event repairs are
needed at any time with respect to culverts, it shall be the responsibility of
the property owner to make such repairs, and, in the event the owner fails to
do so, the City shall have the right to make the repairs. If the property owner
fails to reimburse the City for the cost of said repairs, the cost shall be
certified to the County Treasurer and specially assessed against the property
as by law provided.
CHAPTER 136
SIDEWALK REGULATIONS
136.01 Purpose                               136.11 Interference with Sidewalk
                                             Improvements
136.02 Definitions                           136.12 Awnings
136.03 Removal of Snow, Ice, and             136.13 Encroachment
Accumulations
136.04 Property Owner’s Responsibility for 136.14 Openings and Enclosures
Maintenance
136.05 City May Order Repairs                136.15 Fires or Fuel on Sidewalks
136.06 Sidewalk Construction Ordered         136.16 Defacing
136.07 Approval Required                     136.17 Debris on Sidewalks
136.08 Sidewalk Standards                    136.18 Merchandise Display
136.09 Barricades and Warning Lights         136.19 Sales Stands
136.10 Failure to Repair or Barricade        136.20 Variances and Deferment
 
136.01   PURPOSE.
The purpose of this chapter is to enhance safe passage by citizens on
sidewalks, to place the responsibility for the maintenance, repair,
replacement, or reconstruction of sidewalks upon the abutting property owner
and to minimize the liability of the City.
136.02   DEFINITIONS.
For use in this chapter the following terms are defined:
   1.   “Broom finish” means a sidewalk finish that is made by sweeping the
sidewalk when it is hardening.
   2.   “Defective sidewalk” means any public sidewalk exhibiting one or more
of the following characteristics:
      A.   Vertical separations equal to three-fourths inch or more.
      B.   Horizontal separations equal to one inch or more.
      C.   Holes or depressions equal to three-fourths inch or more and at
least four inches in diameter.
      D.   Spalling over 50 percent of a single square of the sidewalk with one
or more depressions equal to one-half inch or more.
      E.   Spalling over less than 50 percent of a single square of the
sidewalk with one or more depressions equal to three-fourths inch or more.
      F.   A single square of sidewalk cracked in such a manner that no part
thereof has a piece greater than one square foot.
      G.   A sidewalk with any part thereof missing to the full depth.
      H.   A change from the design or construction grade equal to or greater
than three-fourths inch per foot.
   3.   “Established grade” means that grade established by the City for the
particular area in which a sidewalk is to be constructed.
   4.   “One-course construction” means that the full thickness of the concrete
is placed at one time, using the same mixture throughout.
   5.   “Owner” means the person owning the fee title to property abutting any
sidewalk and includes any contract purchaser for purposes of notification
required herein. For all other purposes, “owner” includes the lessee, if any.
   6.   “Portland cement” means any type of cement except bituminous cement.
   7.   “Sidewalk” means all permanent public walks in business, residential or
suburban areas.
   8.   “Sidewalk improvements” means the construction, reconstruction, repair,
replacement, or removal of a public sidewalk and/or the excavating, filling, or
depositing of material in the public right-of-way in connection therewith.
   9.   “Wood float finish” means a sidewalk finish that is made by smoothing
the surface of the sidewalk with a wooden trowel.
136.03   REMOVAL OF SNOW, ICE, AND ACCUMULATIONS.
The abutting property owner shall remove snow, ice, and accumulations promptly
from sidewalks. If a property owner does not remove snow, ice, or accumulations
within 48 hours after the snowfall or ice formation, the City may do so and
assess the costs against the property owner for collection in the same manner
as a property tax. The abutting property owner may be liable for damages caused
by failure to remove snow, ice, and accumulations promptly from the sidewalk.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[2b and e])
136.04   PROPERTY OWNER’S RESPONSIBILITY FOR MAINTENANCE.
The abutting property owner shall repair, replace, or reconstruct, or cause to
be repaired, replaced, or reconstructed, all broken or defective sidewalks and
maintain in a safe and hazard-free condition any sidewalk outside the lot and
property lines and inside the curb lines or, in the absence of a curb, any
sidewalk between the property line and that portion of the public street used
or improved for vehicular purposes.   
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12(2)(c))
(Section 136.04 – Ord._O24-3288.5– Sep. 24 Supp.)
136.05   CITY MAY ORDER REPAIRS.
If the abutting property owner does not maintain sidewalks as required, the
Council may serve notice on such owner, by certified mail, requiring the owner
to repair, replace, or reconstruct sidewalks within a reasonable time and if
such action is not completed within the time stated in the notice, the Council
may require the work to be done and assess the costs against the abutting
property for collection in the same manner as a property tax.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[2d and e])
136.06   SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION ORDERED.
The Council may order the construction of permanent sidewalks upon any street
or court in the City and may specially assess the cost of such improvement to
abutting property owners in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 384 of
the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.38)
136.07   APPROVAL REQUIRED.
No person shall remove, reconstruct, or install a sidewalk unless such person
has obtained a written approval from the City Public Works Director and has
agreed in writing that said removal, reconstruction, or installation will
comply with all ordinances and requirements of the City for such work.
136.08   SIDEWALK STANDARDS.
Sidewalks repaired, replaced, or constructed under the provisions of this
chapter shall be of the following construction and meet the following
standards:
   1.   Cement. Portland cement shall be the only cement used in the
construction and repair of sidewalks.
   2.   Construction. Sidewalks shall be of one-course construction.
   3.   Sidewalk Base. Concrete may be placed directly on compact and well-
drained soil. Where soil is not well drained, a three-inch sub-base of compact,
clean, coarse gravel or sand shall be laid. The adequacy of the soil drainage
is to be determined by the City.
   4.   Sidewalk Bed. The sidewalk bed shall be so graded that the constructed
sidewalk will be at established grade.
   5.   Length, Width and Depth. Length, width, and depth requirements are as
follows:
      A.   Residential sidewalks shall be at least five feet wide and five
inches thick, and each section shall be no more than five feet in length.
      B.   Business District sidewalks shall be at least 10 feet wide. Each
section shall be four inches thick and no more than five feet in length.
      C.   Driveway areas shall be not less than six inches in thickness.
   6.   Location. Residential sidewalks shall be located with the inner edge
(edge nearest the abutting private property) one foot outside the property
line, unless the Council establishes a different distance due to special
circumstances.
   7.   Grade. Curb tops shall be on level with the centerline of the street,
which is the established grade.
   8.   Elevations. All sidewalks except those on Business District streets
shall be elevated at least four inches from the height of the adjoining curb
and shall be elevated four inches above the adjoining ground. Business District
sidewalks shall be at curb level.
   9.   Slope. All sidewalks shall slope one-fourth inch per foot toward the
curb.
   10.   Finish. All sidewalks shall be finished with a broom finish or wood
float finish.
   11.   Curb Ramps and Sloped Areas for Persons with Disabilities. If a
street, road, or highway is newly built or reconstructed, a curb ramp or sloped
area shall be constructed or installed at each intersection of the street,
road, or highway with a sidewalk or path. If a sidewalk or path is newly built
or reconstructed, a curb ramp or sloped area shall be constructed or installed
at each intersection of the sidewalk or path with a street, highway, or road.
Curb ramps and sloped areas that are required pursuant to this subsection shall
be constructed or installed in compliance with applicable federal requirements
adopted in accordance with the Federal Americans with Disabilities Act,
including (but not limited to) the guidelines issued by the Federal
Architectural and Transportation Barriers Compliance Board.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 216C.9)
136.09   BARRICADES AND WARNING LIGHTS.
Whenever any material of any kind is deposited on any street, avenue, highway,
passageway or alley when sidewalk improvements are being made or when any
sidewalk is in a dangerous condition, it shall be the duty of all persons
having an interest therein, either as the contractor or the owner, agent, or
lessee of the property in front of or along which such material may be
deposited, or such dangerous condition exists, to put in conspicuous places at
each end of such sidewalk and at each end of any pile of material deposited in
the street, a sufficient number of approved warning lights or flares, and to
keep them lighted during the entire night and to erect sufficient barricades
both at night and in the daytime to secure the same. The party or parties using
the street for any of the purposes specified in this chapter shall be liable
for all injuries or damage to persons or property arising from any wrongful act
or negligence of the party or parties, or their agents or employees or for any
misuse of the privileges conferred by this chapter or of any failure to comply
with provisions hereof.
136.10   FAILURE TO REPAIR OR BARRICADE.
It is the duty of the owner of the property abutting the sidewalk, or the
owner’s contractor or agent, to notify the City immediately in the event of
failure or inability to make necessary sidewalk improvements or to install or
erect necessary barricades as required by this chapter.
136.11   INTERFERENCE WITH SIDEWALK IMPROVEMENTS.
No person shall knowingly or willfully drive any vehicle upon any portion of
any sidewalk or approach thereto while in the process of being improved or upon
any portion of any completed sidewalk or approach thereto, or shall remove or
destroy any part or all of any sidewalk or approach thereto, or shall remove,
destroy, mar, or deface any sidewalk at any time or destroy, mar, remove, or
deface any notice provided by this chapter.
136.12   AWNINGS.
It is unlawful for a person to erect or maintain any awning over any sidewalk
unless all parts of the awning are elevated at least eight feet above the
surface of the sidewalk and the roof or covering is made of duck, canvas or
other suitable material supported by iron frames or brackets securely fastened
to the building, without any posts or other device that will obstruct the
sidewalk or hinder or interfere with the free passage of pedestrians.
136.13   ENCROACHMENT.
It is unlawful for a person to erect or maintain any encroachment to any
building upon any part of any sidewalk without permission by resolution of the
Council and if such encroachment involves a setback issue or zoning code
matter, the zoning code shall also be followed, including a variance if needed
from the Board of Adjustment. The Board of Adjustment does not have the
authority to grant an encroachment, and the City Council cannot grant a
variance to the Sheldon Zoning and Subdivision ordinances unless said
ordinances are amended prior, per the established process.
136.14   OPENINGS AND ENCLOSURES.
It is unlawful for a person to:
   1.   Stairs and Railings. Construct or build a stairway or passageway to any
cellar or basement by occupying any part of the sidewalk, or to enclose any
portion of a sidewalk with a railing without permission by resolution of the
Council.
   2.   Openings. Keep open any cellar door, grating, or cover to any vault on
any sidewalk except while in actual use with adequate guards to protect the
public.
   3.   Protect Openings. Neglect to properly protect or barricade all openings
on or within six feet of any sidewalk.
136.15   FIRES OR FUEL ON SIDEWALKS.
It is unlawful for a person to make a fire of any kind on any sidewalk or to
place or allow any fuel to remain upon any sidewalk.
136.16   DEFACING.
It is unlawful for a person to scatter or place any paste, paint, or writing on
any sidewalk.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.1)
136.17   DEBRIS ON SIDEWALKS.
It is unlawful for a person to throw or deposit on any sidewalk any glass,
nails, glass bottle, tacks, wire, cans, trash, garbage, rubbish, litter, offal,
or any other debris, or any substance likely to injure any person, animal, or
vehicle.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[2])
136.18   MERCHANDISE DISPLAY.
It is unlawful for a person to place upon or above any sidewalk, any goods or
merchandise for sale or for display in such a manner as to interfere with the
free and uninterrupted passage of pedestrians on the sidewalk; in no case shall
more than three feet of the sidewalk next to the building be occupied for such
purposes.
136.19   SALES STANDS.
It is unlawful for a person to erect or keep any vending machine or stand for
the sale of fruit, vegetables or other substances or commodities on any
sidewalk without first obtaining a written permit from the Council.
136.20   VARIANCES AND DEFERMENT.
Sidewalk deferrals may be granted if it is deemed the existence of the sidewalk
would not substantially contribute to the public welfare, safety, convenience,
and enjoyment of the public and the land use and development patterns are such
that the sidewalk, if built, would not create a benefit.
   1.   Written Request. Any property owner or agent thereof may make a written
request to the Zoning Board of Adjustment for a variance or deferment of
sidewalk construction. A fee for an application for a variance or deferment is
set by resolution, payable when application is made. Such application must be
made within 60 days from notice to property owners.
   2.   All requests for variances and deferment shall be submitted to the
Zoning Board of Adjustment for final determination.
   3.   The Zoning Board of Adjustment will use and follow the standards,
listed below, to assist in making their determination on whether or not to
grant a variance or deferral:
      A.   Sidewalk deferrals may be granted if it is deemed the existence of
the sidewalk would not substantially contribute to the welfare, safety,
convenience, and enjoyment of the public and the land use and development
patterns are such that the sidewalk, if built, would not create a benefit.
      B.   Rationale for considering deferrals:
         (1)   Vacant lot owners shall install sidewalks if no new home
construction has taken place within the last two years in that development.
(This would exclude those with more than two consecutive vacant lots or part of
new construction/building permits.) Exempted is ground owned by the City of
Sheldon or the Sheldon Chamber and Development Corporation (SCDC).
         (2)   Abut property zoned or not zoned, and used, for agricultural,
commercial storage or industrial purposes on both sides of the street or
already has sidewalks installed.
         (3)   Does not contribute to a continuing pattern of sidewalk
construction.
         (4)   Does not contribute to the public’s convenient access to
property currently developed.
         (5)   Encourage pedestrian traffic where it is unsafe.
         (6)   If it is not deemed feasible by a certified civil engineer to
construct a sidewalk due to the conditions, grade, etc. of the property.
         (7)   Cul-de-sac properties.
         (8)   Properties adjacent to frontage roads.
      C.   Deferments.
         (1)   Deferments existing at the time of the adoption of these rules
shall expire.
         (2)   Deferments shall be considered on an individual basis and shall
be granted, continued, or terminated for specific reasons on their own merits,
consistent with land use and development patterns of other properties in the
area.
         (3)   The time limit and conditions under which deferments will be
terminated shall be stated at the time the deferment is granted or renewed.
         (4)   Deferments shall be terminated when the facts, circumstances and
conditions on which they were based no longer exist.
         (5)   Deferments that have been granted on an “indefinite” basis shall
be reviewed no sooner than two years after originally granted and then no more
frequently than every two years, unless the facts, circumstances and conditions
change.
   4.   In requests for variances or deferment or other matters brought before
the Zoning Board of Adjustment, the Board of Adjustment shall inform, in
writing, all parties involved of its decisions and the reasons therefor.
   5.   Variances and deferment regarding reconstruction or construction of
sidewalks shall be granted only by resolution of the Council. Variances may be
granted upon request in specific cases in which such variance will not be
contrary to the public interest and the spirit of this chapter shall be still
observed, public safety and welfare secured, and substantial justice done.
Deferment of up to five years for construction or reconstruction completion
dates may be granted where, owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement
of the provisions of this chapter will in individual cases result in
practicable difficulty or unnecessary hardship.
CHAPTER 137
VACATION AND DISPOSAL OF STREETS
 
137.01 Power to Vacate                137.04 Findings Required
137.02 Planning and Zoning Commission 137.05 Disposal of Vacated Streets or
                                      Alleys
137.03 Notice of Vacation Hearing     137.06 Disposal by Gift Limited
 
137.01   POWER TO VACATE.
When, in the judgment of the Council, it would be in the best interest of the
City to vacate a street, alley, portion thereof, or any public grounds, the
Council may do so by ordinance in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[2a])
137.02   PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION.
Any proposal to vacate a street, alley, portion thereof, or any public grounds
shall be referred by the Council to the Planning and Zoning Commission for its
study and recommendation prior to further consideration by the Council. The
Commission shall submit a written report including recommendations to the
Council within 30 days after the date the proposed vacation is referred to the
Commission.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)
137.03   NOTICE OF VACATION HEARING.
The Council shall cause to be published a notice of public hearing of the time
at which the proposal to vacate shall be considered.
137.04   FINDINGS REQUIRED.
No street, alley, portion thereof, or any public grounds shall be vacated
unless the Council finds that:
   1.   Public Use. The street, alley, portion thereof, or any public ground
proposed to be vacated is not needed for the use of the public, and therefore,
its maintenance at public expense is no longer justified.
   2.   Abutting Property. The proposed vacation will not deny owners of
property abutting on the street or alley reasonable access to their property.
137.05   DISPOSAL OF VACATED STREETS OR ALLEYS.
When in the judgment of the Council it would be in the best interest of the
City to dispose of a vacated street or alley, portion thereof or public ground,
the Council may do so in accordance with the provisions of Section 364.7, Code
of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.7)
137.06   DISPOSAL BY GIFT LIMITED.
The City may not dispose of real property by gift except to a governmental body
for a public purpose or to a fair.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 174.15[2] and 364.7[3])
EDITOR’S NOTE
The following ordinances, not codified herein and specifically saved from
repeal, have been adopted vacating certain streets, alleys and/or public
grounds and remain in full force and effect.
ORDINANCE NO. ADOPTED            ORDINANCE NO. ADOPTED
089-2912      May 24, 1989
092-3036      May 13, 1992
092-3041      September 2, 1992
094-3057      June 29, 1994
094-3059      September 7, 1994
096-3080      April 3,1996
096-3083      July 18, 1996
098-3093      September 2, 1998
099-3098      January 6, 1999
099-3099      March 3, 1999
099-3107      September 15, 1999
001-3123      September 5, 2001
001-3126      November 7, 2001
002-3137      November 6, 2002
003-3140      March 5, 2003
003-3144      July 16, 2003
003-3145      July 16, 2003
005-3154      May 18, 2005
005-3156      September 7, 2005
006-3161      June 21, 2006
006-3162      September 6, 2006
006-3163      September 6, 2006
006-3168      November 15, 2006
007-3174      August 15, 2007
008-3184      July 2, 2008
R20-4560      November 18, 2020
R20-4561      November 18, 2020
 
CHAPTER 138
STREET GRADES
 
138.01 Purpose and Definition 138.03 Record Maintained
138.02 Established Grades
 
138.01   PURPOSE AND DEFINITION.
This chapter is designed to meet the requirements of the Code of Iowa for the
establishment of street grades. As used herein, “grade” means the longitudinal
reference lines, as established by ordinance of the Council, which designate
the elevation at which a street or sidewalk is to be built.
138.02   ESTABLISHED GRADES.
The grades of all streets, alleys, and sidewalks, which have been heretofore
established by ordinance, are hereby confirmed, ratified, and established as
official grades.
138.03   RECORD MAINTAINED.
The Clerk shall maintain a record of all established grades and furnish
information concerning such grades upon request.
EDITOR’S NOTE 
The following ordinances not codified herein, and specifically saved from
repeal, have been adopted establishing street and/or sidewalk grades and
remain in full force and effect.
ORDINANCE NO. ADOPTED           ORDINANCE NO. ADOPTED
073-1413      September 5, 1973
088-2768      October 5, 1988
089-2905      March 31, 1989
089-2906      March 31, 1989
093-3047      June 16, 1993
094-3063      October 5, 1994
098-3092      May 20, 1998
 
CHAPTER 139
NAMING OF STREETS
 
139.01 Naming New Streets      139.04 Official Street Name Map
139.02 Changing Name of Street 139.05 Revision of Street Name Map
139.03 Recording Street Names
 
139.01   NAMING NEW STREETS.
New streets shall be assigned names in accordance with the following:
   1.   Extension of Existing Street. Streets added to the City that are
natural extensions of existing streets shall be assigned the name of the
existing street.
   2.   Resolution. All street names, except streets named as a part of a
subdivision or platting procedure, shall be named by resolution.
   3.   Planning and Zoning Commission. Proposed street names shall be referred
to the Planning and Zoning Commission for review and recommendation.
139.02   CHANGING NAME OF STREET.
The Council may, by resolution, change the name of a street.
139.03   RECORDING STREET NAMES.
Following official action naming or changing the name of a street, the Clerk
shall file a copy thereof with the County Recorder, County Auditor, and County
Assessor.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 354.26)
139.04   OFFICIAL STREET NAME MAP.
Streets within the City are named as shown on the Official Street Name Map,
which is hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this chapter.
The Official Street Name Map shall be identified by the signature of the Mayor,
and bearing the seal of the City under the following words: “This is to certify
that this is the Official Street Name Map referred to in Section 139.04 of the
Code of Ordinances of Sheldon, Iowa.”
139.05   REVISION OF STREET NAME MAP.
If in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, changes are made in
street names, such changes shall be entered on the Official Street Name Map
promptly after the change has been approved by the Council with an entry on the
Official Street Name Map as follows: “On (date), by official action of the City
Council, the following changes were made in the Official Street Name Map:
(brief description),” which entry shall be signed by the Mayor and attested by
the Clerk.
CHAPTER 140
SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL
140.01 Statement of Purpose and Intent 140.09 Snow Removal Procedures
140.02 Statement of General Policy     140.10 Towing Illegally Parked Vehicles
140.03 Use of Chemicals and Abrasives  140.11 Boundary Street Jurisdiction;
                                       Responsibility
140.04 Equipment Available             140.12 Responsibility for Private
                                       Sidewalks
140.05 Manpower                        140.13 Private Driveways
140.06 Snow Routes                     140.14 Plowing Private Property
140.07 Monitoring and Notification of  140.15 Mailboxes
Ice and Snow Events
140.08 Sanding Procedures
 
140.01   STATEMENT OF PURPOSE AND INTENT.
The following policies and procedures shall serve as a guide in the removal and
control of snow and ice on the streets, alleys, public parking lots, and City-
owned sidewalks in the City by the Street Department with assistance by other
departments. A procedures manual shall be updated annually in October, and more
frequently if conditions dictate. The streets, alleys, public parking lots, and
sidewalks shall be kept clean of ice and snow for the safety of motorists and
pedestrians. However, cost effective control and removal operations shall be
used at all times. The concept of reasonableness shall guide snow and ice
removal efforts. Under certain circumstances, emergency situations, budgetary
concerns, personnel problems, and the unpredictability of weather conditions in
Northwest Iowa, these policies may have to be superseded when conditions
warrant.
140.02   STATEMENT OF GENERAL POLICY.
The overall budgetary and planning goal for the City’s snow and ice removal
efforts is to plan for the worst, hope for the best, and budget for an average
snowfall and use contingency funds if the City has a severe winter. Each storm
has individual characteristics and must be dealt with accordingly. The portion
of the streets, alleys, and public parking lots improved for travel will have
upon their surfaces snow and ice in a compacted condition. These conditions may
be continuous, or they may be more concentrated on hills, intersections, and
sheltered areas. The snow removed from intersections will be piled in its
corners in piles of unequal height. The line of sight, sight distance, or
visibility of motorists and pedestrians approaching these intersections may be
greatly reduced or impaired. Motorists shall drive their vehicles during these
conditions with additional caution and watchfulness and are advised to reduce
their speed below that legally permitted or advised under normal conditions.
During these conditions, no additional warning or regulatory signs will be
placed to warn of impaired sight distances, visibility at intersections, road
blockages, one-lane conditions, or that the road surface is slick or slippery,
or what the advised speed should be.
140.03   USE OF CHEMICALS AND ABRASIVES.
The policy of the department is to not use pure salt for the melting of ice or
hard-packed snow. A mixture of 91 percent sand or chips, six percent salt and
three percent calcium chloride are used as an abrasive to help remove ice and
hard-packed snow and as a driving aid during slippery conditions. It is not a
policy of the department to place sand or salt upon streets that are slick or
slippery due to the formation of frost.
140.04   EQUIPMENT AVAILABLE.
The primary equipment available to remove snow and ice will be supplied by the
Street Department. Equipment and manpower may be supplied by other City
departments if needs dictate. During normal snow removal operations, four truck
plows, two end loaders, one motor grader, one four-wheel-drive jeep with plow,
and two sanding trucks are available. All truck-mounted snowplows have quick
attachments and can be mounted in five minutes. The sanding units consist of
two V-box type spreaders. During a major snow event, private contractors’
equipment may be placed in service.
140.05   MANPOWER.
The primary manpower for snow removal shall be supplied by the City street
department. The basic crew consists of the Public Works Director, one blower
operator, and five operators. During major snow events, personnel from other
City departments may assist with snow removal efforts.
140.06   SNOW ROUTES.
A system of unmarked snow routes has been established for effective snow
removal. The snow routes provide service to within three blocks of most
residential properties; and direct access to nursing homes, medical facilities,
community protection facilities, businesses, and Village Northwest Unlimited.
The procedures manual shall contain snow route information. (See also Section
69.15)
140.07   MONITORING AND NOTIFICATION OF ICE AND SNOW EVENTS.
Weather reports shall be continuously monitored by the Police Department and
Public Works Director when inclement weather is approaching. The Police Chief,
Public Works Director, and City Manager shall keep each other informed of
anticipated snow events, including timing and intensity of the event. The
primary responsibility shall rest with the Public Works Director. During night-
time, weekends, and holidays, the Police Department shall monitor weather
reports and road conditions and shall notify the Public Works Director when
action is needed by the street department. During normal weekday operations,
the Police Department shall notify the Public Works Director when action may be
needed by the Street Department. (See also Section 69.14)
140.08   SANDING PROCEDURES.
Sand shall be used sparingly and only when application will produce a positive
result. All streets, including the snow routes, will only have dangerous
intersections and other hazard areas sanded. Sand will generally be used when
the temperatures are 20? and rising. Sand may be applied below 20? if the sun
is shining and melting will take place. It is not the policy of the City to
obtain a bare pavement condition through the use of sand and chemicals.
140.09   SNOW REMOVAL PROCEDURES.
Snow removal efforts shall be made on a priority system as follows:
   1.   Emergency Snow Routes. Snowfalls two inches or more — service shall
begin at approximately 2:00 a.m. or as conditions dictate.
   2.   Residential Streets. Cleared within 12 to 48 hours of end of snow
event. Snowfalls of less than two inches will not be cleared unless drifting is
occurring.
   3.   Residential Alleys. Cleared after all streets have been cleared.
   4.   Commercial Alleys. Cleared within 12 to 48 hours after end of snow
event.
   5.   Public Parking Lots. Cleared within 12 to 48 hours after end of snow
event depending on severity of occurrence.
   6.   Central Business District Street Parking. Removed within 12 to 48 hours
after end of snow event depending on severity of occurrence.
   7.   City-Owned Sidewalks. Cleared within 24 hours after end of snow event.
140.10   TOWING ILLEGALLY PARKED VEHICLES.
Vehicles parked on the streets during a snow removal event may be ticketed or
towed away pursuant to the provisions of Chapters 69 and 70. The Police
Department shall contact the street department and coordinate ticketing and
towing operations relative to the snow removal effort.
140.11   BOUNDARY STREET JURISDICTION; RESPONSIBILITY.
The City will not be responsible for any snow removal operations outside of the
municipal boundaries. City-owned or -maintained facilities outside the
corporate boundaries, Washington Avenue from the north City limits to its
intersection with HWY 60, and certain portions of Western Avenue are exempted
from the foregoing prohibition. By mutual agreement, O’Brien County secondary
road personnel have the responsibility for snow removal on the following
sections of roads within the City limits:
   1.   16th Street from Washington Avenue to east City limits.
   2.   Washington Avenue from 16th Street to south City limits.
   3.   Country Club Road from north City limits to HWY 18.
   4.   Country Club Road from East 9th Street to south City limits.
Responsibility for snow removal on HWY 18 and HWY 60 within the corporate
limits of the City is that of the Iowa Department of Transportation.
140.12   RESPONSIBILITY FOR PRIVATE SIDEWALKS.
All sidewalks adjacent to private property are the responsibility of the
property owner. All complaint calls shall be routed to the Public Works
Director for complaint follow-up and Code enforcement. The property owners’
responsibilities are set forth in Chapter 136 of this Code of Ordinances. The
City lacks sufficient manpower to clear sidewalks, so every effort must be made
by private property owners to clear their sidewalks of ice and snow. (See also
Section 136.03)
140.13   PRIVATE DRIVEWAYS.
City snowplows will not clear private driveways. It is the responsibility of
the property owner or occupant to remove the snow placed in driveways by City
plows. Snow from a private driveway may not be placed upon or pushed across a
City street. (See also Section 135.12)
140.14   PLOWING PRIVATE PROPERTY.
It is strictly forbidden for a City plow to clear snow or ice from private
property unless it must be done to allow emergency vehicles access to private
property for ambulance, fire, or police calls. However, the City may from time-
to-time contract to provide snow and ice removal services to certain qualified
private entities. Such contracts shall be exempt from the above provision.
140.15   MAILBOXES.
Every attempt will be made by the snowplow operators to clean snow adjacent to
mailboxes to allow rural-type mail delivery. The snow will only be cleared,
however, from curb line to curb line. The adjacent property owner is
responsible for any other snow cleaning and to assure the mailbox is properly
installed to withstand snow clearing efforts by the City. The City will not
replace mailboxes damaged by snow removal efforts.
CHAPTER 145
DANGEROUS BUILDINGS
 
145.01 Enforcement Officer          145.05 Conduct of Hearing
145.02 General Definition of Unsafe 145.06 Posting of Signs
145.03 Unsafe Building              145.07 Right to Demolish; Municipal
                                    Infraction
145.04 Notice to Owner              145.08 Costs
 
145.01   ENFORCEMENT OFFICER.
The City Manager is responsible for the enforcement of this chapter.
145.02   GENERAL DEFINITION OF UNSAFE.
All buildings or structures that are structurally unsafe or not provided with
adequate egress, or that constitute a fire hazard, or are otherwise dangerous
to human life, or that in relation to existing use constitute a hazard to
safety or health, or public welfare, by reason of inadequate maintenance,
dilapidation, obsolescence, or abandonment, are, for the purpose of this
chapter, unsafe buildings. All such unsafe buildings are hereby declared to be
public nuisances and shall be abated by repair, rehabilitation, demolition, or
removal in accordance with the procedure specified in this chapter.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 657A.1 and 364.12[3a])
145.03   UNSAFE BUILDING.
“Unsafe building” means any structure or mobile home meeting any or all of the
following criteria:
   1.   Various Inadequacies. Whenever the building or structure, or any
portion thereof, because of: (i) dilapidation, deterioration, or decay; (ii)
faulty construction; (iii) the removal, movement, or instability of any portion
of the ground necessary for the purpose of supporting such building; (iv) the
deterioration, decay, or inadequacy of its foundation; or (v) any other cause,
is likely to partially or completely collapse.
   2.   Manifestly Unsafe. Whenever, for any reason, the building or structure,
or any portion thereof, is manifestly unsafe for the purpose for which it is
being used.
   3.   Inadequate Maintenance. Whenever a building or structure, used or
intended to be used for dwelling purposes, because of dilapidation, decay,
damage, faulty construction, or otherwise, is determined by any health officer
to be unsanitary, unfit for human habitation or in such condition that it is
likely to cause sickness or disease.
   4.   Fire Hazard. Whenever any building or structure, because of dilapidated
condition, deterioration, damage, or other cause, is determined by the Fire
Marshal or Fire Chief to be a fire hazard.
   5.   Abandoned. Whenever any portion of a building or structure remains on a
site after the demolition or destruction of the building or structure or
whenever any building or structure is abandoned for a period in excess of six
months so as to constitute such building or portion thereof an attractive
nuisance or hazard to the public.
145.04   NOTICE TO OWNER.
The enforcement officer shall examine or cause to be examined every building or
structure or portion thereof reported as dangerous or damaged and, if such is
found to be an unsafe building as defined in this chapter, the enforcement
officer shall give to the owner of such building or structure written notice
stating the defects thereof. This notice may require the owner or person in
charge of the building or premises, within 48 hours or such reasonable time as
the circumstances require, to commence either the required repairs or
improvements or demolition and removal of the building or structure or portions
thereof, and all such work shall be completed within 90 days from date of
notice, unless otherwise stipulated by the enforcement officer. If necessary,
such notice shall also require the building, structure, or portion thereof to
be vacated forthwith and not reoccupied until the required repairs and
improvements are completed, inspected, and approved by the enforcement officer.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3h])
   1.   Notice Served. Such notice shall be served by sending by certified mail
to the owner of record, according to Section 364.12[3h] of the Code of Iowa, if
the owner is found within the City limits. If the owner is not found within the
City limits, such service may be made upon the owner by registered mail or
certified mail. The designated period within which said owner or person in
charge is required to comply with the order of the enforcement officer shall
begin as of the date the owner receives such notice.
   2.   Hearing. Such notice shall also advise the owner that he or she may
request a hearing before the Council on the notice by filing a written request
for a hearing within the time provided in the notice.
145.05   CONDUCT OF HEARING.
If requested, the Council shall conduct a hearing in accordance with the
following:
   1.   Notice. The owner shall be served with written notice specifying the
date, time and place of hearing.
   2.   Owner’s Rights. At the hearing, the owner may appear and show cause why
the alleged nuisance shall not be abated.
   3.   Determination. The Council shall make and record findings of fact and
may issue such order as it deems appropriate.† 9
 
Notes
  † EDITOR’S NOTE: Suggested forms of notice and of a resolution and order of the
  Council for the administration of this chapter are provided in the APPENDIX to
9 this Code of Ordinances. Caution is urged in the use of this procedure. We
  recommend you review the situation with your attorney before initiating
  procedures and follow his or her recommendation carefully.
145.06   POSTING OF SIGNS.
The enforcement officer shall cause to be posted at each entrance to such
building a notice to read: “DO NOT ENTER.
UNSAFE TO OCCUPY.
CITY OF SHELDON, IOWA.” Such notice shall remain posted until the required
demolition, removal or repairs are completed. Such notice shall not be removed
without written permission of the enforcement officer and no person shall enter
the building except for the purpose of making the required repairs or of
demolishing the building.
145.07   RIGHT TO DEMOLISH; MUNICIPAL INFRACTION.
In case the owner fails, neglects, or refuses to comply with the notice to
repair, rehabilitate, or to demolish and remove the building or structure or
portion thereof, the Council may order the owner of the building prosecuted as
a violator of the provisions of this chapter and may order the enforcement
officer to proceed with the work specified in such notice. A statement of the
cost of such work shall be transmitted to the Council. As an alternative to
this action, the City may utilize the municipal infraction process to abate the
nuisance.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3h])
145.08   COSTS.
Costs incurred under Section 145.07 shall be paid out of the City treasury.
Such costs shall be charged to the owner of the premises involved and levied as
a special assessment against the land on which the building or structure is
located, and shall be certified to the County Treasurer for collection in the
manner provided for other taxes. In addition, the City may take any other
action deemed appropriate to recover costs incurred.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3h])
CHAPTER 146
MANUFACTURED AND MOBILE HOMES
 
146.01 Definitions                 146.03 Foundation Requirements
146.02 Conversion to Real Property 146.04 Recreational Trailers or Units
 
146.01   DEFINITIONS.
For use in this chapter the following terms are defined:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 435.1)
   1.   “Manufactured home” means a factory-built structure built under the
authority of 42 U.S.C. Sec. 5403 which was constructed on or after June 15,
1976, and is required by federal law to display a seal from the United States
Department of Housing and Urban Development.
   2.   “Manufactured home community” means any site, lot, field, or tract of
land under common ownership upon which ten or more occupied manufactured homes
are harbored, either free of charge or for revenue purposes, and includes any
building, structure, or enclosure used or intended for use as part of the
equipment of the manufactured home community.
   3.   “Mobile home” means any vehicle without motive power used or so
manufactured or constructed as to permit its being used as a conveyance upon
the public streets and highways and so designed, constructed, or reconstructed
as will permit the vehicle to be used as a place for human habitation by one or
more persons; but also includes any such vehicle with motive power not
registered as a motor vehicle in Iowa. A mobile home means any such vehicle
built before June 15, 1976, which was not built to a mandatory building code
and which contains no State or federal seals.
   4.   “Mobile home park” means any site, lot, field, or tract of land upon
which three or more mobile homes or manufactured homes, or a combination of any
of these homes, are placed on developed spaces and operated as a for-profit
enterprise with water, sewer or septic, and electrical services available.
The term “manufactured home community” or “mobile home park” is not to be
construed to include manufactured or mobile homes, buildings, tents, or other
structures temporarily maintained by any individual, educational institution,
or company on its own premises and used exclusively to house said entity’s own
labor or students. The manufactured home community or mobile home park shall
meet the requirements of any zoning regulations that are in effect.
146.02   CONVERSION TO REAL PROPERTY.
A mobile home or manufactured home that is located outside a manufactured home
community or mobile home park shall be converted to real estate by being placed
on a permanent foundation and shall be assessed for real estate taxes except in
the following cases:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 435.26)
   1.   Retailer’s Stock. Mobile homes or manufactured homes on private
property as part of a retailer’s or a manufacturer’s stock not used as a place
for human habitation.
   2.   Existing Homes. A taxable mobile home or manufactured home that is
located outside of a manufactured home community or mobile home park as of
January 1, 1995, shall be assessed and taxed as real estate, but is exempt from
the permanent foundation requirement of this chapter until the home is
relocated.
146.03   FOUNDATION REQUIREMENTS.
A mobile home or manufactured home located outside of a manufactured home
community or mobile home park shall be placed on a permanent frost-free
foundation system that meets the support and anchorage requirements as
recommended by the manufacturer or required by the State Building Code. The
foundation system must be visually compatible with permanent foundation systems
of surrounding residential structures. Any such home shall be installed in
accordance with the requirements of the State Building Code.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 103A.10 and 414.28)
146.04   RECREATIONAL TRAILERS OR UNITS.
This chapter shall in no way be construed to prevent the temporary or storage
parking of recreational mobile vehicles or recreational trailers or units on
private property other than in parks or courts.
CHAPTER 150
BUILDING NUMBERING
 
150.01 Definitions        150.03 Building Numbering Plan
150.02 Owner Requirements
 
150.01   DEFINITIONS.
For use in this chapter, the following terms are defined:
   1.   “Owner” means the owner of the principal building.
   2.   “Principal building” means the main building on any lot or subdivision
thereof.
150.02   OWNER REQUIREMENTS.
Every owner shall comply with the following numbering requirements:
   1.   Obtain Building Number. The owner shall obtain the assigned number to
the principal building from the Clerk.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3d])
   2.   Display Building Number. The owner shall place or cause to be installed
and maintained on the principal building the assigned number in a conspicuous
place to the street in figures not less than three inches in height and of a
contrasting color with their background.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3d])
   3.   Failure to Comply. If an owner refuses to number a building as herein
provided, or fails to do so for a period of three days after being notified in
writing by the City to do so, the City may proceed to place the assigned number
on the principal building and assess the costs against the property for
collection in the same manner as a property tax.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3h])
150.03   BUILDING NUMBERING PLAN.
Building numbers shall be assigned in accordance with the building numbering
plan on file in the office of the Clerk.
CHAPTER 151
TREES
 
151.01 Definition                      151.05 Disease Control
151.02 Planting Restrictions           151.06 Inspection and Removal
151.03 Duty To Trim Trees              151.07 Topping of Trees
151.04 Trimming Trees To Be Supervised
 
151.01   DEFINITION.
For use in this chapter, “parking” means that part of the street, avenue, or
highway in the City not covered by sidewalk and lying between the lot line and
the curb line or, on unpaved streets, that part of the street, avenue, or
highway lying between the lot line and that portion of the street usually
traveled by vehicular traffic.
151.02   PLANTING RESTRICTIONS.
No tree shall be planted in any parking or street except in accordance with the
following:
   1.   Planting Moratorium. No tree of any kind may be planted in the parking
for a period of five years, beginning with the date of the adoption of this
ordinance amendment.
   2.   Alignment. After the expiration of the aforementioned moratorium, all
trees planted in any street shall be planted in the parking midway between the
outer line of the sidewalk and the curb. In the event a curb line is not
established, trees shall be planted on a line seven and a half feet from the
property line.
   3.   Spacing. After the expiration of the aforementioned moratorium, trees
shall not be planted in any parking that is less than nine feet in width or
contains less than 81 square feet of exposed soil surface per tree. Trees shall
not be planted closer than 20 feet from street intersections (property lines
extended) and 10 feet from driveways. If it is at all possible, trees should be
planted inside the property lines and not between the sidewalk and the curb.
   4.   Prohibited Trees. After the expiration of the aforementioned
moratorium, no person shall plant in any parking any fruit-bearing tree, or any
tree of the kinds commonly known as cottonwood, poplar, box elder, Chinese elm,
evergreen, willow, or black walnut.
   5.   The City reserves the right to remove any planting of any type in the
parking.
151.03   DUTY TO TRIM TREES.
The owner or agent of the abutting property shall keep the trees on, or
overhanging the street, trimmed so that all branches will be at least 15 feet
above the surface of the street and 10 feet above the sidewalks. If the
abutting property owner fails to trim the trees, the City may serve notice on
the abutting property owner requiring that such action be taken within five
days. If such action is not taken within that time, the City may perform the
required action and assess the costs against the abutting property for
collection in the same manner as a property tax.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[2c and e])
151.04   TRIMMING TREES TO BE SUPERVISED.
Except as allowed in Section 151.03, it is unlawful for any person to trim or
cut any tree in a street or public place unless the work is done under the
supervision of the City.
151.05   DISEASE CONTROL.
Any dead, diseased, or damaged tree or shrub that may harbor serious insect or
disease pests or disease injurious to other trees is hereby declared to be a
nuisance. (See also Chapter 50)
151.06   INSPECTION AND REMOVAL.
The Public Works Director or designee shall inspect or cause to be inspected
any trees or shrubs in the City reported or suspected to be dead, diseased, or
damaged, and such trees and shrubs shall be subject to the following:
   1.   City Property. If it is determined that any such condition exists on
any public property, including the strip between the curb and the lot line of
private property, the Public Works Director may cause such condition to be
corrected by treatment or removal. The Public Works Director may also order the
removal of any trees on the streets of the City which interfere with the making
of improvements or with travel thereon.
   2.   Private Property. If it is determined with reasonable certainty that
any such condition exists on private property and that danger to other trees or
to adjoining property or passing motorists or pedestrians is imminent, the
Council shall notify by certified mail the owner, occupant, or person in charge
of such property to correct such condition by treatment or removal within 14
days of said notification. If such owner, occupant, or person in charge of said
property fails to comply within 14 days of receipt of notice, the Council may
cause the condition to be corrected and the cost assessed against the property.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3b and h])
151.07   TOPPING OF TREES.
The topping of trees on public property, including the City rights-of-way, as a
method of trimming, is prohibited unless approved by the Public Works Director
or designee with respect to specific trees where other trimming practices are
impractical. Selective branch thinning, proper early training, or entire tree
removal should be favored over the practice of tree topping.
CHAPTER 160
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT
 
160.01 Definitions                      160.06 Standards for Floodplain
                                        (Overlay) District
160.02 Statutory Authority, Findings of 160.07 Establishment of Variance
Fact, and Purpose                       Procedures
160.03 General Provisions               160.08 Nonconforming Uses
160.04 Administration                   160.09 Penalties for Violation
160.05 Establishment of Floodplain      160.10 Amendments
(Overlay) District
 
160.01   DEFINITIONS.
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter shall
be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to
give this chapter its most reasonable application.
   1.   “Appurtenant structure” means a structure which is on the same parcel
of the property as the principal structure to be insured and the use of which
is incidental to the use of the principal structure.
   2.   “Base flood” means the flood having one percent chance of being equaled
or exceeded in any given year (also commonly referred to as the “100-year
flood”).
   3.   “Base flood elevation” (BFE) means the elevation floodwaters would
reach at a particular site during the occurrence of a base flood event.
   4.   “Basement” means any enclosed area of a building which has its floor or
lowest level below ground level (subgrade) on all sides. Also see “lowest
floor.”
   5.   “Development” means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining,
dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation, drilling operations or storage
of equipment or materials. “Development” does not include minor projects or
routine maintenance of existing buildings and facilities, as defined in this
section. It also does not include gardening, plowing, and similar practices
that do not involve filling or grading.
   6.   “Enclosed area below lowest floor” means the floor of the lowest
enclosed area in a building when all the following criteria are met:
      A.   The enclosed area is designed to flood to equalize hydrostatic
pressure during flood events with walls or openings that satisfy the provisions
of 160.06(4)(A) of this chapter; and
      B.   The enclosed area is unfinished (not carpeted, drywalled, etc.) and
used solely for low damage potential uses such as building access, parking, or
storage; and
      C.   Machinery and service facilities (e.g., hot water heater, furnace,
electrical service) contained in the enclosed area are located at least one
foot above the base flood elevation; and
      D.   The enclosed area is not a basement, as defined in this section.
   7.   “Existing construction” means any structure for which the start of
construction commenced before the effective date of the first floodplain
management regulations adopted by the community.
   8.   “Existing factory-built home park or subdivision” means a factory-built
home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing
the lots on which the factory-built homes are to be affixed (including at a
minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either
final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the
effective date of the first floodplain management regulations adopted by the
community.
   9.   “Expansion of existing factory-built home park or subdivision” means
the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for
servicing the lots on which the factory-built homes are to be affixed
(including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of
streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
   10.   “Factory-built home” means any structure, designed for residential use
which is wholly or in substantial part, made, fabricated, formed or assembled
in manufacturing facilities for installation or assembly and installation, on a
building site. For the purpose of this chapter factory-built homes include
mobile homes, manufactured homes, and modular homes; and also includes
recreational vehicles which are placed on a site for greater than 180
consecutive days and not fully licensed for and ready for highway use.
   11.   “Factory-built home park or subdivision” means a parcel or contiguous
parcels of land divided into two or more factory-built home lots for sale or
lease.
   12.   “500-year flood” means a flood, the magnitude of which has a two-
tenths percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year or which,
on average, will be equaled or exceeded at least once every 500 years.
   13.   “Flood” means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete
inundation of normally dry land areas resulting from the overflow of streams or
rivers or from the unusual and rapid runoff of surface waters from any source.
   14.   “Flood Insurance Rate Map” (FIRM) means the official map prepared as
part of (but published separately from) the Flood Insurance Study which
delineates both the flood hazard areas and the risk premium zones applicable to
the community.
   15.   “Flood Insurance Study” (FIS) means a report published by FEMA for a
community issued along with the community’s Flood Insurance Rate Map(s). The
study contains such background data as the base flood discharge and water
surface elevations that were used to prepare the FIRM.
   16.   “Floodplain” means any land area susceptible to being inundated by
water as a result of a flood.
   17.   “Floodplain management” means an overall program of corrective and
preventive measures for reducing flood damages and promoting the wise use of
floodplains, including but not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood
control works, floodproofing, and floodplain management regulations.
   18.   “Flood proofing” means any combination of structural and nonstructural
additions, changes, or adjustments to structures, including utility and
sanitary facilities, which will reduce or eliminate flood damage to such
structures.
   19.   “Floodway” means the channel of a river or stream and those portions
of the floodplains adjoining the channel, which are reasonably required to
carry and discharge flood waters or flood flows so that confinement of flood
flows to the floodway area will not cumulatively increase the water surface
elevation of the base flood by more than one foot.
   20.   “Floodway fringe” means those portions of the special flood hazard
area outside the floodway.
   21.   “Highest adjacent grade” means the highest natural elevation of the
ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.
   22.   “Historic structure” means any structure that is:
      A.   Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places,
maintained by the Department of Interior, or preliminarily determined by the
Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing of
the National Register;
      B.   Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the
Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered
historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to
qualify as a registered historic district;
      C.   Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in
states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the
Secretary of the Interior; or
      D.   Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in
communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified
either: (i) by an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the
Interior; or (ii) directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without
approved programs.
   23.   “Lowest floor” means the floor of the lowest enclosed area in a
building including a basement except when the criteria listed in the definition
of “enclosed area below lowest floor” are met.
   24.   “Maximum damage potential development” means hospitals and like
institutions; buildings or building complexes containing documents, data, or
instruments of great public value; buildings or building complexes containing
materials dangerous to the public or fuel storage facilities; power
installations needed in emergency or other buildings or building complexes
similar in nature or use.
   25.   “Minor projects” means small development activities (except for
filling, grading, and excavating) valued at less than $500.00.
   26.   “New construction” (new buildings, factory-built home parks) means
those structures or development for which the start of construction commenced
on or after the effective date of the first floodplain management regulations
adopted by the community.
   27.   “New factory-built home park or subdivision” means a factory-built
home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing
the lots on which the factory-built homes are to be affixed (including at a
minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either
final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after
the effective date of the effective date of the first floodplain management
regulations adopted by the community.
   28.   “Recreational vehicle” means a vehicle which is:
      A.   Built on a single chassis;
      B.   Four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at the largest
horizontal projection;
      C.   Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty
truck; and
      D.   Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as a
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
   29.   “Routine maintenance of existing buildings and facilities” means
repairs necessary to keep a structure in a safe and habitable condition that do
not trigger a building permit, provided they are not associated with a general
improvement of the structure or repair of a damaged structure. Such repairs
include:
      A.   Normal maintenance of structures such as re-roofing, replacing
roofing tiles and replacing siding;
      B.   Exterior and interior painting, papering, tiling, carpeting,
cabinets, counter tops and similar finish work;
      C.   Basement sealing;
      D.   Repairing or replacing damaged or broken window panes;
      E.   Repairing plumbing systems, electrical systems, heating or air
conditioning systems, and repairing wells or septic systems.
   30.   “Special flood hazard area” (SFHA) means the land within a community
subject to the base flood. This land is identified on the community’s Flood
Insurance Rate Map as Zone A, A1-30, AE, AH, AO, AR, and/or A99.
   31.   “Start of construction” includes substantial improvement, and means
the date the development permit was issued, provided the actual start of
construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or
other improvement, was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start
means either the first placement or permanent construction of a structure on a
site, such as pouring of a slab or footings, the installation of pile, the
construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the
placement of a factory-built home on a foundation. Permanent construction does
not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading, and filling; nor does
it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include
excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of
temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of
accessory buildings such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or
not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start
of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or
other structural part of the building, whether or not that alteration affects
the external dimensions of the building.
   32.   “Structure” means anything constructed or erected on the ground or
attached to the ground, including, but not limited to, buildings, factories,
sheds, cabins, factory-built homes, storage tanks, grain storage facilities,
and/or other similar uses.
   33.   “Substantial damage” means damage of any origin sustained by a
structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damage
condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure
before the damage occurred. Volunteer labor and donated materials shall be
included in the estimated cost of repair. Substantial damage also means flood-
related damages sustained by a structure on two separate occasions during a 10-
year period for which the cost of repairs at the time of such flood event, on
the average, equals or exceeds 25 percent of the market value of the structure
before the damage occurred. Volunteer labor and donated materials shall be
included in the estimated cost of repair.
   34.   “Substantial improvement” means any improvement to a structure which
satisfies either of the following criteria:
      A.   Any repair, reconstruction or improvement of a structure taking
place during a 10-year period, the cumulative cost of which, equals or exceeds
50 percent of the market value of the structure either: (i) before the start of
construction of the first improvement of the structure; or (ii) if the
structure has been substantially damaged and is being restored, before the
damage occurred. The term does not, however, include any project for
improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local
health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by
the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to
assure safe living conditions. The term also does not include any alteration of
a historic structure, provided the alteration will not preclude the structure’s
designation as a historic structure.
      B.   Any addition which increases the original floor area of a building
by 25 percent or more. All additions constructed after the effective date of
the first floodplain management regulations adopted by the community shall be
added to any proposed addition in determining whether the total increase in
original floor space would exceed 25 percent.
   35.   “Variance” means a grant of relief by a community from the terms of
the floodplain management regulations.
   36.   “Violation” means the failure of a structure or other development to
be fully compliant with the community’s floodplain management regulations.
160.02   STATUTORY AUTHORITY, FINDINGS OF FACT, AND PURPOSE.
   1.   The Legislature of the State of Iowa has, in Chapter 414 of the Code of
Iowa, as amended, delegated the power to cities to enact zoning regulations to
secure safety from flood and to promote health and the general welfare.
   2.   Findings of Fact.
      A.   The flood hazard areas of the City are subject to periodic
inundation which can result in loss of life and property, health and safety
hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public
expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base
all of which adversely affect the public health, safety, and general welfare of
the community.
      B.   These flood losses, hazards, and related adverse effects are caused
by: (i) the occupancy of flood hazard areas by uses vulnerable to flood damages
which create hazardous conditions as a result of being inadequately elevated or
otherwise protected from flooding; and (ii) the cumulative effect of
obstructions on the floodplain causing increases in flood heights and
velocities.
      C.   This chapter relies upon engineering methodology for analyzing flood
hazards which is consistent with the standards established by the Department of
Natural Resources.
   3.   Statement of Purpose. It is the purpose of this chapter to protect and
preserve the rights, privileges, and property of the City and its residents and
to preserve and improve the peace, safety, health, welfare, and comfort and
convenience of its residents by minimizing those flood losses described in
Subsection 2(A) of this section with provisions designed to:
      A.   Reserve sufficient floodplain area for the conveyance of flood flows
so that flood heights and velocities will not be increased substantially.
      B.   Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety, or
property in times of flood or which cause excessive increases in flood heights
or velocities.
      C.   Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including public facilities
which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction or substantial improvement.
      D.   Protect individuals from buying lands which may not be suited for
intended purposes because of flood hazard.
      E.   Assure that eligibility is maintained for property owners in the
community to purchase flood insurance through the National Flood Insurance
Program.
160.03   GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   1.   Lands to Which Chapter Applies. The provisions of this chapter shall
apply to all lands within the jurisdiction of the City which are located within
the boundaries of the Floodplain (Overlay) District as established in Section
160.05. The “lands within the jurisdiction of the City” shall also include all
unincorporated lands subject to the zoning jurisdiction of the City pursuant to
Section 414.23 of the Code of Iowa and Sheldon, Iowa Zoning Ordinance Section
3.1(5), unless such lands are (or become) subject to a County ordinance that is
comparable to this chapter.
   2.   Establishment of Official Floodplain Zoning Map. The Flood Insurance
Rate Map (FIRM) for O’Brien County and Incorporated Areas, City of Sheldon,
Panels 19141C0117C, 19141C0128C, 19141C0129C, 19141C0133C, 19141C0136C,
19141C0137C, and 19141C0141C, dated December 17, 2020, which were prepared as
part of the Flood Insurance Study for O’Brien County, and the Flood Insurance
Rate Map (FIRM) for Sioux County and Incorporated Areas, Panel 1909060003B,
dated May 1, 2011, which was prepared as part of the Flood Insurance Study for
Sioux County, are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be the Official
Floodplain Zoning Map. The O’Brien County and Sioux County Flood Insurance
Studies are hereby adopted by reference and is made a part of this chapter for
the purpose of administering floodplain management regulations.
   3.   Rules for Interpretation of Floodplain (Overlay) District. The
boundaries of the Floodplain (Overlay) District areas shall be determined by
scaling distances on the official Flood Insurance Rate Map. When an
interpretation is needed as to the exact location of a boundary, the Zoning
Officer shall make the necessary interpretation. The Board of Adjustment shall
hear and decide appeals when it is alleged that there is an error in any
requirement, decision, or determination made by the Zoning Administrator in the
enforcement or administration of this chapter.
   4.   Compliance. No structure or land shall hereafter be used, and no
structure shall be located, extended, converted, or structurally altered,
without full compliance with the terms of this chapter and other applicable
regulations which apply to uses within the jurisdiction of this chapter.
   5.   Abrogation and Greater Restrictions. It is not intended by this chapter
to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed
restrictions. However, where this chapter imposes greater restrictions, the
provisions of this chapter shall prevail. All other ordinances inconsistent
with this chapter are hereby repealed to the extent of the inconsistency only.
   6.   Interpretation. In their interpretation and application, the provisions
of this chapter shall be held to be minimum requirements and shall be liberally
construed in favor of the governing body and shall not be deemed a limitation
or repeal of any other powers granted by State statutes.
   7.   Warning and Disclaimer of Liability. The standards required by this
chapter are considered reasonable for regulatory purposes. This chapter does
not imply that areas outside the designated Floodplain (Overlay) District areas
will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not create
liability on the part of the City or any officer or employee thereof for any
flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative
decision lawfully made thereunder.
   8.   Severability. If any section, clause, provision, or portion of this
chapter is adjudged unconstitutional or invalid by a court of competent
jurisdiction, the remainder of this chapter shall not be affected thereby.
160.04   ADMINISTRATION.
   1.   Appointment, Duties and Responsibilities of Floodplain Administrator.
      A.   The City’s Zoning Administrator is hereby appointed to implement and
administer the provisions of this chapter and will herein be referred to as the
Administrator.
      B.   Duties and responsibilities of the Administrator shall include, but
not necessarily be limited to the following:
         (1)   Review all floodplain development permit applications to assure
that the provisions of this chapter will be satisfied.
         (2)   Review floodplain development applications to assure that all
necessary permits have been obtained from federal, State, and local
governmental agencies including approval when required from the Department of
Natural Resources for floodplain construction.
         (3)   Record and maintain a record of: (i) the elevation (in relation
to North American Vertical Datum 1988) of the lowest floor (including basement)
of all new or substantially improved structures or (ii) the elevation to which
new or substantially improved structures have been floodproofed.
         (4)   Notify adjacent communities/counties and the Department of
Natural Resources prior to any proposed alteration or relocation of a
watercourse and submit evidence of such notifications to the Federal Emergency
Management Agency.
         (5)   Keep a record of all permits, appeals, and such other
transactions and correspondence pertaining to the administration of this
chapter.
         (6)   Submit to the Federal Insurance Administration an annual report
concerning the community’s participation, utilizing the annual report form
supplied by the Federal Insurance Administration.
         (7)   Notify the Federal Insurance Administration of any annexations
or modifications to the community’s boundaries.
         (8)   Review subdivision proposals to ensure such proposals are
consistent with the purpose of this chapter and advise the Board of Adjustment
of potential conflict.
         (9)   Maintain the accuracy of the community’s Flood Insurance Rate
Maps when:
            a.   Development placed within the Floodway (Overlay) District
results in either of the following: (i) an increase in the Base Flood
Elevations; or (ii) alteration to the floodway boundary;
            b.   Development placed in Zones A, AE, AH, and A1-30 that does not
include a designated floodway that will cause a rise of more than one foot in
the base elevation; or
            c.   Development relocates or alters the channel.
Within six months of the completion of the development, the applicant shall
submit to FEMA all scientific and technical data necessary for a Letter of Map
Revision.
         (10)   Perform site inspections to ensure compliance with the
standards of this chapter.
         (11)   Forward all requests for variances to the Board of Adjustment
for consideration. Ensure all requests include the information ordinarily
submitted with applications as well as any additional information deemed
necessary to the Board of Adjustment.
   2.   Floodplain Development Permit.
      A.   Permit Required. A Floodplain Development Permit issued by the
Administrator shall be secured prior to any floodplain development (any manmade
change to improved and unimproved real estate, including but not limited to
buildings or other structures, mining, filling, grading, paving, excavation, or
drilling operations), including the placement of factory-built homes.
      B.   Application for Permit. Application shall be made on forms furnished
by the Administrator and shall include the following:
         (1)   Description of the work to be covered by the permit for which
application is to be made.
         (2)   Description of the land on which the proposed work is to be done
(e.g., lot, block, track, street address, or similar description) that will
readily identify and locate the work to be done.
         (3)   Location and dimensions of all structures and structure
additions.
         (4)   Indication of the use or occupancy for which the proposed work
is intended.
         (5)   Elevation of the base flood.
         (6)   Elevation (in relation to North American Vertical Datum 1988) of
the lowest floor (including basement) of buildings or of the level to which a
building is to be floodproofed.
         (7)   For buildings being improved or rebuilt, the estimated cost of
improvements and market value of the building prior to the improvements.
         (8)   Such other information as the Administrator deems reasonably
necessary (e.g., drawings or a site plan) for the purpose of this chapter.
      C.   Action on Permit Application. The Administrator shall, within a
reasonable time, make a determination as to whether the proposed floodplain
development meets the applicable standards of this chapter and shall approve or
disapprove the application. For disapprovals, the applicant shall be informed,
in writing, of the specific reasons therefor. The Administrator shall not issue
permits for variances except as directed by the Board of Adjustment.
      D.   Construction and Use to Be as Provided in Application and Plans.
Floodplain Development Permits based on the basis of approved plans and
applications authorize only the use, arrangement, and construction set forth in
such approved plans and applications and no other use, arrangement, or
construction. Any use, arrangement, or construction at variance with that
authorized shall be deemed a violation of this chapter. The applicant shall be
required to submit certification by a professional engineer or land surveyor,
as appropriate, registered in the State of Iowa, that the finished fill,
building floor elevations, flood proofing, or other flood protection measures
were accomplished in compliance with the provisions of this chapter, prior to
the use or occupancy of any structure.
160.05   ESTABLISHMENT OF FLOODPLAIN (OVERLAY) DISTRICT.
The special flood hazard areas within the jurisdiction of this chapter are
hereby divided into the following districts:
Floodplain (Overlay) District – those areas identified as Zone A on the
Official Floodplain Zoning Map.
The boundaries shall be as shown on the Official Floodplain Zoning Map. Within
these districts, all uses not allowed as Permitted Uses are prohibited unless a
variance to the terms of this chapter is granted after due consideration by the
Board of Adjustment.
160.06   STANDARDS FOR FLOODPLAIN (OVERLAY) DISTRICT.
All uses must be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage and meet the
following applicable performance standards. Where base flood elevations and
floodway data have not been provided on the Flood Insurance Rate Map, the Iowa
Department of Natural Resources shall be contacted to compute such data. The
applicant will be responsible for providing the Department of Natural Resources
with sufficient technical information to make such determination.
   1.   All Development. All development within the Floodplain (Overlay)
District shall:
      A.   Be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage.
      B.   Use construction methods and practices that will minimize flood
damage.
      C.   Use construction materials and utility equipment that are resistant
to flood damage.
      D.   Obtain all other necessary permits from federal, State, and local
governmental agencies including approval when required from the Iowa Department
of Natural Resources.
   2.   Residential Structures. All new or substantially improved residential
structures shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated a minimum
of one foot above the base flood elevations. Construction shall be upon
compacted fill which shall, at all points, be no lower than one foot above the
base flood elevations and extend at such elevation at least 18 feet beyond the
limits of any structure erected thereon. Alternate methods of elevating (such
as piers or extended foundations) may be allowed subject to favorable
consideration by the Board of Adjustment, where existing topography, street
grades, or other factors preclude elevating by fill. In such cases, the methods
used must be adequate to support the structure as well as withstand the various
forces and hazards associated with flooding. All new residential structures
located in areas that would become isolated due to flooding of surrounding
ground shall be provided with a means of access that will be passable by
wheeled vehicles during the base flood. However, this criterion shall not apply
where the Administrator determines there is sufficient flood warning time for
the protection of life and property. When estimating flood warning time,
consideration shall be given to the criteria listed in 567-75.2(3), Iowa
Administrative Code.
   3.   Nonresidential Structures. All new or substantially improved
nonresidential structures shall have the lowest floor (including basement)
elevated a minimum of one foot above the base flood elevation, or together with
attendant utility and sanitary systems, be flood proofed to such a level. When
flood proofing is utilized, a professional engineer registered in the State of
Iowa shall certify that the flood proofing methods used are adequate to
withstand the flood depths, pressures, velocities, impact and uplift forces and
other factors associated with the base flood; and that the structure, below the
base flood elevation is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the
passage of water. A record of the certification indicating the specific
elevation (in relation to North American Vertical Datum 1988) to which any
structures are flood proofed shall be maintained by the Administrator.
   4.   All New and Substantially Improved Structures.
      A.   Fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor (not including
basements) that are subject to flooding shall be designed to automatically
equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry
and exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be
certified by a registered professional engineer or meet or exceed the following
minimum criteria:
         (1)   A minimum of two openings, with positioning on at least two
walls, having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every
square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided.
         (2)   The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one-foot
above grade.
         (3)   Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other
coverings or devices provided they permit the automatic entry and exit of
floodwaters.
Such areas shall be used solely for parking of vehicles, building access and
low damage potential storage. Where the distance between the floor and ceiling
of the fully enclosed area below the lowest floor is five feet or more, the
applicant shall be required to sign and record with the O’Brien County Recorder
a Non-Conversion Agreement that ensures the lower enclosed area remains
compliant with the criteria outlined in this paragraph.
      B.   New and substantially improved structures must be designed (or
modified) and adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral
movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads,
including the effects of buoyancy.
      C.   New and substantially improved structures shall be constructed with
electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air conditioning equipment and
other service facilities (including ductwork) elevated or flood-proofed to a
minimum of one foot above the base flood elevation.
   5.   Factory-Built Homes.
      A.   All new and substantially improved factory-built homes, including
those placed in existing factory-built home parks or subdivisions, shall be
elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the structure
is a minimum of one foot above the base flood level.
      B.   All new and substantially improved factory-built homes, including
those placed in existing factory-built home parks or subdivisions, shall be
anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of
anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame
ties to ground anchors. Anchorage systems may include, but are not limited to,
use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors as required by the State
Building Code.
   6.   Utility and Sanitary Systems.
      A.   On-site waste disposal and water supply systems shall be located or
designed to avoid impairment to the system or contamination from the system
during flooding.
      B.   All new and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system as well as
the discharge of effluent into flood waters. Wastewater treatment facilities
(other than on-site systems) shall be provided with a level of flood protection
equal to or greater than one foot above the base flood elevation.
      C.   New or replacement water supply systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system. Water
supply treatment facilities (other than on-site systems) shall be provided with
a level of protection equal to or greater than one foot above the base flood
elevation.
      D.   Utilities such as gas or electrical systems shall be located and
constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage to the system and the risk
associated with such flood damaged or impaired systems.
   7.   Storage of Materials and Equipment. Storage of equipment and materials
that are flammable, explosive, or injurious to human, animal or plant life is
prohibited unless elevated a minimum of one foot above the base flood
elevation. Other material and equipment must either be similarly elevated or:
(i) not subject to major flood damage and be anchored to prevent movement due
to flood waters; or (ii) readily removable from the area within the time
available after flood warning.
   8.   Flood Control Structures. Flood control structural works such as
levees, flood walls, etc. shall provide, at a minimum, protection from the base
flood with a minimum of three feet of design freeboard and shall provide for
adequate interior drainage. In addition, structural flood control works shall
be approved by the Department of Natural Resources.
   9.   Watercourse Alterations. Watercourse alterations or relocations must be
designed to maintain the flood carrying capacity within the altered or
relocated portion. In addition, such alterations or relocations must be
approved by the Department of Natural Resources.
   10.   Subdivisions. Subdivisions (including factory-built home parks and
subdivisions) shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damages and
shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood damage.
Development associated with subdivision proposals (including the installation
of public utilities) shall meet the applicable performance standards of this
chapter. Subdivision proposals intended for residential use shall provide all
lots with a means of access which will be passable by wheeled vehicles during
the base flood. Proposals for subdivisions greater than five acres or 50 lots
(whichever is less) shall include base flood elevation data for those areas
located within the Floodplain (Overlay) District.
   11.   Accessory Structures to Residential Uses. Detached garages, sheds, and
similar structures that are incidental to a residential use are exempt from the
base flood elevation requirements where the following criteria are satisfied.
      A.   The structure shall be designed to have low flood damage potential.
Its size shall not exceed 600 square feet in size. Those portions of the
structure located less than one foot above the BFE must be constructed of
flood-resistant materials.
      B.   The structure shall be used solely for low flood damage potential
purposes such as vehicle parking and limited storage. The structure shall not
be used for human habitation.
      C.   The structure shall be constructed and placed on the building site
so as to offer minimum resistance to the flow of floodwaters.
      D.   The structure shall be firmly anchored to resist flotation,
collapse, and lateral movement.
      E.   The structure's service facilities such as electrical and heating
equipment shall be elevated or floodproofed to at least one foot above the base
flood elevation.
      F.   The structure’s walls shall include openings that satisfy the
provisions of Subsection 4(A) of this section.
Exemption from the base flood elevation requirements for such a structure may
result in increased premium rates for flood insurance coverage of the structure
and its contents.
   12.   Recreational Vehicles.
      A.   Recreational vehicles are exempt from the requirements of Subsection
5 of this section regarding anchoring and elevation of factory-built homes when
the following criteria are satisfied.
         (1)   The recreational vehicle shall be located on the site for less
than 180 consecutive days; and
         (2)   The recreational vehicle must be fully licensed and ready for
highway use. A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its
wheels or jacking system and is attached to the site only by quick disconnect
type utilities and security devices and has no permanently attached additions.
      B.   Recreational vehicles that are located on the site for more than 180
consecutive days or are not ready for highway use must satisfy requirements of
Subsection 5 of this section regarding anchoring and elevation of factory-built
homes.
   13.   Pipeline Crossings. Pipeline river and stream crossings shall be
buried in the streambed and banks, or otherwise sufficiently protected to
prevent rupture due to channel degradation and meandering.
   14.   Maximum Damage Potential Development. All new or substantially
improved maximum damage potential development shall have the lowest floor
(including basement) elevated a minimum of one foot above the elevation of the
500-year flood, or together with attendant utility and sanitary systems, be
floodproofed to such a level. When floodproofing is utilized, a professional
engineer registered in the State shall certify that the floodproofing methods
used are adequate to withstand the flood depths, pressures, velocities, impact
and uplift forces and other factors associated with the 0.2 percent chance
flood; and that the structure, below the 0.2 percent chance flood elevation is
watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water. A
record of the certification indicating the specific elevation (in relation to
North American Vertical Datum 1988) to which any structures are floodproofed
shall be maintained by the Administrator. Where 0.2 percent chance flood
elevation data has not been provided in the Flood Insurance Study, the Iowa
Department of Natural Resources shall be contacted to compute such data. The
applicant will be responsible for providing the Department of Natural Resources
with sufficient technical information to make such determinations.
160.07   ESTABLISHMENT OF VARIANCE PROCEDURES.
   1.   The Board of Adjustment may authorize upon request in specific cases
such variances from the terms of this chapter that will not be contrary to the
public interest where, owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of
the provisions of this chapter will result in unnecessary hardship. Variances
granted must meet the following applicable standards.
      A.   Variances shall only be granted upon: (i) a showing of good and
sufficient cause; (ii) a determination that failure to grant the variance would
result in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and (iii) a determination that
the granting of the variance will not result in increased flood heights,
additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create
nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public or conflict with
existing local codes or ordinances.
      B.   Variances shall only be granted upon a determination that the
variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford
relief.
      C.   In cases where the variance involves a lower level of flood
protection for buildings than what is ordinarily required by this chapter, the
applicant shall be notified in writing over the signature of the Administrator
that: (i) the issuance of a variance will result in increased premium rates for
flood insurance up to amounts as high as $25.00 for $100.00 of insurance
coverage; and (ii) such construction increases risks to life and property.
   2.   Factors upon Which the Decision of the Board of Adjustment Shall Be
Based. In passing upon applications for variances, the Board shall consider all
relevant factors specified in other sections of this chapter and:
      A.   The danger to life and property due to increased flood heights or
velocities caused by encroachments.
      B.   The danger that materials may be swept on to other land or
downstream to the injury of others.
      C.   The proposed water supply and sanitation systems and the ability of
these systems to prevent disease, contamination, and unsanitary conditions.
      D.   The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to
flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner.
      E.   The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to
the City.
      F.   The requirements of the facility for a floodplain location.
      G.   The availability of alternative locations not subject to flooding
for the proposed use.
      H.   The compatibility of the proposed use with existing development and
development anticipated in the foreseeable future.
      I.   The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and
floodplain management program for the area.
      J.   The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary
and emergency vehicles.
      K.   The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment
transport of the flood water expected at the site.
      L.   The cost of providing governmental services during and after flood
conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities (sewer, gas,
electrical and water systems), facilities, streets, and bridges.
      M.   Such other factors which are relevant to the purpose of this
chapter.
   3.   Conditions Attached to Variances. Upon consideration of the factors
listed above, the Board of Adjustment may attach such conditions to the
granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purpose of this
chapter. Such conditions may include, but not necessarily be limited to:
      A.   Modification of waste disposal and water supply facilities.
      B.   Limitation of periods of use and operation.
      C.   Imposition of operational controls, sureties, and deed restrictions.
      D.   Requirements for construction of channel modifications, dikes,
levees, and other protective measures, provided such are approved by the
Department of Natural Resources and are deemed the only practical alternative
to achieving the purpose of this chapter.
      E.   Floodproofing measures.
160.08   NONCONFORMING USES.
   1.   A structure or the use of a structure or premises which was lawful
before the passage or amendment of the ordinance codified in this chapter, but
which is not in conformity with the provisions of this chapter, may be
continued subject to the following conditions:
      A.   If such use is discontinued for six consecutive months, any future
use of the building premises shall conform to this chapter.
      B.   Uses or adjuncts thereof that are or become nuisances shall not be
entitled to continue as nonconforming uses.
   2.   If any nonconforming use or structure is destroyed by any means,
including flood, it shall not be reconstructed if the cost is more than 50
percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred, unless
it is reconstructed in conformity with the provisions of this chapter. This
limitation does not include the cost of any alteration to comply with existing
State or local health, sanitary, building, or safety codes or regulations or
the cost of any alteration of a structure listed on the National Register of
Historic Places, provided that the alteration shall not preclude its continued
designation.
160.09   PENALTIES FOR VIOLATION.
Violations of the provisions of this chapter or failure to comply with any of
the requirements shall constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates this
chapter or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall upon conviction
thereof be fined not more than $500.00. Nothing herein contained shall prevent
the City from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or
remedy violation.
160.10   AMENDMENTS.
The regulations and standards set forth in this chapter may from time to time
be amended, supplemented, changed, or repealed. No amendment, supplement,
change, or modification shall be undertaken without prior approval of the
Department of Natural Resources.
CHAPTER 165
ZONING REGULATIONS
SUBDIVISION ZONING ORDINANCE
2010
(Revised December 2, 2020)
ADOPTING ORDINANCE
ORDINANCE NO. 10-3195
REPLACES CHAPTER 166 IN THE SHELDON CODE OF ORDINANCES AND AMENDMENTS THERETO
ZONING ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF SHELDON, IOWA
AN ORDINANCE to regulate and restrict the location and use of buildings,
structures, and land for trade, industry, residence, and other purposes; to
regulate and restrict the height of buildings and structures, the number and
size of buildings and other structures; to establish the size of yards and
courts and other open spaces; to establish minimum lot areas; to regulate the
density of population and the percentage of lot that may be occupied; to
require off-street parking; to regulate the location, size, and number of
signs; to divide the city into districts for such purposes; to provide for the
administration and enforcement of its provisions; to confirm the Board of
Adjustment; to prescribe penalties for the violation of its provisions, all in
accordance with Chapter 414, Code of Iowa; and to be known, and cited as "The
Zoning Ordinance of the City of Sheldon, Iowa".
WHEREAS, the city council of the City of Sheldon, Iowa deems it necessary to
prevent and to lessen congestion in the streets and highways; to secure safety
from fire, flood, and panic and other dangers; to protect the public health and
general welfare; to provide adequate light and air; to prevent the overcrowding
of land; to avoid undue concentration of population; to facilitate the adequate
provision of transportation, water, sewage, schools, parks, and other public
requirements; to conserve the value of buildings, and encourage the most
appropriate use of land throughout the city, all in accordance with a
comprehensive land use plan,
NOW THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF SHELDON, IOWA:
ARTICLE I
Basic Provisions
Article 1: Basic Provisions
   Section
1.1.   Short Title
   Section
1.2.   Purpose
   Section
1.3.   Jurisdiction
   Section
1.4.   Repeal and Saving Clause
   Section
1.5.   Validity and Severability Clause
   Section
1.6.   Conflict with Other Laws
1.1. SHORT TITLE. 
   This ordinance shall be known and may be cited and referenced as: “The
Sheldon, Iowa Zoning Ordinance,” to the same effect as if the full title were
stated.
1.2. PURPOSE. 
   The purpose of this ordinance is to provide adequate light and air, to
prevent the overcrowding of land, to avoid undue concentration of population,
to regulate the use of land, and to promote the health, safety, and general
welfare in the City of Sheldon.
1.3. JURISDICTION.
   In accordance with the provisions of Chapter 414 of the Code of Iowa and
amendatory acts thereto, this ordinance is adopted by the City of Sheldon, Iowa
governing the zoning of all lands within the corporate limits of the city.
1.4. REPEAL AND SAVINGS CLAUSE.
   Effective on the effective date of this ordinance the City of Sheldon Zoning
Regulations-Chapter 166 in the Sheldon Code of Ordinances and amendments
thereto is repealed. The repeal of said existing zoning regulations shall not
have the effect to release or relinquish any penalty, forfeiture or liability
incurred under said ordinance or any part thereof, and such existing zoning
regulations and all parts thereof shall be treated as still remaining in force
for the purpose of instituting or sustaining any proper action or prosecution
for the enforcement of such penalty, forfeiture or liability.
1.5. VALIDITY AND SEVERABILITY CLAUSE.
   If any court of competent jurisdiction shall declare any part of this
ordinance to be invalid, such ruling shall not affect any other provisions of
this ordinance not specifically included in said ruling.
   If any court of competent jurisdiction shall declare invalid the application
of any provision of this ordinance to a particular land, parcel, lot, district,
use, building or structure, such ruling shall not affect the application of
said provision to any other land, parcel, lot, district, use, building or
structure not specifically included in said ruling.
1.6. CONFLICT WITH OTHER LAWS.
   Where any condition imposed by any provision of this ordinance upon the use
of any lot, building or structure is either more restrictive or less
restrictive than any comparable condition imposed by any other provision of
this ordinance or by the provision of an ordinance adopted under any other law,
or by provision of any Statute, the provision which is more restrictive or
which imposes a higher standard or requirement shall apply.
   This ordinance is not intended to abrogate or annul any easement, covenant
or other private agreement provided that where any provision of this ordinance
is more restrictive or imposes a higher standard or requirement than such
easement, covenant or other private agreement, the provision of this ordinance
shall govern.
ARTICLE II
Definitions/Use Classifications
Article 2: Definitions/Use Classifications
   Section
2.1.   Definitions
   Section
2.2.   Use Classifications
2.1. DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of interpreting this ordinance, certain words, terms and
expressions are defined.
∙   Words used in the present tense include the future;
∙   The singular number includes the plural and the plural includes the
singular;
∙   The word “may” is discretionary and the word “shall” is always mandatory;
∙   The word “person” includes a firm, association, organization, partnership,
trust, company, or corporation as well as an individual;
∙   The words “used” or “occupied” include the words intended, designed or
arranged;
∙   The word “lot” includes the words “plot” or “parcel.”
   1.   ABUTTING: Having property or district lines in common.
   2.   ACCESS: A way of approaching or entering a property from a public
street.
   3.   ACCESSORY BUILDING (OR STRUCTURE): A customarily incidental and
subordinate building located on the same lot with the main building, occupied
by or devoted to, an accessory use. Where an accessory building or structure is
attached to the principal building in the subordinate manner, as by a wall or
roof, such accessory building or structure shall be considered part of the
principal building. Private detached garages are considered accessory
buildings.
   4.   ACCESSORY USE: A use which:
      1)   is subordinate to and serves a principal building;
      2)   is subordinate in extent or purpose to the principal building
served;
      3)   contributes to the comfort, convenience, or necessity of occupants
of the principal building;
      4)   is located on the same zoning lot as the principal building.
   5.   ADDITION: Any construction which increases the site coverage, height,
length, width, or gross floor area of a structure.
   6.   ALLEY: A public or private thoroughfare, other than a street, for the
use of vehicles which affords only a secondary means of access to abutting
properties.
   7.   ALTERATION: Any change in the supporting members of a building, such as
bearing walls, partitions, columns, beams or girders. The enlargement of the
size or height of a building shall be construed to be a structural alteration.
   8.   APARTMENT: A single room or set of rooms occupied as a dwelling which
is part of a multi-family structure.
   9.   ATTACHED: Having one or more walls common with a principal building, or
joined to a principal building by a covered porch or passageway, the roof of
which is a part or extension of a principal building.
   10.   BASEMENT: A story partly underground but having at least one-half (1/
2) of its height above the curb level, and also one half (1/2) of its height
above the highest level of the adjoining ground. A basement shall be counted as
a story under the provisions of this code.
   11.   BILLBOARD: A billboard, shall include all structures, regardless of
the material used in construction, that are erected, maintained or used for
public display of posters, painted signs, or wall signs, whether the structure
be placed on the wall or freestanding. Billboards include pictures or other
pictorial reading material which advertises a business or attraction which is
not carried on, manufactured, grown, or sold on the premises where the said
signs or billboards are located.
   12.   BLOCK: That property abutting on one side of a street, and lying
within the two nearest intercepting or intersecting streets or lying within the
nearest intercepting or intersecting streets and unsubdivided acreage or
railroad right-of-way.
   13.   BOARD (OR ZONING BOARD): The Sheldon Zoning Board of Adjustment
   14.   BUILDABLE AREA: The portion of a lot or parcel remaining after
required yard setbacks have been provided.
   15.   BUILDING: A structure that is completely enclosed by a roof and by
solid exterior walls, which is permanently affixed to a lot or lots, and used
or intended for shelter, protection, support, or enclosure of persons, animals
or property of any kind, but not including signs, billboards or structures or
vehicles originally designed for transportation purposes. When separated by
division walls from the ground up without openings, each portion of such
structure shall be deemed a separate building. The word “building” includes the
word “structure.”
   16.   BUILDING, HEIGHT OF: The vertical distance from the average natural
grade at the building line to the highest point of the roof. Where a dwelling
is situated on a lot with more than one grade or level, the measurements shall
be taken from the main entrance elevation.
   17.   BUILDING, PRINCIPAL: The building in which the primary use of the lot
or parcel is conducted. 
   18.   BUILDING LINE: The setback distance from the front property line, rear
lot line, and side lot lines as provided in this ordinance.
   19.   BUILDING WALL: The wall of the principal building forming a part of
the main structure. The foundation walls of enclosed porches, steps, walks and
retaining wall or similar structures shall not be considered as building walls
under the provisions of this ordinance.
   20.   BUSINESS (OR COMMERCIAL): The engaging in the purchase, sale, or
exchange of goods or services, or the operation for the profit of offices or
recreational amusement enterprises.
   21.   CARPORT: Space for the housing or storage of vehicles and completely
enclosed on not more than 2 sides by affixed or semi-permanent walls. Those
structures identified as hoop buildings, portable or foldable buildings, tent
buildings or fully enclosed steel buildings shall not be considered a carport
for purposes of this ordinance. Carports attached to the principal building are
considered a part of the principal building, and shall be of similar appearance
or materials to the principal building. Freestanding carports are considered an
accessory building.
   22.   CHILD DAY CARE: The care, supervision, or guidance of a child under
eighteen years of age by a person other than the parent, guardian, relative, or
custodian for periods of less than twenty-four hours per day, on a regular
basis in a place other than the child’s home.
   23.   CHILD DAY CARE CENTER: A facility providing child day care for seven
(7) or more children for compensation but not defined as a group day care home.
   24.   CITY: The City of Sheldon, Iowa
   25.   COMMISSION (OR PLANNING COMMISSION): The Sheldon Planning and Zoning
Commission. A Commission appointed by the city council to recommend the
boundaries of the various districts and appropriate regulations and
restrictions to be enforced through this ordinance and as granted powers under
Chapter 414 of the Code of Iowa.
   26.   CONDOMINIUM: A building, or group of buildings, in which the dwelling
units, offices, or floor area are owned independently, and whereas the
structure, common areas, and facilities are owned by all of the owners on a
proportional, undivided basis.
   27.   COUNCIL: The Sheldon City Council.
   28.   DECK: An unenclosed, roofless structure adjoined to the principal
building. Decks higher than twelve (12) inches above the average grade of the
ground shall also be subject to required yard setbacks.
   29.   DETACHED: Fully separated from any other building, or joined to
another building by structural members not constituting an enclosed or covered
space.
   30.   DISTRICT: A part, zone, or geographic area within the city within
which certain zoning or development regulations apply.
   31.   DRIVEWAY: A permanently surfaced area providing vehicular access
between a street and an off-street parking or loading area.
   32.   DUPLEX: A building containing two single-family dwelling units totally
separated from each other by an unpierced wall extending from ground to roof.
See DWELLING, TWO FAMILY.
   33.   DWELLING: Any house, building, or mobile home, or portion thereof
designed for and intended to be occupied as the place of habitation of human
beings.
   34.   DWELLING, EXISTING RELOCATED RESIDENTIAL: A residence which presently
exists and is proposed to be relocated upon a lot within the City of Sheldon,
Iowa.
   35.   DWELLING, MULTIPLE FAMILY: An apartment house or dwelling used or
intended to be used or occupied as the residence of three (3) or more families
living independently of each other, with separate housekeeping and cooking
facilities for each. 
   36.   DWELLING, SINGLE FAMILY: A detached building that is arranged,
designed for or occupied exclusively as the primary residence of one (1) single
family, having no party wall in common with an adjacent house or houses and is
surrounded by open space or yards.
   37.   DWELLING, TWO FAMILY: A detached building that is arranged, designed
for or occupied as the residences of two (2) families living independently of
each other with separate housekeeping and cooking facilities for each. See
also: DUPLEX.
   38.   EASEMENT: A grant of one or more of the property rights by the
property owner to and/or for use by the public, a corporation, or another
person or entity.
   39.   ENCROACHMENT: Any obstruction or illegal or unauthorized intrusion in
a delineated floodway, right-of-way, or on adjacent land.
   40.   ESSENTIAL SERVICES: The erection, construction, alteration or
maintenance by public utilities or governmental agencies of underground or
over-head gas, electrical or water transmission or distribution systems,
including poles, wires, mains, drains, sewers, pipes, conduits, cables, fire
alarms, police call boxes, traffic signals, hydrants, and other similar
equipment and accessories in connection with and necessary for the furnishing
of adequate service by such public utilities, governmental agencies, and/or for
the public health, safety or general welfare, but not including buildings.
   41.   FAÇADE: The exterior walls of a building exposed to public view or
that wall viewed by persons not within the building.
   42.   FAMILY: One or more persons related by blood, marriage or adoption
occupying a single dwelling unit. A family may include no more than 4 persons
not related by blood, marriage or adoption but further provide that domestic
employees employed on the premises may be housed on the premises without being
counted as a family or families. When facilities for dwelling purposes are
rented to other occupants of a building, those occupants shall not be
considered part of the same family under this ordinance.
   43.   FENCE: Any artificially constructed barrier of approved fencing
material or combination of materials erected to enclose or screen areas of
land.
   44.   FLOODPLAIN: The channel and relatively flat area adjoining the channel
of a natural stream    or river that has been or may be covered by flood
waters.
   45.   FLOOR AREA: The square feet of floor space within the building
perimeter, including the total of all space on all floors of a building. Floor
area shall not include porches, garages, or basement space that is not finished
living space or used for storage or other incidental uses.
   46.   FRONTAGE: All the property on one side of a street between two
intersecting streets (crossing or terminating), measured along the line of the
street, or if the street is dead ended, then all of the property abutting on
one side between an intersecting street and the dead end of the street.
   47.   FROST FREE FOUNDATION: A foundation supporting a structure which is
required to be at least 42" below grade.
   48.   GARAGE: An accessory building or portion of a building used only for
the enclosed parking of or storage of one or more motor vehicles by the
occupants of the premises or the leasing of space as provided herein, including
covered parking space or carport; but in which no business services or industry
connected with motor vehicles is carried on other than leasing of space.
   49.   GRADE: The lowest horizontal elevation of a finished surface of the
ground, paving, or sidewalk at a point where the height is to be measured.
   50.   HOME OCCUPATION: An accessory occupation or profession conducted
entirely within a dwelling unit by the inhabitants thereof, and in accordance
with the regulations outlined in Section
17.6 of this ordinance.
   51.   HOUSEHOLD: A family living together in a single dwelling unit, with
common access to all living and eating areas and all areas and facilities
within the dwelling unit.
   52.   HOUSING UNIT: See DWELLING
   53.   INCIDENTAL: Subordinate and minor in significance and bearing a
reasonable relationship with the primary use.
   54.   INDUSTRY: Those fields of economic activity including forestry,
fishing, hunting, and trapping; mining; construction; manufacturing;
transportation, communication, electric, gas, and sanitary services; and
wholesale trade.
   55.   INSTITUTION: A building or premises occupied by a non-profit
corporation or establishment for public use.
   56.   JUNK (OR SALVAGE): Any old scrap copper, brass, rope, rags, batteries,
paper, trash, rubber debris, waste appliances, furniture, equipment, building
demolition materials or structural steel materials. This definition shall also
include junked, dismantled, or wrecked motor vehicles or parts of motor
vehicles, and iron, steel or other old or scrap ferrous or nonferrous material.
Junk shall also mean waste, yard waste not stored in an approved manner as
determined by the City of Sheldon, reclaimable material or debris, whether or
not stored or used in conjunction with dismantling, processing, salvage,
storage, baling, disposal or other use or disposition.
   57.   JUNK VEHICLE OR JUNK MACHINERY: Any vehicle, other machines or
portions thereof not in running condition and/or not licensed for the current
year as provided by law, or any other non-operating vehicle or machinery
located in open view to the public for a period of more than thirty (30) days
which, because of its defective or obsolete condition, or rotted, rusted or
loose parts, or in any other way constitutes a threat to the public health,
welfare or safety.
   58.   JUNKYARD (or SALVAGE YARD): Any open area of any lot or parcel where
waste, discarded or salvaged materials are bought, sold, exchanged, baled or
packed, disassembled, kept, stored or handled, including scrap metals or scrap
materials, or the abandonment or dismantling of machinery, motor vehicles, or
other vehicles, or parts thereof; but not including areas where such uses are
conducted entirely within a completely enclosed building and not including the
processing of used, discarded or salvaged materials as part of manufacturing
operations.
   59.   LAND USE: A description of how land is occupied or utilized.
   60.   LANDSCAPED: An area devoted to or developed predominantly with plant
material or natural landscape features, including lawn, ground cover, gardens,
trees, shrubs, and other plant materials; and also including accessory
decorative outdoor landscape elements such as pools, fountains, water features,
paved or decorated surfaces or rock, stone, brick, block or similar material
(excluding driveways, parking, loading, or storage areas), and sculptural
elements, provided that the use of brick, stone aggregate, or other inorganic
materials shall not predominate over the use of plant materia1.
   61.   LOADING SPACE: An area used for loading or unloading of goods from a
vehicle in connection with the use of the site on which such space in located.
   62.   LOT AREA: The net horizontal area delineated by front, side and rear
lot lines, providing access to a street and excluding any public or private
easement or right of way providing access to another lot not to exclude utility
easements.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/0346b833617bfb463c260f908cfa9487bbb73bcf/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1833.png]
 
   63.   LOT: A parcel of land as established by plat, subdivision, or as
otherwise permitted by law, which may be owned, used, developed, or built upon,
having its frontage upon one (1) or more improved public streets or an
officially approved private street, and may consist of:
      a.    A single lot of record;
      b.    A portion of a lot of record;
      c.    A combination of complete lots of record, or complete lots of
record and portions of lots of record, or of portions of lots of record;
      d.    A parcel of land described by metes and bounds, provided that in no
case of division or combination shall any residual lot or parcel be created
which does not meet the requirements of this ordinance.
   64.   LOT, CORNER: A lot fronting on two (2) intersecting streets.
   65.   LOT, INTERIOR: A lot other than a corner lot with only one frontage on
a street other than an alley.
   66.   LOT, THROUGH: An interior lot having frontage on two parallel or
approximately parallel streets and also known as a double frontage lot.
   67.   LOT, REVERSE CORNER: A comer lot, the side street line of which is
substantially a continuation of the front lot line of the first lot to its
rear.
   68.   LOT (or BUILDING) COVERAGE:
      The area of a lot covered by buildings or roofed areas, but excluding
incidental eaves and gutters, balconies, and similar features and excluding
ground level paving, landscaping, and recreational facilities.
   69.   LOT DEPTH: The distance from the front lot line to the rear lot line.
In the case of a lot of irregular shape, the mean depth shall be the lot depth.
   70.   LOT OF RECORD: A lot of which is a part of a subdivision, the plat of
which has been recorded in the office of the County of Recorder of O’Brien
County, Iowa; or a lot or parcel of land, the deed or valid contract of sale of
which was recorded in the office of the County Recorder of O’Brien County, Iowa
prior to the effective date of this Ordinance.
   71.   LOT WIDTH: The distances between the side lot lines. In the case of a
lot of irregular shape, the mean width shall be the lot width.
   72.   LOT LINES: The property lines bounding a lot.
   73.   LOT LINE, FRONT: In the case of an interior lot abutting on only one
street, the “front lot line” is the street line (also known as the right-of-way
line) of such lot. In the case of any other lot, the front lot line will be
such street line as is located in front of the main entrance to the principal
structure.  
   74.   LOT LINE, REAR: The boundary line opposite and most distant from the
front lot line.
   75.   LOT LINE, SIDE: Any boundary lines not a front line or a rear line.
   76.   MANUFACTURED HOUSING: A factory-built structure which is manufactured
or constructed under the authority of 42 U.S.C. Sec. 5403, Federal Manufactured
Home Construction and Safety Standards, and is to be used as a place for human
habitation, but which is not constructed or equipped with a permanent hitch or
other device allowing it to be moved other than for the purpose of moving it to
a permanent site, and which does not have permanently attached to its body and
frame any wheels or axles. For the purpose of these regulations, a manufactured
home shall have been built after June 15, 1976 and shall bear a seal certifying
that it is in compliance with the Federal Manufactured Housing Construction Act
of 1974. A mobile home as defined in Section 435.1 of the Code of Iowa is not a
manufactured home, unless it has been converted to real property as provided in
Section 435.26 of the Code of Iowa, and is taxed as a site-built dwelling. For
the purposes of these regulations, manufactured homes shall be considered the
same as any site built single-family detached dwelling. This section shall not
be construed as abrogating a recorded restrictive covenant.
   77.   MANUFACTURED HOUSING CONVERTED TO REAL ESTATE: An unencumbered
manufactured home which has been attached to a permanent foundation on real
estate owned by the manufactured home owner, which has had any vehicular or
other transportation frame modified or destroyed, rendering it impossible to
reconvert it to a manufactured home and which has been inspected by the
assessor, the manufactured home title, registration, and license collected from
the owner and property entered on the tax rolls of the O’Brien County Assessor.
   78.   MOBILE HOME: Any vehicle without motive power used or so manufactured
or constructed as to permit its being used as a conveyance upon the public
streets and highways and so designed, constructed, or reconstructed as will
permit the vehicle to be used as a place for human habitation by one or more
persons; but shall also include any such vehicle with motive power not
registered as a motor vehicle. See also: RECREATIONAL VEHICLE.
   79.   MOBILE HOME PARK: Any site, lot, field or tract of land upon which two
(2) or more occupied mobile homes are placed and connected to utilities for
non-transient purposes; and shall also include any buildings, structures, tent,
vehicle or enclosure used or intended for use as part of the equipment of such
mobile home park.
   80.   MOBILE HOME SPACE: An area within a designated mobile home park which
is designed for and designated as the location for a single mobile home and the
exclusive use of its occupants.
   81.   MODULAR HOME: Factory-built housing certified as meeting the State
Building Code as applicable to modular housing. Once certified by the State,
modular homes shall be subject to the same standards as site-built homes.
   82.   NONCONFORMING USE: A lawful use of any land, building, or structure,
other than a sign, that does not conform with currently applicable use
regulations, but which complied with use regulations in effect at the time the
use was established.
   83.   NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE: A structure or building in size, dimensions,
or location of which was lawful prior to the adoption, revision, or amendment
to the Zoning Ordinance, but which fails to conform to present requirements of
the zoning district.
   84.   OCCUPANCY (or OCCUPIED): The residing of an individual or individuals
overnight in a dwelling unit or the storage or use of equipment, merchandise,
or machinery in any public, commercial, or industrial building.
   85.   OFFICIAL (ZONING) MAP: An ordinance in map form adopted by the
governing body that conclusively shows the location of zoning districts’
boundaries, proposed streets, public areas, and other data referencing the
distinction and separation of zoned land uses.
   86.   PARKING AREA: An area on a lot or within a building, or both,
including none or more parking spaces together with driveways, aisles, turning
and maneuvering areas, clearances, and similar features, and meeting the
requirements established by this Ordinance. Parking areas shall include parking
lots, garages, and parking structures.
   87.   PARKING LOT: An off-street, ground level open area usually improved
for the temporary storage of motor vehicles. See also: PARKING AREA.
   88.   PARKING SPACE: An area, enclosed or unenclosed, having dimensions of
not less than nine (9) feet by twenty (20) feet (180 sq. ft.) exclusive of a
driveway or access drives, plus necessary maneuvering space for the parking of
a motor vehicle, and connected with a street or alley by a surfaced driveway
which affords satisfactory ingress and egress for motor vehicles. Space
required for maneuvering, incidental to parking or unparking, shall not
encroach upon any public right-of-way. Driveways for one- and two-family
structures may be considered as parking spaces. When four (4) or more
automobile parking spaces are to be grouped as a common facility, meeting a
requirement of this definition, the individual car spaces plus the area
necessary for driveways shall total not less than 315 square feet per car
space.
   89.   PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT (PUD): An area of minimum contiguous size
specified in this ordinance developed according to plan as a single entity and
containing one or more structures or land uses with appurtenant or adjacent
common areas.
   90.   PORCH, OPEN: A roofed structure, open on two (2) or more sides,
projecting from the front, side or rear wall of the building.
   91.   PERMITTED USE: See USE: b. Permitted Use.
   92.   PRINCIPAL USE: See USE: a. Principal Use.
   93.   PROHIBITED USE: Any use that is not permitted in a zoning district.
   94.   PROJECTIONS (INTO YARDS): Parts of buildings such as architectural
features that extend beyond the building's exterior wall.
   95.   PROPERTY: A lot, parcel, or tract of land together with the buildings
and structures located thereon.
   96.   PUBLIC NOTICE: A publication of the time and place of any public
hearing typically not less than four (4) or not more than twenty (20) days
prior to the date of said hearing in one newspaper of general circulation in
the city. In the instances of publications amending or adopting changes to this
ordinance, the public notice notification period is not less than seven (7) or
not more than twenty (20) days prior to the date of said public hearing.
   97.   QUORUM: A majority of the full authorized membership.
   98.   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE: A vehicle or structure so designed and
constructed in such a manner as will permit occupancy thereof as sleeping
quarters for one or more persons, or for sporting or recreational purposes. A
recreational vehicle is so designed that it is or may be mounted on wheels and
used as a conveyance on highways or city streets, propelled or drawn by its own
or other motive power, except a device used exclusively upon stationary rails
or tracks. Such a vehicle shall be customarily or ordinarily used for, but not
limited to, vacationing, recreational purposes, travel trailers, pick-up
campers, camping trailers, motor coach homes, or converted trucks and/or buses;
and not used as a place of human habitation for more than ninety (90) days in
any twelve (12) month period, or it shall be classed as a mobile home.
   99.   REMODEL: To construct an addition or alter the design or layout of a
building or make    substantial repairs or alterations.
   100.   RESIDENTIAL CONVENIENCE SERVICE: A use or activity of a commercial
nature conducted as an accessory use to multiple family residential or mobile
home park residential use, and intended solely for the convenience of residents
thereof.
   101.   ROADSIDE STAND: A temporary structure, unenclosed, and so designed
and constructed that the structure is easily portable or can be readily moved,
and which is adjacent to a road and used for the sale of agricultural, natural
or human-made products.
   102.   ROOMS, HABITABLE: A room that provides the required area and window
area to provide necessary light and ventilation of occupants, and shall be
clean and sanitary at all times.
   103.   SETBACK: The required distance between any lot line and the
supporting walls or prominent features of any building, structure or deck more
than 12” above grade.
   104.   SETBACK LINE: A line within a lot parallel to and measured from a
corresponding lot line, forming the boundary of a required yard and defining
that minimum distance between the building and property line which buildings
and structures may not be placed.
   105.   SIGN: An identification, description, illustration, or device which
is affixed to or     represented directly or indirectly upon a building,
structure or land and which directs     attention to a product, place,
activity, person, institution or business.
   106.   SIGN AREA: That area enclosed by one contiguous line, connecting the
extreme points or edges of a sign. The area shall be determined by using the
largest area or silhouette visible at any one time from any one point. This
does not include the main supporting sign structure.
   107.   SITE DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS: The combinations of controls that
establish the maximum size of a building and its location on the lot.
Components of site development regulations include: size and height of
building; location of exterior walls at all levels with respect to lot lines,
streets, or other buildings; building coverage; gross floor area of building in
relation to the lot area; open space; and amount of lot area provided per
dwelling unit.
   108.   SITE PLAN: A plan, prepared to scale, showing accurately and with
complete dimensioning, all of the buildings, structures and uses, and the
principal site development features including parking, access, and landscaping
and screening, proposed for a specific parcel of land.
   109.   SPOT ZONING: Rezoning of a lot or parcel of land to benefit an owner
for a use incompatible with surrounding land uses and that does not further the
comprehensive plan.
   110.   SPRAWL: Uncontrolled growth, usually of a low-density nature, in
previously rural areas and some distance from existing development and
infrastructure.
   111.   STATEMENT OF INTENT: A statement preceding regulations for individual
districts, intended to characterize the districts and their legislative
purpose.
   112.   STORY: That part of any building included between the surface of any
floor and the surface of the floor next above it, or if there is no floor above
it, then the space between the floor and the ceiling or roof next above it; the
first story of a building is the lowest story having at least one-half (1/2) of
its height above the highest level of adjoining ground.
   113.   STREET: A public or private thoroughfare that affords the primary
means of access to abutting property.
   114.   STREET, FRONT: The street or public place upon which a plot abuts. If
a plot abuts upon more than one street or public place it shall mean the street
in front of the principal or primary entrance to the building.  
   115.   STREET, PUBLIC: A public thoroughfare twenty feet (20') or more in
width.
   116.   STREET (OR ROAD) LINE: The dividing line between a lot, tract or
parcel of land and the right-of-way of any contiguous road, street or alley.
   117.    STRUCTURAL ALTERATION: Any replacement or changes in the type of
construction or in the supporting members of a building beyond ordinary repairs
and maintenance; such as bearing walls or partitions, columns, beams or
girders. 
   118.   STRUCTURE: Anything constructed or erected which requires location on
the ground or attached to something having location on the ground, including
(but not limited to) fences, signs, and billboards.
(Ordinance 017-3228, 9/13/2017)
   119.   SUBSTANDARD LOT (OR NONCONFORMING LOT): A lot of record that does not
comply with currently applicable minimum area, width, or depth requirements for
the zoning district in which it is located, but which complied or was
conforming with applicable requirements when it was placed on record prior to
the enactment of this zoning Ordinance.
   120.   TEMPORARY STRUCTURE: A structure without any foundation or footings
and that is removed when the designated time period, activity, or use has
ceased.
   121.   TOWNHOUSE: A one-family dwelling in a row of at least three such
units in which each unit has its own front and/or rear access to the outside,
no unit is located over another unit, and each unit is separated from any other
unit by one or more vertical common fire- resistant walls.
   122.   USE: The conduct of an activity or the performance of a function or
operation on a site or in a building or facility.
      a.   Principal Use: The main use which is the primary function of a lot
or structures as distinguished from an accessory use.
      b.   Permitted Use: Any use permitted as a matter of right when conducted
in accord with the regulations established by this ordinance; of which fulfills
the primary function of a household, establishment, institution, or other
entity.
      c.   Special Exception Use: A use allowable solely on a discretionary and
conditional basis subject to a Special Exception Use Permit, and to all other
regulations established by this ordinance.
      d.   Accessory Use: A use or activity located on the same lot and of a
nature customarily incidental and subordinate to the principal use or building.
   123.   VACANT (OR VACANCY): Any unoccupied land, structure, or part thereof
that is available and suitable for occupancy.
   124.   VALUATION: The estimated cost to replace a building; based on the
current cost of replacement. This is in reference to the replacement of
nonconforming structures identified in Section
22.4 and nonconforming uses of structures and land identified in Section
22.5.
   125.   VARIANCE: The relaxation of the terms of the zoning Ordinance where
such variance will not be contrary to the public interest and where, owing to
conditions and peculiarity of the property and not the results of actions of
the applicant; where a literal enforcement of the zoning regulations would
result in an unnecessary and undue hardship. A variance is authorized only for
height, area, and size of structure or size of yards and open spaces.
Establishment or expansion of a use otherwise prohibited shall not be allowed
by variance, nor shall a variance be granted because of the presence of
nonconformities in the zoning district or uses in an adjoining zoning district.
   126.   YARD: A required open space on a lot adjoining a lot line, containing
only landscaping and such uses and facilities as may be permitted by this
ordinance. In measuring a yard for the purpose of determining the depth of a
front yard or rear yard, the least distance between the lot line and the main
principal building shall be used. In measuring a yard for the purpose of
determining the width of a side yard, the least distance between the lot line
and the nearest permitted building shall be used. Fences and walls are
permitted in any yard, subject to height limitations as indicated herein.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/0346b833617bfb463c260f908cfa9487bbb73bcf/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1835.png]
 
      a.   Front Yard: A required yard extending across the full width of a lot
and measured between the front lot line and the building wall or any other
projection or supporting element thereof, other than the projection of usual
steps or open porches. In the case of corner lots, the front yard shall be
considered as the yard adjacent to the street where the principal building has
its main entrance.
      b.   Interior Yard: Any required yard, not adjacent to a street, which is
determined on the basis of an interior lot line.
      c.   Rear Yard: A required yard extending across the full width of a lot
and measured between the rear lot line and the building or any projections
other than steps or unenclosed balconies or porches, but excluding any area
located within the street side yard of a corner lot. On both corner lots and
interior lots the opposite end of the lot from the front yard shall be
considered the rear yard.
      d.   Side Yard: A required yard extending the depth of a lot from the
front yard to the rear yard and measured between the side lot line and the
nearest building. In the case of a corner lot, the street side yard shall
extend from the front yard to the rear lot line.
   127.   ZONING: The delineation of districts and the establishment of
regulations governing the use, placement, spacing, and size of land and
buildings.
   128.   ZONING ADMINISTRATOR: The administrative officer appointed by the
city council of the City of Sheldon, Iowa responsible for reviewing and issuing
zoning permits and to administer and ensure compliance with the zoning
ordinance.  
   129.   ZONING COMPLIANCE PERMIT: A permit issued and enforced by the zoning
administrator as required in this ordinance, as a condition precedent to the
commencement of use, or the erection, construction, reconstruction,
restoration, alteration, conversion, or installation of a structure or
building; acknowledging the proposed use, building, or structure complies with
the provisions of the zoning ordinance or authorized variance.
   130.   ZONING MAP: The map delineating the boundaries of districts which,
along with the zoning text, comprises the zoning ordinance.
2.2. USE CLASSIFICATIONS.
   The purpose of the Use Classifications shall be to provide a consistent set
of terms encompassing and defining those uses permitted by right or under
special exception as identified in the various districts; and to provide a
procedure for determination of the applicable use classification of any
activity not clearly within any defined use classification.
   In event of any question as to the appropriate use classification of any
existing or proposed use or activity, the zoning administrator shall have the
authority to determine the classification, subject to the right of appeal
pursuant to
Article XXIII. In making such determinations, the zoning administrator shall
consider the characteristics of the use in question, and consider any
functional, product, service, or physical requirements common with or similar
to uses cited as examples of use classifications.
   1)   General Description of AGRICULTURAL USE TYPES:   
   Agricultural use types include the on-site production of plant and animal
products by agricultural methods.
      a.   Commercial Farm Operation: An area that is used for the growing of
the usual farm products as well as the raising of farm animals including
cattle, swine and sheep. This definition shall include the raising of animals
or production of animal products such as eggs or dairy products, on an
agricultural or commercial basis. Typical uses include but not limited to
grazing, ranching, dairy farming, poultry farming, and the raising of fur
bearing animals.
      b.   Crop Production: The raising and harvesting of tree crops, row
crops, or field crops on an agricultural or commercial basis, including
incidental packing and processing.
      c.    Farm: An area which is used for the growing of the usual farm
products such as vegetables, fruits, trees and grain, and their storage on the
premises, as well as the raising thereon of the usual farm poultry and animals.
The term "farm" includes the operating of such an area for one (1) or more of
the above uses including the necessary accessory uses for treating or storing
produce; provided, however, that the operation of accessory uses shall be
secondary to the normal farming activities and provided further that farming
does not include the commercial feeding of animals or poultry.
      d.   Horticulture: The growing of horticultural and floricultural
specialties, such as flowers, shrubs, or trees intended for ornamental or
landscaping purposes, but excluding retail sales.
      e.   Residential Animal Raising (Recreational): Limit the keeping of
animals on a non- commercial, non-profit basis. Restrictions on this type of
use include three (3) large animals per acre (e.g. horses, sheep and cattle,
etc); twenty (20) small fowl or animals per acre (e.g. chickens, rabbits,
ducks, ferrets, etc.); five (5) large fowl per acre (e.g. turkeys, geese,
peacocks, etc.).
      f.   Stables: Boarding, breeding or raising of horses not owned by the
occupants of the premises or riding of horses by other than the occupants of
the premises or their non- paying guests. Typical uses include but not limited
to boarding stables or public stables.
      g.   Support Housing: The occupancy of any living accommodations by one
(1) agricultural employee and their family, without regard to duration, which
occurs exclusively in association with the performance of agricultural labor,
on the same property as the support housing.
   2)   General Description of RESIDENTIAL USE TYPES:
      Residential use types include the occupancy of living accommodations on
primarily nontransient basis or institutional living arrangements, but
excluding those providing forced residence such as asylums and prisons.
      a.   Condominium Residential: The use of a site for three (3) or more
multiple family dwelling units intended for separate ownership, together with
common area serving all dwelling units; whereas the structure, common areas and
facilities are owned by all of the owners on a proportional, undivided basis.
      b.   Duplex Residential: The use of a site for two (2) dwelling units on
a single lot or parcel.
      c.   Family Home (as per Chapter 414.22 Iowa Code): A community based
residential home which is licensed as a residential care facility under Chapter
135C of the Iowa Code or as a child foster care facility under Chapter 237 of
the Iowa Code to provide room and board, personal care, habilitation services,
and supervision in a family environment exclusively for not more than eight (8)
persons with a developmental disability or brain injury and any necessary
support personnel. However, family home does not mean an individual foster care
family home licensed under Chapter 237.
      d.   Group Residential: The residential occupancy of living
accommodations by groups of more than five (5) persons not defined as a family
on a weekly or longer basis. Typical uses include but not limited to fraternity
or sorority houses, dormitories, or residence halls.
      e.   Kennel, Private: Any building or land designed or arranged for the
care of no more than a combined total of three (3) dogs or and cats belonging
to the owner of the principal structure, kept for purposes of show, hunting, or
pets.
      f.   Mobile Home Residential: The residential occupancy of mobile homes
by families on a weekly or longer basis. Uses only include mobile home parks or
mobile home subdivisions.
      g.   Multiple Family Residential: The use of a site for three (3) or more
dwelling units, within one or more buildings.
      h.   Relocated Residential: An existing, previously built residential
structure, intended for occupancy, which has been moved into the community from
a location outside of Sheldon, or an existing residential structure which has
been relocated from another location from within the City of Sheldon to a new
residential site. A relocated residential structure does not include the moving
of a new manufactured, modular or mobile home into the city. Relocated
residential properties shall submit a route plan, photographs of the building
to be moved, and an application for zoning permit prior to moving a building or
structure into Sheldon.
      i.   Residential Health Care Facilities: Any residential care services,
intermediate care facility or skilled nursing home.
         1)   Residential Care Services: A use, other than a hospital or
convalescent facility, providing care for ambulatory persons in a residential
environment, including overnight occupancy or extended care.
         2)    Assisted Living Facility: Residences for primarily senior or
retired persons that provide dwelling units, housekeeping services, meals,
personal care, and supervision of self-administered medication. Assisted living
facilities may also provide other services such as recreational activities,
financial services, and transportation and these facilities are sometimes
combined with other types of housing such as congregate apartment housing,
senior housing, or residential care services.
         3)   Skilled Nursing Facility: Any institution, building, or agency
providing care for a period exceeding twenty-four hours for accommodation,
board or nursing services, the need for which is certified by a physician to
three or more individuals not related to the administrator or owner, who by
reason of illness, disease, or physical or mental illness require continuous
care services and related medical services, but do not require hospital care.
The care services provided must be under the direction of a registered nurse on
a twenty-four (24) hour per day basis.
      j.   Single Family Residential: The use of a site for only one (1) single
family dwelling unit.
      k.   Townhouse Residential: The use of a site for three (3) or more
townhouse dwelling units, constructed with common or adjacent walls and each
located on a separate ground parcel within the total development site.
   3)   General Description of COMMERCIAL USE TYPES:   
      Commercial use types include the sale, rental, service, and distribution
of goods; and the provision of services other than those classified as
industrial or civic uses.
      a.   Administrative and Business Offices: Office of private firms or
organizations, which are primarily used for the provision of executive,
management, or administrative services. Typical uses include but not limited to
administrative offices, and services including real estate, insurance, property
management, investment, personnel, travel, secretarial services, telemarketing,
photocopy and reproduction, and offices of public utilities or associations.
      b.    Agricultural Sales and Services: Establishments or places of
business engaged in sale from the premises of feed, grain, fertilizers,
pesticides and similar goods or in the provision of agriculturally related
services with incidental storage on lots other than where the service is
rendered. Typical uses include but not limited to nurseries, hay, feed and
grain stores, and tree service firms.
      c.    Automotive and Equipment Services: Establishments or places of
business primarily engaged in automotive-related or heavy equipment sales or
services. The following are automotive and equipment use types:
         1)   Automotive Washing: Washing and cleaning of automobiles, related
light equipment, and trucks. Typical uses include but not limited to auto
laundries, car washes, or truck washes. Does not include large truck cleanouts
or wash outs.
         2)   Service Station: Provision of fuel, lubricants, parts and
accessories, and incidental services to motor vehicles.
         3)   Commercial Off-Street Parking: Parking of motor vehicles on a
temporary basis within privately owned off-street parking facility, other than
accessory to a principal use. Uses include commercial parking lots or parking
garages.
         4)   Automotive Rentals: Rental of automobiles, noncommercial trucks,
trailers, and recreational vehicles. Typical uses include but not limited to
auto rental agencies, trailer rental agencies, and taxicab parking and
dispatching.
         5)   Automotive Sales: Sales or rental of automobiles, noncommercial
truck, motorcycles, motor homes, recreational vehicles or boats, including
incidental storage, maintenance, and servicing. Typical uses include but not
limited to new and used car dealerships, motorcycle dealerships, and boat,
trailer, and recreational vehicle dealerships.
         6)   Equipment Sales: Sale or rental of trucks, tractors, construction
equipment, agricultural implements, mobile homes and similar heavy equipment,
including incidental storage, maintenance, and servicing. Typical uses include
but not limited to truck dealerships, construction equipment dealerships, and
mobile home sales.
         7)   Automotive Repair Services: Repair of automobiles, noncommercial
truck, motorcycles, motor homes, recreational vehicles or boats, including the
sale, installation, and servicing of equipment and parts. Typical uses include
but not limited to new and used car dealerships, motorcycle, boat, trailer, and
recreational vehicle dealerships.
         8)   Equipment Repair Services: Repair of trucks, tractors,
construction equipment, agricultural implements, and similar heavy equipment.
Typical uses include but not limited to truck repair garages, tractor and farm
implement repair services, and machine shops, but exclude dismantling or
salvage.
         9)   Vehicle Storage: Long term storage of operating or non-operating
vehicles. Typical uses include but not limited to storage of private parking
tow-a-ways or impound yards, but exclude dismantling or salvage.
      d.   Building Maintenance Services: Establishments primarily engaged in
the provision of maintenance and custodial services to firms rather than
individuals. Typical uses include but not limited to janitorial, landscape
maintenance, or window cleaning services.
      e.    Business Support Services: Establishments or places of business
primarily engaged in the sale, rental or repair of equipment and supplies used
by office, professional and service establishments to the firms themselves
rather than to individuals, but exclude automotive, construction and farm
equipment. Typical uses include but not limited to office equipment and supply
firms, small business machine repair shops or hotel equipment and supply firms.
      f.    Business or Trade School: A use providing education or training in
business, commerce, language, or other similar activity or occupational
pursuit, and not otherwise defined as a home occupation, college or university,
or public or private educational facility.
      g.   Cocktail Lounge: A use engaged in the preparation and retail sales
of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises, including taverns,
bars, cocktail lounges, and similar uses.
      h.   Commercial Recreation: Establishments or places primarily engaged in
the provision of sports, entertainment, or recreation for participants or
spectators. The following are commercial recreation use types:
         1)   Indoor Sports and Recreation: Uses conducted within an enclosed
building. Typical uses include but not limited to bowling alleys, billiard
parlors, ice- and roller-skating rinks, video game arcades.
         2)   Outdoor Sports and Recreation: Uses conducted in open or
partially enclosed or screened facilities. Typical uses include but not limited
to golf courses, swimming pools, tennis courts, and racquetball courts.
         3)   Indoor Entertainment: Predominantly spectator uses conducted
within an enclosed building. Typical uses include but not limited to motion
picture theaters, meeting halls, community or event centers, and dance halls.
         4)   Outdoor Entertainment: Predominantly spectator uses conducted in
open facilities. Typical uses include but not limited to sports arenas, racing
facilities, go-kart track, amusement parks, driving ranges, and miniature golf
courses.
      i.   Communications Services: Establishments primarily engaged in the
provision of broadcasting and information relay services accomplished through
the use of electronic and telephonic mechanisms but exclude those classified as
Major Utility Facilities. Typical uses include but not limited to
telecommunication services; radio, television, cellular and other similar
receiving antennas, towers, or structures; and fiber optic lines and
transmission facilities.
      j.   Condominium Storage Unit: A building or series of buildings in which
the storage units or floor area is owned independently; and whereas the
structure and property is owned by all of the owners on a proportional,
undivided basis or by single ownership. These storage units are designed for
individually owned indoor storage of RVs, boats, watercrafts, snowmobiles,
motorcycles, automobiles, antiques, toys, trailers, record storage or other
similar uses. Condominium storage must be designed in a way that each unit
maintains a separate entrance.
      k.   Construction Sales and Services: Establishments or places of
business primarily engaged in construction activities and incidental storage on
lots other than construction sites as well as the retail or wholesale, from the
premises, of materials used in construction of building or other structures
other than retail sale of paint, fixtures and hardware; but excludes those
classified as one of the Automotive and Equipment Services use types. Typical
uses include but not limited to building materials stores, tool and equipment
rental or sales, or building contractors.
      l.   Consumer Repair Services: Establishments primarily engaged in repair
services to individuals or households rather than firms, but excluding
automotive and equipment uses. Typical uses include but not limited to
appliance repair, watch/jewelry repair, or musical instrument repair.
      m.   Convenience Storage: Storage services primarily for personal effects
and household goods within enclosed storage areas having individual access.
This may include use as workshops and hobby shops, but excludes manufacturing,
commercial activity, and housing. Typical uses include but are not limited to
mini warehousing.
(Ordinance O20-3259, 12/02/2020)
      n.   Financial Services: Establishments primarily engaged in the
provision of financial and banking services. Typical uses include but not
limited to banks, savings and loan institutions, loan and lending activities,
and similar services.
      o.   Food Sales: Establishment or places of business primarily engaged in
the retail sale of food or household products for home consumption. Typical
uses include but not limited to grocery stores, delicatessens, meat markets,
retail bakeries, and candy shops.
      p.   Funeral Services: Establishments engaged in undertaking services
such as preparing the human dead for burial and arranging and managing
funerals. Typical uses include but not limited to funeral homes, crematoriums
or mortuaries.
      q.   General Retail Sales: Sale or rental of commonly used goods, and
merchandise for personal or household use, but excludes those classified more
specifically in this Section inclusive. Typical uses include but not limited to
department stores, apparel stores, furniture stores, or establishments
providing the following Products or services: household cleaning and
maintenance products; drugs, cards, and stationery, notions, books, tobacco
products, cosmetics, and specialty items; flowers, plants, hobby materials,
toys and handcrafted items; apparel, jewelry, fabrics, and like items; cameras,
photography services, household electronic equipment, records, sporting
equipment, kitchen utensils, home furnishing and appliances, art supplies and
framing, arts and antiques, paint and wallpaper, carpeting and floor covering,
interior decorating services, office supplies; bicycles; and automotive parts
and accessories (excluding service and installation)
      r.   Hospital Services: A facility providing medical, psychiatric, or
surgical services for sick or injured persons primarily on an inpatient and
emergency treatment, diagnostic services, training, research, administration,
and services to patients, employees, or visitors.
      s.   Kennel, public: A commercial establishment in which four (4) or more
dogs, cats or domesticated animals at least six months of age are housed,
groomed, bred, boarded, trained, or sold, all for a fee or compensation.
Typical uses include but not limited to boarding kennels, pet motels, or dog
training centers.
      t.   Laundry Sales: Establishments primarily engaged in the provision of
laundering, dry cleaning, or dyeing services other that those classified as
Personal Services. Typical uses include but not limited to bulk laundry and
cleaning facilities, diaper services, or linen supply services.
      u.   Liquor Sales: Establishments or places of business engaged in retail
sale for consumption off the premises of alcoholic beverages. Typical uses
include but not limited to liquor stores, bottle shops, or any licensed sales
for off-site consumption.
      v.   Medical Clinics/Offices: A use providing consultation, diagnosis,
therapeutic, preventative, or corrective personal treatment services by
doctors, dentists, medical and dental laboratories, and similar practitioners
of medical and healing arts licensed for practice by the State of Iowa.
      w.   Personal Improvement Services: Establishments primarily engaged in
the provision of informational, instructional, personal improvement and similar
services of nonprofessional nature. Typical uses include but not limited to
photography studios, driving schools, health or physical fitness studios,
reducing salons, dance studios, handicraft and hobby instruction.
      x.   Personal Services: Establishments or places of business primarily
engaged in the provision of frequently or recurrently needed services of a
personal nature. Typical uses include but not limited to beauty and
barbershops, seamstress, tailor, shoe repair shops, and self-service laundry or
apparel cleaning services.
      y.   Pet Services: Retail sales and grooming of dogs, cats, birds, fish,
and similar small animals customarily used as household pets. Typical uses
include but not limited to pet stores, animal bathing facilities, or pet
grooming shops.
      z.   Professional Office: Any building or use providing professional or
consulting services in the fields of law, architecture, design, engineering,
accounting, and similar licensed professions.
      aa.   Restaurant (Convenience): A use engaged in the preparation and
retail sale of food and beverages, excluding alcoholic beverages, for on
premise consumption. Typical uses include but not limited to soda fountains,
ice cream parlors, sandwich shops, cafes, and coffee shops.
      bb.   Restaurant (General): A use engaged in the preparation and retail
sales of food and beverages, including sale of alcoholic beverages when
conducted as an accessory or secondary feature and producing less than 50
percent of the gross income. A general restaurant may include live
entertainment. Typical uses include but not limited to restaurants, lounges,
bar & grills, and other similar establishments with incidental alcoholic
service.
      cc.   Retail Specialty Shop: Various commercial establishments offering
sales of goods which fall into a specific category, and any service which may
be related to those goods. Typical uses include but not limited to bicycle
shop, camera shop, antique shops, bookstores, etc.
      dd.   Veterinary Services: Veterinary services for animals. Typical uses
include but not limited to pet clinics, dog and cat hospitals, and veterinary
hospitals.
      ee.   Visitor Habitation: Establishments primarily engaged in the
provision of lodging services with incidental food, drink and other sales and
services intended for the convenience of guests. The following are visitor
habitation use types:
         1)   Campground: Facilities or an area providing spaces for two (2) or
more travel trailers, recreational vehicles, camping trailers, or tent sites
for temporary occupancy with necessary incidental services, sanitation and
recreation facilities to serve the traveling public. Typical uses include but
not limited to campgrounds or recreational vehicle parks.
         2)   Hotel-Motel: A building containing guest rooms primarily intended
for temporary occupancy to transient guests for compensation and provides
parking for the guests. Other such accessory uses associated with a hotel-motel
may include a swimming pool, restaurant, meeting/conference rooms, management
office and quarters for the use of operating personnel.
         3)   Bed & Breakfast Inn: A private, owner-occupied housing unit, or
portion thereof where short-term lodging and meals are provided for up to five
(5) guests for rent to the general public. The only meal to be provided to
guests is breakfast, and it shall only be served to those taking lodging in the
facility. Individual units designed as rentals shall contain no cooking
facilities.
         4)   Boarding House: A building, other than a hotel or motel, where
for compensation, meals and lodging are provided for more than three (3)
persons not defined as a family
   4)   General Description of INDUSTRIAL USE TYPES:
      Industrial use types include the on-site extraction or production of
goods by methods not agricultural, and storage and distribution of products.
      a.   Basic Industry: A use engaged in the basic processing and
manufacturing of materials or products predominantly from extracted or raw
materials, or a use engaged in storage of, or manufacturing processes utilizing
flammable or explosive materials, or storage or manufacturing processes which
potentially involve hazardous or commonly recognized offensive conditions.
      b.   Custom Manufacturing: Establishments primarily engaged in the on-
site production of goods by hand manufacturing which involves the use of hand
tools or mechanical equipment and the incidental direct sale to consumers of
only those goods produced on- site. Typical uses include but not limited to
ceramic studios, candle making shops or custom jewelry.
      c.   Light Manufacturing: A use engaged in the manufacture, predominantly
from previously prepared materials, of finished products or parts, including
processing, fabrication, assembly, treatment, and packaging of such products,
and incidental storage, sales, and distribution of such products, but excluding
basic industrial processing.
      d.   Research and Production Services: Establishments primarily engaged
in research of an industrial or scientific nature, including animal or human
products testing. Typical uses include but not limited to animal or human
research laboratories, research and development firms, or animal or human
pharmaceutical research labs.
      e.   Resource Extraction: A use involving the on-site extraction of
surface mineral products or natural resources. Typical extractive uses include
but limited to quarries, borrow pits, sand and gravel operations, oil and gas
extraction, and mining operations.
      f.   Sanitary Landfill: Any area of land designated for the disposal of
garbage, refuse, rubbish, and other solid or semisolid materials, of which are
buried between layers of earth.
      g.    Scrap and Salvage Services: Places of business primarily engaged in
the storage, sale, dismantling or other processing of used or waste materials
which are not intended for reuse. Typical uses include but not limited to
junkyards or auto scrap and salvage yards.
      h.   Stockyards: Stockyard services involving the temporary keeping of
livestock for slaughter, market or shipping. Typical uses include but not
limited to stockyards or animal sales or auction yards.
      i.   Railroad Facilities: Railroad yards, equipment servicing facilities,
and terminal facilities.
      j.   Warehousing and Distribution: Establishments or places of business
primarily engaged in wholesaling, storage, distribution and handling of
materials and equipment other than live animals and plants. The following are
warehousing use types:
         1)   Limited Warehousing and Distribution: Wholesaling, storage and
warehousing services within enclosed structures. Typical uses include but not
limited to wholesale distributors, storage warehouses or moving and storage
firms.
         2)   General Warehousing and Distribution: Open-air storage,
distribution and handling of materials and equipment. Typical uses include but
not limited to grain elevators or open storage yards.
   5)   General Description of CIVIC USE TYPES:   
      Civic use types include the performance of utility, educational,
recreational, cultural, medical, protective, governmental, and other uses which
are strongly vested with public or social importance.
      a.   Aviation Facilities: Landing fields, aircraft parking and service
facilities, and related facilities for operation, service, fueling, repair,
storage, charter, sales, and rental of aircraft.
      b.   Cemetery: Land used or intended to be used for the burial of the
dead and dedicated for cemetery purposes, including columbiums, crematoriums,
mausoleums and mortuaries when operated in conjunction with and within the
boundary of such cemetery.
      c.   Club or Lodge: A use providing meeting, recreational, or social
facilities for private or non-profit association, primarily for use by members
and guests.
      d.   College and University Facilities: An educational institution of
higher learning which offers a course of study designed to culminate in the
issuance of a degree.
      e.   Cultural Services: A library, museum, art gallery, or similar
nonprofit use affording display, preservation and exhibition of objects of
permanent interest in the arts and sciences.
      f.   Day Care Services (Limited): A facility, or use of a dwelling unit
or portions thereof, for full-time care of six (6) or fewer individuals at one
time.
      g.   Day Care Center: A facility, or use of a building or portion
thereof, for daytime care of seven (7) or more individuals. This term may
include nursery schools, pre-schools, day care centers or children or adults,
and similar uses.
      h.   Detention Facilities: A publicly operated use providing housing and
care for individuals confined by law.
      i.   Government/Public Services: Offices, administrative, clerical,
governmental, or public services that deal directly with the citizen. Typical
uses include but not limited to federal, state, county, and city offices,
postal facilities, or other public or non-profit organizations directly
benefiting the general public.
      j.   Local Utility Services: Essential services which are necessary to
support principal development and involve only minor structures such as lines
and poles.
      k.   Maintenance and Service Facilities: A facility supporting
maintenance, repair, vehicular or equipment servicing, materials storage, and
similar activities, including equipment service centers and similar uses having
characteristics of commercial services or contracting or industrial activities.
      l.   Major Utility Facilities: Communication towers, antennas, generating
plants, electrical switching facilities and primary substations, refuse
collection or disposal facilities, water and wastewater treatment plants and
similar facilities of public use, and firms having potentially significant
impact upon surrounding uses.
      m.   Military Installations: Military facilities of federal or state
governments.
      n.   Park and Recreation Services: Publicly owned and operated parks,
playgrounds, open spaces, and swimming pools.
      o.   Pre-Kindergarten, Preschool, or Nursery School: A private
establishment enrolling children where tuition or other forms of compensation
for the care of children is charged, and which is licensed or approved to
operate as a child care center and which received more than one child per
attendant.
      p.   Primary/Secondary Educational Facilities: A public, private, or
parochial school offering instruction at the elementary, junior and senior high
school levels.
      q.   Public Assembly: Publicly owned or operated facilities for major
public assembly, recreation, sports, amusement or entertainment, including
civic or community auditoriums, sports stadiums, convention facilities,
fairgrounds, and exhibition facilities.
      r.   Religious Assembly: A use located in a permanent building and
providing regular organized religious worship and religious education
incidental thereto, excluding primary or secondary educational facilities.
      s.   Safety Services: Facilities for public safety and emergency
services, including police and fire protection services and emergency medical
and ambulance services.
      t.   Transportation Terminal: A facility for loading, unloading, and
interchange of passengers, baggage, and incidental freight or package between
modes of transportation, including bus terminals, railroad stations, airport
terminals, and public transit facilities.
      u.   Treatment Services: A use providing counseling, guidance,
recuperative, vocational, or similar services to persons requiring
rehabilitation assistance as a result of mental illness alcoholism, detention,
drug addiction, or similar condition on a residential or daytime basis.
ARTICLE III
Zoning Districts Established
Article 3: Zoning Districts Established
   Section
3.1.   Establishment of Districts; Official Zoning Map
   Section
3.2.   Interpretation of Districts Boundaries
   Section
3.3.   Road or Public Right-of-Way Vacation
   Section
3.4.   Annexed Territory
   Section
3.5.   Application of District Regulations
3.1. ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS; OFFICIAL ZONING MAP.
   The city council shall cause to be prepared and approved, an official zoning
districts map showing the various districts, which may be changed or corrected
from time to time as recommended by the planning commission and enacted by the
city council. The map shall be kept up to date by the zoning administrator and
will be placed in a convenient place in the municipal office of the city for
reference at any time.
   1)   Zoning Districts: These districts are established as identified on the
official zoning map which, together with all explanatory matters thereon, is
hereby adopted by reference and declared to be part of this ordinance.
      AG    - Agricultural District
      CN    - Conservation District
      SR   - Suburban Residential
      RS   - Single Family Residential District
      RM    - Multiple Family Residential District
      MH    - Mobile Home/Manufactured Housing District
      CR   - Commercial Residential District
      AC    - Arterial Commercial District
      BC    - Business Commercial District
      BP    - Business Park
      LI    - Light Industrial District
      HI   - Heavy Industrial District
   2)   Boundaries: The boundaries of these districts are indicated and
established as shown upon maps designated as the official zoning map of
Sheldon, Iowa, which, with all their notations, designations, references, and
other matters shown thereon, shall be as much a part of this zoning ordinance
as if fully described and set forth herein.
   Amendments, supplements, or changes of the boundaries of districts as shown
on the official zoning map shall be made by an ordinance amending this zoning
ordinance. The amending ordinance shall refer to the official zoning map and
shall set out the identification of the area affected by legal description, and
identify the zoning district as the same exists and the new district
designation applicable to said property. Said ordinance shall, after adoption
and publication, be recorded by the City Clerk as other ordinances and a
certified copy thereof be attached to the official zoning map. Such amendatory
ordinance shall, however, not repeal or reenact said map, but only amend it.
The official zoning map, together with amending ordinances, shall be the final
authority as to the current zoning status of land areas, buildings, and other
structures in the city.
   3)   Official Zoning Map: The official zoning map shall be on file in a
convenient place in the municipal office of the city and all references
hereafter to said official map shall mean the map just referred to, said map by
this reference being made a part of this zoning title. The official zoning map
shall be identified by the Mayor and attested by the City Clerk. It shall be
the responsibility of the zoning administrator to update the zoning district
map within thirty (30) days of any change of zoning.
   4)   Replacement of Official Zoning Map: In the event the official zoning
map becomes damaged, destroyed, lost or difficult to interpret because of use
or nature of the number of changes or additions, the city council may, by
resolution, adopt a new official zoning map which shall supersede the prior
official zoning map. A new official zoning map may correct drafting or other
errors or omissions in the prior official zoning map, but no such corrections
shall have the effect of amending the original official zoning ordinance or any
subsequent amendments thereof.
   The new official zoning map shall be identified by the Mayor, attested by
the City Clerk, and bearing the Seal of the City. Unless the prior official
zoning map has been lost, or has been totally destroyed, the prior map or any
significant parts thereof remaining, shall be preserved, together with all
available records pertaining to its adoption or amendment.
   5)    Two-mile Extraterritorial Zoning: All regulations within this
ordinance shall apply to lands within 2 miles of the City of Sheldon generally
described and shown on the official zoning map of the city. The exemption from
regulation granted by the Code of Iowa to property used for agricultural
purposes shall apply to said unincorporated area. The specific regulations and
districts created under this subsection hereunder shall be terminated within
three months of the establishment of the administrative authority for county
zoning, or at such date as mutually agreed upon by the municipality and county.
3.2. INTERPRETATION OF DISTRICT BOUNDARIES.
   Where uncertainty exists as to a district’s boundaries as shown on the
official zoning map, the following rules shall apply.
   1)   Boundaries indicated as approximately following the center lines of
streets, highways, alleys or other public rights-of-way shall be construed to
follow such center lines.
   2)   Boundaries indicated as approximately following platted lot lines shall
be construed as following such lot lines.
   3)   Boundaries indicated as approximately following section lines, quarter
section lines, or quarter- quarter section lines shall be construed as
following such lines.
   4)   Boundaries indicated as approximately following city limits shall be
construed as following such city limits.
   5)   Boundaries indicated as following railroad lines shall be construed to
be midway between the main tracks.
   6)   Boundaries indicated as approximately following the center line of
streams, rivers, canals, lakes or other bodies of water shall be construed as
following such center lines.
   7)   Boundaries indicated as parallel to or extensions of features indicated
in subsections 1-6 above shall be so construed. Distances not specifically
indicated on the official zoning map shall be determined by the scale of the
map.
   8)   Where physical or cultural features existing on the ground are at
variance with those shown on the official zoning map, or in other circumstances
not covered by subsection 1-7 above, the Board of Adjustment shall interpret
the district boundaries.
   9)   Whenever a variance exists between the zoning map and the legal
description on an amendment to this ordinance, the legal description applies.
3.3. ROAD OR PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY VACATION.
   Whenever any road, street, or other public right-of-way is vacated by the
official action of the city council, the zoning district(s) adjoining each side
of such road or public right-of-way shall automatically extend to the center of
such vacation and all area included in such vacation shall then and thenceforth
be subject to all appropriate regulations of the extended district.
3.4. ANNEXED TERRITORY.
   Upon the annexation of any land into the City of Sheldon, the city council,
upon recommendation of the Planning and Zoning Commission, shall determine
which zoning district shall be applicable to the annexed land.
3.5. APPLICATION OF DISTRICT REGULATIONS.
   No structures, buildings, or parts thereof shall hereafter be erected,
constructed, reconstructed; remodeled, converted, altered, enlarged, extended,
raised, moved or used, and no land shall be used except in conformity with the
regulations herein prescribed for the district in which such building or land
is located and until a zoning compliance permit has been issued by the Zoning
Administrator as provided herein. The regulations set by this ordinance within
each district shall be minimum regulations and shall apply uniformly to each
class or kind of structure or land, and particularly, except as hereinafter
provided:
   1)   The principal building on a lot shall front on a street or a public
place.
   2)   No yard or lot existing at the time of passage of this ordinance shall
be reduced in dimension or area below the minimum required by this ordinance.
No yard or part of a yard, off-street parking or loading space, or other open
space provided about or in connection with any building for the purpose of
complying with the provisions of this ordinance shall be considered as
providing a yard, off-street parking or loading space, or open space for any
other building, structure, or use; nor shall the lot area per family be reduced
in any manner except in conformity with the area regulations herein established
for the district in which such building is located.
   3)   The depths of front yards or rear yards and width of side yards shall
be measured from the lot line to the nearest point of the adjacent building
wall of the building under consideration.
   4)   No yard or lot existing at the time of passage shall hereafter be
reduced in dimension or area below the minimum requirements set forth herein.
All yards or lots created after the effective date of the ordinance shall meet
the minimum requirements established by the ordinance.
   5)   No accessory building in the yard of any principal building shall be
used for residential purposes.
   6)   Any portion of a building that is covered by a roof shall be considered
as a part of the building.
   7)   Every building hereafter erected or structurally altered shall be
located on a lot as herein defined and in no case shall there be more than one
(1) principal building on one (1) lot unless otherwise provided in this
ordinance.
   8)   No building shall be erected or structurally altered to the extent
specifically provided hereinafter except in conformity with the off-street
parking and loading regulations of this ordinance.
   9)   All structures existing, as of the effective date of this ordinance and
which comply with the terms and conditions of this ordinance, shall be
considered lawful and be allowed to continue and exist or be constructed on the
current perimeters of the existing structure.
   These regulations shall be required in addition to any applicable state and
city health and building regulations.
ARTICLE IV
AG - Agriculture District
Article 4: Agriculture District
   Section
4.1.   Intent
   Section
4.2.   Principal Permitted Uses
   Section
4.3.   Special Exception Uses
   Section
4.4.   Permitted Accessory Uses and Structures
   Section
4.5.   Site Development Regulations
   Section
4.6.   Off-Street Parking and Loading Space
   Section
4.7.   Sign Regulations
   Section
4.8.   Zoning Permits Required
4.1. INTENT.
   The intent of the Agricultural District is to preserve land best suited for
agriculture from the encroachment of incompatible uses and to preserve land
suited to eventual development in other uses, pending proper timing for
economical and practical provisions of streets, utilities and other community
facilities may be provided or programmed as to ensure the orderly and
beneficial conversion of these lands to non-agricultural use. However, uses
which may be offensive to the surrounding area or to the community as a whole
by reasons of noise, dust, smoke, odor, traffic or physical appearance or other
similar factors are not permitted.
4.2. PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES.
   Within the (AG) Agricultural District, unless otherwise provided, no
building or land shall be used for other than one or more of the following
principal permitted uses:
 
Agriculture    Residential Uses                                                        Civic Uses
Uses
                                                                                       Cemetery
                                                                                       Local
Crop                                                                                   Utility
production                                                                             Services
Farm           Kennel, Private                                                         Railroad
Horticulture   Support Housing                                                         Facilities
Residential    Single Family Residential                                               Government/
Animal Raising -   when it is only the owner or renter of a farm or associated with Public
(recreational) agricultural purposes.                                                  Services
Stables                                                                                Religious
                                                                                       Assembly
                                                                                       Safety
                                                                                       Services
4.3. SPECIAL EXCEPTION USES:
   The following uses may be permitted in the (AG) Agricultural District
subject to provisions of Articles XXV and XXVI of this ordinance and with
specific conditions and requirements subject to approval of the Board of
Adjustment intended to make them compatible with and acceptable to adjacent
uses.
 
Agriculture Residential Uses                                                                Industrial
Uses                                                                                        Uses
                                                                                            Resource
Commercial  Relocated Residential                                                           Extraction
Farm        -   when it is the owner or renter of a farm or associated with agricultural Scrap and
Operation   purposes.                                                                       Salvage
                                                                                            Services
Commercial Uses                Civic Uses
Agricultural Sales and
Services
Commercial Recreation          Aviation Facilities
   -   Outdoor Sports andMajor Utility Facilities
Recreation                     Military Installations
   -   Outdoor EntertainmPark and Recreation Services
Veterinary Services               
Kennel, public
Communication Services
4.4. PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES.
   Permitted accessory uses shall not be the principal structure on any lot,
and accessory uses are to remain incidental and secondary in size, use, and
nature to the principal permitted use. The following accessory uses and
structures shall be permitted.
   1.   Private garage or carport.
   2.   Barns and other agricultural related buildings.
   3.   Private parking lots.
   4.   Radio, television, satellite dish, and other similar receiving antennas
for residential purposes.
   5.   One (1) single family residence including one (1) mobile home if used
by; the farm owner or operator; member of the immediate family; or an employee
working on the premises.
   6.   Private utility sheds or garden buildings not used for commercial
purposes.
   7.   Temporary buildings for uses incidental to construction, in which
buildings shall be removed upon completion or abandonment of construction.
   8.   Roadside stands for the sale of agricultural products or other products
produced on the premises.
   7.    Kennel, private.
   8.   Home occupations.
   9.   Accessory uses of land or structures customarily incidental and
subordinate to the principal permitted uses and structures.
4.5. SITE DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS.
The following requirements shall be provided for light and open space around
permitted and special exception uses and structures in the (AG) Agricultural
District, and subject to modifications contained in the Supplementary District
Regulations.
Lot Area -             5 acres - minimum lot area
Lot Width -             300 feet - minimum lot width
Residential Density -         Not more than (2) two dwelling units per lot,
including agricultural support housing
Height -            35 feet maximum height for dwellings and non-farming
buildings and structures
               No height limitations on agricultural buildings
               (See Section
16.10 for further Height Modifications)
               No structure shall be permitted to extend into approach zones,
clear zones or other restricted air space required for the protection of any
public airport.
Front Yard -             50 feet - minimum required setback
Side Yard -             25 feet - minimum required setback
Rear Yard -             50 feet - minimum required setback
   No minimum requirements for local utility facilities and essential services,
except that buildings or other above ground structures or devices constructed
in support of utilities or essential services must comply with minimum yard
setback requirements.
   All residential dwelling units must be constructed in compliance with the
Residential Dwelling Standards regulations outlined in Section
17.9.
4.6. OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING SPACE.
   Off-street parking and loading requirements shall be required for activities
in the Agricultural District in accordance with the provisions of
Article XIX of this ordinance.
4.7. SIGN REGULATIONS.
   Sign regulations shall be required for activities in the Agricultural
District in accordance with the provisions of
Article XX of the ordinance. 
4.8. ZONING PERMITS REQUIRED.
   Zoning permits shall be required in accordance with the provisions of
Section
23.3 of this ordinance.
ARTICLE V
CN - Conservation District
Article 5: Conservation District
   Section
5.1.   Intent
   Section
5.2.    Principal Permitted Uses
   Section
5.3.   Special Exception Uses
   Section
5.4.   Permitted Accessory Uses
   Section
5.5   Special Conditions
   Section
5.6.   Site Development Regulations
   Section
5.7.    Off-Street Parking and Loading Spaces
   Section
5.8.    Sign Regulations
   Section
5.9.    Zoning Permits Required
5.1 INTENT.
   This district is intended to provide for water quality and conservation,
protection of wildlife habitat, protect erosion control, protect natural
drainage ways and to generally provide for ecologically sound land use of
environmentally sensitive areas that can be considered critical areas, or
otherwise best suited as buffers between land uses and not suitable for
structural developments. This district is also intended to prevent, in those
areas which are subject to periodic or potential flooding, such development as
would result in a hazard to health or safety or be otherwise incompatible with
the public welfare.
5.2. PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES.
   Within the (CN) Conservation District, unless otherwise provided, no
building or land shall be used for other than one or more of the following
principal permitted uses:
 
 
Conservation Uses                                    Civic Uses
Critical area
Floodplain or marshlands
Game refuge/preserve                                 Local Utility Services
Undeveloped and unused land in its natural condition
Water retention basins or retention ponds
 
5.3. SPECIAL EXCEPTION USES.
   Certain uses may be permitted in the (CN) Conservation District subject to
specific conditions and requirements subject to approval of the Board of
Adjustment intended to make them compatible with and acceptable to adjacent
uses. Special Exception Uses are also subject to the provision of Articles XXV
and XXVI of this ordinance.
 
 
Agricultural Uses Commercial Uses        Civic Uses
Crop production
(agricultural)                           Government/Public Services
Farm              Communication Services Park and Recreation Services
Horticulture
 
 
5.4. PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES.
   Uses of land or structure customarily incidental and subordinate to a
permitted use in the CN district including, but not limited to, the following:
   1.   Agricultural or recreational buildings or structures which will not
adversely affect the area and the value would not be impaired by being flooded,
exclusive of dwelling units.
   2.   Parking lots.
   3.   Temporary uses for uses incidental to construction, in which buildings
shall be removed upon the completion or abandonment of construction, and in
compliance with Section
17.5.
   4.   Accessory uses and structures normally incidental and subordinate to
the principal permitted uses and structures, as approved by the zoning officer,
and in compliance with Section
17.3.
   In any case, accessory uses are to remain incidental and secondary in size,
use, and nature to the principal permitted use.
5.5. SPECIAL CONDITIONS.
   Along critical portions of water courses, wetlands, water settling basins
and water detention ponds certain minimum requirements shall be established
within the (CN) Conservation District. These minimum requirements include no
development allowed within the designated floodway of any water course or
within the 100-year floodplain as identified by FEMA (Federal Emergency
Management Agency) on the city’s floodplain map. However, these provisions are
exclusive of bridges, elevated roadways, open space parks and flood control
levees. Furthermore, land zoned within the Conservation District shall not be
used to meet side or rear yard requirements of other zoning districts herein.
The Conservation District shall include all areas designated as flood hazard
areas by the Federal Emergency Management Agency.
5.6. SITE DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS.
The following requirements shall provide for light and air around permitted
uses and buildings in the Conservation District:
Lot Area -          2 acres - minimum lot area
Lot Width -          200 feet - minimum lot width
Height -          35 feet - maximum height   
            No height limitations on agricultural buildings
            (See Section
16.10 for further Height Modifications)
Front Yard -          50 feet - minimum required setback
Side Yard -          15 feet - minimum required setback
Rear Yard -          50 feet - minimum required setback
Building Coverage -      10 percent of the lot area – maximum coverage
Impervious Coverage -    25 percent of the lot area – maximum coverage
Usable Open Space -      75 percent of the lot area – minimum coverage
No minimum requirements for local utility facilities and essential services
5.7. OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING SPACE.
   Off-street parking and loading requirements shall be required for activities
in the Conservation (CN) district in accordance with the provisions of
Article XIX of this ordinance.
5.8. SIGN REGULATIONS.
   Sign regulations shall be required for activities in the Conservation (CN)
district in accordance with the provisions of
Article XX of the ordinance. 
5.9. ZONING PERMITS REQUIRED.
   Zoning permits shall be required in accordance with the provisions of
Section
23.3 of this ordinance.
ARTICLE VI
SR - Suburban Residential District
Section 6: Suburban Residential District
   Section
6.1.   Intent
   Section
6.2.    Principal Permitted Uses
   Section
6.3.   Special Exception Uses
   Section
6.4.   Permitted Accessory Uses and Structures
   Section
6.5.   Site Development Regulations
   Section
6.6.   Off-Street Parking and Loading Space
   Section
6.7.   Sign Regulations
   Section
6.8.   Zoning Permits Required
6.1. INTENT.
   The intent of the Suburban Residential District is to provide for a
transitional area between agricultural and urban land uses to be applied in
areas contiguous to or in close proximity to developed areas.
6.2. PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES.
   Within the (SR) Suburban Residential District, unless otherwise provided, no
building or land shall be used for other than one or more of the following
principal permitted uses:
 
 
Residential Uses           Civic Uses                   Agricultural Uses
Daycare Services (Limited) Government/Public Services   Crop Production
Family Home                Local Utility Services       Farm
Kennel, Private            Park and Recreation Services Horticulture
Single Family Residential  Religious Assembly            
                            
 
6.3. SPECIAL EXCEPTION USES.
   These uses may be permitted in the (SR) Suburban Residential District
subject to provisions of Articles XXV and XXVI of this ordinance and with
specific conditions and requirements subject to approval of the Board of
Adjustment intended to make them compatible with and acceptable to adjacent
uses.
 
 
Residential Uses                   Civic Uses
Duplex Residential                 Cemetery
Relocated Residential              Daycare Center
Residential Health Care Facilities Major Utility Facilities
                                  Pre-Kindergarten, Preschool or Nursery
                                  School
                                   Primary/Secondary Educational Facility
Commercial Uses                    Agricultural Uses
Commercial Recreation
- Outdoor Sports & Recreation      Residential Animal Raising (recreational)
Communication Services             Stables
 
 
6.4. PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES.
   The following accessory uses and structures shall be permitted.
   1.   Private garages or carports.
   2.   Private recreational facilities for use by residents (swimming pools,
trampolines, play equipment).
   3.   Patios, cabanas, porches, gazebos, and incidental household storage
buildings.
   4.   Private greenhouses, not operated for commercial purposes.
   5.   Radio, television, satellite dish, and other similar receiving antennas
for residential purposes.
   6.   Solar collectors.
   7.   Home occupations.
   8.   Private Parking Lots.
   9.   Kennel, private.
   10.   Roadside stands for the sale of agricultural produce grown on the
premises.
   11.   Temporary buildings or uses incidental to construction, which
buildings shall be removed upon the completion or abandonment of construction
work, and in compliance with Section
17.5.
   12.   Other necessary and customary accessory buildings or uses in
compliance with Section
17.3, and as determined by the zoning administrator to be appropriate,
incidental, and subordinate to a principal permitted and special exception uses
and structures.
6.5. SITE DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS.
The following requirements shall be provided for light and open space around
permitted and special exception uses and structures in the (SR) Suburban
Residential District, and subject to modifications contained in the
Supplementary District Regulations.
Lot Area -             1 acre (43,560 square feet) - minimum lot area
Lot Width -             200 feet - minimum lot width except at entry points off
cul-de-sacs
Residential Density -          Not more than one (1) dwelling unit per lot.
Height -             35 feet - maximum height
Front Yard -             50 feet - minimum required setback
Side Yard -             20 feet - minimum required setback
Rear Yard -             50 feet - minimum required setback
   No minimum requirements for local utility facilities and essential services,
except that buildings or other above ground structures or devices constructed
in support of utilities or essential services must comply with minimum yard
setback requirements.
   All residential dwelling units must be constructed in compliance with
Residential Dwelling Standards as outlined in Section
17.9. Manufactured or mobile homes placed in designated residential
subdivisions must be converted to real property in conformance with section
135D.26 of the Code of Iowa
6.6. OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING SPACE.
   Off-street parking and loading requirements shall be required for activities
in the (SR) Suburban Residential District in accordance with the provisions of
Article XIX of this ordinance.
6.7. SIGN REGULATIONS.
   Sign regulations shall be required for activities in the (SR) Suburban
Residential District in accordance with the provisions of
Article XX of the ordinance. 
6.8. ZONING PERMITS REQUIRED.
   Zoning permits shall be required in accordance with the provisions of
Section
23.3 of this ordinance.
ARTICLE VII
RS - Single Family Residential District
Article 7: Single Family Residential District
   Section
7.1.   Intent
   Section
7.2.   Principal Permitted Uses
   Section
7.4.   Special Exception Uses
   Section
7.4   Permitted Accessory Uses and Structures
   Section
7.5.   Site Development Regulations
   Section
7.6.   Off-Street Parking and Loading Space
   Section
7.7.   Sign Regulations
   Section
7.8.   Zoning Permits Required
7.1. INTENT.
   The intent of the Single Family Residential District is to provide for low
density residential development with a limited number of institutional or civic
and recreational facilities permitted.
7.2. PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES.
   Within the (RS) Single Family Residential District, unless otherwise
provided, no building or land shall be used for other than one of the following
principal permitted uses:
 
 
Residential Uses          Civic Uses
Single Family Residential Day Care Services (Limited)
Duplex Residential        Local Utility Services
Family Home               Religious Assembly
Kennel, Private            
 
7.3. SPECIAL EXCEPTION USES.
   The following uses and structures may be permitted in the (RS) Single Family
Residential District subject to provisions of Articles XXV and XXVI of this
ordinance and with specific conditions and requirements subject to approval of
the Board of Adjustment intended to make them compatible with and acceptable to
adjacent uses.
 
 
Residential Uses        Civic Uses                   Commercial Uses
                        College & University
                        Facilities
                        Cultural Facilities
Private Parking Lots    Government/Public Services
Relocated Residential   Major Utility Facilities     Bed & Breakfast Inn
Residential Health Care Pre-Kindergarten, Preschool  Commercial Recreation
Facilities              or Nursery School            - Outdoor Sports &
                       Primary/Secondary            Recreation
                       Educational                  Funeral Services
                        Facilities
                        Safety Services
                        Park and Recreation Services
                         
 
7.4. PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES.
   The following accessory uses and structures shall be permitted.
   1.   Private garages or carports.
   2.   Private recreational facilities for use by residents (swimming pools,
trampolines, play equipment). 
   3.   Patios, cabanas, porches, gazebos, and incidental household storage
buildings.
   4.   Private greenhouses, not operated for commercial purposes.
   5.   Radio, television, satellite dish, and other similar receiving antennas
for residential purposes.
   6.   Solar collectors.
   7.   Home occupations.
   8.   Kennel, private.
   9.   Temporary uses incidental to construction, which buildings shall be
removed upon the completion or abandonment of construction work, and in
compliance with Section
17.5.
   10.   Other necessary and customary accessory buildings or uses in
compliance with Section
17.3, and as determined by the zoning administrator to be appropriate,
incidental, and subordinate to a principal permitted and special exception uses
and structures.
7.5. SITE DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS.
   The following requirements shall be provided for light and open space around
permitted and special exception uses and structures in the (RS) Single Family
Residential District, and subject to modifications contained in the
Supplementary District Regulations.
Lot Area -         Single Family     7,000   square feet - minimum lot area
            Two Family 10,000 square feet - minimum lot area
Lot Width -          80 feet - minimum lot width,
            except at entry points off cul-de-sacs.
Residential Density -       Not more than one (1) dwelling unit per lot,
            except for duplex residential.
Height -          35 feet - maximum height
Front Yard -         25 feet - minimum required setback
Side Yard -          8 feet - minimum required setback
Rear Yard -          25 feet - minimum required setback
   No minimum requirements for local utility facilities and essential services,
except that buildings or other above ground structures or devices constructed
in support of utilities or essential services must comply with minimum yard
setback requirements.
   All residential dwelling units must be constructed in compliance with
Residential Dwelling Standards as outlined in Section
17.9. Manufactured or mobile homes placed in designated residential
subdivisions must be converted to real property in conformance with section
135D.26 of the Code of Iowa.
7.6. OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING SPACE.
   Off-street parking and loading requirements shall be required for activities
in the (RS) Single Family Residential District in accordance with the
provisions of
Article XIX of this ordinance.
7.7. SIGN REGULATIONS.
   Sign regulations shall be required for activities in the (RS) Single Family
Residential District in accordance with the provisions of
Article XX of this ordinance. 
7.8. ZONING PERMITS REQUIRED.
   Zoning permits shall be required in accordance with the provisions of
Section
23.3 of this ordinance.
ARTICLE VIII
RM – Multiple Family Residential District
Article 8: Medium Density Residential District
   Section
8.1.   Intent
   Section
8.2.    Principal Permitted Uses
   Section
8.3.   Special Exception Uses
   Section
8.4   Permitted Accessory Uses and Structures
   Section
8.5.   Site Development Regulations
   Section
8.6.   Off-Street Parking and Loading Space
   Section
8.7.    Sign Regulations
   Section
8.8.   Zoning Permits Required
8.1. INTENT.
   The intent of the Multi-Family Residential District is to provide for a
variety of multi-family residential areas where public utilities and services
are available and to encourage a suitable living environment through the
promotion of public health, safety and welfare; in addition to providing for
those areas within the community which are compatible in character and density
with the multiple family residential environment. 
8.2. PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES.
   Within the (RM) Multiple Family Residential District, unless otherwise
provided, no building or land shall be used for other than one or more of the
following principal permitted uses:
 
Residential Uses                   Civic Uses
Condominium Residential
Duplex Residential
Family Home                        Day Care Center
Group Residential                  Day Care Services (limited)
Kennel, Private                    Governmental/Public Services
Multiple Family Residential        Local Utility Services
Residential Health Care Facilities Park and Recreation Services
Single Family Residential          Religious Assembly    
Townhouse Residential
 
 
8.3. SPECIAL EXCEPTION USES.
   The following uses and structures may be permitted in the (RM) Multiple
Family Residential District subject to provisions of Articles XXV and XXVI of
this ordinance and with specific conditions and requirements subject to
approval of the Board of Adjustment intended to make them compatible with and
acceptable to adjacent uses.
 
Residential Uses      Civic Uses                  Commercial Uses
                      Cemetery
                      College & University
                      Facilities
                      Cultural Services           Bed & Breakfast Inn
                      Major Utility Facilities    Commercial Recreation
Relocated Residential Pre-Kindergarten, Preschool - Outdoor Sports & Recreation
Private Parking Lots  or                          Communication Services
                      Nursery School              Funeral Services
                      Primary/Secondary           Personal Services
                      Educational
                      Facilities
                      Safety Services
 
8.4. PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES.
   The following accessory uses and structures shall be permitted.
   1.   Private garages or carports.
   2.   Private recreational facilities for use by residents (swimming pools,
trampolines, play equipment).
   3.   Patios, cabanas, porches, gazebos, and incidental household storage
buildings.
   4.   Private greenhouses not operated for commercial purposes.
   5.   Radio, television, satellite dish, and other similar receiving antennas
for residential purposes.
   6.   Solar collectors.
   7.   Home occupations.
   8.   Kennel, private.
   9.   Temporary uses incidental to construction, which buildings shall be
removed upon the completion or abandonment of construction work, and in
compliance with Section
17.5.
   10.   Other necessary and customary accessory buildings or uses in
compliance with Section
17.3, and as determined by the zoning administrator to be appropriate,
incidental, and subordinate to a principal permitted and special exception uses
and structures.
8.5. SITE DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS.
   The following requirements shall be provided for light and open space around
permitted and special exception uses and structures in the (RM) Multiple Family
Residential District, and subject to modifications contained in the
Supplementary District Regulations.
Minimum Lot Area -             10,000 square feet
                  + 1,500 square feet for each additional dwelling unit in
excess of two dwelling units
Minimum Lot Width -          100 feet
                   except at entry points off cul-de-sacs.
Height -                35 feet
Front Yard -                25 feet - minimum required setback
Side Yard -                6 feet - minimum required setback
Rear Yard -                25 feet - minimum required setback
   No minimum requirements for local utility facilities and essential services,
except that buildings or other above ground structures or devices constructed
in support of utilities or essential services must comply with minimum yard
setback requirements.
   All residential dwelling units must be constructed in compliance with
Residential Dwelling Standards as outlined in Section
17.9. Manufactured or mobile homes placed in designated residential
subdivisions must be converted to real property in conformance with section
135D.26 of the Code of Iowa.
8.6. OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING SPACE.
   Off-street parking and loading requirements shall be required for activities
in the (RM) Multiple Family Residential District in accordance with the
provisions of
Article XIX of this ordinance.
8.7. SIGN REGULATIONS.
   Sign regulations shall be required for activities in the (RM) Multiple
Family Residential District in accordance with the provisions of
Article XX of this ordinance. 
8.8. ZONING PERMITS REQUIRED.
   Zoning permits shall be required in accordance with the provisions of
Section
23.3 of this ordinance.
ARTICLE IX
MH - Mobile Home/Manufactured Housing District
Section 9: Mobile Home/Manufactured Housing District
   Section
9.1.   Intent
   Section
9.2.    Principal Permitted Uses
   Section
9.3.   Special Exception Uses
   Section
9.4   Permitted Accessory Uses and Structures
   Section
9.5.   Site Development Regulations
   Section
9.6.   Mobile Home Park Requirements
   Section
9.7.   Zoning Permits Required
9.1. INTENT.
   The intent of the Mobile Home/Manufactured Housing District is to regulate
the location and placement of mobile homes, manufactured housing and mobile
home parks or subdivisions within the City of Sheldon, and to provide for
certain medium density residential areas now developed as mobile home parks
which by reason of their design and location are compatible with surrounding
residential areas and areas of the city where similar development seems likely
to occur.  
9.2. PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES.
   Within the Mobile Home/Manufactured Housing District, unless otherwise
provided in this Article, no building or land shall be used for other than one
or more of the following principal permitted uses:
 
Residential Uses        Civic Uses
                        Daycare Services (Limited)
Mobile Home Residential Local Utility Services
                        Park and Recreation Services
                         
9.3. SPECIAL EXCEPTION USES.
   The following uses and structures may be permitted in the Mobile Home/
Manufactured Housing District subject to provisions of Articles XXV and XXVI of
this ordinance and with specific conditions and requirements subject to
approval of the Board of Adjustment intended to make them compatible with and
acceptable to adjacent uses.
 
Civic Uses                                    Commercial Uses
Daycare Center
Religious Assembly
Pre-Kindergarten, Preschool or Nursery School Communication Services
Primary/Secondary Educational Facilities       
Safety Services
 
 
9.4. PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES.
The following accessory uses and structures shall be permitted.
   1.   Private garage or carport.
   2.   Storage shed.
   3.   Private recreational facilities for use by residents (swimming pools,
trampolines, play equipment.) 
   4.   Patios, cabanas, porches, gazebos, and incidental household storage
buildings.
   5.   Private greenhouses, not operated for commercial purposes.
   6.   Radio, television, satellite dish, and other similar receiving antennas
for residential purposes.
   7.   Solar collectors.
   8.   Home occupations.
   9.   Kennel, private.
   10.   Temporary uses incidental to construction, which buildings shall be
removed upon the completion or abandonment of construction work, and in
compliance with Section
17.5.
   11.   Other necessary and customary accessory buildings or uses in
compliance with Section
17.3, and as determined by the zoning administrator to be appropriate,
incidental, and subordinate to a principal permitted and special exception uses
and structures.
9.5. SITE DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS.
The following requirements shall be provided for light and open space around
permitted and special exception uses and structures in the (MH) Mobile Home/
Manufactured Housing District, and subject to modifications contained in the
Supplementary District Regulations.
Mobile Home Park Area -          Two (2) acres – minimum park area   
Mobile Home Lot Area -          5,000 square feet - minimum lot area
Mobile Home Lot Width -          40 feet – minimum lot width
Residential Density -            Not more than one dwelling unit per mobile
home lot
Height -                35 feet
Front Yard -                 25 feet - minimum required setback
Side Yard -                8 feet – minimum required setback
Rear Yard -                15 feet - minimum required setback
Mobile Home Park boundary -       25 feet – minimum required setback for mobile
homes
No minimum requirements for local utility facilities and essential services,
except that buildings or other above ground structures or devices constructed
in support of utilities or essential services must comply with minimum yard
setback requirements.
Furthermore, mobile home lots and parks shall be developed in conformance with
the following Mobile Home Park Requirements outlined in Section
9.6 below.
9.6. MOBILE HOME PARK (OR SUBDIVISION) REQUIREMENTS.
Each mobile home park and/or manufactured housing subdivision shall be
developed in conformance with the regulations listed below.
1)   Development Plan: The following information shall be shown on the
development plan or submitted in writing with it:
   a.   The name of the proposed mobile home park;
   b.   Names, addresses and telephone numbers of the developer or his/her
representative;
   c.   Location of the mobile home park, giving the subdivision and lot
numbers;
   d.   A map of the entire area scheduled for development, if the proposed
development is a portion of a larger holding intended for subsequent
development;
   e.   Location map showing the relationship of the proposed development and
the adjacent tracts;
   f.   Present land use and existing zoning of the proposed development and
adjacent tracts;
   g.   Interior streets, streets, street names, right-of-way and roadway
widths;
   h.   All lot lines and open spaces with dimensions shown;
   i.   Delineation of all improvements required in this section.
   j.   Location, capacity, and design for the mobile home park’s storm
shelter, if such a shelter or safe room is to be provided in the park.
2)   Permitted accessory uses and requirements thereof:
   a.   Accessory buildings or structures under park management supervision
shall be used only as office space, storage, laundry facilities, recreation
facilities, garage storage or other necessary service for park residents’ use
only. No accessory building or structure shall exceed twenty-five feet (25’) in
height; and shall meet the requirements of other applicable ordinances;
   b.   A mobile home may be displayed and offered for sale, provided that the
mobile home is situated on a permanent pad within the mobile home park;
   c.   One (1) identification sign approved in conjunction with the final site
plan approval of the mobile home park. In no case shall such sign be larger
than sixty (60) square feet in surface area nor have any moving parts or stand
higher than ten (10) feet from the ground to the top of the sign. Such sign
shall be no closer to the public right-of-way line than thirty (30) feet
   d.   No more than one (1) entry and/or one (1) exit sign at each access
drive onto the public right-of-way, approved in conjunction with the final site
plan approval of the mobile home park. In no case shall the sign be larger than
two (2) square feet in surface area, nor have any moving parts, nor stand
higher than five (5) feet from the ground to the top of the sign
3)   Required development standards: 
   a.   Each mobile home site shall be provided with a stand consisting of a
solid, 6-inch thick, poured Portland cement concrete apron not less than eight
(8) feet wide and forty-five (45) feet long and a paved outdoor patio of at
least one hundred eighty feet (180’) located at the main entrance to the mobile
home;
   b.   Each mobile/manufactured home shall be anchored to the ground as
provided in 661 IAC Chapter 16.626(103A);
   c.   Storage of goods and articles underneath any mobile home shall be
prohibited;
   d.   A greenbelt, at least twenty-five feet (25’) in width, shall be located
along all boundaries of each mobile home park, except where it is crossed by
driveways;
   e.   Each street and parking area in any mobile home park shall be bounded
by a sidewalk at least four feet (4’) wide;
   f.   Each mobile/manufactured home site shall have front, side and rear
yards, and a double front yard setback will be required on corner lots;
   g.   For the purpose of this section, yard width shall be determined by
measurement from the building face (side) to its site boundary from which every
point shall not be less than the minimum width herein provided. Open patios
shall be disregarded in determining yard widths. Enclosed all weather patios
and carports shall be included in determining yard widths. The front yard is
that yard which runs from the hitch end of the mobile home to the nearest lot
line. The rear yard is at the opposite end of the mobile home and side yards
are at right angles to the front and rear ends;
   h.   Each mobile/manufactured home within such park shall contain a flush
toilet, sleeping accommodations, a tub or shower bath, kitchen facilities and
plumbing and electrical connections designed for attachment to appropriate
external systems and so attached;
   i.   Accessory structures may be no closer than 5 feet to any lot line;
   j.   No accessory building shall be erected within 5 feet of another
structure;
   k.   If a temporary foundation or permanent pier or post foundation is
provided, uniform skirting of each mobile home base shall be required, within
thirty (30) days after initial placement, such skirting shall be of
noncorrosive metal or aluminum or material of equal strength and so constructed
and attached to the mobile home so as to prevent entry of rodents and insects;
   l.   On-site outdoor laundry space of adequate area and suitable location
shall be provided if park is not furnished with indoor dryers. Where outdoor
drying space is required or desired, individual clothes drying facilities on
each site of the collapsible umbrella type of hanging apparatus shall be
allowed;
   m.   All mobile homes within such parks shall be suitably connected to sewer
and water services provided at each site. All sanitary sewer facilities,
including plumbing connections to each mobile home site, shall be constructed
so that all facilities and lines are protected from freezing, from bumping or
from creating any type of nuisance or health hazard. Running water from a
tested and approved supply shall be piped to each unit. All sanitary sewer and
water facilities shall conform to minimum state and county health regulations;
   n.   Community garbage and trash containers shall be placed in a
conveniently located similarly designed enclosed structure(s) or dumpster;
   o.   Every mobile/manufactured home shall be equipped at all times with fire
extinguishing equipment and a smoke detector in good working order of such type
and size so as to satisfy regulations of the State Fire Marshall and the local
fire district;
   p.   All electric, telephone, and other lines from supply poles outside the
park or other sources to each mobile home site shall be underground;
   q.   A recreation space of at least three hundred (300) square feet of land
per mobile home site in the park shall be developed and maintained by
management. Streets, sidewalks, parking areas and accessory buildings are not
included as recreation space in computing the necessary area;
   r.   All roads, driveways and motor vehicle parking spaces shall be paved
and constructed as to handle all anticipated peak loads, and adequately drained
and lighted for safety and ease of movement of pedestrians and vehicles;
   s.   One (1) parking space shall be provided at each mobile home site. In
such park there shall be provided additional parking spaces in number not less
than the number of sites within such park for additional storage of
recreational type vehicles and visitor parking. Said parking area shall be
properly screened as not to be a nuisance, and each parking space shall be a
minimum of 180 square feet in size;
   t.   All streets intended for general public use shall be dedicated as a
public right-of-way and subject to such improvements as may be required by the
City of Sheldon;
   u.   All streets intended for or approved as private streets shall maintain
the following widths in mobile home parks:
MOTOR VEHICLE PARKING      TRAFFIC USE    MIN. PAVEMENT WIDTH.
                                 (curb face to curb face)
No Parking                1-way road         14 feet
No Parking               2-way road          22 feet
Parallel parking (1 side only)         1-way road         22 feet
Parallel parking (1 side only)         2-way road         30 feet   
Parallel parking (2 sides)          1-way road         31 feet
Parallel parking (2 sides)          2-way road          36 feet
   v.   When a cul-de-sac is provided, the radius of such roadway loop shall be
a minimum of one hundred (100) feet, curb face to curb face, with the drive
length a maximum of three hundred (300) feet;
   w.   Mobile Home Park owners and management are required to maintain the
physical and natural facilities and features of the park in neat, orderly, and
safe manner;
   x.   A written emergency plan submitted to the city and posted at sites
within the mobile home park to advise all of the residents of safety measures.
In the event that a storm shelter or safe room is provided, it should be
adequate in size to accommodate all residents of the park;
   y.   Adequate provisions shall be made to handle all surface drainage and
storm water runoff as determined by the city’s engineer.
All mobile home parks shall conform to the above requirements in addition to
all current city specifications and standards.
9.7. ZONING PERMITS REQUIRED.
Zoning permits shall be required in accordance with the provisions of Section
23.3 of this ordinance.
ARTICLE X
CR – Commercial Residential District
Article 10: Commercial Residential District
   Section
10.1.   Intent
   Section
10.2.    Principal Permitted Uses
   Section
10.3.    Special Exception Uses
   Section
10.4    Permitted Accessory Uses and Structures
   Section
10.5.    Site Development Regulations
   Section
10.6.    Additional Regulations
   Section
10.7.    Off-Street Parking and Loading Space
   Section
10.8.     Sign Regulations
   Section
10.9.    Zoning Permits Required
10.1. INTENT.
   The intent of the Commercial Residential District is to provide for the
establishment of businesses that are considered desirable located immediately
accessible to single-family residential neighborhoods. Although it is
convenient to have some types of business enterprises adjacent to residential
areas it can be easily seen that other types, which by their intended nature,
generate larger amounts of vehicular traffic can be better accommodated in the
central business district, or along highways.
10.2. PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES.
   Within the (CR) Commercial Residential District, unless otherwise provided,
no building or land shall be used for other than one or more of the following
principal permitted uses:
 
Residential Uses          Civic Uses                 Commercial Uses
                                                     Administrative/Business
                                                     Offices
                                                     Financial Services
Single Family Residential Cultural Services          Food Sales (except grocery
Duplex Residential        Government/Public Services stores)
Private Parking Lots      Local Utility Services     Hospital Services
Residential Healthcare    Religious Assembly         Medical Clinics/Offices
Facilities                Safety Services            Personal Improvement
                                                     Services
                                                     Personal Services
                                                     Professional Office
                                                     Restaurant (Convenience)
(Ordinance O20-3259, 12/02/2020)
10.3. SPECIAL EXCEPTION USES.
   The following uses and structures may be permitted in the (CR) Commercial
Residential District subject to provisions of Articles XXV and XXVI of this
ordinance and with specific conditions and requirements subject to approval of
the Board of Adjustment intended to make them compatible with and acceptable to
adjacent uses.
 
Commercial Uses           Civic Uses
Communication Services
Condominium Storage Use
Convenience Storage
Funeral Services          Daycare (Limited)
Restaurants (General)     Daycare Center
Visitor Habitation        Major Utility Facilities
-   Hotel/Motel
-   Bed &Breakfast Inn
-   Boarding House
 
(Ordinance O20-3259, 12/02/2020)
10.4. PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES.
The following accessory uses and structures shall be permitted.
   1.   Essential Services.
   2.   Temporary uses incidental to construction, which buildings shall be
removed upon the completion or abandonment of the work, and in compliance with
Section
17.5.
   3.   Accessory uses, buildings and structures customarily incidental and
subordinate to the permitted principal uses or special exceptions, as permitted
in Section
17.3.
   4.   Other necessary and customary uses and structures determined by the
zoning administrator to be appropriate, incidental, and subordinate in size,
use, and nature.
10.5. SITE DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS.
The following requirements shall be provided for light and open space around
permitted and special exception uses and structures in the (CR) Commercial
Residential District, and subject to modifications contained in the
Supplementary District Regulations.
Minimum Lot Area -          10,000 square feet
Minimum Lot Width -       100 feet
Maximum Height -          35 feet
Front Yard -              25 feet - minimum required setback
Side Yard -             10 feet - minimum required setback
Rear Yard -             25 feet - minimum required setback
Buffer Requirements -       See
Article XXI.
No minimum requirements for local utility facilities and essential services,
except that buildings or other above ground structures or devices constructed
in support of utilities or essential services must comply with minimum yard
setback requirements.
All residential dwelling units must be constructed in compliance with the
Residential Dwelling Standards as outlined in Section
17.9.
10.6. ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS.
   Any residential use properties permitted or allowed in the Commercial
Residential District shall be subject to the site development regulations
identified in Section
7.5 in lieu of any corresponding regulation identified above in Section
10.5.
10.7. OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING SPACE.
   Off-street parking and loading requirements shall be required for activities
in the Commercial Residential District in accordance with the provisions of
Article XIX of this ordinance.
10.8. SIGN REGULATIONS.
   Sign regulations shall be required for activities in the Commercial
Residential District in accordance with the provisions of
Article XX of the ordinance. 
10.9. ZONING PERMITS REQUIRED.
   Zoning permits shall be required in accordance with the provisions of
Section
23.3 of this ordinance.
ARTICLE XI
AC – Arterial Commercial District
Article 11: Arterial Commercial District
   Section
11.1.   Intent
   Section
11.2.   Principal Permitted Uses
   Section
11.3.   Special Exception Uses
   Section
11.4.   Permitted Accessory Uses and Structures
   Section
11.5.   Site Development Regulations
   Section
11.6.   Additional Regulations – Nonconforming Uses of Residential Structures
   Section
11.7.    Open-air Sales, Display and Storage
   Section
11.8.   Off-Street Parking and Loading Space
   Section
11.9.    Sign Regulations
   Section
11.10.   Zoning Permits Required
11.1. INTENT.
   The intent of the Arterial Commercial District is predominately for service,
retail, and other non- residential uses which because of certain locational
requirements and operational characteristics are appropriately located in close
proximity to a major trafficway. Site development regulations and performance
standards are intended to ensure larger lot sizes, off-street parking, adequate
setbacks, clear vision, safe ingress and egress, and access to other adjacent
thoroughfares.
11.2. PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES.
   Within the (AC) Arterial Commercial District, unless otherwise provided, no
building or land shall be used for other than one or more of the following
principal permitted uses:
 
Commercial Uses                                   Civic Uses
                                    Food Sales    Club or Lodge
                                    Funeral       College & University
                                    Services      Facilities
                                    General       Government/Public Services
                                    Retail Sales  Local Utility Services    
                                    Hospital      Park and Recreation Services
                                    Services      Public Assembly
                                    Laundry       Religious Assembly
Automotive Rentals                  Services      Safety Services
Automotive Sales                    Medical
Automotive Repair Services          Clinics/
Automotive Washing                  Offices
Building Maintenance Services       Personal
Business Support Services           Improvement
Business or Trade School            Services
Commercial Off-Street Parking       Personal
Commercial Recreation               Services
-    Indoor Sports & Recreation  Pet Services
-    Indoor Entertainment        Professional
-    Outdoor Sports & Recreation Offices       Agricultural Uses
-    Outdoor Entertainment       Restaurant    Farm
Construction Sales and Services     (Convenience) Horticulture
Consumer Repair Services            Restaurant    Crop Product
Convenience Store                   (General)
Financial Services                  Retail
                                    Specialty
                                    Shop
                                    Service
                                    Station
                                    Visitor
                                    Habitation
                                    - Bed &
                                    Breakfast Inn
                                    - Hotel/Motel
(Ordinance O20-3258, 12/02/2020)
11.3. SPECIAL EXCEPTION USES.
   The following uses and structures may be permitted in the (AC) Arterial
Commercial District, subject to provisions of Articles XXV and XXVI of this
ordinance and with specific conditions and requirements subject to approval of
the Board of Adjustment intended to make them compatible with and acceptable to
adjacent uses. All first-floor dwelling units or basement dwelling units are
prohibited. The only residential use permitted by the Board of Adjustment
pursuant to this Section
11.3 shall be second-floor dwelling units that, at a minimum, meet the
following conditions: Each such dwelling unit (1) shall be accessed from the
rear and/or side (and not the front) of the principal structure; (2) shall have
at least two off-street parking spaces; (3) shall consist of a minimum of 800
square feet of floor space; and (4) shall be located within a principal
structure that is also used for a permitted commercial, civic, or industrial
use, with at least two-thirds of the ground floor of the principal structure
being used for non-storage uses, including a permitted commercial, civic, or
industrial use.
(Ordinance 019-3250 – 12/18/2019)
 
Commercial Uses           Civic Uses                  Industrial Uses
Agricultural Sales &      Cemetery
Services                  Cultural Services
Cocktail Lounge           Day Care Center
Communications Services   Detention Facilities
Condominium Storage       Pre-Kindergarten, Preschool Custom Manufacturing
Convenience Storage       or                          Limited Warehousing/
Equipment Repair Services Nursery School              Distribution
Equipment Sales           Primary/Secondary           Research & Production
Liquor Sales              Educational                 Services
Vehicle Storage           Facilities
Veterinary Services       Transportation Terminals
                         Treatment Services
                           
Residential Uses
Dwelling Units – upper floors with rear or side access.
(Ordinance 019-3250 – 12/18/2019)
 
(Ordinance O20-3258, 12/02/2020)
11.4. PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES.
The following accessory uses and structures shall be permitted.
   1.   Essential Services
   2.   Private garages or carports
   3.   Temporary uses incidental to construction, in which buildings shall be
removed upon the completion or abandonment of the work, and in compliance with
Section
17.5.
   4.   Any other commercial use type that is not listed as a permitted use in
the same district, and complies with all the following criteria.
      a.   Operated primarily for convenience of employees, clients, or
customers of the principal use.
      b.   Occupies less than 10 percent of the total floor area of the
principal use.
      c.   Located and operated as an integral part of the principal use and
does not comprise a separate business use or activity.
   5.   Accessory buildings and structures normally incidental and subordinate
to the permitted uses or special exceptions, as permitted in Section
17.3.
   6.   Other necessary and customary uses and structures determined by the
zoning administrator to be appropriate, incidental, and subordinate in size,
use, and nature.
11.5. SITE DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS.
The following requirements shall be provided for light and open space around
permitted and special exception uses and structures in the (AC) Arterial
Commercial District, and subject to modifications contained in the
Supplementary District Regulations.
Minimum Lot Area -          7,500 square feet
Minimum Lot Width -       80 feet
Maximum Height -          35 feet - No structure shall be permitted to extend
into approach zones, clear zones or restricted air space required for the
protection of any public airport.
Front Yard -             50 feet - minimum required setback
Side Yard -             10 feet – minimum required setback
                Unless, if adjacent to a residential district, the side yard
shall be 25 feet.
Rear Yard -             10 feet – minimum required setback
               Unless, if adjacent to as residential district, the rear yard
shall be 25 feet.
Buffer Requirements -       See
Article XXI.
No minimum requirements for local utility facilities and essential services,
except that buildings or other above ground structures or devices constructed
in support of utilities or essential services must comply with minimum yard
setback requirements.
11.6. ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS- NONCONFORMING USE OF RESIDENTIAL STRUCTURES
   Certain uses may be permitted in the Arterial Commercial (AC) District
subject to specific conditions and requirements intended to make them
compatible with and acceptable to adjacent permitted uses. Nonconforming uses
of residential structures may be permitted to be enlarged, extended,
reconstructed or structurally altered if such non-conforming residential
structure is beyond fifty feet (50’) from the property line of an existing
commercial use.
11.7. OPEN-AIR SALES, DISPLAY AND STORAGE.
All open-air sales display and storage for used auto sales and storage, new
auto sales and storage, new and used farm implement and equipment sales and
storage, new and used truck, machinery, or equipment sales and storage, shall
comply with the following minimum requirements:
   1.   The side and rear lot lines, when abutting residential properties, will
be screened with a wall or fence with its surface at least fifty (50) percent
solid and at least seven (7) feet in height. The fence shall not be required to
extend beyond the front yard setback line;
   2.   All lighting or lighted facilities shall be arranged so that they do
not focus or glare directly on adjacent residential properties, or public
streets, thereby creating a traffic hazard;
   3.   No lighted flashing signs, or revolving beacon lights shall be
permitted;
   4.   The open-air area shall be maintained to be reasonably free of weeds,
debris, trash and other objectionable materials.
11.8. OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING SPACE.
   Off-street parking and loading requirements shall be required for activities
in the Arterial Commercial District in accordance with the provisions of
Article XIX of this ordinance.
11.9. SIGN REGULATIONS.
   Sign regulations shall be required for activities in the Arterial Commercial
District in accordance with the provisions of
Article XX of the ordinance. 
11.10. ZONING PERMITS REQUIRED.
   Zoning permits shall be required in accordance with the provisions of
Section
23.3 of this ordinance.
ARTICLE XII
BC – Business Commercial (Downtown) District
Article 12: Business Commercial District
   Section
12.1.    Intent
   Section
12.2.    Principal Permitted Uses
   Section
12.3.    Special Exception Uses
   Section
12.4    Permitted Accessory Uses and Structures
   Section
12.5.    Site Development Regulations
   Section
12.6. Additional Regulations – Nonconforming Uses of Residential Structures
   Section
12.7.    Additional Regulations – Allowable Residential Uses in BC District
   Section
12.8.     Open-air Sales, Display and Storage
   Section
12.9.    Off-Street Parking and Loading Space
   Section
12.10. Sign Regulations
   Section
12.11.    Zoning Permits Required
12.1. INTENT.
   The intent of the Business Commercial District is to accommodate the central
core of business and office concentration in Sheldon. It is characterized
further by a variety of stores and related activities to serve the general
shopping needs of the retail trade area and to permit uses which will
strengthen the Central Business District as the center of trade, commerce,
services, government, and cultural activity.  
12.2. PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES.
   Within the (BC) Business Commercial District, unless otherwise provided, no
building or land shall be used for other than one or more of the following
principal permitted uses:
 
Commercial Uses               Civic Uses
Administrative/ Food Sales    Club or Lodge
Business        Funeral       Cultural Services
Offices         Services      Day Care Center
Automotive      General       Government/Public Services
Rentals         Retail Sales  Local Utility Services
Automotive      Hospital      Maintenance/Service Facilities
Sales           Services      Park and Recreation Services
Automotive      Laundry       Public Assembly
Washing         Services      Religious Assembly
Building        Medical       Safety Services
Maintenance     Clinics/       
Services        Offices
Business        Personal
Support         Services
Services        Personal
Commercial      Improvement
Recreation      Services
- Indoor Sports Professional
and Recreation  Offices
- Indoor        Research
Entertainment   Services      Residential Uses
Commercial Off- Restaurant    Dwelling Units – upper floors and/or above commercial uses
Street Parking  (Convenience)
Consumer Repair Restaurant
Services        (General)
Convenience     Retail
Store           Specialty
Construction    Shop
Sales & Service Visitor
Financial       Habitation
Services        - Hotel-Motel
12.3. SPECIAL EXCEPTION USES.
   The following uses and structures may be permitted in the (BC) Business
Commercial District, subject to provisions of Articles XXV and XXVI of this
ordinance and with specific conditions and requirements subject to approval of
the Board of Adjustment intended to make them compatible with and acceptable to
adjacent uses. The only residential use permitted by the Board of Adjustment
pursuant to this Section
12.3 shall be ground-floor dwelling units that, at a minimum, meet the
following conditions: Each such dwelling unit (1) shall be accessed from the
rear and/or side (and not the front) of the principal structure; (2) shall have
at least two off- street parking spaces; (3) shall consist of a minimum of 800
square feet of floor space; and (4) shall be located within a principal
structure that is also used for a permitted commercial, civic, or industrial
use, with at least two-thirds of the ground floor of the principal structure
being used for such a permitted commercial, civic, or industrial use.
(Ordinance 019-3249 – 12/18/2019)
 
Commercial Uses                 Civic Uses
Agricultural Sales and Services Detention Facilities
Automotive Repair Services      Pre-Kindergarten, Preschool or Nursery School
Business or Trade School        Primary/Secondary Educational Facilities
Cocktail Lounge                 Convalescent Services
Communication Services          Major Utility Facilities
Convenience Storage             Transportation Terminal
Equipment Sales                 Treatment Services
Equipment Repair Services
Kennel, public
Liquor Sales                    Industrial Uses
Pet Services                    Custom Manufacturing
Vehicle Storage                 Limited Warehousing & Distribution
Veterinary Services
 
Residential Uses
Dwelling Units – ground floors of structures also used for permitted
commercial, civic, or industrial uses.
(Ordinance 019-3249 – 12/18/2019)
12.4. PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES.
The following accessory uses and structures shall be permitted.
   1.   Essential Services.
   2.   Private garages or carports.
   3.   Temporary uses incidental to construction in which buildings shall be
removed upon the completion or abandonment of the work, and in compliance with
Section
17.5.
   4.   Any other commercial use type that is not listed as a permitted use in
the same district, and complies with all the following criteria.
      a.   Operated primarily for the convenience of employees, clients, or
customers of the principal use.
      b.   Occupies less than 10 percent of the total floor area of the
principal use.
      c.   Located and operated as an integral part of the principal use and
does not comprise a separate business use or activity.
   5.   Accessory buildings and structures normally incidental and subordinate
to the principal permitted uses or special exceptions, as permitted in Section
17.3.
   6.   Other necessary and customary uses and structures determined by the
zoning administrator to be appropriate, incidental, and subordinate in size,
use, and nature.
12.5. SITE DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS.
The following requirements shall be provided for light and open space around
permitted and special exception uses and structures in the (BC) Business
Commercial District, and subject to modifications contained in the
Supplementary District Regulations.
Minimum Lot Area -          No minimum required
Minimum Lot Width -       50 feet
Maximum Height -          45 feet
Front Yard -             No minimum required setback
Side Yard -             None, except 5 feet minimum setback if a side yard is
provided or abutting a residential district
Rear Yard -             None, except 6 feet minimum setback is a rear yard is
provided or abutting a residential district, dedicated alley or public street.
Buffer Requirements -       See Articles XXI.
No minimum requirements for local utility facilities and essential services,
except that buildings or other above ground structures or devices constructed
in support of utilities or essential services must comply with minimum yard
setback requirements.
12.6. ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS – NONCONFORMING USE OF RESIDENTIAL STRUCTURES.
   Certain uses may be permitted in the Business Commercial (BC) District
subject to specific conditions and requirements intended to make them
compatible with and acceptable to adjacent permitted uses. Nonconforming uses
of residential structures may be permitted to be enlarged, extended,
reconstructed or structurally altered if such non-conforming residential
structure is beyond fifty feet (50’) from the property line of an existing
commercial use.
12.7. ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS – ALLOWABLE RESIDENTIAL USES IN BC DISTRICT.
   Any residential use properties permitted or allowed in the (BC) Business
Commercial District shall be subject to the site development regulations
identified in Section
7.5 in lieu of any corresponding regulation identified above in Section
12.5.
12.8. OPEN-AIR SALES, DISPLAY AND STORAGE.
All open-air sales display and storage for used auto sales and storage, new
auto sales and storage, new and used farm implement and equipment sales and
storage, new and used truck, machinery, or equipment sales and storage, shall
comply with the following minimum requirements:
   1.   The side and rear lot lines, when abutting residential properties, will
be screened with a wall or fence with its surface at least fifty (50) percent
solid and at least seven (7) feet in height. The fence shall not be required to
extend beyond the front yard set-back line;
   2.   All lighting or lighted facilities shall be arranged so that they do
not focus or glare directly on adjacent residential properties, or public
streets, thereby creating a traffic hazard;
   3.   No lighted flashing signs, or revolving beacon lights shall be
permitted;
   4.   The open-air area shall be maintained to be reasonably free of weeds,
debris, trash and other objectionable materials.
12.9. OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING SPACE.
   Off-street parking and loading requirements shall be required for activities
in the Business Commercial District in accordance with the provisions of
Article XIX of this ordinance.
12.10. SIGN REGULATIONS.
   Sign regulations shall be required for activities in the Business Commercial
District in accordance with the provisions of
Article XX of the ordinance. 
12.11. ZONING PERMITS REQUIRED.
   Zoning permits shall be required in accordance with the provisions of
Section
23.3 of this ordinance.
ARTICLE XIII
BP – Business Park District
Article 13: Business Park District
   Section
13.1.    Intent
   Section
13.2.    Principal Permitted Uses
   Section
13.3.    Special Exception Uses
   Section
13.4.    Permitted Accessory Uses and Structures
   Section
13.5.    Site Development Bulk Regulations
   Section
13.6.    Off-Street Parking and Loading Space
   Section
13.7.    Sign Regulations
   Section
13.8.    Zoning Permits Required
13.1. INTENT.
   The intent of the Business Park District is to provide areas to attract
desirable and stable professional/office developments to be constructed in
harmony with adjacent properties and land uses.
13.2. PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES.
   Within the (BP) Business Park District, unless otherwise provided, no
building or land shall be used for other than one or more of the following
principal permitted uses:
 
 Commercial Uses                   Civic Uses
Administrative and Business Offices
Financial Services
Medical Clinics/Offices             Government/Public Services
Personal Improvement Services       Local Utility Services
Personal Services
Professional Office
 
13.3. SPECIAL EXCEPTION USES.
   The following uses may be permitted in the (BP) Business Park District
subject to provisions of Articles XXV and XXVI of this ordinance, with specific
conditions and requirements subject to approval of the Board of Adjustment
intended to make them compatible with and acceptable to adjacent uses.
 
Commercial Uses           Civic Uses
Retail Specialty Shop     Cultural Services
Restaurants (Convenience) Daycare Center
Restaurants (General)     Park and Recreation Services
Visitor Habitation        Public Assembly
-   Hotel/Motel        Major Utility Facilities
                         Safety Services
                           
 
13.4. PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES.
The following accessory uses and structures shall be permitted.
   1.   Essential Services.
   2.   Temporary uses incidental to construction, which buildings shall be
removed upon the completion or abandonment of the work, and in compliance with
Section
17.5.
   3.   Accessory buildings and structures normally incidental and subordinate
to the permitted uses or special exceptions, as permitted in Section
17.3.
   4.   Other necessary and customary uses and structures determined by the
zoning administrator to be appropriate, incidental, and subordinate in size,
use, and nature.
13.5. SITE DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS.
The following requirements shall be provided for light and open space around
permitted and special exception uses and structures in the (BP) Business Park
District, and subject to modifications contained in the Supplementary District
Regulations.
Minimum Lot Area -             10,000 square feet
Minimum Lot Width -          100 feet
Maximum Height -             35 feet
Front Yard -                50 feet - minimum required setback
Side Yard -                10 feet - minimum required setback
Rear Yard -                25 feet - minimum required setback
Buffer Requirements -          See Articles XXI.
No minimum requirements for local utility facilities and essential services,
except that buildings or other above ground structures or devices constructed
in support of utilities or essential services must comply with minimum yard
setback requirements.
13.6. OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING SPACE.
   Off-street parking and loading requirements shall be required for activities
in the Business Park District in accordance with the provisions of
Article XIX of this ordinance.
13.7. SIGN REGULATIONS.
   Sign regulations shall be required for activities in the Business Park
District in accordance with the provisions of
Article XX of the ordinance. 
13.8. ZONING PERMITS REQUIRED.
   Zoning permits shall be required in accordance with the provisions of
Section
23.3 of this ordinance.
ARTICLE XIV
LI – Light Industrial District
Article 14: Light Industrial District
   Section
14.1.    Intent
   Section
14.2.    Principal Permitted Uses
   Section
14.3.    Special Exception Uses
   Section
14.4.    Permitted Accessory Uses and Structures
   Section
14.5.    Site Development Regulations
   Section
14.6.    Additional Regulations
   Section
14.7.     Open-air Sales, Display and Storage
   Section
14.8.    Off-Street Parking and Loading Space
   Section
14.9.    Sign Regulations
   Section
14.10.    Zoning Permits Required
14.1. INTENT.
   The intent of the Light Industrial District is to provide for a wide range
of industrial uses and structures that have high standards of performance and
can locate near certain residential and business uses. The district regulations
are designed to permit the development of certain manufacturing or industrial
operations which on the basis of actual physical and operational
characteristics, would not be detrimental to the surrounding area or to the
community as a whole by reasons of noise, dust, smoke, odor, traffic, physical
appearance or similar factors. Industrial operations must be in an enclosed
building. No residential uses are permitted in this district.
14.2. PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES.
   The following uses and structures shall be permitted by right in the (LI)
Light Industrial District except those uses which by reason of odor, dust,
fumes, smoke, noise and other obnoxious characteristics would be injurious to
the public health, safety, and general welfare of the community.
 
Commercial Uses                     Industrial Uses
Administrative and Business Offices Custom Manufacturing
Agricultural Sales and Services     Light Manufacturing
Automotive Sales & Rentals          Limited Warehousing and Distribution
Automotive Repair Services          Research and Production Services
Automotive Washing
Building Maintenance Services
Business Support Services
Business or Trade School
Commercial Off-Street Parking       Civic Uses
Communications Services             Administrative Services
Condominium Storage Units           Local Utility Services
Construction Sales and Service      Maintenance and Service Facilities
Convenience Storage                 Park and Recreation Services
Convenience Store                   Safety Services
Equipment Sales & Repair Services
Laundry Services
Service Station
 
14.3. SPECIAL EXCEPTION USES.
   The following uses and structures may be permitted in the (LI) Light
Industrial District subject to provisions of Articles XXV and XXVI of this
ordinance and with specific conditions and requirements subject to approval of
the Board of Adjustment intended to make them compatible with and acceptable to
adjacent uses.
 
Commercial Uses                Industrial Uses         Civic Uses
Commercial Recreation
- Indoor Sports and Recreation
- Indoor Entertainment
- Outdoor Sports and                                   Railroad Facilities
Recreation                     General Warehousing and Major Utility Service
- Outdoor Entertainment        Distribution            Public Assembly
Kennels, public                                        Transportation Terminals
Scrap and Salvage Services
Veterinary Services
 
14.4. PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES.
The following accessory uses and structures shall be permitted.
   1.   Essential Services
   2.   Temporary uses incidental to construction, which buildings shall be
removed upon the completion or abandonment of the construction work, and in
compliance with Section
17.5.
   3.   Any commercial use type or any other industrial use type that is not a
permitted use in the same district, and complies with all the following
criteria:
      a.   Operated primarily for convenience of employees, clients, or
customers of the principal use.
      b.   Occupies less than 25 percent of the total floor area of the
principal use.
      c.   Located and operated as an integral part of the principal use and
does not comprise a separate business use or activity.
   4.   Accessory buildings, structures and uses normally incidental and
subordinate to the permitted uses or special exceptions, as permitted in
Section
17.3.
   5.   Other necessary and customary uses and structures determined by the
zoning administrator to be appropriate, incidental, and subordinate in size,
use, and nature.
14.5. SITE DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS.
The following requirements shall be provided for light and open space around
permitted and special exception uses and structures in the (LI) Light
Industrial District, and subject to modifications contained in the
Supplementary District Regulations.
Minimum Lot Area -          10,000 square feet
Minimum Lot Width -       100 feet
Maximum Height -          None, except 35’ if property abuts residential
district
               No structure shall be permitted to extend into approach zones,
clear zones or restricted air space required for the protection of any airport.
Front Yard -             50 feet - minimum required setback
Side Yard -             10 feet - minimum required setback, except that if
adjacent to any residential district, then 50’
Rear Yard -             25 feet - minimum required setback, except that if
adjacent to any residential district, then 50’
Buffer Requirements -       See
Article XXI
No minimum requirements for local utility facilities and essential services,
except that buildings or other above ground structures or devices constructed
in support of utilities or essential services must comply with minimum yard
setback requirements.
14.6. ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS- NONCONFORMING USE OF RESIDENTIAL STRUCTURES.
   Certain uses may be permitted in the Light Industrial (LI) District subject
to specific conditions and requirements intended to make them compatible with
and acceptable to adjacent permitted uses. Nonconforming uses of residential
structures may be permitted to be enlarged, extended, reconstructed or
structurally altered if such non-conforming residential structure is beyond one
hundred feet (100’) from the property line of an existing industrial facility.
14.7. OPEN-AIR SALES, DISPLAY AND STORAGE.
   All open-air sales display and storage for used auto sales and storage, new
auto sales and storage, new and used farm implement and equipment sales and
storage, new and used truck, machinery, or equipment sales and storage, shall
comply with the following minimum requirements:
   1.   The side and rear lot lines, when abutting residential properties, will
be screened with a wall or fence with its surface at least fifty (50) percent
solid and at least seven (7) feet in height. The fence shall not be required to
extend beyond the front yard set-back line;
   2.   All lighting or lighted facilities shall be arranged so that they do
not focus or glare directly on adjacent residential properties, or public
streets, thereby creating a traffic hazard;
   3.   No lighted flashing signs, or revolving beacon lights shall be
permitted;
   4.   The open-air area shall be maintained to be reasonably free of weeds,
debris, trash and other objectionable materials.
14.8. OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING SPACE.
   Off-street parking and loading requirements shall be required for activities
in the Light Industrial District in accordance with the provisions of
Article XIX of this ordinance.
14.9. SIGN REGULATIONS.
   Sign regulations shall be required for activities in the Light Industrial
District in accordance with the provisions of
Article XX of the ordinance. 
14.10. ZONING PERMITS REQUIRED.
   Zoning permits shall be required in accordance with the provisions of
Section
23.3 of this ordinance.
ARTICLE XV
HI – Heavy Industrial District
Article 15: Heavy Industrial District
   Section
15.1.   Intent
   Section
15.2.   Principal Permitted Uses
   Section
15.3.   Special Exception Uses
   Section
15.4.   Permitted Accessory Uses and Structures
   Section
15.5.   Site Development Regulations
   Section
15.6.   Additional Regulations
   Section
15.7.   Open-air Sales, Display and Storage
   Section
15.8.   Off-Street Parking and Loading Space
   Section
15.9.   Sign Regulations
   Section
15.10.   Zoning Permits Required
15.1. INTENT.
   The intent of the Heavy Industrial District is to provide areas for
activities and uses of a heavy industrial character and is the least
restrictive of any district. In the best interest of the city, certain uses in
the HI district shall be subject to final city council approval, conditional
approval, or denial to insure that proper safeguards are taken. No residential
uses are permitted.
15.2. PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES.
   The following principal uses and structures shall be permitted by right in
the (HI) Heavy Industrial District, except those uses which by reason of the
emission of odor, dust, fumes, smoke, noise, and other obnoxious
characteristics would be injurious to the public health, safety and general
welfare of the community;
 
Commercial Uses             Industrial Uses         Civic Uses
Administrative/Business
Offices
Agricultural Sales and
Services                    Basic Industry          Aviation Facilities
Automotive Washing          Custom Manufacturing    Local Utility Services
Building Maintenance        Light Manufacturing     Major Utility Services
Services                    Limited Warehousing and Maintenance/Service
Business Support Services   Distribution            Facilities
Communications Services     Research/Production     Park and Recreation
Condominium Storage Units   Services                Services
Construction Sales/Services General Warehousing and Railroad Facilities  
Convenience Storage         Distribution
Equipment Sales
Equipment Repair Services
 
15.3. SPECIAL EXCEPTION USES.
   The following uses and structures may be permitted in the (HI) Heavy
Industrial District subject to provisions of Articles XXV and XXVI of this
ordinance and with specific conditions and requirements subject to approval of
the Board of Adjustment intended to make them compatible with and acceptable to
adjacent uses.
 
Commercial Uses                  Industrial Uses
Adult-oriented Establishments   Resource Extraction
(See Section                     Stockyards
17.8. for regulations)
   Before granting such separate approval, the zoning administrator shall refer
applications to the Planning Commission for study, investigation and report. If
no report is received in thirty (30) days, the Board of Adjustment may assume
approval of the application. The Board of Adjustment shall then, after holding
a public hearing, consider all of the following provisions in its determination
upon the particular use at the location requested:
   1)    That the proposed location, design, construction, and operation of the
particular use adequately safeguards the health, safety and general welfare of
persons residing or working in adjoining or surrounding property;
   2)    That such use shall not impair an adequate supply of light and air to
surrounding property;
   3)    That such use shall not unduly increase congestion in the streets, or
public danger of fire and safety;
   4)    That such use shall not diminish or impair established property values
in adjoining or surrounding property; and
   5)    That such use shall be in accord with the intent, purpose and spirit
of this ordinance and the comprehensive plan of the City of Sheldon.
   Limited commercial/retail uses may be permitted by special exception use
within the Heavy Industrial District when intended to serve the needs of a
business’ tenants/employees only. Such special exception commercial/retail uses
would include: eatery, café, health club, convenience store, bakery shop, gift
shop, post office substation, photo studio, barbershop/stylist, or other
appropriate use as determined by the Board of Adjustment.
15.4. PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES.
   The following accessory uses and structures shall be permitted.
   1.   Essential Services
   2.   Temporary uses incidental to construction, which buildings shall be
removed upon the completion or abandonment of the construction work, and in
compliance with Section
17.5.
   3.   Any commercial use type or any other industrial use type that is not a
permitted use in the same district, and complies with all the following
criteria:
      a.   Operated primarily for convenience of employees, clients, or
customers of the principal use.
      b.   Occupies less than 25 percent of the total floor area of the
principal use.
      c.   Located and operated as an integral part of the principal use and
does not comprise a separate business use or activity.
   4.   Accessory buildings, structures and uses normally incidental and
subordinate to the permitted uses or special exceptions, as permitted in
Section
17.3.
   5.   Other necessary and customary uses and structures determined by the
zoning administrator to be appropriate, incidental, and subordinate in size,
use, and nature.
15.5. SITE DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS.
The following requirements shall be provided for light and open space around
permitted and special exception uses and structures in the (HI) Heavy
Industrial District, and subject to modifications contained in the
Supplementary District Regulations.
Minimum Lot Area -          43,560 square feet (1 acre)
Minimum Lot Width -       150 feet
Maximum Height -          None, except 35 feet if property abuts a residential
or mobile home district
               No structure shall be permitted to extend into approach zones,
clear zones or restricted air space required for the protection of any airport.
Front Yard -             50 feet - minimum required setback
Side Yard -             10 feet - minimum required setback
               Except that if adjacent to any residential district, then 50 ft.
Rear Yard -             25 feet - minimum required setback
               Except that if adjacent to any residential district, then 50 ft.
Buffer Requirements -       See
Article XXI.
All principal buildings and all accessory buildings or structures shall be
located at least one hundred (100) feet from any residential district boundary,
except where adjoining a railroad right-of-way, and fifty (50) feet from any
commercial district boundary.
No minimum requirements for local utility facilities and essential services,
except that buildings or other above ground structures or devices constructed
in support of utilities or essential services must comply with minimum yard
setback requirements.
15.6. ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS- NONCONFORMING USE OF RESIDENTIAL STRUCTURES.
   Certain uses may be permitted in the (HI) Heavy Industrial District subject
to specific conditions and requirements intended to make them compatible with
and acceptable to adjacent permitted uses. Nonconforming uses of residential
structures may be permitted to be enlarged, extended, reconstructed or
structurally altered if such non-conforming residential structure is beyond one
hundred feet (100’) from the property line of an existing industrial facility.
15.7. OPEN-AIR SALES, DISPLAY AND STORAGE.
   All open-air sales display and storage for used auto sales and storage, new
auto sales and storage, new and used farm implement and equipment sales and
storage, new and used truck, machinery, or equipment sales and storage, shall
comply with the following minimum requirements:
   1.   The side and rear lot lines, when abutting residential properties, will
be screened with a wall or fence with its surface at least fifty (50) percent
solid and at least seven (7) feet in height. The fence shall not be required to
extend beyond the front yard setback line;
   2.   All lighting or lighted facilities shall be arranged so that they do
not focus or glare directly on adjacent residential properties, or public
streets, thereby creating a traffic hazard;
   3.   No lighted flashing signs, or revolving beacon lights shall be
permitted;
   4.   The open-air area shall be maintained to be reasonably free of weeds,
debris, trash and other objectionable materials.
15.8. OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING SPACE.
   Off-street parking and loading requirements shall be required for activities
in the Heavy Industrial District in accordance with the provisions of
Article XIX of this ordinance.
15.9. SIGN REGULATIONS.
   Sign regulations shall be required for activities in the Heavy Industrial
District in accordance with the provisions of
Article XX of the ordinance. 
15.10. ZONING PERMITS REQUIRED.
   Zoning permits shall be required in accordance with the provisions of
Section
23.3 of this ordinance.
ARTICLE XVI
Supplementary District Regulations
Article 16: Supplementary District Regulations
   Section
16.1.   Intent
   Section
16.2.   Lot of Record
   Section
16.3.   Yard Regulations
   Section
16.4.   Steps, Decks and Patios
   Section
16.5.   Fences and Hedges
   Section
16.6.   Sidewalks
   Section
16.7.   Buildings to Have Access
   Section
16.8.   Use of Public Right-of-Way
   Section
16.9.   Block Frontage Continuity
   Section
16.10.   Height Requirements
16.1. INTENT.Section 1: Intent  
   The regulations set forth in this Article qualify, supplement and/or modify
the zoning district regulations set forth elsewhere in this ordinance.
16.2. LOT OF RECORD.  
   Any lot of record at the time of passage of this ordinance having less area
or width than herein required may be used for a single family dwelling where
such uses are permitted as provided in this ordinance subject to required
setbacks and further provisions of
Article XXII, Nonconformities.
16.3. YARD REGULATIONS.
   1)   Projecting Overhang or Structure. The ordinary horizontal projection
from buildings including eaves, sills, fascia, parapets, cornices, belt courses
or other similar architectural and ornamental features, except for gutters, may
not project or extend more than three feet (3’) into a required yard.
   2)   Yard Encroachments. Air conditioning units, propane or other fuel
tanks, heat pumps, or other such similar devices may not encroach into the
required side yard. Carports, bay windows, cantilevered projections, chimneys
and structures may not project into any required yard.
   3)   Through Lots. Buildings on through lots, extending from street to
street shall provide the required front yard on both streets.
   4)   Line of Site Visibility (at Intersections). On a corner lot in any
district, except the Business Commercial District, nothing shall be erected,
placed, planted or allowed to grow in such a manner that will obstruct vision
between a height of two feet (2’) and ten feet (10’) above the centerline grade
of the intersecting streets within the triangular area formed, by connecting a
point at the center of the curb radius with two points that are thirty-five
(35) feet from the center of the curb radius as measured along the curb. (see
diagram)
   5)   Corner Lots. For buildings on corner lots with frontage on two (2) or
more public streets, each yard abutting a public street shall be the same as
the required front yard on such street and no accessory building shall project
beyond the required front yard on either street.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/0346b833617bfb463c260f908cfa9487bbb73bcf/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1837.png]
 
   6)   Utilities. Nothing in this ordinance shall have the effect of
prohibiting utility service lines.
   7)   Swimming Pools. Private swimming pools shall be allowed only in rear
yards and shall not be closer than five (5) feet to side or rear lot lines.
16.4. STEPS, DECKS AND PATIOS.
   1)   Open fire escapes, fireproof outside stairways and balconies opening
upon fire towers, and the ordinary projections of chimneys and flues into a
rear yard for a distance of not more than three and one-half feet (3½’) when so
placed as not to obstruct light and ventilation, may be permitted by the zoning
administrator.
   2)   Steps providing access to the ground level may encroach no more than
three feet (3’) into a required side yard. Steps may encroach no more than six
feet (6’) into a required front or rear yard.
   3)   Deck floors higher than twelve inches (12”) above the average grade of
the ground shall conform to required yard setbacks. An open unenclosed deck may
project into a required front yard or required rear yard for a distance not
exceeding ten feet (10’).
   4)   Open uncovered porches, patios or other concrete slab structures
constructed on the ground or less than 12 inches above the average grade of the
ground shall be allowed to be constructed within the front, side or rear yards.
Concrete slab structures built on the ground or uncovered patios shall be
permitted to be built up to within two feet (2’) of the side or rear lot lines.
However, within the front yard, uncovered patios or other concrete slab
structures shall not extend more than ten feet (10’) beyond either side of a
driveway, not inclusive of a sidewalk, stoop or entrance steps to the front
entryway.
16.5. FENCES AND HEDGES.
   1)   No fence or hedge constructed more than fifty percent (50%) solid or
more than three feet (3’) in height may be located in any front yard. Fences
less than three feet (3’) in height may be located on any part of a lot. Please
reference Section
16.3.4. when considering fences in front or side yards.
   2)   Except as provided above, fences less than six feet (6’) in height may
be erected in any required side or rear yards on those parts of a lot that are
setback from the street as far as the main building is from the street. Fences
in excess of six feet (6’) will be allowed in the cases of tennis courts and
swimming pools, and by special exception permit only.
   3)   Fences at least four feet (4’) in height shall be required around the
entire perimeter of swimming pools or the yard area that swimming pools are
located in for any swimming pool or water feature in excess of three feet (3’)
in depth. Fence shall include self-closing and self-latching gates/doors. This
section shall not apply to hot tubs with hard covers. Variances may be
considered by the Board of Adjustment for hard covers for swimming pools in
lieu of fences.
(Ordinance O20-3257, 11/18/2020)
   4)   Fences shall not be closer than one foot (1’) to any property line and
perennial plantings shall not be planted closer than two and one-half feet
(2½’) to any property line. Except that perennial plantings and fences may be
placed up to the property line by mutual agreement of both adjacent property
owners.
   5)   Fences shall not be constructed of non-treated or natural wood
products; corrugated tin, metal, or fiberglass; or sheet metal or fiberglass.
Fences may be constructed from chain link, non-decomposing wood products,
molded plastic or wrought iron. The Planning Commission may approve other
materials. Fences should be constructed in an orderly and neat manner as to
accent and compliment the natural landscape of the property.
16.6. SIDEWALKS.
   No zoning permit shall be issued for construction of a principal building
upon any tract or platted lot in the SR, RS, RM, MH, CR, BC, or BP districts
unless said tract or platted lot has sidewalks provided for in such
application. In addition, if said tract or platted lot has sidewalks at the
time of application for said permit, no zoning permit for a principal building
shall be issued if the existing sidewalks are in a state of disrepair.
Sidewalks shall be constructed according to the sidewalk standards as set forth
in the Sheldon City Code of Ordinances, Section 136.08, or have a sidewalk
agreement approved by the zoning administrator.
16.7. BUILDINGS TO HAVE ACCESS.
   Every building or principal use hereafter erected or structurally altered,
shall be on a lot or parcel having frontage on a public street, or with deeded
access to a public or private street, and all structured shall be so located on
lots as to provide safe and convenient access for servicing, fire protection,
and required off-street parking.
16.8. USE OF PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAYS.
   No portion of the public road, street or alley right-of-way shall be used,
or occupied by an abutting use of land or structure for storage or display
purposes, or to provide any parking or loading space.
16.9. BLOCK FRONTAGE CONTINUITY.
   In the case where the front yards in a given block improved with buildings
amount to more than 30% of the total number of lots, including vacant lots, on
one side of the street between two intersecting streets, then the required
minimum setbacks will be based on a line joining the two front corners of the
buildings on either side thereof, or where there is a building on only one
side, beyond a line projected from the corresponding adjacent corners of the
two nearest buildings, except that no building shall be required to provide a
front yard setback greater than thirty-five feet (35’) in any event. Where an
official line has been established for future widening or opening of a street
upon which a lot abuts, than the depth of a front or side yard shall be
measured from such official line.
   In the case where the block front improved with buildings amounts to less
than 30% of the total number of lots, including vacant lots, on one side of the
street between two intersecting streets, the required minimum yards of the
district shall be enforced.
16.10. HEIGHT MODIFICATIONS.Section 3: Height Requirements
   The building height limitations of this ordinance shall be modified as
follows:
   1)   No building shall exceed a height of thirty-five feet (35’) except non-
dwelling agricultural buildings, unless otherwise provided.
   2)   Height regulations shall not apply to television and radio towers,
church spires or steeples, belfries, monuments, tanks, water and fire towers,
stage towers or scenery lofts, cooling towers, grain elevators, ornamental
towers and spires, chimneys, elevator bulkheads, drilling rigs, conveyors,
flagpoles and other pertinent mechanical apparatuses which may be erected to
any height not in conflict with any other applicable regulations. These
additional structures or accessories may be erected, provided however, all
towers or structures exceeding height requirements shall not be permitted to
extend into approach zones, clear zones or other restricted air space required
for the protection of the public.
   3)   Public, semi-public, or public service buildings, hospitals,
sanitariums, or schools when permitted in a district may be erected to a
greater height than otherwise permitted in the district if the building is set
back from each property line at least one foot (1’) in addition to the minimum
yard requirements, for each two feet of additional building height above the
height limit otherwise provided in the district in which the building is
constructed.
ARTICLE XVII
Additional Use Regulations
Article 17: Additional Use Regulations
   Section
17.1.   Intent
   Section
17.2.   Multiple Principal Structures per Lot
   Section
17.3.   Accessory Building Uses
   Section
17.4.   Portable Accessory Buildings and Storage Structures
   Section
17.5.   Temporary Uses
   Section
17.6.   Home Occupation Uses
   Section
17.7.   Recreational Vehicle Uses
   Section
17.8.   Adult-Oriented Establishment Use Regulations
   Section
17.9.   Residential Dwelling Standards
   Section
17.10.    Architectural Design Standards
   Section
17.11.    Planned Unit Development – Special Exception
17.1. INTENT.  
   These provisions apply to additional use regulations in addition to those
guidelines set forth in the zoning district regulations. In event of any
conflict in provisions, the more restrictive provision shall apply unless
specifically indicated to the contrary.
17.2. MULTIPLE PRINCIPAL STRUCTURES PER LOT.  
   Except in the SR, RS, and MH residential districts, more than one principal
permitted or permissible structure or use, not intended to be a single family
residential structure, may be erected on a single lot subject to the following
conditions.
   1)   Provided that yard setbacks and other requirements of this article are
met for each structure as though it were on an individual lot.
   2)   No principal building or structure shall be located closer than twenty-
five feet (25’) in relation to another principal building or structure on the
same lot, so as to cause danger from fire;
   3)   All principal buildings or structures on a lot shall be served by
access ways suitable for police, fire, and emergency vehicles.
   4)   All of the multiple principal buildings on the same lot shall be
accessible via pedestrian walkways connected to the required parking and
emergency accesses for the premises, and to each principal building.
17.3. ACCESSORY BUILDINGS.
   The purpose of these provisions is to establish the relationship among
principal and accessory uses and to establish provisions governing the conduct
of accessory uses.
   Principal uses specified as permitted uses or special exception uses for a
district shall be deemed to include accessory buildings and uses identified by
these regulations and such other accessory uses that are necessary and
customarily associated with and are appropriate, incidental, and subordinate to
such principal or special exception uses. Accessory buildings and uses shall be
subject to the same regulations as apply to principal uses in each district,
except as otherwise provided in these regulations.
   Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to that of the principal
building may be erected or established as permitted, provided they comply with
the following limitations:
   1)   Accessory buildings that are structurally part of or attached to the
principal building shall conform to the site development regulations of the
principal building.
   2)   Accessory buildings shall not be erected in any front yard.
   3)   Accessory buildings located in the CR, AC, BC, BP, LI and HI zoning
districts may be allowed as the only principal structure on a separate platted
lot so long as the accessory building and property is located no more than 300
feet from the lot of the principal structure it is associated with.
   4)   Site development regulations for detached accessory buildings in
residential districts are:
      a.   Residential accessory buildings shall be limited to a maximum of
three (3) total buildings, including a detached garage, of which all total
accessory buildings in any required yard area shall not occupy more than thirty
percent (30%) of the required rear yard area or not more than 1,200 square feet
for the principal accessory structure and one accessory storage building not to
exceed 120 square feet. However, in the event of unusually small rear yards,
the 30% regulation shall not prohibit the construction of at least one garage
not to exceed 600 square feet and at least one accessory storage building not
to exceed 120 square feet.
      b.   No detached accessory building on a corner lot may be placed in any
rear or side yard nearer to a public street right-of-way than the principal
building on the same lot.
      c.   Accessory buildings shall not be erected within five feet (5’) of
any main (principal) building or structure, or within five feet (5’) of the
side or rear property line. Accessory buildings may be built up to but not on
or over any utility or permanent easement.
      d.   If a garage door directly faces an alley, there must be a fifteen
(15) feet minimum setback.
   5)   No accessory building shall be constructed, including siding and
roofing materials, from galvanized metal, but not to exclude the use of
standing seam metal roofs or other fabricated or painted metal roof shingles.
Accessory buildings should be built of similar materials and of a similar
appearance to the principal building on the lot.
   6)   Detached accessory buildings shall not exceed a height of 18 feet.
   7)   No accessory building shall be constructed upon a lot or used until
construction of the main building has been commenced, and no accessory building
shall be used unless the main building on the lot is also being used.
   8)   Accessory buildings shall not be used for dwelling purposes.
   9)   For the purposes of this ordinance, a gasoline dispensing pump shall
not be classified as an accessory structure.
   10)   Satellite dishes are subject to the accessory building rules above.
17.4. PORTABLE ACCESSORY BUILDINGS AND STORAGE STRUCTURES.
   1)   “Storage Structure” shall mean one of the following definitions:
      Membrane storage structure: A structure consisting of a frame covered
with a plastic, fabric, canvas, aluminum or other non-permanent material, which
is used to provide storage for vehicles, boats, recreational vehicles or other
personal property. The term also applies to structures commonly known as hoop
buildings, canopy carports or tent garages; but shall not apply to temporary
tents or canopies used for special events such as weddings or celebrations.
      On-demand or on-site storage structure: Any portable or permanent storage
container, storage pod, storage unit, receptacle or other portable structure
that is used for the storage of personal property, which is located outside an
enclosed building. The term does not include normal sheds, garages,
outbuildings or membrane storage structures.
   2)   The term “storage structure” shall not apply to a truck trailer or
semi-trailer while it is actively being used for the transportation of
materials, inventory or equipment and is temporarily located adjacent to a
loading dock. A storage structure may be used as a construction site trailer
but only during construction on the site.
   3)   All Residential and Conservation Zoning Districts.
      Temporary membrane storage structures are not permitted on any
residential properties. A permanent membrane storage structure with a hard roof
(such as a carport structure) may be permitted on any property if the structure
is permanently attached to the ground, concrete driveway or hard surface, or
permanently attached to a principal or accessory structure. A temporary
portable on demand or on-site storage structure may be kept within the yard
areas on any residential property for a maximum of 7 days for purposes of
packing, shipping or moving materials from a permanent structure.
   4)   All Commercial, Industrial and Agricultural Zoning Districts. 
      A permanent storage structure for other than residential or commercial
purposes is permitted but shall be located on the property within the permitted
rear or side yard areas so as not to obstruct any drive access or block
required parking spaces.
17.5. TEMPORARY USES.
   Provisions authorizing temporary uses are intended to permit occasional,
temporary uses when consistent with the purposes of these zoning regulations
and when compatible with other nearby uses.
   1)   Temporary Use Types: The following types of temporary use may be
authorized, subject to specific limitations herein and such additional
conditions as may be established by the zoning administrator.
      a.   Contractor's office, storage yard, and equipment parking and
servicing on the site of an active construction project may be permitted in any
district during the period that the construction work is in progress, but such
temporary building(s) shall be removed within thirty (30) days after completion
or abandonment of the construction work.
      b.   Religious, patriotic, or historic assemblies, displays, or exhibits.
      c.   Circuses, carnivals, rodeos, fairs, or similar transient amusement
or recreational activities not closer than 200 feet to an existing dwelling.
      d.   Outdoor art and craft shows and exhibits.
      e.   Christmas tree sale lots.
      f.   Temporary signs relating to temporary uses.
      g.   Outdoor special sales, including swap meets, flea markets, parking
lot sales, or similar activities, limited to locations in commercial or
industrial districts, and when operated not more than 3 days in the same week
or more than 5 days in the same month.
      h.   Temporary use of trailer units or similar portable structures for
nonresidential uses, and limited to a maximum period of 6 months per calendar
year.
      i.   Additional similar uses determined to be temporary by the zoning
administrator.
   2)   Required Conditions of Temporary Use:
      a.   Each site occupied by a temporary use shall be left free of debris,
litter, or other evidence of temporary use upon completion or removal of the
use.
      b.   The zoning administrator may establish such additional conditions as
deemed necessary to ensure land use compatibility and to minimize potential
impacts on nearby uses, including but not limited to time and frequency of
operation, temporary arrangements for parking and traffic circulation,
requirements for screening or enclosure, and guarantees for site restoration
and cleanup following temporary use.
   3)   Determination: The zoning administrator may authorize a temporary use
only when, in his judgement, the following determination can be made:
      a.   The temporary use will not impair the normal, safe, and effective
operation of a permanent use on the same site.
      b.   The temporary use will be compatible with nearby uses in the general
vicinity.
      c.   The temporary use will not impact public health, safety, or
convenience, or create traffic hazards or congestion or otherwise interrupt or
interfere with the normal conduct of uses and activities in the vicinity.
   4)   Application and Authorization:
      a.   Application to conduct a temporary use shall be made to the zoning
administrator, and shall include a site plan and description of the use and
such additional information as the zoning administrator may require to evaluate
the use and to make the determination.
      b.   Authorization of a temporary use shall be by issuance of a zoning
permit.
      c.   A temporary use authorized pursuant to these provisions shall not be
exempt or relieved from compliance with any other ordinance, law, permit, or
license applicable to such use.
17.6. HOME OCCUPATIONS. 
   Home occupations as an accessory to residential uses shall be subject to the
following limitations.
   1)   The use must be clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the
dwelling unit for residential purposes and in such a manner as not to give an
outward appearance nor manifest any characteristics of a business in the
ordinary meaning of the term. The home occupation shall be conducted entirely
within a residential dwelling unit that is the bona fide residence of the
practitioner(s), or entirely within an attached or detached garage (not to
include a carport, driveway, yard or outside area).
   2)   Is carried on by a member of the family residing in the dwelling unit.
   3)   Does not employ more than one (1) full time employee outside the
immediate family residing on the premises, except by special exception by the
Board of Adjustment;
   4)   Have no exterior display, no exterior storage of materials, and no
other exterior indication of the home occupation or variation from the
residential character of the principal building.
   5)   Home occupations may have one (1) exterior, flush mounted, non-
illuminated sign located on private property, off of the public right-of-way;
in which sign shall not exceed four (4) square feet in area, shall not exceed
four (4) feet in height.
   6)   The home occupation shall not occupy more than 30 percent of the main
floor area. Any extension of the home occupation beyond 30 percent of the floor
area shall only be approved by special exception of the Board of Adjustment.
However, this regulation shall not apply to day care services.
   7)   Does not produce offensive or objectionable noise, vibration, fumes,
smoke, dust, odors, heat, glare or waste run off rendering such building or
premises objectionable to the residential character of the neighborhood.
   8)   No traffic shall be generated in greater volumes that would normally be
expected in a residential neighborhood. Any need for parking generated by the
conduct of such home occupation shall be met by providing off-street parking
and shall not be in a required front yard. No pedestrian traffic shall be
generated into the home occupation more than the customer being served.
   9)   No equipment or materials associated with the home occupation shall be
displayed or stored where visible from anywhere off the premises.
   10)   The use must not infringe upon the right of neighbors to enjoy
peaceful and healthy occupancy of their home for which purpose the residential
district was created and primarily intended.
   11)   Nothing herein shall be construed to allow the following businesses or
occupations as home occupations: animal hospitals, animal breeding, clinics,
hospitals, contractor's yards, junk yards, restaurants, rental outlets,
automotive repair, vehicle repair shops or massage parlors.
17.7. RECREATIONAL VEHICLES.
   1)   Recreational vehicles may be parked for seasonal use (short term use)
on a driveway within a front yard, but not upon the right-of-way, in
residential districts provided the view of the street is not obstructed as to
vehicular ingress and egress. Recreational vehicles, including campers, boats,
personal watercraft, snowmobiles, trailers, and other recreational based
vehicles not intended for permanent occupancy, may be parked or stored (long
term use) within the side yard or rear yard of a residential lot, or within an
enclosed garage.
   2)   For purposes of long term storage, all year long, or a period of time
exceeding 30 consecutive days, recreational vehicles parked within side yards
of a property shall not be located in front of a line parallel to the front of
the principal structure on the lot.
   3)   Recreational vehicles shall be customarily or ordinarily used for
vacation or recreation purposes and not used as a place of human habitation for
more than fourteen (14) consecutive days in any three (3) month period.
   4)   Recreational vehicles shall not be used for permanent human occupancy
in any district.
   5)   Recreational vehicle shall not be used for business purposes.
17.8. ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENT REGULATIONS. 
   1)   Purpose. The City of Sheldon finds:
      a.   Adult entertainment establishments require special consideration in
order to protect and preserve the health, safety, and welfare of the patrons of
such establishments as well as the citizens of Sheldon;
      b.   Adult entertainment establishments, because of their very nature,
have a detrimental effect on both existing establishments around them and
surrounding residential areas adjacent to them;
      c.   The concern over sexually transmitted diseases is a legitimate
health concern of the city that demands reasonable regulation of adult
entertainment establishments in order to protect the health and well-being of
the community;
      d.   Adult entertainment establishments, due to their very nature, have
serious objectionable operational characteristics, thereby contributing to
blight and downgrading the quality of life in the adjacent area;
      e.   The City of Sheldon wants to prevent these adverse effects and
thereby protect the health, safety, and welfare of its residents; protect
residents from increased crime; preserve the quality of life; preserve the
property values and character of the surrounding neighborhoods; and deter the
spread of blight;
      f.   It is not the intent of this ordinance to suppress any speech
activities protected by the First Amendment, but to enact content neutral
regulations that address the secondary effects of adult entertainment
establishments as well as the health problems associated with such
establishments.
   2)   Definitions Related to Adult Entertainment Establishments.
      a.   ADULT BOOKSTORE: An establishment that has a facility or facilities,
including but not limited to, booths, cubicles, rooms or stalls for the
presentation of “adult entertainment,” including adult-oriented films, movies,
or live performances for observation by patrons therein; or an establishment
having a substantial or significant portion of its stock-in-trade for sale,
rent, trade, lease, inspection, or viewing of books, films, video cassettes,
magazines, or other periodicals, which are distinguished or characterized by
their emphasis on matters depicting, describing, or relating to specified
anatomical areas or specified sexual activities as defined below.
      b.   ADULT ENTERTAINMENT: Any exhibition of any motion picture, live
performance, display, or dance of any type, which has as its dominant theme or
is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on any actual or simulated
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas as defined below.
      c.   ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER: An enclosed building used for
presenting material having as its dominant theme or distinguished or
characterized by an emphasis on matters depicting, describing, or relating to
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas as defined below for
observation by patrons of the building.
      d.   ADULT ESTABLISHMENT: Any premises including, without limitation,
"adult bookstores," or "adult motion picture theaters." It further means any
premises to which public patrons or members are invited or admitted and which
are physically arranged so as to provide booths, cubicles, rooms, compartments,
or stalls separate from the common area of the premises for the purposes of
viewing adult-oriented motion pictures, or wherein an entertainer provides
adult entertainment to a member of the public, a patron, or a member, where
such adult entertainment is held, conducted, operated, or maintained for a
profit, direct or indirect. Adult Entertainment Establishment further includes,
without limitation, any premises physically arranged and used as such whether
advertised or represented as an adult entertainment studio, exotic dance
studio, encounter studio, sensitivity studio, or any other term of like import.
      e.   OPERATORS: Any person, partnership, or corporation operating,
conducting, maintaining or owning any adult entertainment establishment.
      f.   SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS: Less than completely and opaquely
covered female or male genitals or buttocks, and the fully exposed female
breasts.
      g.   SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES: Simulated or actual acts of:
         (i)   showing of specified anatomical areas in a state of sexual
stimulation or arousal;
         (ii)   actual or simulated acts of sexual intercourse, sodomy, sado-
masochism; or
         (iii)   fondling or erotic touching of specified anatomical areas.
   3)   Location Restrictions.
      An adult entertainment establishments shall be permitted within the City
of Sheldon only in the Heavy Industrial (HI) District upon receipt of a site
plan (
Article XVIII) and special exception use permit in accordance with the
procedures set forth in
Article XXVI, and only if it meets all of the location requirements set forth
below. Distances provided hereafter shall be measured by following a straight
line, without regard to intervening buildings, from the nearest point of the
property parcel upon which the proposed adult entertainment business is to be
located, to the nearest point of the parcel of property or zoning district
boundary line from which the proposed adult entertainment business is to be
separated.
      a.   Adult entertainment establishments shall be prohibited in or within
one thousand (1,000) feet of the borders of a residential district.
      b.   Adult entertainment establishments shall be prohibited within one
thousand (1,000) feet of any church, synagogue, mosque, temple, or other place
of religious worship.
      c.   Adult entertainment establishments shall be prohibited within one
thousand (1,000) feet of any public or private school offering general
education for students between the years of Kindergarten and Twelfth grade.
      d.   Adult entertainment establishments shall be prohibited within one
thousand (1,000) feet of any daycare home or daycare business.
      e.   Adult entertainment establishments shall be prohibited within one
thousand (1,000) feet of any public park or playground. For purposes of this
section, bike paths, trails, waterways, and boat launches shall not be deemed a
public park.
      f.   Adult entertainment establishments shall be prohibited within one
thousand (1,000) feet of any other adult entertainment business.
      g.   Adult entertainment establishments shall be prohibited within one
thousand (1,000) feet of any existing establishment selling alcoholic beverages
for consumption on premises.
   4)   Development Design Standards.
      a.   Exterior. It shall be unlawful for an owner of an adult
entertainment establishment to allow the merchandise or activities of the
establishment to be visible from a point outside the establishment.
Furthermore, the exterior portion of the adult-oriented establishment shall not
have flashing lights, or any words, lettering, photographs, silhouettes,
drawings, or pictorial representation of any manner depicting specified
anatomical areas or specified sexual activities.
      b.   Signage. The operator shall comply with
Article XX of this ordinance. Additionally, the display surfaces of the sign
shall not contain any flashing lights or photographs, silhouettes, drawings, or
pictorial representations of any manner, except for the name of the enterprise.
   5)    Responsibilities of the Operator. Every act or omission by an employee
constituting a violation of the provisions of this ordinance shall be deemed
the act or omission of the operator if such act or omission occurs either with
the authorization, knowledge, or approval of the operator, or as a result of
the operator's negligent failure to supervise the employee's conduct, and the
operator shall be punishable for such act or omission in the same manner as if
the operator committed the act or caused the omission.
   6)   Minors. It shall be unlawful to allow a person who is younger than
eighteen (18) years of age to enter or be on the premises of an adult
entertainment establishment at any time that the establishment is open for
business. The operator must ensure that an attendant is stationed at each
public entrance at all times during regular business hours. The attendant shall
prohibit any person under the age of eighteen (18) from entering the
establishment. It shall be presumed that an attendant knew a person was under
the age of eighteen (18) unless a valid driver’s license is asked for and
furnished reflecting that person’s age.
17.9. RESIDENTIAL DWELLING STANDARDS.
   All structures intended for residential occupancy placed, erected, assembled
or constructed in the City of Sheldon shall meet and comply with the following
minimum requirements:
   1)   Structure Size: Each such structure shall have a main body with a
minimum exterior dimension of at least twenty-two and one-half feet (22’ 6”)
measured from outside of the dimension of three (3) or more exterior walls,
exclusive of attached garages, porches, or other attached accessory structures.
A structure may include porches, sunrooms, garages and wings of lesser
dimensions and area, so long as the main body meets the minimum requirements.
   2)   Minimum Floor Area: All single-family residential dwelling units shall
provide for a minimum of eight hundred (800) square feet of floor space.
(Ordinance 018-3232, 2/07/2017)
   3)   Foundation: All residential dwelling units, including attached
structures shall be placed on a permanent frost free perimeter foundation,
except that a perimeter foundation shall not be required for a mobile home or
manufactured housing if a perimeter foundation in incompatible with the
structural design of the mobile or manufactured home. For such a mobile home or
manufactured housing, a permanent foundation may be a pier footing foundation
system designed and constructed to be compatible with the structure and the
conditions of the site. Foundation materials may be masonry, poured concrete,
wood or metal and must extend below the normal frost line or be an approved
frost free permanent foundation. The structure must be permanently attached to
the foundation.
   4)   Detached Structures: Any detached garage shall have a minimum of 18"
depth perimeter footings.
   5)   Exterior Wall and Roof Material:  
      a.   Exterior wall covering shall be wood or masonry finish, vertical or
horizontal grooved siding, lap siding, log siding, wood shingles, or another
approved material of similar appearance.
      b.   Roofing material shall be shingles (asphalt, fiberglass, or wood),
slate, ceramic, concrete, or metal of a type customarily used for residential
roofing material, such as “standing seam” or embossed or textured metal.
      c.   Smooth, unfinished or corrugated sheet metal or sheet fiberglass
shall not be used for exterior wall or roof covering.
      d.   Soffits and/or eaves, window and door trim, roofs and coverings over
bay and bow windows and doors may be smooth finished metal, vinyl or wood or
unfinished metal, such as copper, customarily used for residential structure
trim.
      e.   All dwelling units shall have a minimum roof pitch of 3:12. This
requirement shall not apply to mobile home housing if the structure complies
with 42 U.S.C., Section 5403.
   6)    Wheels, Axles or Towing Device: No residential structure shall have
attached wheels, axles, or a towing device.
   7)   Office Structures: No mobile home, trailer, portable type building,
etc., shall be used as an office or for other business purposes, unless by
special exception granted by the Board of Adjustment.
   8)   Exemption: The provisions of this Article shall not apply to “mobile”
or “manufactured” homes placed in a mobile home park in compliance with the
remaining regulations in this zoning ordinance.
17.10. ARCHITECTURAL DESIGN STANDARDS.
   As part of the submittal of a site plan for development within any of the
zoning districts and for any of the uses except one and two family dwellings,
architectural plans for buildings shall be submitted for review and approval by
the city staff as part of the permitting process. Documentation to be submitted
shall include drawings showing the building’s design and a description of
structural and exterior materials to be used, on all sides. The following
standards shall be used by the city staff to review architectural plans:
   1)   Non-Residential uses in any RESIDENTIAL District: Any building used for
a permitted or special exception non-residential use in any residential
district, shall be designed and constructed with architecture and use of
materials compatible with the residential uses within the neighborhood.
   2)   All uses within the COMMERCIAL District: Buildings within commercial
districts shall be designed, having as a primary element of the building
exterior: fascia glass, wood siding, stucco, vinyl, brick, concrete panels,
finished or painted metal or aluminum siding, ribbed metal panels, textured
concrete block or stone with all sides of any building consistent in design and
use of materials. These materials shall make up at least a majority of the
building walls of each side of the structure. No masonite, asphaltic wall
material, galvanized sheet metal, non-textured concrete block, or other similar
materials shall constitute a major portion of any building except as a trim
material, unless city staff shall determine said material when used as a
primary element, does not distract from the physical appearance of the
building. The architectural design and use of materials for the construction
shall be reviewed as part of any site plan.
   3)   All uses within the INDUSTRIAL District: The exterior material of the
building’s front elevation shall be comprised of one or a combination of the
building materials permitted in commercial districts. These materials shall be
present on at least a majority of the building’s front facade. The use of
galvanized metal shall not be considered acceptable for any facade. The
architectural design and use of construction materials shall be reviewed as
part of any site plan.
   Buildings proposed in commercial or industrial areas that are adjacent to
less intense uses (e.g. residential or civic uses) should be designed with an
articulated roofline, giving emphasis to architectural elements that help
divide the mass of a large building into smaller, identifiable parts.
Commercial and industrial buildings shall incorporate facade modulation in all
building elevations visible to the public or adjacent to other less intense
uses in order to preserve building scale and reduce the effect of long, large
or expansive wall surfaces. Variation of these surfaces can be accomplished by
physical offsets or the use of color, pattern or texture. Buildings shall
incorporate architectural design elements, materials, and colors into the side
and rear building elevations similar to those used in the front building
elevation.
17.11. PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT (PUD) – SPECIAL EXCEPTION.
   Planned Unit Developments (PUD’s) are intended to accommodate a wide variety
of use types in accordance with the city’s comprehensive plan. The purpose of
the PUD is to provide flexibility in the design and development of land in
order to promote its most appropriate use and to facilitate the adequate and
economical provision of streets, utilities and public spaces; while
simultaneously striving to preserve the natural and scenic qualities of open
areas. PUD’s are intended to encourage innovative, well-designed projects that
achieve a high level of low impact development, environmental sensitivity,
energy efficiency, safety, and aesthetics. Each PUD will be applied for and
reviewed as a special exception within the zoning district in which it is
located. The PUD application shall contain a general statement by the applicant
describing how the proposed development departs from the city’s standard zoning
regulations and how the proposed development is an improvement over the
requirements of the city’s zoning regulations.
   1.   To be eligible for PUD consideration, the proposed development must:
      a.   be in accordance with the comprehensive plan and with the
regulations of this ordinance;
      b.   be an effective and unified means of treating possible development
providing for preservation of scenic features and amenities of the site and the
surrounding area;
      c.   encourage a more creative and efficient development of land and its
improvements;
      d.   allow for a mixture of uses in an integrated and well-planned area;
      e.   ensure concentration of open space into more usable areas and
preservation of the natural resources of the site including wetlands,
woodlands, steep slopes, and scenic areas;
      f.   facilitate economic provisions of streets and public utilities;
      g.   encourage low impact developments.
   The overall land use makeup of PUDs shall be consistent with the underlying
land use designation and the following standards:
   2.    Residential PUDs: PUDs established on land zoned as one of the city’s
residential districts shall be considered a residential PUD. The following
standards shall apply:
      a.   Residential and Public/Civic Uses: The Board of Adjustment may
approve any residential and public/civic uses within residential PUDs.
Permitted dwelling units shall include detached, clustered, semi-detached,
attached, or multi-storied structures or combinations thereof. Customary
accessory uses are also permitted.
      b.    Commercial Uses: In addition to residential and public/civic uses,
the Board of Adjustment may approve commercial uses within residential PUDs;
provided that:
         i.   A sufficient population within the PUD supports such uses;
         ii.   Such uses are designed and located in such a manner as to
protect the character of the affected project and surrounding land uses and
natural assets; and
         iii.   Such uses do not occupy in total more than 25 percent of the
total land area in the PUD.
   3.    Commercial PUDs: PUDs established on land zoned as one of the city’s
commercial or industrial districts shall be considered a commercial PUD. The
following standards shall apply:
      a.    Residential and Public/Civic Uses: The Board of Adjustment may
approve any residential and public/civic uses within commercial PUDs; provided
that the overall density of residential uses shall not exceed 16 units per
acre.
      b.    Commercial Uses: The Board of Adjustment may approve any commercial
uses within commercial PUDs.
      c.    Industrial Uses: The Board of Adjustment may approve any industrial
uses within commercial PUDs.
   4.    Mixed-Use PUDs: PUDs to be established on land zoned as either
residential or nonresidential (commercial or industrial) on the city’s zoning
map shall be considered a mixed-use PUD. Those portions of a mixed-use PUD that
have an underlying residential zoning designation shall be regulated in
accordance with the residential PUD standards. Those portions of a mixed-use
PUD that have an underlying commercial or industrial zoning designation shall
be regulated in accordance with the commercial PUD standards.
   5.   General Regulations. In order for PUD’s to be eligible for
consideration of a special exception use permit, certain regulations needs to
be satisfied to preserve the integrity of the planned development and minimize
any potential impact to adjacent properties.
      a.   Conformance with the Comprehensive Plan: The proposed planned unit
development is in conformance with the Sheldon Comprehensive Plan. At a
minimum, the Board of Adjustment shall find that the planned unit development
does not conflict with the comprehensive plan.
      b.   Minimum Site Area: A planned unit development shall include no less
than five (5) acres of contiguous land. Property shall be deemed to be
contiguous so long as all parts are under unified control of the applicant, and
all parts abut or are separated by only a road, easement or right of way. A
minimum of two (2) or more principal structures must be proposed.
      c.   Preservation of Natural Features: Mature trees, vegetative cover,
watercourses and other natural site features shall be preserved to the greatest
extent possible. Abrupt changes in natural slope shall be avoided. Preservation
shall be directed toward;
         i.   Enhancing the quality of new developments;
         ii.   Protecting the natural environment;
         iii.   Providing buffering between new developments and surrounding
properties;
         iv.   Handling of storm water flows in natural channels;
         v.   Maintaining existing vegetation along stream corridors as water
quality filters; and
         vi.   Developing and sustaining low impact developments.
      d.   Common Open Space: A minimum of twenty-five percent (25%) of every
residential PUD shall be developed as public open space for the use and
enjoyment of the residents. A minimum of fifteen percent (15%) of the gross
area of every commercial PUD shall be devoted to common open space. In the case
of a mixed-use PUD, the greater requirement of minimum open space shall apply.
Parking areas and vehicle access facilities shall not be considered in
calculating open space requirements. Common open space may qualify wholly or
partially as recreation areas, recreational buildings, pedestrian open space
system (permanently maintained walks and trails), or environmental features
such as natural habitats or environmentally sensitive areas. If natural
habitats or environmentally sensitive areas exist, the Planning Commission may
require the area so defined to be left in an undisturbed state and adequately
protected or incorporated into the design of the PUD as a natural resource or
recreation area.
      e.   Maintenance of Common Open Space: In the event that the owner or
organization established to own and maintain common open space shall fail to
maintain the land in reasonable condition, the Zoning Administrator shall serve
written notice defining the maintenance deficiencies. If such deficiencies are
not corrected after 30 days, the Zoning Administrator shall call upon any
public or private agency to maintain the common open space. In such cases, the
tax assessor shall assess the costs proportionally against all properties
within the PUD that have the right of use of the common open space.
      f.   Screening: Additional buffering beyond minimum requirements of this
ordinance, both around the perimeter and interior of the planned unit
development, shall be provided where appropriate to mitigate against adverse
impacts of noise, glare, sound, or other influences on the proposed development
or on adjacent land.
      g.   Lighting: All lighting from proposed developments shall be arranged
to prevent direct glare or hazardous interference to adjoining streets or
lands.
      h.   Off-Street Parking and Loading: Off-street parking and loading
requirements shall be required for activities in the Planned Unit Development
(PUD) District in accordance with the provisions of
Article XIX of this ordinance, unless a deviation from those standards is
specifically approved during the PUD approval process.
      i.   On-Site Utilities: Underground utilities shall be provided wherever
possible.
      h.   Streets: Principal vehicular access to PUDs shall be from primary
arterial or collector streets. Any PUD containing over 50 dwelling units and/or
30,000 square feet of nonresidential floor space shall provide at least 2
access points, where feasible. Access points shall be designed to provide
smooth flow, controlled turning movements, and minimum hazard to vehicular or
pedestrian traffic.
      i.   Other Conditions: The zoning administrator and the Board of
Adjustment shall have the authority to impose such other conditions as are
necessary to accomplish the purposes of this zoning ordinance and the
comprehensive plan.
   6.   Application and Approval. PUD’s shall be subject to the approval of a
special exception use permit approved by the Board of Adjustment.
      a.   Pre-Application Meeting.
         Prior to submitting a PUD plan to the Board of Adjustment, the
applicant shall meet with the zoning administrator and Board of Adjustment to
discuss the proposed project. This includes the procedures for a special
exception use permit and preliminary plat. The applicant may submit a simple
sketch plan at this stage for informal review and discussion.
      b.   Development Plan Documentation.
      The following information shall be submitted for application of the
special exception use permit.
         i.   A statement describing the general character of the intended
development and the manner in which it has been designed to take advantage of
the PUD regulations.
         ii.   An accurate site plan of the proposed project, along with
additional information requested by the city to make possible the evaluation of
the criteria for approval.
         iii.   A statement of proposed financing of the planned unit
development (PUD)
         iv.   Intended organizational structure related to ownership,
covenants, and provision of services
         v.   A list of property owners and addresses within two hundred (200)
feet of property
         vi.   An indication of the expected development schedule including
time schedules
         vii.   A description of how city services will be provided (sewer,
water, streets, other utilities)
         viii.   Any additional information requested by the Board of
Adjustment that may be required for clarification of the proposed project in
review of the special exception application
      c.   Preliminary Plat. 
      The applicant shall also submit a preliminary plat and all the necessary
documentation as required under the subdivision regulations of all or that
portion of the project to be platted. For purposes of administrative
simplification, the public hearings required for the special exception use
permit and preliminary plat may be combined or held concurrently.
      d.   Development Plan Procedures. 
      The applicant shall file a completed application for a special exception
use with the zoning administrator. The zoning administrator shall review for
conformity and transmit the application to the Board of Adjustment and notify
all property owners within the affected zone and within two hundred (200) feet
of the property; however, failure of any property owner to receive such
notification shall not invalidate the proceedings. The zoning administrator
shall set a date for a public hearing and shall have notices of such hearing
published in the legal newspaper at least once, not less than seven (7) days
and not more than twenty (20) days prior to said hearing. The Board of
Adjustment shall hold the public hearing and make a determination on one of
three actions - approval, denial, or conditional approval.
      Within sixty (60) days of Board of Adjustment decision of the PUD
development plan and the preliminary plat, the applicant shall file with the
zoning administrator a final plat for that portion to be platted. The final
plat shall contain those changes as recommended by the Board of Adjustment
during the preliminary review. The final plat shall be submitted to the O’Brien
County Recorder's Office by the developer within ninety (90) days. This shall
include posting a performance bond or certified check with the City of Sheldon,
Iowa, guaranteeing those required improvements will be constructed according to
the approved implementation schedule. This shall be accomplished prior to the
issuance of any zoning compliance permit. Once the development plan and final
plat are approved, the city may issue the zoning compliance permit for the
area. Said area shall then be designated on the official zoning map.
      e.   Enforcing Development Schedule.
      The construction and provision of common open space and public or
recreation facilities shown on the development plan must proceed at the same
rate as construction of the dwelling units. If the rate of construction of
dwelling units is faster than the rate of open space or public facilities, this
information will be forwarded to Board of Adjustment of which then the special
exception use permit may be revoked.
      f.    Review and Amendments. 
      The Board of Adjustment may make modifications, revisions or amendments
to the special exception permit for the PUD including changes to the location,
placement, and heights of buildings or structures if required by engineering or
other circumstances not foreseen at the time of approval. The Board of
Adjustment may also revoke the special exception permit for a PUD if
substantial development has not occurred within one (1) year after the original
approval of the permit.
ARTICLE XVIII
Site Plans
Article 18: Site Plans
   Section
18.1.   Intent
   Section
18.2.    Scale
   Section
18.3.   Legal Information
   Section
18.4.    Site Plan
18.1. INTENT.Section 1: Intent  
   Site plans are required for new construction of permitted or special
exception buildings and structures in any district, and shall comply with and
illustrate the following. Accessory uses, buildings and structures, interior
remodeling projects, and those exterior projects that do not change the size,
cubic content or building footprint are exempt from site plan requirements.
Although site plans according to this article are not required for such
accessory uses or other remodeling or interior projects, it does not imply that
such uses are exempt from the zoning permit process and any site drawings or
plans required of the zoning permit application.
18.2. SCALE.
   All site plans shall be drawn at a scale not smaller than 1”=10’ for
individual lot plans and not smaller than 1”=100’ for subdivision plans. If
review is required by the Planning Commission and/or Board of Adjustment, ten
(10) copies of the site plan shall be submitted with the zoning permit
application. Otherwise, 1 copy of the site plan shall be submitted to the city.
18.3. LEGAL INFORMATION.
   The final site plan required shall include the following legal information:
   a.   Legal property owners name and description of property.
   b.   Appellant's name, requested land use and zoning.
   c.   If the appellant is other than the legal owner, the appellant's
interest shall be indicated and the legal owners’ authority to appeal shall be
submitted in a certified legal form.
18.4. SITE PLAN.
   The final site plan shall clearly illustrate the following information:
   a.   Property boundary lines, dimensions and total area.
   b.   If substantial topographic change is proposed, contour lines at
intervals of not more than two feet (2’) may be requested by city staff.
   c.   The availability and location of existing utilities.
   d.   The proposed location, size, shape and type of all buildings or
structures.
   e.   The total square feet of all proposed buildings, both individually and
collectively.
   f.   The number of dwelling units, bedrooms, offices, etc.
   g.   Existing buildings, rights-of-way, street improvements, utilities,
easements, or drainage ways.
   h.   Parking areas, number of parking spaces proposed and type of surfacing
to be used.
   i.   Walkways, lighting, walls, fences, signs, monuments and other man-made
features.
   j.   Location and type of hard landscaping and plantings, fences or walls to
be used for screening purposes shall be illustrated in elevation as well as in
the plan, if required.
   k. Traffic considerations, architectural themes, and any other
considerations pertinent to the proposed use may be requested by city staff.
ARTICLE XIX
Off Street Parking and Loading Space
Article 19: Off Street Parking and Loading Space
    Section
19.1.    Intent
   Section
19.2.   General Parking Area and Surface Requirements
   Section
19.3.   Off Street Parking Requirements
   Section
19.4.   Computation of Parking Spaces
   Section
19.5.   Location and Type of Parking
   Section
19.6.   Off Street Loading RequirementsSection 3: Computation of Spaces
19.1. INTENT.  
   It is the intent of this article to prevent traffic congestion and to
provide for proper traffic safety by preserving the public thoroughfares for
the unimpaired movement of pedestrian and vehicular traffic. Therefore, after
the effective date of this ordinance, in all districts, there shall be provided
at the time any new building or structure is erected, off-street parking spaces
in accordance with the requirements set forth herein. The requirements of this
Article are minimum standards, and in certain uses these requirements may be
inadequate. Where review of the site plans and intended land use indicate
through the application of proven standards or experienced statistics that the
requirements herein are inadequate for the specific land use adaptation, a
greater requirement for off-street parking may be required to preserve the
intent of this ordinance.
19.2. GENERAL PARKING AREA AND SURFACE REQUIREMENTS. 
All off-street parking areas as required in this section shall comply with the
following minimum area and surface requirements.
   1)   Owners of two (2) or more uses or parcels of land may agree to jointly
utilize the same parking spaces provided that satisfactory legal evidence is
presented in the form of deeds, leases, or contract documents to establish such
joint area of use;
   2)   A parking space shall be not less than 180 square feet (typically 9' x
20').
   3)   Parking spaces shall be surfaced with portland cement, concrete,
asphaltic concrete, or other such hard surface as approved by the planning
commission.
   4)   Enclosed parking areas or garages shall qualify to meet the minimum
parking space requirements under this section.
   5)   Requirements as to number and size of parking space in this section are
minimum requirements only and shall not be construed as limitations.
   6)   Willful failure to permanently maintain and provide parking spaces as
required under this section shall be deemed in violation of this ordinance and
subject to the penalty listed in
Article XXIV, Violation and Penalty.
   7)   Within all residential districts, parking of vehicles is permitted
within the front yard portion of property; however, no parking is allowed on
that portion of the front yard considered to be the public right-of-way.
   8)   All commercial uses located within the Business Commercial (BC)
District shall be exempt from off-street parking requirements.
19.3. OFF STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS.
   At the time of Section 2: Off-Street Parking.construction, alteration, or
enlargement of a structure or building, or change in the use of the land; off-
street parking spaces and loading areas shall be provided, constructed, and
maintained for all uses as follows.
   A.   Agricultural Dwellings/Rural Residential:         2 spaces per each
dwelling unit
   B.   Roadside Stands:                  1 space per each 50 square feet of
enclosed floor area
   C.   Greenhouses/Nurseries:               1 space per each 1,000 square feet
of enclosed floor area.
   D.   Single Family Residential:               2 spaces per dwelling unit
   E.   Multiple Family Residential:               1.5 spaces per dwelling unit
   F.   Mobile Home Residential:               2 spaces per mobile home
   G.   Hotel / Motel:                     1 space per room plus 1 space per
employee
   H. Professional Office/Medical Clinic:            1 space per 300 square
feet of gross floor area
   I.   Hospital:                     1 space for each four hospital beds, plus
1 space for each two employees on the major shift
   J.   Convalescent/Nursing Home:               1 Space for each eight beds,
plus 1 space for each 3 employees on the largest shift.
   K.   Public Assembly:                  1 space for each six (6) seats of
seating capacity provided
      - Churches, Auditoriums, Stadiums, Etc. 
      -  Schools (see requirements below)
   L.   Public Government or Community Facilities:      1 space per each six
(6) seats in the main assembly area; or 1 space per each 500 square feet of
gross floor area.
   M.   Bowling Alley:                  3 spaces per alley
   N.   Skating rinks, dance halls or other places         1 space per 300 sq.
ft. of gross floor area of general indoor recreational activities:
   O.    General Retail Sales/General Commercial:         1 space per 300 sq.
ft. of gross floor area.
   P.   Restaurants:                     1 space for each four (4) seats, plus
1 space for each two (2) employees
   Q.   Lounges/Bars/Taverns/Nightclubs:            1 space for each two (2)
seats or 1 space per 300 sq. ft. of gross floor area, whichever is greater
   R. Daycare Centers/Preschools/Nurseries:            1 space for each
employee
   S.   Primary Educational Facility:               1 space per regular
employee and 1 space for every ten (10) seats in the largest facility for
public assembly.
   T.   Secondary Education/College Facilities:         1 space per regular
employee and 1 space for every six (6) seats in the largest facility for public
assembly.
   U.   Industry/Manufacturing/Research:            1 space for every two (2)
employees of maximum number employed.
   V.   All Other Uses:                  All other buildings having a gross
floor area of more than two thousand (2,000) square feet shall provide one (1)
off-street parking space for each five hundred (500) square feet of floor space
on the same lot as the principal building.
19.4. COMPUTATION OF PARKING SPACES. Section 3: Computation of Spaces
   1)   In the case of any building, structure or premises, the use of which is
not specifically mentioned herein, the provisions for a use which is so
mentioned and to which said use is similar, shall apply, as determined by the
zoning administrator.
   2)   Where fractional spaces occur, the parking spaces required shall be
construed to be the nearest whole number.
   3)   Whenever a building or use constructed or established after the
effective date of this ordinance is changed, altered, or enlarged in floor
area, number of employees, number of dwelling units, seating capacity or
otherwise, to create a need for an increase of ten (10) percent or more in the
number of existing parking spaces, such spaces shall be provided on the basis
of the enlargement or change. Whenever a building or use existing prior to the
effective date of this ordinance is enlarged to the extent of fifty percent
(50%) or more in floor area or in the area used, said building or use shall
then and thereafter comply with the parking requirements set forth herein.
   4)   In the case of mixed or joint uses, the parking spaces required shall
equal the sum of the requirements of the various uses if computed separately.
19.5. LOCATION AND TYPE OF PARKING.
Section 3: Computation of SpacesSection 4: Location and Type of Parking
Spaces   All parking spaces required herein shall be located on the same lot as
the building or use served, except that where an increase in the number of
spaces is required due to a change or enlargement of use or where such spaces
are provided collectively or used jointly by two or more buildings or
establishments. Required sparking paces may be located and maintained no more
than three hundred feet (300') from institutional or other non-residential
buildings.
   1)   In any case where the required parking spaces are not located on the
same lot with the building or use served, or where such spaces are collectively
or jointly provided and used, a written agreement thereby assuring their
retention for such purposes, shall be properly drawn and executed by the
parties concerned, approved as to form and execution, and shall be filed with
the application for a zoning permit.
   2)   Off-street parking spaces may be located within the required front yard
of any multiple family residential, commercial or industrial zoning districts.
   3)   Automotive vehicles or trailers of any kind or type without current
license plates shall not be parked or stored on any lot other than in
completely enclosed buildings.
   4)   No automotive vehicle or trailers of any kind shall be stored, for long
term purposes (in excess of 7 days), on the front yard within any residential
district. No vehicle of any kind shall be parked or stored on public or private
property so as to create a safety hazard with pedestrian or vehicular traffic.
   5)   All required off-street parking areas of more than five (5) spaces
shall be surfaced with asphalt, concrete, or other such surface as shall be
approved by the zoning administrator so as to provide a durable surface. They
shall be graded and drained to dispose of all surface water accumulation within
the lot, and shall be arranged and marked to provide for orderly and safe
loading or unloading.
   6)   Any lighting used to illuminate any off-street parking areas shall be
arranged to reflect light away from adjacent lots and uses of land.
   7)   In case commercial or other non-residential parking lots adjoin a
residential district, it shall be at least five feet from the property line and
effectively screened by the use of a fence, hedge, or other similar methods.
   8)   Parking in any district is not permitted on rights-of-way.
19.6. OFF STREET LOADING REQUIREMENTS.Section 5: Off-Street Loading Spaces
Required
Any commercial or industrial activity allowed in any zoning district shall be
provided with adequate receiving facilities accessible by motor vehicle off any
adjacent service drive or open space on the same zoning lot. At the time of
construction, alteration, or enlargement of every building hereafter erected,
every hospital, hotel, institution, manufacturing, storage, warehouse, retail
store, wholesale store, or other similar commercial or industrial building
having secondary access from an alley, side street or otherwise shall have a
minimum of one permanently maintained loading space for buildings in excess of
ten thousand (10,000) square feet.
   1)   Each loading space shall be no less than ten feet (10') in width, forty
feet (40') in length.
   2)   No truck or trailer, for purposes of loading, unloading or parking will
be permitted to be located on or block any street or other public right-of-way.
   3)   Such space may occupy all or any part of any required side or rear
yard, except where adjoining a residential district. If the loading space is
adjacent to a residential district, it shall be set back at least ten feet
(10') from said district and be effectively screened from view.
ARTICLE XX
Sign Regulations
Article 20: Sign Regulations
   Section
20.1.   Intent
   Section
20.2.   Definitions
   Section
20.3.   Sign Requirements
   Section
20.4.   Special Exceptions
   Section
20.5.   Additional Regulations
   Section
20.6.   General Sign Provisions
   Section
20.7.   Permits Required
   Section
20.8.   Exempt Signs
   Section
20.9   Unsafe Signs and Removal of Signs
   Section
20.10.   Nonconforming Signs
20.1. INTENT.
Section 1: Purpose   This article is established to protect and promote health,
safety, general welfare and order within the City of Sheldon through the
establishment of comprehensive and uniform standards, regulations and
procedures governing the type, number, size, structure, location, height,
lighting, erection, use or display of devices, signs, or symbols serving as a
visual communications media to persons situated within or upon public rights-
of-way or private properties. The provisions of this article are intended to
encourage opportunity for effective, aesthetically compatible, and orderly
communications by reducing confusion and hazards resulting from unnecessary or
indiscriminate use of communications facilities. Hereafter no sign shall be
erected, constructed, altered, or modified except as regulated by the
provisions of this article.
20.2. DEFINITIONS. 
   For use in this article, the following terms are defined.
   20.2.1   AWNING: A device made of cloth, metal, or other material affixed to
and projecting from a building in such a manner that the device is either
permanently fixed or so erected as to allow it to be raised or retracted and
return to a flat position against the building when not in use.
   20.2.2   ERECT: To build, construct, attach, hang, suspend or affix, and
shall also include the painting of wall signs.
   20.2.3   FACING (or SURFACE): The surface of the sign upon; against or
through which the message is displayed or illustrated on the sign.
   20.2.4   INCOMBUSTIBLE MATERIAL: Any material that will not ignite at or
below a     temperature of 120° F and will not continue to burn or glow at that
temperature.
   20.2.5.   ON-PREMISE SIGN: An advertising device concerning the sale or
lease of the property    upon which it is located, and/or advertising devices
concerning activities conducted or    products sold on the property upon which
it is located.
   20.2.6.   OFF-PREMISE SIGN: An advertising device including the supporting
structure which directs the attention of the general public to a business,
service, or activity not usually conducted or a product not usually sold upon
the premises where such a sign is located.  Such a sign shall not include: On-
premises signs, directional or other official sign or signs which have a
significant portion of their face devoted to giving public service information
(date, time, temperature, weather, information, etc.)
   20.2.7   PERSON: Any one being, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company or organization of any kind.
   20.2.8   SIGN: The use of any words, numerals, pictures, figures, devices or
trademarks by which anything is made known such as are used to show an
individual, firm, profession or business, and are visible to the general
public.
      a.   ABANDONED SIGN: A sign which no longer correctly directs any person,
advertises a bona fide business, lessor, owner, product, or activity conducted
on the premises where such sign is displayed.
      b.   ADDRESS SIGN: A sign communicating street address only, whether
written or in numerical form.
      c.   AWNING SIGN: A sign consisting of either an operating or permanently
affixed awning containing letters, graphics, pictures, or other images which
portray the business or other advertising of the establishment in which it is
attached to. Awning signs shall not encroach more than four (4) feet out in
front of a building, but shall meet all other size requirements addressed in
this ordinance. Permanent awnings may be lighted (from the backside); however,
awning signs shall not have any flashing, strobe, or otherwise intermittent
light emitting from the awning sign.
      d.   CAMPAIGN SIGN: A temporary sign promoting the candidacy of a person
running for a governmental office, or promoting an issue to be voted upon at a
governmental election.
       e.   CONSTRUCTION SIGN: A sign placed at construction site identifying
the project or the name of the architect, engineer, contractor, financier or
other involved parties.
      f.   DIRECTIONAL SIGN: A sign erected on public or private property which
bears the address and name of a business, institution, church, or other use or
activity plus directional arrows or information on location.
      g.   FLASHING SIGN: Any illuminated sign that has artificial light or
color which is not maintained at a constant intensity or color when such sign
is in use. A sign providing public service information, such as time, weather,
date, temperature or similar information shall not be considered a flashing
sign. A scrolling marquee sign or signs with animated, digital or video screens
are not considered flashing signs.
      h.   FREE STANDING SIGN: Any sign or sign structure, not securely
attached to the ground or to any other structure. This shall not include
trailer signs as defined in this section
      i.   GOVERNMENTAL SIGN: A sign which is erected by a governmental unit.
      j.   ILLUMINATED SIGN: Any sign which has character, letters, figures,
designs or outline illuminated by electric lights or luminous tubes as a part
of the sign proper.
      k.   INFORMATION SIGN: Any sign giving information to employees, visitors
or delivery vehicles, but containing no advertising or identification.
      l.   JOINT IDENTIFICATION SIGN: A free-standing sign which identifies a
subdivision, a multiple residential complex consisting of three (3) or more
structures, a shopping center consisting of three (3) or more separate business
concerns, an industrial area, an office complex consisting of three (3) or more
structures or any combination of the above.
      m.   NON-CONFORMING SIGN: A sign which lawfully existed at the time of
the passage of this Ordinance or amendments thereto but which does not conform
to the regulation of this ordinance.
      n.   POLE SIGN: Any sign which is supported by structures or supports in
or upon the ground and independent of support from any building.
      o.   PORTABLE SIGN: Any sign not permanently attached to a building,
structure, or the ground, capable of being moved at periodic intervals.
      p.   PROJECTING SIGN: A sign, other than a wall sign, which projects
perpendicular to the wall surface of a building or structure, and is supported
by a wall of the building or structure.
      q.   REAL ESTATE SIGN: A business sign placed upon a property advertising
that particular property for sale, for lease or for rent.
      r.   ROOF SIGN: A sign erected upon or above a roof or parapet of a
building or structure.
      s.   SWINGING SIGN: A sign installed on an arm or spar that is not, in
addition, permanently fastened to an adjacent wall or upright pole.
      t.   TRAILER SIGN: Any sign mounted on a vehicle normally licensed by the
State of Iowa as a trailer and used for advertising or promotional purposes.
      u.   WALL SIGN: All flat signs of solid face construction placed against
a building or other structure and attached to the exterior front, rear or side
wall of any building or other structure. Such signs may extend no more than
twelve (12) inches from the surface of the building or structure to which they
are attached. Wall signs are also known as "flush mounted signs".
   20.2.9   SIGN AREA: That area within the marginal lines of the surface which
bears the advertisement or, in the case of messages, figures or symbols
attached directly to the part of a building; that area which is included in the
smallest connecting geometric figures which can be made to circumscribe the
message, figure or symbol displayed thereon. Only changeable copy areas of
marquee or canopies shall be considered in determining the total sign area.
   20.2.10   SIGN STRUCTURE: The supports, uprights, bracing and framework for
a sign including the sign area.
   20.2.11   STREET LINE (or PROPERTY LINE): The place where the street right
of way line begins and the private property line ends.
   20.2.12   STRUCTURAL TRIM: The molding, battens, capping, nailing strips,
latticing and platforms that are attached to the sign structure.
   20.2.13   TEMPORARY SIGN: Any sign which is erected or displayed for a
specified period of time.
20.3. SIGN REQUIREMENTS.
Billboards and signs in conjunction with principal permitted uses are allowed
subject to the following regulations. Only signs specifically permitted shall
be allowed in the various districts.
   1)   All Residential Districts (SR, RS, RM & MH) and Conservation District.
      Signs pertaining to principal permitted uses are allowed subject to the
following regulations.
      a.   On-premise signs are permitted. On-premise signs for residential
businesses and home occupations, shall be attached to permanent mountings and
no sign shall be in excess of nine (9) square feet appurtenant to a permitted
use of the property on which displayed.
      b.   On-premise signs for non-residential businesses located in
residential areas shall be limited to no more than twenty (20) square feet on
one (1) free standing sign not to exceed a height of five (5) feet from the
ground to the top of the sign structure. One (1) additional wall mounted sign
not to exceed nine (9) square feet is also permitted for non- residential
businesses.
      c.   One (1) on-premise sign pertaining only to the sale or lease of the
land or building upon which displayed shall be allowed.
      d.   Off-premises signs and flashing signs are not permitted.
      e.   Permitted Sign Types:
          1. Address signs      4. Joint Identification signs      7. Real
Estate signs
         2. Wall signs         5. Government signs         8. Ground signs
         3. Campaign signs      6. Awning signs
   2)   Commercial Residential (CR) District.
      Signs in conjunction with principal permitted uses are allowed subject to
the following regulations.
      a.   Signs shall be limited to: (i) identifying uses conducted within the
building; (ii) necessary for directional purposes; (iii) used to advertise the
sale or lease of real property on buildings on which displayed; (iv)
identifying the commercial enterprise by name or symbol.
      b.   On-premise signs are permitted. The total aggregate area of all on-
premise signs shall not exceed 150 square feet. Signs shall be attached to
permanent mountings. Only one permanent type sign will be allowed for each
principal use, except for corner lots or double frontage lots in which case one
permanent sign shall be permitted per each street frontage.
      c.   Signs incorporated as part of the building façade, or signs attached
to buildings or erected upon the premises in such a manner as deemed adequate
for the protection of public health and safety are permitted.
      d.   For the purposes of this section, the sign area allowed by Section
“b” above shall:
         i.   For freestanding letters, be computed by taking the area enclosed
within the smallest rectangle needed to completely encompass each word or
insignia of the sign.
         ii.   For signs other than freestanding letters, be computed by taking
the total area of the facing or the total area within the outer edge of any
existing border of the sign.
      e.   All signs shall be fixed and shall not be audible. No illumination
shall be intermittent, flashing, or scintillating, nor shall any sign or
illumination be revolving or animated. No signs shall have moving parts
including devices set in motion by movement of air.
      f.    Wall-mounted signs are permitted, but shall not project out from a
wall or face of a building more than twelve inches (12”) nor project above the
roofline more than four (4) feet.
      g.   Service stations shall be limited to two hundred fifty (250) square
feet of sign area. Where a service station has frontage on more than one
street, both street frontages may be used to compute the allowable sign area.
In no case however, shall the total of all signs for any one service station
exceed 250 square feet per each street frontage.
      h.   One (1) temporary, on-premise sign for lots with no structure or
building development, no greater than four (4) square feet in area and
advertising the sale or rental of property, shall be permitted.
      i.   Off-premises signs and flashing or lighted signs are not permitted.
      j.   Permitted Sign Types:
          1. Real Estate signs          5. Informational signs         9.
Temporary or Portable signs
         2. Government signs          6. Directional signs          10. Awning
signs
         3. Address signs          7. Joint Identification signs       11. Pole
signs
         4. Campaign signs          8. Wall signs            12. Ground Signs
   3)   Business Commercial (BC) District (Downtown).
      Signs in conjunction with principal permitted uses are allowed subject to
the following regulations.
      a.   Signs shall be limited to: (i) identifying uses conducted within the
building; (ii) necessary for directional purposes; (iii) used to advertise the
sale or lease of real property on buildings on which displayed; (iv)
identifying the commercial enterprise by name or symbol.
      b.   On-premise signs are permitted. The total aggregate area of all on-
premise signs shall not exceed 150 square feet. Signs shall be attached to
permanent mountings. Only one permanent type sign will be allowed for each
principal use, except for corner lots or double frontage lots in which case one
permanent sign shall be permitted per each street frontage.
      c.   Signs incorporated as part of the building façade, or signs attached
to buildings or erected upon the premises in such a manner as deemed adequate
for the protection of public health and safety are permitted.
      d.   For the purposes of this section, the sign area allowed by Section
“b” above shall:
         i.   For freestanding letters, be computed by taking the area enclosed
within the smallest rectangle needed to completely encompass each word or
insignia of the sign.
      ii.   For signs other than freestanding letters, be computed by taking
the total area of the facing or the total area within the outer edge of any
existing border of the sign.
      e.   All signs shall be fixed and shall not be audible. No illumination
shall be intermittent, flashing, or scintillating, nor shall any sign or
illumination be revolving or animated. No signs shall have moving parts
including devices set in motion by movement of air.
      f.    Wall-mounted signs are permitted, but shall not project out from a
wall or face of a building more than twelve inches (12”) nor project above the
roofline more than four (4) feet.
      g.   Service stations shall be limited to two hundred fifty (250) square
feet of sign area. Where a service station has frontage on more than one
street, both street frontages may be used to compute the allowable sign area.
In no case however, shall the total of all signs for any one service station
exceed 250 square feet per each street frontage.
      h.   Portable signs (sidewalk signs) shall be allowed. Portable signs
shall be granted for any consecutive twelve (12) month period. Such portable
signs shall be required to be two (2) feet by three (3) feet in size and placed
within three (3) feet of the applicant’s place of business. The applicant shall
be required to indemnify and hold the city harmless from any liability costs,
including attorney fees. The applicant shall provide proof of liability
insurance.
      i.   Traveling or marquee shall be allowed. Such traveling or marquee
type signs shall be attached to permanent mountings.
      j.   Off-premises signs and flashing or lighted signs are not permitted.
      k.   Permitted Sign Types:
          1. Real Estate signs          5. Informational signs         9.
Temporary or Portable signs
         2. Government signs          6. Directional signs          10. Awning
signs
         3. Address signs          7. Joint Identification signs       11. Pole
signs
         4. Campaign signs          8. Wall signs            12. Ground Signs
   4)   Business Park (BP), Arterial Commercial (AC), Light Industrial (LI),
Heavy Industrial (HI), and Agriculture (A) Districts. Signs and billboards in
conjunction with principal permitted uses are allowed subject to the following
regulations.
      a.   Signs shall be limited to: (i) identifying uses conducted within the
building; (ii) necessary for directional purposes; (iii) used to advertise the
sale or lease of real property on buildings on which displayed; (iv)
identifying the commercial enterprise by name or symbol.
      b.   On-premise signs are permitted. The total aggregate area of an
independent structure sign shall not exceed 200 square feet. Only two permanent
type signs will be permitted; one must be a wall sign, and one may be an
independent structure located not more than 150 feet from the principal
building;
      c.   Off-premise (billboard type) signs are permitted, and will be
limited to one hundred (100) square feet, and must not impair sight distance or
create a traffic hazard. Off-premise signs shall comply with the setbacks and
height requirements of the district they are located in. Other bulk regulations
do not apply. Off-premise signs are governed by State and Federal regulations
along highways, where zoning exists. Off-premise sign shall not be allowed in
Agricultural Districts.
      d.   For the purposes of this section, the sign area allowed by Section
“b” above shall:
         i.   For freestanding letters, be computed by taking the area enclosed
within the smallest rectangle needed to completely encompass each word or
insignia of the sign.
         ii.   For signs other than freestanding letters, be computed by taking
the total area of the facing or the total area within the outer edge of any
existing border of the sign.
      e.   All signs shall be fixed and shall not be audible. No illumination
shall be intermittent, flashing, or scintillating, nor shall any sign or
illumination be revolving or animated. No signs shall have moving parts
including devices set in motion by movement of air.
      f.    Wall-mounted signs are permitted, but shall not project out from a
wall or face of a building more than twelve inches (12”) nor project above the
roofline more than four (4) feet.
      g.   Service stations shall be limited to two hundred fifty (250) square
feet of sign area. Where a service station has frontage on more than one
street, both street frontages may be used to compute the allowable sign area.
In no case however, shall the total of all signs for any one service station
exceed 250 square feet per each street frontage.
      h.   Portable signs (sidewalk signs) shall be allowed. Portable signs
shall be granted for any consecutive twelve (12) month period. Such portable
signs shall be required to be two (2) feet by three (3) feet in size and placed
within three (3) feet of the applicant’s place of business. The applicant shall
be required to indemnify and hold the city harmless from any liability costs,
including attorney fees. The applicant shall provide proof of liability
insurance.
      i.   Traveling or marquee shall be allowed. Such traveling or marquee
type signs shall be attached to permanent mountings.
      j.   Section Reserved for Future Use.
(Ordinance 020-3252, April 15, 2020)
      k.   Permitted Sign Types:
          1. Real Estate signs          5. Informational signs         9.
Temporary or Portable signs
         2. Government signs          6. Directional signs          10. Awning
signs
         3. Address signs          7. Joint Identification signs       11. Pole
signs
         4. Campaign signs          8. Wall signs            12. Ground signs
20.4. SPECIAL EXCEPTIONSSection 3: Special Exceptions.
   Any sign type may be granted special exception status after review by the
Board of Adjustment and subject to any conditions deemed by the board to be
appropriate.
20.5. ADDITIONAL REGULATIONSSection 4: Additional Regulations.
   In all districts, signs and billboards shall adhere to pertinent state
regulations and other local ordinances.
20.6. GENERAL SIGN PROVISIONSSection 5: General Sign Provisions.
   1)   Safety
      a.    Obstructions to doors, windows or fire escapes. No sign shall be
erected, located or maintained so as to prevent free ingress to or egress from
any door, window or fire escape. No sign of any kind shall be attached to a
standpipe or fire escape.
      b.    Face of sign shall be smooth. All signs or other advertising
structures which are constructed on street lines, or within five (5) feet
thereof, shall have a smooth surface and no nails, tacks or wires shall be
permitted to protrude therefrom, except electrical reflectors and devices which
may extend over the top and in front of the advertising structures.
      c.    Signs not to constitute a traffic hazard. No sign or other
advertising structure, as permitted by this ordinance shall, by reason of its
location, lighting, size, color or intensity, create a hazard to the safe,
efficient movement of vehicular or pedestrian traffic or obscure or physically
interfere with an official traffic control sign, signal or device. No signs
shall be erected at the intersection of any streets in such a manner as to
obstruct free and clear vision. No private sign shall contain words which might
be construed as traffic controls, or be confused with any authorized traffic
sign, signal or device; or which makes use of the words “STOP”, “LOOK”,
“WARNING”, “CAUTION”, “DANGER”, or any other word, phrase, symbol or character
in such manner as to interfere with, mislead or confuse traffic. No sign or
other advertising structure as regulated by this ordinance shall have posts,
guides or supports located within any street or alley.
      d.   Goose neck reflectors. Goose neck reflectors and lights shall be
permitted on ground signs, roof signs and wall signs, provided, however, the
reflectors shall be provided with proper glass lenses concentrating the
illumination upon the area of the sign as to prevent glare upon the street and
adjacent property.
   2)   Sign Maintenance: All signs and sign structures shall be properly
maintained and kept in a safe, orderly condition. In addition, all parts and
supports shall be properly painted. Any sign or sign structure which is rotted,
unsafe, deteriorated, defaced, or otherwise altered, shall be repainted,
repaired, or replaced by the property owner or agent of the owner of the
property upon which the sign is located, within thirty (30) days after written
notice by the City of Sheldon.    
   3)   Interference: No sign, nor any guys, stay or attachment thereto shall
be posted, erected, placed or maintained by any person on rocks, fences, trees
or other perennial plants; nor in such a manner as to interfere with the
effective use of firefighting equipment or personnel, or any electric light,
power, telephone, fiber optic, or cable wires or supports thereof.
   4)   Signs in Right-of Way: No signs, other than government signs, shall
encroach or extend over the public right-of-way, except as specifically
provided herein.
   5)   Temporary Signs: The temporary use of portable or moveable signs,
search lights, banners, pendants, and similar devices shall be allowed only by
permit granted by the zoning administrator. The sign permit shall be granted in
excess of and in addition to the sign limitations of this Article effective for
periods of thirty (30) consecutive days and no more than two (2) permits shall
be granted for a property during any consecutive twelve (12) month period.
   6)   Banners: The following banner regulations shall apply within the
Arterial Commercial (AC) and Business Commercial (BC) Districts.
      a.   Banners shall be allowed on by permit granted by the zoning
administrator. Said permit shall be effective for a period of thirty (30) days
per event.
      b.   During any period in which a permit has been granted by the zoning
administrator, only one (1) banner shall be allowed per business.
      c.   Off-premise and on-premise banners are permitted. Off-premise
banners shall comply with the setbacks of the district in which they are
located.
      d.   No banner shall be lighted or obstructing the view of any highway or
railroad.    
      e.   The banner shall not encroach or extend over the public right-of-
way.
      f.   No banner may obscure or physically interfere with an official
traffic control sign, signal or device. No banner shall be posted or maintained
on rocks, fences, trees or other perennial plants or on poles maintained by
public utilities. All banners must be attached to a permanent structure.
      g.   All banners must be maintained by the business owner making the
application. In the event the sign is damaged due to weather conditions or
other events, the applicant and owner must repair, reattach or remove such
banner within twenty-four (24) hours.
   7)   Clearance: All signs located over public rights-of-way or any public or
private access route (sidewalk, mall, etc.) shall be located a minimum of
fourteen (14) feet above grade.
   8)   Safe Ingress and Egress: No sign or part thereof shall be erected or
maintained so as to prevent or deter free ingress and egress from any door,
window, or fire escape. No sign or sign structure shall be attached to a
standpipe or fire escape.
   9)   Signs Required by Law: All signs required by law shall be permitted in
all districts.
   10)   Back to Back Signs: If a free-standing sign or sign structure is
constructed so that the faces are not back to back, the angle shall not exceed
thirty (30) degrees. If the angle is greater than thirty degrees, the total
area of both sides added together shall be the calculated sign area. Back to
back signs (when less than thirty degrees) shall be considered as one sign when
debited against the total number of signs permitted on one zoning lot.
   11)   Roof Signs: Roof signs shall not be permitted except for a business
sign that is attached to the parapet wall and extending above the building
height except where no alternative is available as determined by the Board of
Adjustment.
   12)   Illumination: All externally illuminated signs shall be constructed so
as to direct the source of light away from adjacent properties or public
streets. No sign may be lighted in a manner which impairs the vision of a
driver of a motor vehicle.
   13)   Animated Signs: Animated signs may be allowed as a special exception
requiring a hearing before the Board of Adjustment. Scrolling marquees, digital
or video electronic signs shall not be considered animated signs.
   14)   Double Frontage: Lots having frontage on two streets or on a street
and an alley shall be permitted to provide the maximum number and square
footage of signs on each of the opposite ends of said lot, provided however,
that not more than the maximum number of square feet of signs per frontage may
be viewed simultaneously.
20.7. PERMITS REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, alter, or relocate within the
city any sign or other advertising structure as defined in this ordinance,
without first obtaining a sign permit and making payment of the required fee.
   1)   Application for Sign Permit. Application for sign permits shall be made
available by the Zoning Administrator and contain or have attached thereto the
following information:
      ∙    Name, address and telephone number of the applicant.
      ∙    Location of building, structure, or lot to which or upon which the
sign or other advertising structure is to be attached or erected.
      ∙    Position of the sign or other advertising structure in relation to
nearby buildings or structures.
      ∙    One sketch of the plan, method of construction, and attachment to
the building or ground.
      ∙    Name of person, firm, corporation or association erecting structure.
      ∙    Inscription of what the sign will say.
      For signs located along a state highway, a state sign permit will also
need to be included.
      Other such information as the zoning administrator shall require showing
full compliance with this ordinance and all other ordinances of the city.
   2)   Permit Issued. It shall be the duty of the zoning administrator, upon
the filing of an application for a sign permit to examine such plans and the
premises upon which it is proposed to erect the sign or other advertising
structure. If it appears the proposed structure is in compliance with all the
requirements of this ordinance and all other ordinances of city, the sign
permit shall then be issued.
   3)   Permit Revocation. Any permit holder who fails to comply with a valid
order of the Zoning Administrator, or who fails to pay reasonable removal or
repair expenses shall have the permit as to such sign or signs revoked. Another
permit for the erection of such sign shall not be issued to said permit holder
for a period of one (1) year from the date of revocation.
20.8. EXEMPT SIGNS.
   The following signs are allowed without a permit but shall comply with all
other applicable provisions of this ordinance.
   1)   Real estate signs (on-site) Announcing the owner, manager, realtor or
other person directly involved in the sale or rental of the property on which
the sign is located. At the date of closing, signs shall be removed within 48
hours. Signs shall not measure more than four (4) square feet in the
residential districts or twenty (20) square feet in the other districts.
   2)   Integral signs, Memorial signs or Professional name plates not
exceeding two (2) square foot in area, and attached to the building, including
names on buildings, date of construction, commemorative tablets and the like,
which are a part of the building or structure.
   3)   Address Signs identifying street address only, whether in written or
numerical form.
   4)   Construction Signs as a non-illuminated sign announcing the names of
architects, engineers, contractors, future use, and other individuals or firms
involved with the construction, alteration, or repair of such building (but not
including any advertisement of any product). Such signs shall be confined to
the site of the construction, alteration or repair and shall be removed within
18 months of the date of issuance of the first zoning permit or when the
particular project is completed, whichever is later. One (1) sign, not to
exceed 32 sq. ft. is permitted on the project site.
   5)   Traffic or municipal signs, legal notices, railroad crossing signs,
danger signs, and other such temporary, emergency or non-advertising signs are
permitted.
   6)   Temporary signs up to a maximum of thirty-two (32) square feet on owned
property or with owner's consent, to be removed within 72 hours following the
advertised event.
   7)   Campaign signs as allowed by Section 68A.406-yard signs, Code of Iowa.
   8)   Government signs of a public, non-commercial nature to include safety
signs, danger signs, trespassing signs, traffic signs, signs indicating scenic
or historical points of interest, memorial plaques and the like, when signs are
erected by order of a public officer or employee in the performance of official
duty.
   9)   Directory signs which identifies the business, owners, manager, or
resident occupant and sets forth the occupation or other address information
but contains no advertising. There may be one directory sign per lot not to
exceed two (2) square feet of area per business or resident occupant.
   10)   On-site Directional and Parking Signs intended to facilitate the
movement of vehicles and pedestrians upon which the sign is located. Signs
shall not exceed six (6) square feet of area.
20.9. UNSAFE SIGNS AND REMOVAL OF SIGNS.
   All signs and sign structures shall be properly maintained and kept in a
safe, orderly condition. Signs shall also maintain a neat and orderly
appearance in which the sign is easily read. Additionally, all parts and
supports shall be properly painted. Any sign or sign structure which is rotted,
unsafe, deteriorated, defaced, or otherwise altered, shall be repainted,
repaired, or replaced by the property owner or agent of the owner of the
property upon which the sign is located within thirty (30) days after written
notice by the City of Sheldon. Such notice shall include a statement explaining
the alleged violations and deficiencies; an order to repair or remove said sign
and an explanation of the consequences of failure to comply with said order. If
the permit holder fails to remove or alter said sign so as to comply with the
order, said sign or other advertising structure may be removed or altered to
comply by the zoning administrator at the expense of the permit holder, or
owner of the property on which it is located. The permit holder may appeal the
order of the zoning administrator to the board of adjustment and, if such an
appeal is on file, the compliance period shall be extended until following the
board of adjustment's decision on the matter. If, however, the zoning
administrator finds that any sign or other advertising structure poses a
serious and immediate threat to the health or safety of any person, the removal
of such sign may be ordered without notice to the permit holder.
   Any sign now or hereafter existing which no longer advertises a bona fide
business conducted, or a product sold, shall be taken down and removed by the
owner, agent or person having the beneficial use of the building or structure
upon which such sign may be found within ninety (90) days from date of notice
provided by the city. The owner of the property on which the sign is located
shall have ninety (90) days from date of notice to remove any such sign. If
after the expiration of the ninety (90) day period, the sign has not been
removed, the city may cause the sign to be removed and any expenses may be
charged back to the property owner.
20.10. NONCONFORMING SIGNSSection 5: General Sign Provisions.
   To avoid any undue hardship, any owner of a nonconforming sign in existence
at the effective date of the 2009 Sheldon Zoning Ordinance shall not be
required to comply with the regulations concerning signs as outlined within
this Article. Such nonconformity shall not be enlarged upon, expanded or
extended. In the event such nonconforming sign is removed, discontinued or
abandoned for a period for twelve (12) consecutive months, the sign shall not
thereafter be used except in conformity with regulations provided for in this
Article.
ARTICLE XXI
District Buffers Required
Article 21: District Buffers Required
   Section
21.1   Intent
   Section
21.2   Conditions for Requiring a Buffer
   Section
21.3   Permissive Buffers
   Section
21.4   Burden of Provision of a Buffer
   Section
21.5   Waiver of Buffer Requirement
21.1. INTENT.
   It is recognized that the transition from one district to another district
of contrasting and conflicting uses, is across a barrier and line in theory and
not in existence. Therefore, it shall be the intent of this article to require
the actual provision of a physical barrier so as to reduce any possible harmful
or detrimental influence one district use may or may not have to abutting and
conflicting district use.
21.2. CONDITIONS FOR REQUIRING A BUFFER.
The following conditions shall require a buffer between abutting districts:
   1)   All industrial districts that abut any residential district shall be
buffered as required in this Article.
   2)   Any lot located in the Business Park, Commercial Residential, Arterial
Commercial, Business Commercial, Light Industrial or Heavy Industrial district
having both its front and rear lines abutting a public thoroughfare (a double
frontage lot) shall be buffered from the thoroughfare abutting its rear line by
one of the buffer methods set forth in this Article.
   3)   Any storage facility, storage yard, loading yard, or equipment storage/
staging area in any commercial or industrial district which abuts a public
thoroughfare shall be restricted from public view by a buffer.
   4)   Any other uses or districts abutting residential properties determined
to be more intensive in nature or as recommended by the Board of Adjustment.
21.3. PERMISSIVE BUFFERS.
   Buffers required under the provisions of this article or elsewhere in this
ordinance shall be accomplished by any one or approved combination of the
following methods:
   1)   A Man-made Buffer:
   Such shall be not less than six (6) feet in height; constructed of a
permanent low maintenance material. The wall shall be designed for both
structural adequacy and aesthetic quality. The use of weather resistant wood,
metal, concrete products, brick, tile, or other manufactured substitutes shall
be used as a primary material for aesthetic quality, as long as the buffer is
solid and opaquely screened.
   2)   A Natural Buffer:
      a.   Natural Buffer Park: Such park shall be not less than sixty (60)
feet in width; designed and landscaped with evergreen type trees, shrubs and
plants so as to assure year around effective screening.
      b.   Natural Buffer Screen: Such natural screen shall not be less than 6
feet in height and comprised of natural plantings; and shall maintain a density
of planting adequate to serve as a solid and impenetrable screen.
      c.   Natural Buffer Berm: Such natural berm or berm in combination with
natural plantings shall not be less than 6 feet in height. If a berm is used in
combination with natural plantings, the earthen berm shall be at least 3 feet
in height.
21.4. BURDEN OF PROVISION OF A BUFFER.
The burden of' provision and selection of the buffer shall be as follows:
   l)   Where two different districts, requiring a buffer between them, are
both in an existing improved condition, the above requirement is not
retroactive and should a buffer be desired, it shall be by mutual agreement
between property owners or as otherwise provided by law. However, in the event
of any or all of the improved property is abandoned, destroyed, demolished,
etc., for the purpose of renewal, redevelopment, etc., that portion of such
property being renewed, redeveloped, etc. shall be considered vacant land
subject to the requirements herein.
   2)   Where one of two different districts requiring a buffer between them is
partially developed, the developer of the vacant land shall assume the burden.
   3)   Where both districts requiring a buffer between them are vacant or
undeveloped, except for agricultural use, the developer shall assume the burden
as the land is improved or developed.
21.5. WAIVER OF BUFFER REQUIREMENT.
   Where the line between two districts requiring a buffer follows a railroad,
stream, or other similar natural or man-made barrier, the requirement for a
buffer may be waived. Waiver of a buffer requirement may be incorporated into
and considered during the subdivision platting process.
ARTICLE XXII
Nonconformities
Article 22: Nonconformities
   Section
22.1   Intent
   Section
22.2   Nonconforming Uses of Land
   Section
22.3.   Nonconforming Lot of Record
   Section
22.4.   Nonconforming Structures
   Section
22.5.   Nonconforming Uses of Structures and Land
   Section
22.6   Repairs and Maintenance
   Section
22.7   Uses Under Exception Provisions Not Nonconforming Uses
   Section
22.8   Change of Tenancy or Ownership
22.1. INTENT.
                     Section 1: Intent         It is the intent of this Article
to permit legal nonconforming lots, structures, or uses to continue until they
are removed but not to encourage their survival. There exists within the
districts established by this ordinance and subsequent amendments, lots,
structures, and uses of land and structures which were lawful before this
ordinance was passed or amended, but which would be prohibited, regulated, or
restricted under the terms of this ordinance or future amendments. Such uses
are declared by this ordinance to be incompatible with permitted uses in the
districts involved. It is further the intent of this ordinance that
nonconformities shall not be enlarged upon, expanded or extended, nor be used
as grounds for adding other structures or uses prohibited elsewhere in the same
district.
   A nonconforming use of a structure, a nonconforming use of land, or a
nonconforming use of a structure and land in combination shall not be extended
or enlarged after passage of this ordinance by attachment on a building or
premises of additional signs intended to be seen from off the premises, or by
addition of other uses of a nature which would not be permitted generally in
the district involved.
   To avoid undue hardship, nothing in this Article shall be deemed to require
a change in the plans, construction or designated use of any building on which
actual construction was lawfully begun prior to the effective date of adoption
or amendment of this ordinance and upon which actual building construction has
been diligently carried on. Actual construction is hereby defined to include
the placing of construction materials in permanent position and fastened in a
permanent manner; except that where excavation, demolition or removal of
existing building has been substantially begun preparatory to rebuilding such
demolition or removal shall be deemed to be actual construction, providing that
work shall be diligently carried on until completion of the building involved.
22.2. NONCONFORMING USES OF LAND (or Land with Minor Structures Only)Section 2:
Nonconforming Uses of Land.
Where at the time of passage effective date of adoption or amendment of this
ordinance, lawful use of land exists that is made no longer permissible under
the terms of this ordinance as enacted or amended. Such use may be continued,
so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following provisions:
   1)    No such nonconforming use shall be enlarged or increased, nor extended
to occupy a greater area of land than was occupied at the effective date of
adoption or amendment of this ordinance.
   2)    No such nonconforming use shall be moved in whole or in part to any
other portion of the lot or parcel occupied by such use at the effective date
of adoption or amendment of this ordinance.
   3)    If such nonconforming use of land ceases for any reason for a period
of twelve (12) months, any subsequent use of such land shall conform to the
regulations specified by this ordinance for the district in which such land is
located.
   4)    No additional structure not conforming to the requirements of this
ordinance shall be erected in connection with such nonconforming use of land.
22.3. NONCONFORMING LOT OF RECORDSection 3: Nonconforming Lot of Record.
   In any district in which single family residential dwellings are permitted,
notwithstanding limitations imposed by other provisions of this ordinance, a
single family dwelling and customary accessory buildings may be erected on any
single lot of record at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this
ordinance. This provision shall apply even though such lot fails to meet the
requirements for area or width or both that are generally applicable in the
district, provided that yard dimensions and other requirements not involving
area or width or both, if the lot shall conform to the regulations for the
district in which such lot is located. Variance of yard requirements shall be
obtained only through the action of the Board of Adjustment.
22.4. NONCONFORMING STRUCTURESSection 4: Nonconforming Structures.
   Where a lawful structure exists at the effective date of adoption or
amendment of this ordinance that could not be built under the terms of this
ordinance by reason of restrictions on area, lot coverage, height, yards, or
other characteristics of the structure or its location on the lot, such
structure may be continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to
the following provisions:
   1)   All nonconforming structures may continue to exist as long as the
structure is not enlarged in the amount of square feet, cubic feet or building
perimeter; or altered in any other way which increases its nonconformity. Such
structure or portion thereof may be altered in a way which does not increase
its nonconformity.
   2)   Should such nonconforming structure or nonconforming portion of a
structure be destroyed by any means to an extent of more than fifty (50)
percent of its replacement costs, exclusive of the foundation, it shall be
reconstructed only in conformity with the provisions of this ordinance.
   3)   Should such structure be moved for any reason for any distance
whatever, it shall thereafter conform to the regulations for the district in
which it is located after it is moved.
   4)   Discontinuance. In the event that a non-conforming building or
structure or premises is discontinued for a period of twelve (12) months, the
use of the same shall conform thereafter to the uses permitted in the district
in which it is located.
22.5. NONCONFORMING USES OF STRUCTURES AND LANDSection 5: Nonconforming Uses of
Structures and Land.
   Where a lawful use of a structure, or of a structure and land in combination
exists at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this ordinance that
would not be permitted in the district under the terms of this ordinance, the
lawful use may be continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to
the following provisions:
   1)   No existing structure devoted to a use not permitted by this ordinance
in the district in which it is located shall be enlarged, extended,
constructed, reconstructed, moved or structurally altered except in changing
the use to a permitted use in the district in which it is located.
   2)   Any nonconforming use may be extended throughout any parts of a
building which was manifestly arranged or designed for such use, and which
existed at the time of adoption or amendment of this ordinance, but no such use
shall be extended to occupy any land outside such building.
   3)    If no structural alterations are made, any nonconforming use of
structure, or structure and land in combination, may as a special exception be
changed to another nonconforming use of the same or a more restricted
classification provided that the Board of Adjustment either by general rule or
by making findings in the specific case, shall find that the proposed use is
equally appropriate or more appropriate to the district than the existing
nonconforming use. In permitting such change, the Board of Adjustment may
require conditions and safeguards in accordance with the purpose and intent of
this ordinance. Where such nonconforming use of a structure, land, or structure
and land in combination is hereafter changed to a more conforming use, it shall
not thereafter be changed to a less conforming use.
   4)   Any structure, or structure and land in combination, in or on which a
nonconforming use is superseded by a permitted use, shall thereafter conform to
the regulations for the district in which such structure is located, and the
nonconforming use may not thereafter be resumed.
   5)   When a nonconforming use of a structure, or structures and land in
combination, is discontinued or ceases to exist for a period of more than
twelve (12) consecutive months, the structure, or structure and land in
combination, shall not thereafter be used except in conformance with the
regulations of the district in which it is located.
   6)   Where nonconforming use status applies to a structure and land in
combination, removal or destruction of the structure shall eliminate the
nonconforming status of the land. Destruction, for the purpose of this
subsection, is defined as damage to an extent of more than fifty (50) percent
of its replacement value. Replacement shall begin within twelve (12) months of
the time of destruction or the nonconforming status shall expire.  
22.6. REPAIRS AND MAINTENANCESection 6: Repairs and Maintenance.
   On any building devoted in whole or in part to any nonconforming use, work
may be done in on ordinary repairs, provided that the cubic content of the
building as it existed at the time of passage or amendment of this ordinance
shall not be increased. Nothing in this ordinance shall be deemed to prevent
the strengthening or restoring to a safe condition of any building or part
thereof declared to be unsafe by an official charged with protecting the public
safety.
22.7. USES UNDER EXCEPTION PROVISIONS NOT NONCONFORMING USESSection 8: Uses
Under Exception Provisions Not Nonconforming Uses.
   Any use for which a special exception is permitted as provided in this
ordinance shall not be deemed a nonconforming use, but shall without further
action, be deemed a conforming use in such district. Any expansion shall be
with approval of the Board of Adjustment.
22.8. CHANGE OF TENANCY OR OWNERSHIPSection 9: Change of Tenancy or Ownership.
   There may be a change of tenancy, ownership, or management of any existing
nonconforming uses of land, of structures, or of structures and land in
combination.
ARTICLE XXIII
Zoning Administration and Enforcement
Article 23: Zoning Administration and Enforcement
   Section
23.1    Zoning Administrator
   Section
23.2.   Zoning Compliance
   Section
23.3.   Zoning/Building Permits Required
   Section
23.4.   Application for Zoning/Building Permit
   Section
23.5.   Construction and Use to be provided in Application, Plans, and Permit
   Section
23.6.   Fees
   Section
23.7.    Special Exceptions
   Section
23.8.    Administrative Appeals
23.1. ZONING ADMINISTRATOR.
Section 1: Administrative Officer         The purpose of this section is to
confirm the existing zoning administrator, and it shall be the duty of said
officer to enforce this ordinance. Such officer may be a person holding other
appointive office in the city, or another governmental agency. All questions of
interpretation and enforcement shall be first presented to the zoning
administrator, or that person's assistant, and that such questions shall be
presented to the Board of Adjustment only on appeal from the decision of the
zoning administrator, and recourse from the decisions of the Board of
Adjustment shall be to the courts as provided by law and particularly by
Chapter 414, Code of Iowa.
23.2. ZONING COMPLIANCESection 2: Zoning Compliance.
   If the zoning administrator shall find that any of the provisions of this
ordinance are being violated, they shall notify in writing the person
responsible for such violations indicating the nature of the violation and
ordering the action necessary to correct it. The zoning administrator shall
order discontinuance of illegal use of land, buildings, or structures; removal
of illegal buildings or structures or of additions, alterations or structural
changes thereto; discontinuance of any illegal work being done, or shall take
any other action authorized by this ordinance to insure compliance with or to
prevent violation of its provisions.
 23.3. ZONING/BUILDING PERMITS REQUIREDSection 3: Zoning Permits Required.
   Buildings or other structures shall not be erected, moved, added to, or
structurally altered without a zoning/building permit issued by the zoning
administrator. Zoning/building permits shall be issued in conformance with the
provisions of this ordinance, or upon written order from the Board of
Adjustment. Permits shall become null and void twelve (12) months after the
date of issuance if the purpose for which the permit is issued has not
commenced.
23.4. APPLICATION FOR ZONING/BUILDING PERMITSection 4: Application for Zoning
Permit.
   Zoning/building permits shall be obtained from the zoning administrator
before starting or proceeding with the erection, construction, moving into, or
the structural alteration of a building or structure. A separate sign permit
shall be obtained prior to the erection or construction of signs and
billboards. Permits shall be kept on file in the office of the zoning
administrator, and copies shall be furnished on request to any person having a
proprietary or tenancy interest in the building affected. Zoning/building
permits shall be issued to complying applicants within seven (7) days after
application is made. Each application for zoning/building permit for a new
permitted or special exception use or any addition adding square feet or
changing the building footprint of an existing permitted or special exception
use shall be accompanied by a site plan prepared in accordance with
Article XVIII. In the case of moving an existing building, the zoning/building
permit application shall be accompanied by moving permit and photos of the
structure to be moved.
23.5. CONSTRUCTION/USE TO BE AS PROVIDED IN APPLICATION, PLANS & PERMITSection
5: Construction and Use to be as Provided in Application, Plans and Permit.
   Zoning/building permits issued on the basis of plans and applications,
approved by the zoning administrator, authorize only that use, arrangement and
construction. Any use, arrangement or construction that alters or is at
variance with that authorized by the zoning administrator shall be deemed a
violation of this ordinance and punishable as provided by
Article XXIV.
23.6. SCHEDULE OF FEES, CHARGES AND EXPENSESSection 6: Fees.
   The city council shall establish a schedule of fees, charges, and expenses
and a collection procedure for zoning district changes, zoning/building
permits, appeals, and other matters pertaining to this ordinance. The schedule
of fees shall be posted in the office of the zoning administrator, and the City
Clerk, and may be altered or amended only by the city council, as recommended
by the Planning Commission. Until all applicable fees, charges, and expenses
have been paid in full, no action shall be taken on any application or appeal.
   Before receiving a zoning/building permit the owner or their agent shall pay
to the city the permit fee as provided by resolution of the council. Fees for
permits issued after the construction, or moving, in the case of house moving,
has begun shall double. All public governmental entities including but not
limited to the city, county, state and federal governments and schools,
colleges and other educational institutions shall be exempt from paying any
scheduled fees.
23.7. SPECIAL EXCEPTIONSSection 7: Special Exceptions.
   The zoning administrator may issue a zoning/building permit for a special
exception after review by the Planning Commission and upon order of the Board
of Adjustment.
23.8. ADMINISTRATIVE APPEALS.
   Whenever a violation of this ordinance occurs, or is alleged to have
occurred, any person may file a written complaint. Such complaint, stating
fully the causes and basis thereof, shall be filed with the zoning
administrator. The administrator shall record properly such complaint,
immediately investigate, and take action thereon as provided by this ordinance.
This procedure is intended to afford review of administrative actions taken
pursuant to the zoning ordinance where such actions may be in error.
ARTICLE XXIV
Violation and Penalty
Article 24: Violation and Penalty
   Section
24.1.   Violation and Penalty
   Section
24.2.   Restraining Order
 24.1. VIOLATION AND PENALTY.
ARTICLE XV: VIOLATION AND PENALTYSection 1: Violation and PenaltySection 1:
Violation and Penalty   Unless provided elsewhere in this ordinance or the
city’s municipal code, any person failing to perform a duty, obtain a zoning
permit, or violating the Sheldon Zoning Ordinance, or any rule or regulation
adopted by reference shall be guilty of a municipal infraction. Any person,
firm or corporation who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to
comply with or resists enforcement of this ordinance, with the exception of
those provisions specifically provided under State law as a felony, an
aggravated misdemeanor, or a serious misdemeanor, or a simple misdemeanor under
Chapters 687 through 747 of the Code of Iowa, is a municipal infraction and
punishable by civil penalty as provided herein. (Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.22[3])
   A municipal infraction in the City of Sheldon is punishable under the
following civil penalties: (Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.22 [1])
   1.   First Offense – Not less than $100 but not to exceed $750.00 plus court
costs
   2.   Second Repeat Offense – Not less than $100 but not to exceed $1,000.00
plus court costs
   Each day that a violation occurs or is permitted to exist constitutes a
separate offense.
24.2. RESTRAINING ORDERSection 2: Restraining Order.
   In case any building or structure is erected, constructed, reconstructed,
altered, repaired, converted, or maintained, or any building, structure or land
is used in violation of this ordinance, the city attorney, in addition to other
remedies, may institute any proper action or proceed in the name of the City of
Sheldon to prevent such unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction,
alteration, repair, conversion, maintenance, conduct, business or use in or
about said premises.
ARTICLE XXV
Board of Adjustment
Article 25: Board of Adjustment
    Section
25.1.   Confirmation of Existing Board of Adjustment
   Section
25.2.   Proceedings of the Board of Adjustment
   Section
25.3.   Hearings, Appeals, and Notice
   Section
25.4.   Stay of Proceedings
   Section
25.5.   Powers and Duties
   Section
25.6.   Variances
   Section
25.7.   Decisions of the Board of Adjustment
   Section
25.8.   Appeals from the Board of Adjustment
25.1. ARTICLE XVI: BOARD OF ADJUSTMENTCONFIRMATION OF EXISTING BOARD OF
ADJUSTMENTSection 1: Confirmation of Existing Board of Adjustment.
   The members of the existing Board of Adjustment are hereby confirmed to
continue their appointed terms of office. The Board shall consist of seven (7)
members. Five (5) members shall be residents of the City of Sheldon and
appointed by the Mayor and city council. Two (2) members shall be residents of
the area outside the city over which the zoning jurisdiction of the city has
been extended. These two (2) members shall be appointed by the Board of
Supervisors of the county in which such extended area is located. Future
members shall be appointed for overlapping terms of five (5) years. Members of
the Board of Adjustment may be removed from office by the city council for
cause upon written charges and after a public hearing. Vacancies shall be
filled in the same manner as the original appointment for the unexpired term of
the resigning member. A majority of the members of the Board of Adjustment
shall be persons representing the public at large and shall not be involved in
the business of purchasing or selling of real estate.
25.2. PROCEEDINGS OF THE BOARD OF ADJUSTMENTSection 2: Proceedings of the Board
of Adjustment.
   The Board of Adjustment shall adopt rules necessary to the conduct of its
affairs, and in keeping with the provisions of this ordinance. Meetings shall
be held at the call of the chairperson and at such other times as the board may
determine. The chairperson, or in that person’s absence, the acting chairperson
may administer oaths and compel attendance of witnesses. All meetings shall be
open to the public. The Board of Adjustment, through its secretary, shall keep
minutes of its proceedings showing the vote of each member upon each question,
or if absent or failing to vote indicating such fact, and shall keep records of
its examination and other official actions, all of which shall be a public
record and be immediately filed in the office of the Board. Said action shall
take effect upon the Board receiving sufficient confirmation of the recording
in the office of the O’Brien County Recorder. A copy of said action shall also
be filed in the office of the zoning administrator. The presence of four (4)
members shall constitute a quorum.
25.3. HEARINGS, APPEALS, AND NOTICESection 3: Hearings, Appeals, Notice.
   Appeals to the Board of Adjustment concerning interpretation or
administration of this ordinance may be taken by any person aggrieved or by any
officer, or bureau of the City of Sheldon affected by a decision of the zoning
administrator. Such appeals shall be taken within a reasonable time, not to
exceed sixty (60) days, by filing with the zoning administrator, a notice of
appeal specifying the grounds thereof. The zoning administrator shall forthwith
transmit to the Board all papers constituting the record from which the action
appealed was taken.
   The Board of Adjustment shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of
appeal, give public notices thereof, not less than seven (7) days nor more than
twenty (20) days public notice in a newspaper of general circulation in
Sheldon, as well as notifying the owners of all property within two hundred
(200) feet of the proposed special exception not less than seven (7) days prior
to the hearing. The Board shall then decide the same within a reasonable time,
typically not more than thirty (30) days. At the hearing any party may appear
in person or by agent or attorney. In exercising the powers set out in this
section, the Board of Adjustment may, in conformity with the provisions of this
ordinance, reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order,
requirement, decision, or determination appealed from, and may take such action
as ought to be made, and shall have all the powers of the zoning administrator
from whose action the appeal was taken. The concurring vote of the majority of
the Board of Adjustment shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirement,
decision, or determination of the zoning administrator.
25.4. STAY OF PROCEEDINGSSection 4: Stay of Proceedings.
   An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action which was
appealed, unless the Zoning Administrator from whom the appeal is taken
certifies to the Board of Adjustment after the notice of appeal is filed, that
by reason of facts stated in the certificate, a stay would cause imminent peril
to life or property. In such case, proceedings shall not be stayed other than
by a restraining order which may be granted by the Board of Adjustment or by a
court of record on the application, on notice to the zoning administrator from
whom the appeal is taken and on due cause shown.
25.5. POWERS AND DUTIESSection 5: Powers and Duties.
   The Board of Adjustment shall have the following powers and duties:
   1)   Administrative Review: To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged
that there is error in any order, requirement, decision, or determination made
by the zoning administrator in the enforcement of this ordinance.
   2)   Special Exceptions: To hear and decide only such exceptions as the
Board of Adjustment is specifically authorized to pass on by the terms of this
ordinance, and as provided for in
Article XXVI.
   3)   Variances: To authorize upon appeal in specific cases such variance
from the terms of this ordinance as will not be contrary to the public interest
where, owing to the special conditions, a literal enforcement of the provisions
of this ordinance would result in unnecessary hardship.
25.6. VARIANCES.
   A variance from the terms of this ordinance shall not be granted by the
Board of Adjustment unless and until:
   1)   An application for the Variance shall be filed with the zoning
administrator. The application shall include the following:
      a.   Name and address of the owner and applicant.
      b.   Address and legal description of the property.
      c.   If the applicant is not the legal owner of the property, a statement
that the applicant is the authorized agent of the owner.
      d.   A statement describing the variance requested and reasons why it
complies with the criteria for variances provided in this section.
      e.   The property address, name and mailing address of the owner of each
lot within 200 feet of the subject property.
      f.   Site plans, as prepared in accordance with
Article XVIII 
   2)   The zoning administrator may request additional information necessary
to enable a complete analysis and evaluation of the variance request, and a
determination as to whether the circumstances prescribed for the granting of a
variance exist.
   3)   The Board of Adjustment shall schedule a public hearing in regards to
the variance request. Notice shall be given of the public hearing as required
by state statute by publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the
city. Notice shall be given to a complete list of persons provided by the
applicant who are all of the owners of property within two hundred (200) feet
of the property in question.
   4)   The board shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of the variance,
and give not less than seven (7) days or more than twenty (20) days public
notice in a newspaper of general circulation in Sheldon, thereof, and decide
the same within thirty (30) days.
   5)   The public hearing shall be held. Any party may appear in person or by
agent or attorney.
   6)   The Board of Adjustment may grant a variance if it makes affirmative
findings of fact on each of the following criteria:
      a.   That special conditions and circumstances exist which are peculiar
to the land, structure, or building involved and which are not applicable to
other lands, structures, or buildings in the same district;
      b.   That literal interpretation of the provisions of this ordinance
would deprive the applicant of rights commonly enjoyed by other properties in
the same district under the terms of this ordinance;
      c.   That the special conditions and circumstances do not result from the
actions of the applicant;
      d.   That granting the variance requested will not confer on the
applicant any special privilege that is denied by this ordinance to other
lands, structures, or buildings in the same district.
      e.   No nonconforming use of neighboring lands, structures or buildings
in the same district, and no permitted or nonconforming uses of land,
structures or buildings in other districts shall be considered grounds for the
issuance of a variance.
   7)   The Board of Adjustment shall make findings that the applicant for a
variance has met the requirements of this section.
   8)   The Board of Adjustment shall further make a finding that the reasons
set forth in the application justify the granting of the variance and that the
variance is the minimum variance that will make possible the reasonable use of
the land, building or structure.
   9)   The Board of Adjustment shall further make a finding that the granting
of the variance will be in harmony with the general purpose and intent of this
ordinance, and will not be injurious to the neighborhood, or otherwise
detrimental to the public welfare.
   10)   A fee to be determined by resolution of city council shall accompany
the application for a variance.
   11)   Under no circumstances shall the Board of Adjustment grant a variance
to allow a use not permissible under the terms of this ordinance in the
district involved or any use expressly or by implication prohibited by the
terms of this ordinance in said district.
   12)    Additional Variance Conditions: In granting any variance, the Board
of Adjustment may prescribe appropriate conditions and safeguards in conformity
with this ordinance. Violations of such conditions and safeguards, when made a
part of the terms under which the variance is granted, shall be deemed a
violation of this ordinance and punishable under
Article XXIV.
   13)   Lapse of Variance: Unless a longer time period shall be specifically
established as a condition of approval, a variance shall lapse and shall become
void one (1) year following the date on which the variance became effective,
unless prior to the expiration of one year a zoning or building permit is
issued and construction is commenced and diligently pursued toward completion
on the site which was the subject of the variance application, or a certificate
of occupancy is issued for the site or structure which was the subject of the
variance application, or the site is occupied if no building permit or
certificate of occupancy is required.
   14)   Revocation of Variance: Upon violation of any applicable provision of
this ordinance, or if granted subject to the conditions, upon failure to comply
with conditions, a variance shall be revoked upon notification to the owner of
the; use or property subject to the variance.
   15)   Variance to Run With Land or Structure: Unless otherwise specified at
the time a variance is granted, a variance shall run with the land and shall
continue to be valid upon a change of ownership of the site or structure to
which it applies.
25.7. DECISIONS OF THE BOARD OF ADJUSTMENTSection 6: Decisions of the Board of
Adjustment.
   1)   In exercising the above mentioned powers, the Board of Adjustment may,
so long as such action is in conformity with the terms of this ordinance and
Chapter 414, Code of Iowa, reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify,
order requirements, decision, or determination as ought to be made and to that
end shall have powers of the administrative officer from whom the appeal is
taken. The concurring vote of four (4) members or the majority of the entire
board shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision or
determination of the zoning administrator; or to decide in favor of the
applicant on any matter upon which it is required to pass under this ordinance;
or to affect any variation in application of this ordinance.
   2)   The action of the board shall not become effective until it has a
written decision describing such action, the vote of each member participating
therein and the reasons for such action, specifying the manner in which the
applicant either satisfied or failed to satisfy each of the applicable
standards, conditions or elements set forth in this Article. Decisions shall be
filed promptly following the board’s action and shall be open to public
inspection. Every variation and exception granted or denied by the board shall
be supported by a written testimony or evidence submitted in connection
therewith.
   3)   If any application for a variance or exception shall have been denied
by the Board of Adjustment, no new application for the same relief shall be
considered for one (1) year by the board unless the board shall find that
conditions have changed.
   4)   Any taxpayer or any officer, department, board, or bureau of the city
or persons jointly or severally aggrieved by any decision of the board may
present to a court of record a petition for writ of certiorari, duly verified,
setting forth that such decision is illegal, in whole or in part, specifying
the grounds of illegality. The petition shall be presented to the court within
30 days after the filing of the decision in the office of the board. All
decisions of the board, except decisions granting use variances or a variance
from any separation requirement shall be final immediately upon filing.
25.8. APPEALS FROM THE BOARD OF ADJUSTMENTSection 7: Appeals from the Board of
Adjustment.
   Any person or persons, or any board, taxpayer, department, board or bureau
of the city aggrieved by any decision of the Board of Adjustment may seek
review of such decision of the Board of Adjustment by a court of record in the
manner provided by the laws of the State of Iowa and particularly by Chapter
414, Code of Iowa.
ARTICLE XXVI
Special Exceptions
Article 26: Special Exceptions
   Section
26.1    Requirements
   Section
26.2   Jurisdiction
   Section
26.3.   Application for a Special Exception Permit
   Section
26.4.   Procedures
   Section
26.5.   Standards
   Section
26.6   Revocation
   Section
26.7.   Supplemental Standards
26.1. REQUIREMENTS.
ARTICLE XIII: SPECIAL EXCEPTIONSSection 1: Procedures and
Requirements      Special exception uses may be permitted, enlarged, or altered
upon application for a special exception use permit in accordance with the
rules and procedures of the Board of Adjustment. The board will grant or deny a
special exception use permit in accordance with the standards set forth herein
and with the intent and purpose of this ordinance. In granting a special
exception use permit, the Board of Adjustment will authorize the special
exception use and may prescribe and impose conditions, safeguards, or a
specified time limit for performance of the special exception use.
26.2. JURISDICTION.
   The zoning administrator shall be responsible for administration of special
exceptions and the Board of Adjustment shall be responsible for the review,
evaluation, and action on all applications for a special exception use permit.
26.3. APPLICATION FOR SPECIAL EXCEPTION PERMITSection 2: Application for
Special Exception Permit.
   A request for a special exception use permit for a special exception use or
modification of a special exception use may be initiated by a property owner or
his or her authorized agent by filing an application with the zoning
administrator upon forms prescribed for the purpose. The application shall be
accompanied by a site plan and other such data showing dimensions,
arrangements, descriptive data, and other materials constituting a record
essential to an understanding of the proposed use and proposed modification in
relation to the standards set forth herein. A fee as determined by resolution
of the city council shall also accompany the application.
   Application and Fee: Application for a special exception use permit shall be
filed with the zoning administrator. The Board of Adjustment shall provide a
copy of the application for special exception for review and comment of the
Planning and Zoning Commission within five (5) days after receipt of the
application. The application shall include the following:
      a.   Name and address of the owner and applicant.
      b.   Address and legal description of the property.
      c.   If the applicant is not the legal owner of the property, a statement
that the applicant is the authorized agent of the owner of the property.
      d.   A statement describing the nature and operating characteristics of
the proposed use, including any data pertinent to the findings required for
approval of the application.
      e.   Site plans as prepared in accordance with
Article XVIII.
26.4. PROCEDURESSection 3: Procedures.
   The Board of Adjustment shall not grant a special exception unless and until
the following procedures have been fulfilled:
   1)   The Board of Adjustment shall schedule a public hearing in relation to
the special exception request. Notice shall be given of the public hearing as
required by state statute by publication in a newspaper of general circulation
in the city. Notice shall be given to a complete list of persons provided by
the applicant who are all of the owners of property within two hundred (200)
feet of the property in question.
   2)   The Board of Adjustment shall determine that it is empowered under this
ordinance to grant the special exception as described in the application, and
that the granting of the special exception will not adversely affect the public
interest pursuant to testimony presented at the public hearing.
   3)   In granting any special exception, the Board of Adjustment may
prescribe appropriate conditions and safeguards in conformity with this
ordinance. Violation of such conditions and safeguards, when made a part of the
terms under which the special exception is granted, shall be deemed a violation
of this ordinance and punishable under
Article XXIV.
   4)   The concurring vote of four (4) members of the whole Board of
Adjustment is required to grant a special use permit, even in the event of
absentee members or conflicts of interest. No order of the Board of Adjustment
granting a special exception use permit shall be valid for a period longer than
six (6) months from the date of such order, unless the Board of Adjustment
specifically grants a longer period of time or a zoning permit is obtained
within the six (6) month period and construction is commenced. 
(Ordinance 020-3252 – 4/15/2020)
26.5. STANDARDSSection 4: Standards.
   The Board of Adjustment shall grant no special exception permit unless such
board shall find:
   1)   That the establishment, maintenance, or operation of the special
exception use will not be detrimental to or endanger the public health, safety,
morals, comfort, or general welfare of the community.
   2)   That the special exception use will not be injurious to the use and
enjoyment of other property in the immediate vicinity for the purpose already
permitted, nor substantially diminish and impair property values within the
neighborhood.
   3)   That in the case of existing relocated single family dwellings, that
the proposed use aesthetically blend in with the neighboring existing permitted
uses and special attention is given to the architectural style, size and
quality of construction of the proposed use.
   4)   That the establishment of the special exception use will not impede the
normal and orderly development in improvement of the surrounding property for
uses permitted in the district.
   5)   That adequate utilities, access roads, drainage, parking, and/or
necessary facilities have been or will be provided.
   6)   That adequate measures have been or will be taken to provide ingress
and egress so designed as to minimize traffic congestion in the public streets.
   7)   The use shall not include any activity involving the use or storage of
flammable, or explosive material unless protected by adequate firefighting and
fire suppression equipment and by such safety devices as are normally used in
the handling of any such material.
   8)   The use shall not include noise that is objectionable due to volume,
frequency, or beat unless muffled or otherwise controlled.
   9)   The use shall not include vibration which is discernable without
instruments on any adjoining lot or property.
   10)   The use shall not involve any malodorous gas or matter which is
discernable on any adjoining property.
   11)   The use shall not involve any pollution of the air by fly-ash, dust
vapors, or other substance which is harmful to health, animals, vegetation or
other property or which causes soiling, discomfort or irritation.
   12)   The use shall not involve any direct or reflected glare which is
visible from any adjoining property or from any public street, road, or
highway.
   13)   The use shall not involve any activity substantially increasing the
movement of traffic on public streets unless procedures are instituted to limit
traffic hazards and congestion.
   14) The use shall not involve any activity substantially increasing the
burden on any public utilities or facilities unless provisions are made for any
necessary adjustments.
   15)   That the use will not be in conflict with the city’s comprehensive
plan.
   16)   The use shall not interfere with the use or enjoyment of neighboring
permitted uses. If such interference is found, provisions must be made for
increased setbacks (up to 500 feet) from property lines or screening of
incompatible use by the use of fences or hedges.
   17)   The ground coverage shall be such that no additional dust or storm
run-off is generated by the special exception use.
   18)   The use shall not create a hazard to vehicular traffic. If any such
hazard is determined, provisions must be made to increase the required setback
in regard to open-air storage.
   19)   The use shall not cause any permanent, irreparable environmental
damage to the parcel or neighboring lands.
   20)   The special exception use permit may be reviewed after a specified
period of time for compliance and for possible additional conditions.
   In addition to the general standards outlined above, specified uses shall
adhere to these standards and operate only after the issuance of a special
exception use permit.
26.6. REVOCATION.
   The issuance of a special exception use permit by the Board of Adjustment
shall entitle the owner to continue to operate the use so long as he remains in
compliance with the terms and conditions of this ordinance and the terms,
conditions, limitations, requirements and safeguards set forth in the special
exception use permit. If such permit is granted, does expressly grant to the
city, for the enforcement of this ordinance, the power and authority to enter
upon the premises at any reasonable time for the purpose of inspection and
enforcement of the terms of the special exception use permit. In the event the
owner or occupant of the property for which a special exception use permit has
been issued, shall violate any term, condition, limitation, regulation or
safeguards contained in the special exception permit, the permit shall become
null and void and the owner or occupant shall be deemed to be in violation of
this ordinance and the city may proceed to enforce the provisions of this
ordinance and the terms, conditions, limitations, and safeguards of the special
exception permit. In addition to all other remedies provided herein, in the
event that such special exception shall become null and void, any bonds, if
any, given by the owner under the provisions of this ordinance shall be
forfeited.
26.7. SUPPLEMENTAL STANDARDS.
   In addition to the general standards outlined in Section
26.5 above, certain specified uses shall adhere to the following standards:
   Salvage Yards: All salvage yards, including any area where waste, junk,
discarded or wrecked and salvaged materials are bought, sold, stored,
exchanged, baled or packed, disassembled or handled, including dismantling or
"wrecking" of automobiles or machinery or other vehicles, shall be located in
the Heavy Industrial (HI) district under special exception use permit. The
application for a special use permit shall be accompanied with a proposed
intent or covenant to meet the minimum requirements described herein:
   1.   The yards shall be at least three hundred (300) feet distant in all
directions from any residential building;
   2.   Outdoor yards shall be screened by a solid wall or uniformly painted
solid fence not less than eight (8) feet in height, or in lieu thereof, a
landscape buffer strip fifty (50) feet wide with coniferous trees or large
shrubs to provide a solid landscape screen at least ten (10) feet high;
   3.   No waste materials, salvage, scrap, or other junk materials may be
visible above the top of the solid wall or solid landscape buffer.
   4.   Off-street parking or service areas may be located outside of the
screened-in area.
ARTICLE XXVII
Changes and Amendments
Article 27: Changes and Amendments
   Section
27.1.   Procedures
   Section
27.2.   Initiation
   Section
27.3.   Application for Change in Zoning District Boundaries
   Section
27.4.   Protest Provision
   Section
27.5.   New Application
27.1. PROCEDURES.
Section 1: Procedures      This ordinance and the district map created by said
ordinance may be amended from time to time. However, no amendment shall become
effective unless it shall have been proposed by or shall have been first
submitted to the Planning and Zoning Commission for review and recommendation.
   The Planning and Zoning Commission shall have forty-five (45) days from
receipt of the requested amendment in which to submit its recommendation to the
city council. Prior to making recommendation to the city council, the Planning
Commission shall hold at least one public hearing on the text amendment or
rezoning request. At least once during the public hearing process, either at
the Planning Commission or city council meeting, property owners within two
hundred feet (200’) of the subject property shall be notified by mail. If the
commission fails to submit a report within the forty-five (45) day period, it
shall be deemed to have approved the proposed amendment.
   Not more than 30 days following receipt of the recommendation of the
Planning and Zoning Commission, the city council shall hold at least one public
hearing before adoption of any text amendment or a rezoning request. A notice
of such public hearing shall be published not less than 7 and no more than 20
days prior to the date established for such hearing along with notification of
the owners of all property within two hundred feet (200’) of the property for
which the change is requested. In no case shall the public hearing be held
earlier than the next regularly scheduled city council meeting following the
published notice. Such notice shall include the time and place for the public
hearing.
   Within 30 days following the closing of a public hearing, the city council
shall make a specific finding as to whether the change is consistent with the
objectives of this ordinance. If the city council finds that the change is not
consistent, it shall deny the application. The city council shall not modify a
recommendation of the Planning and Zoning Commission on a rezoning or change
until it has requested and considered a report of the commission on the
modification. Failure of the commission to report within 30 days after receipt
of the city council request shall be deemed concurrence. If the city council
finds that the change is consistent, it shall introduce an ordinance amending
the text of the zoning regulations or amending the zoning map, whichever is
appropriate.
Section 1: Procedures      Notwithstanding Chapter 414.2 of the Iowa Code, as a
part of an ordinance changing land from one zoning district to another zoning
district or an ordinance approving a site development plan, the council may
impose conditions on a property owner which are in addition to existing
regulations if the additional conditions have been agreed to in writing by the
property owner before the public hearing required under this section or any
adjournment of the hearing. The conditions must be reasonable and imposed to
satisfy public needs which are directly caused by the requested change.
27.2. INITIATION.
   Requests for rezoning of property or zoning text amendments may be initiated
by one of three ways.
   1)   The Planning and Zoning Commission or the city council may initiate a
text amendment.
   2)   The Planning and Zoning Commission or the city council may initiate a
rezoning request
   3)   The owner or the authorized agent of the owner of property may initiate
a rezoning request by filing an application for a change in district boundaries
(rezoning) as prescribed in this article. If the property for which rezoning is
proposed is in more than one ownership, all the owners or their authorized
agents shall join in filing the application.
27.3. APPLICATION FOR CHANGE IN ZONING DISTRICT BOUNDARIESSection 2:
Application for Change in Zoning District Boundaries.
   Applications for rezoning requests shall be filed with the zoning
administrator on a form provided by the city and shall include the following
data and maps:
   1)   Each application shall be filed and accompanied by a fee as determined
by resolution by the city council and shall contain the following information:
      a.   The name and address of the owner and applicant.
      b.   The legal description and local address of the property.
      c.   If the applicant is not the legal owner of the property, statement
that the applicant is the authorized agent of the owner.
      d.   The present zoning classification and the zoning classification
requested for the property.
      e.   The existing use and proposed use of the property.
      f.   The names and addresses of the owners of all property within two
hundred (200) feet of the property for which the change is requested.
      g.   A statement of the reasons why the applicant feels the present
zoning classification is no longer appropriate.
      h.   A plat showing existing and proposed locations, dimensions and use
of the applicant's property and all property within two-hundred (200) feet
thereof, including streets, alleys, railroads, and other physical features.
   The zoning administrator may require additional information or maps if they
are necessary to enable the Planning Commission to determine whether the change
is consistent with the objectives of this ordinance.
   2)   All fees shall be deposited to the general revenue fund of the city.
Failure to approve the requested change shall not be deemed cause to refund the
fee to the applicant.
   3)   Upon receipt of the application by the administrative officer a copy
shall be forwarded immediately to the Planning Commission for study and
recommendation. The commission shall, prior to making a recommendation,
determine the following:
      a.   Whether or not the current district classification of the property
to be rezoned is valid.
      b.   Whether there is a need for additional land zoned for the purpose
requested.
      c.   Whether the proposed change is consistent with the current land use
plan.
      d.   Whether there is intent on the part of the applicant to develop the
property to be rezoned diligently and within a reasonable time.
27.4. PROTEST PROVISION.
   In case the Planning Commission does not approve the change, or in a case of
a written protest against a change or repeal which is filed with the City Clerk
and signed by the owners of twenty percent (20%) or more of the area of the
lots included in the proposed change or repeal, or by the owners of twenty
percent (20%) or more of the property which is located within two hundred feet
(200’) of the exterior boundaries of the property for which the change or
repeal is proposed, the change or repeal shall not become effective except by
the favorable vote of at least three- quarters of all the members of the
council. The protest, if filed, must be filed before or at the public hearing.
Any amendment to this ordinance shall be recorded in the office of the O’Brien
County Recorder.
27.5. NEW APPLICATION.
   Whenever a petition requesting an amendment, supplement or change of any
regulations prescribed by this article has been denied by the city council such
petition cannot be renewed for one year thereafter unless it is signed by the
owners of at least fifty percent (50%) of the property owners who previously
objected to the change; this provision, however, shall not prevent the city
council from acting on its own initiative in any case or at any time provided
in this section.
ARTICLE XXVIII
Effective Date
28.1     EFFECTIVE DATE.
   This ordinance shall be in full effect from and after its adoption and
publication as required by law and as provided for in Chapter 380.6 and 380.7
of the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.6[1]; Sec. 380.7[3]; and Sec. 362.3)
ARTICLE XXIX
Adoption
ORDINANCE NO.     10-3195    
ZONING ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF SHELDON, IOWA
NOW THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE
CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF SHELDON:
Passed and approved this  3rd  day of  March     , 2010.
                                          Katricia Rider         
                                       Mayor, City of Sheldon
 
   Arlene Budden               
Sheldon City Clerk
I hereby certify that the foregoing was published as Ordinance No.  10-3195  in
the City of Sheldon, Iowa on the  31st       day of  March , 2010.
SUPPLEMENT RECORD
Supplement Record
SUPP. AMENDMENT DATE    REPEALS,
NO.   ORDINANCE ADOPTED AMENDS OR   SUBJECT
      NUMBER            ADDS
Dec.  O11-3205  12/21/  Amend       Rezoning of 812 Park St from Residential Multiple to AC
2020            2011    Zoning Map
Dec.  O12-3207  3/21/   Amend       Rezoning of Parcel L near Hy- Vee from LI to AC
2020            2012    Zoning Map
Dec.  O12-3208  3/21/   Amend       Rezoning of 730 Western Ave from LI to RM
2020            2012    Zoning Map
Dec.  O16-3222  11/02/  Amend       Rezoning of parcel of land from RM to AC for School District
2020            2016    Zoning Map
Dec.            9/13/               Amending Zoning Ordinance section 2.1.118 to read “anything constructed…which
2020  O17-3228  2017    2.1.118.    requires location on the ground or attached to something, including fences,
                                    signs and billboards
Dec.  O18-3232  2/07/   17.9.2.     Min 800 Sq Ft for Single Dwelling units
2020            2018
Dec.  O18-3234  5/16/   Amend       Rezone of Rustic Ridge and Crossroads N. Bus Park.
2020            2018    Zoning Map
                                    Rezoning Lots 2, 3, 10 and a portion of Lot 9 All in Block 53A to AC
Dec.            7/03/   Amend        
2020  O18-3235  2018    Zoning Map  a.   Includes Rezoning of 1302 & 1304 S 3rd from C1 to AC.
                                    b.   Includes Rezoning of Sheldon Grain at 1202 S 3rd Ave and adjacent parcel
                                    from RM to AC.
Dec.  O18-3237  3/06/   Amend       Rezoning Lot 1 in Block 53A and Rezoning McCabe Addition
2020            2019    Zoning Map
Dec.  O19-3248  12/04/  Amend       Rezone of 1220 2nd Ave (former County Shed) to AC
2020            2019    Zoning Map
Dec.  O19-3249  12/18/  12.3.       Allow 1st Floor dwelling in BC with Special Exception
2020            2019
Dec.  O19-3250  12/18/  11.3.       Allow 2nd Floor dwelling in AC with Special Exception
2020            2019
Dec.  O20-3252  4/15/20 20.3.4.j. & Rezoning of pavilion area and zoning code amendments (clean-up of sign
2020                    26.4.4.     ordinance section and voting process for BOA
Dec.  O20-3257  11/18/  16.5.3.     Height of fences around perimeter of a swimming pool or yard area swimming
2020            2020                pools
                                    Amend storage sheds in Arterial Commercial (AC). Repeal Condominium Storage
                                    Unit and Convenience Storage as Principal Permitted Uses within
Dec.  O20-3258  12/02/  1.2.   & Article XI, Section
2020            2020    11.3.       11.2 and Amending XI, Section
                                    11.3 Special Exception Uses by Adding Condominium Unit and Convenience
                                    Storage.
                                    Amend storage sheds in Light Industrial (LI), Heavy Industrial (HI) and
Dec.  O20-3259  12/02/  2.2.3.m. &  Commercial Residential (C1) or CR). Repeal and replace 2.2.3.m. Convenience
2020            2020    10.3.       Storage and adding convenience storage and condominium storage as Commercial
                                    Residential Zoning District permitted special exception uses.
 
APPENDIX – ZONING MAPS
ZONING MAPS
Zoning Maps Adopted by Resolution R20-4533 on July 15, 2020.
 
EDITOR’S NOTE
The Zoning Regulations for the City of Sheldon, adopted March 10, 2010, by
Ordinance No. O10-3195 and amendments thereto, contained in a separate
volume, are a part of this Code of Ordinances and are in full force and
effect. The following ordinances have been adopted amending the Official
Zoning Map of the City and have not been codified herein, but are
specifically saved from repeal and are in full force and effect.
ORDINANCE ADOPTED            ORDINANCE ADOPTED
O11-3205  December 21, 2011
O12-3207  March 21, 2012
O12-3208  March 21, 2012
O16-3222  November 2, 2016
O17-3228  September 13, 2017
O18-3232  February 7, 2018
O18-3234  May 16, 2018
O18-3235  July 3, 2018
O18-3237  March 6, 2019
O19-3248  December 4, 2019
O19-3249  December 18, 2019
O19-3250  December 18, 2019
O20-3252  April 15, 2020
O20-3254  July 1, 2020
O20-3255  July 1, 2020
O20-3257  November 18, 2020
O20-3258  December 2, 2020
O20-3259  December 2, 2020
O21-3261  May 5, 2021
O21-3264  June 16, 2021
O21-3265  July 7, 2021
O23-3276  April 19, 2023
O23-3277  May 17, 2023
O23-3280  December 6, 2023
O23-3281  December 6, 2023
O24-3282  January 17, 2024
O24-3285  May 15, 2024
O24-3289  September 18, 2024
 
CHAPTER 166
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS ORDINANCE
Ordinance 10-3196 - March 3, 2010
2010
 
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS ORDINANCEARTICLE 2 - SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
FOR THE INCORPORATED CITY OF SHELDON, IOWA
AN ORDINANCE providing rules and regulations for the subdivision of land in the
City of Sheldon, Iowa, prescribing minimum standards for the preliminary and
final plats; and requiring as a condition of approval, certain improvements;
all for the purpose of promoting the safety, health and general welfare of the
public in accordance with the city s comprehensive land use plan.
WHEREAS, The City Council of Sheldon, Iowa, deems it necessary in order to
secure coordination of subdivisions of land and extensions of streets; to
promote proper standards for development of land, utilities and streets; to
promote the general welfare; to facilitate the adequate provision of
transportation, water supply, sewage treatment, storm drainage and other public
improvements and services in areas of new development and throughout the city.
NOW THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF SHELDON, IOWA:
ARTICLE I
BASIC PROVISIONS
Section 1. SHORT TITLE.  
   This ordinance may be known and cited as the "Sheldon Subdivision
Regulations"
Section 2. PURPOSE.  
   The subdivision regulations set forth in this ordinance are intended to
provide for harmonious development of the city. It is deemed essential to
establish minimum standards for the design, development and improvement of all
new subdivisions and resubdivision of land, so that existing land uses and
developments will be protected and so that adequate provisions are made for
public facilities and utilities, and so growth occurs in an orderly manner
consistent with the comprehensive plan, and to promote and improve the public
health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens of the City of Sheldon.
Furthermore, subdivision standards will be enforced to ensure conformance with
the capital improvement program of the city and its planning area; and to
secure equitable handling of all subdivision plats by providing uniform
procedures for observance by subdividers, the Planning Commission and City
Council.
Section 3. INTERPRETATION OF THIS ORDINANCE. 
   In the interpretation and application of the provisions of this ordinance,
such provisions shall be held to be minimum requirements for the promotion of
the public safety, health, convenience, comfort, morals, prosperity and general
welfare.
Section 4. JURISDICTION.  
   In accordance with the provisions of Chapter 354 of the Code of Iowa and
amendatory acts thereto, this ordinance is adopted by the City of Sheldon,
Iowa, governing the subdivisions of all lands within the legal boundaries of
the city, as the same may be amended by subsequent annexation, and in
accordance with Section 354.9 of the Code of Iowa, including all land lying
within one (1) mile of the corporate limits of the city and not located in any
other municipality;
Section 5. APPLICATION.  
   The provisions of this chapter apply to every owner of any tract or parcel
of land which has been subdivided or any owner who shall hereafter subdivide or
plat land into more than two (2) parts, for the purposes of laying out an
addition, subdivision, building lot, or lots, acreages or suburban lots, and
containing the information hereinafter set out before selling any lot or lots
therein contained or placing the plat on any public record.
Section 6. CONFORMANCE TO THE COMPREHENSIVE PLAN.  
   In subdividing property, consideration shall be given to suitable sites for
schools, parks, playgrounds and other common areas for public use so as to best
conform to recommendations of the comprehensive plan. Any provisions for
schools, parks and playgrounds should be indicated on the preliminary plat in
order that it may be determined when and in what manner such areas will be
provided or acquired by an appropriate agency.
Section 7. RESTRICTIVE COVENANTS.  
   The subdivider may, at their own expense, restrict the use of premises
contained in a subdivision plat by means of restrictive covenants. Any such
covenants shall be included as deed restrictions on the final plat. Where any
restrictive covenants are anticipated in a proposed subdivision which do not
assist orderly, efficient, integrated development, promote the public health,
safety and general welfare of the community, and insure conformance of the
subdivision plans with the capital improvements program, comprehensive plan or
major street plan, the City Council may deem these grounds for disapproval of
the subdivision plat.
Section 8. RECORDING OF PLAT.  
   No subdivision plat, resubdivision plat or street dedication within the City
of Sheldon, Iowa, as provided in Chapter 354.9, Code of Iowa, shall be filed
for record with the O Brien County Recorder, or recorded by the County
Recorder, until a final plat of such subdivision, resubdivision, or street
dedication has been reviewed and approved in accordance with the provisions of
this ordinance.
   Furthermore, the City of Sheldon will make recommendation to the O Brien
County Planning and Zoning Commission that no subdivision plat, resubdivision
plat or street dedication located within one (1) mile of the corporate limits
of Sheldon be filed for records with the O Brien County Recorder until the
Sheldon Planning Commission has had an opportunity to review and comment on
such subdivision with regards to compliance of this ordinance.
   Upon approval of the final plat by the City Council of Sheldon, Iowa, it
shall be the duty of the subdivider to immediately file such plat with the O
Brien County Auditor and County Recorder, as required by law. Such approval
shall be revocable after thirty (30) days, unless such plat has been duly
recorded and evidence thereof filed with the City Clerk within such thirty (30)
days.
Section 9. ACREAGE SUBDIVISIONS.  
   Where the parcel of land is subdivided into larger tracts than ordinarily
used for building lots, such parcel shall be divided so as to allow for the
opening of major streets and the ultimate extension of adjacent collector and
local streets.
Section 10. SUBDIVISION CLASSIFICATION.  
   Any proposed subdivision or resubdivision shall be classified as either a
minor subdivision or a major subdivision by the Zoning Administrator. To aid in
this, the proprietor shall submit in written or other appropriate documentation
the principle features of access, relationship and location of existing roads,
proposed water and sanitary sewer systems, public utilities and improvements,
the number and location of the proposed lots and other pertinent data or
information. Any subdivision may be classified as a major subdivision at the
proprietor s request.
Section 11. PLATS OUTSIDE OF THE CORPORATE LIMITS.  
   In accordance with the provisions of Section 354.9 of the Code of Iowa, as
amended, a proprietor or other agent, shall file a copy of all preliminary and
final subdivision plats including minor plats, for the unincorporated areas
within one (1) mile of the City. The City may review and comment on the
proposed subdivision. The City may approve, disapprove, or waive their right to
review all plats within the extraterritorial area defined herein. The plat(s)
shall be filed with the City prior to or at the same time as filing with the
County. Approval by one (1) political entity does not automatically constitute
approval by the others unless the political entities have so agreed. Procedure
for review of the preliminary and final plats of land within one (1) mile of
the corporate limits of Sheldon shall be the same as set out in Section 2 of
Article IV and Section 1 of Article V, except for those properties located
within Sioux County. The City shall submit to the Sioux County Planning and
Zoning Commission the city s recommendations to approve, revise, or reject the
proposed county subdivision. The Sheldon Planning Commission shall submit its
recommendations within thirty (30) days after the referrals of the plat from
the County Engineer or the County Planning and Zoning Commission, or the city s
recommendation shall be deemed as approval of the proposed county subdivision.
   In the case of an extraterritorial subdivision that is annexed into the
corporate boundaries of the city, all improvements required shall be done at
the expense of the subdivision property owners either through direct expense if
the subdivision property owners complete the improvements or through special
assessment if the city may cause the improvements to be made.
ARTICLE II
DEFINITIONS
Section 1. DEFINITIONS.  
   For the purpose of this ordinance, certain terms and words are hereby
defined. Words used in the present tense shall include the future, the singular
number shall include the plural and the plural the singular; the word shall is
mandatory, and the word may is permissive.
   1.1     Access street  A street that is parallel to and adjacent to a major
thoroughfare or highway; and which provides access to abutting properties and
protection from through traffic.
   1.2    Aliquot part  Means a fractional part of a section within the United
States public land survey system. Only the fractional parts one-half, one-
quarter, one-half of one-quarter, or one-quarter of one-quarter shall be
considered an aliquot part of a section.
   1.3    Alley  Shall mean a public right-of-way dedicated to vehicular
traffic, other than a street, being twenty (20) feet or more in width, but not
greater than fifty (50) feet in width, and affording secondary means of access
to abutting property.
   1.4    Auditor s plat  Is a subdivision plat required by either the County
Auditor or Assessor, prepared by a surveyor under the direction of the Auditor
to clarify property descriptions for the purposes of assessment and taxation.
   1.5    Block An area of land within a subdivision that is entirely bounded
by streets, highways, lakes, sloughs, wetlands or marshes, tracts of public
land, or other public rights-of-way, except alleys, and the exterior boundaries
of the subdivision.
   1.6    Building Setback Line  is the line indicating the minimum horizontal
distance permitted between a building or structure and a street right-of-way
line. Such line shall be shown on all lots intended for residential uses, and
on commercial and industrial lots when required by ordinance. Where the
subdivided area is not under zoning control, the Planning Commission shall
require building lines in accordance with the needs of each addition.
   1.7    City Engineer  Any registered professional engineer designated by the
City Council.
   1.8    Commission or Planning Commission  The Sheldon Planning & Zoning
Commission.
   1.9    Comprehensive Plan  Is the general plan for development of the
community adopted and used by the council for the guidance of growth and
improvements of the city and its planning area including modifications or
refinements which may be applied from time to time.
   1.10    Council  The Sheldon City Council.
   1.11    Collector streets  Those streets which carry traffic from minor
streets to the major system of arterial streets and highways, including the
principal entrance streets of residential developments and streets for
circulation within such a development.
   1.12    Cul-de-sac  A short minor street having one end open to vehicular
traffic and the other end being permanently terminated by a vehicular
turnaround.
   1.13    Develop  To erect buildings on or to desire publicly maintained
streets and alleys and\or utility systems upon a parcel of land.
   1.14    Developer  Any person or persons, who develops or makes available to
others, lots within a platted area for the purpose or erecting a building or
buildings.
   1.15    Easement  A grant by the property owner of the use for a specific
purpose, of a strip of land by the general public, a corporation or certain
persons, and within the limits of which the owner of the fee shall not erect
any permanent structures but shall have the right to make any other use of the
land subject to such easement which is not inconsistent with the rights of the
grantee. Public utilities shall have the right to trim or remove trees that
interfere with the use of such easements.
   1.16    Engineer  A registered professional engineer authorized to practice
civil engineering and surveying, as defined by the registration act of the
State of Iowa.
   1.17   "Frontage" The property measured along the street right-of-way line
upon which a lot abuts.
   1.18    Half street  A one-half width street right-of-way on the boundary of
a subdivision dedicated by the subdivider to the city for future development
when another subdivision is platted along the side of the half street.
   1.19    Highway  A major street which carries a large volume of traffic
(usually state/federal routes).
   1.20    Improvements  Pavements, curbs, gutters, sidewalks, water mains,
sanitary sewers, storm sewers, grading, street signs, plantings and other items
for the welfare of the property owners and the public.
   1.21    Lot  A portion of a subdivision or other parcel of land intended for
the purpose, whether immediate or future, of transfer of ownership or for
building development.
   1.22    Lot, comer  A lot at the junction of and fronting on two or more
intersecting streets.
   1.23    Lot of record  A lot which is a part of a plat, a map of which has
been recorded in the office of the Register of Deeds of the County.
   1.24    Lot, through  A lot other than a comer lot having frontage on two
parallel or approximately parallel streets.
   1.25    Major thoroughfare  A street used primarily for fast, large volume
traffic.
   1.26    Metes and Bounds Description  A description of land that uses
distances and angles, uses distances and bearings, or describes the boundaries
of the parcel by reference to the physical features of the land.
   1.27    Minor Plat  A plat replacing a preliminary and final subdivision
plat in the case of minor subdivisions to enable the proprietor to save time
and expense in reaching a general agreement as to the form of the plat.
   1.28    Minor street  A street used primarily to access abutting properties.
   1.29     Owner  The legal entity holding title to the property being
subdivided or such representative or agent as is fully empowered to act on its
behalf.
   1.30    Parcel  A part or tract of land.
   1.31    Performance Bond  A surety bond, cash deposit or an approved letter
of credit made out to the city in an amount equal to the full cost of the
improvements which are required by this ordinance, said cost being estimated by
the city engineer, and said surety bond, cash deposit or letter of credit being
legally sufficient to secure to the city that said improvements will be
constructed in accordance with this ordinance.
   1.32    Planning Area  - The incorporated City of Sheldon and a one-mile
area surrounding in O'Brien and Sioux Counties in all directions.
   1.33    Plat  A map, drawing or chart on which the developer's or subdivider
s plan of the subdivision is presented for approval and which the developer
intends to be recorded in final form.
   1.34    Plat, Final  A finished drawing showing completely and accurately
all legal and engineering information and certification necessary for
recording.
   1.35    Proprietor  Is a person who has a recorded interest in land,
including a person selling or buying land pursuant to contract, but excluding
persons holding mortgage, easement, or lien interest.
   1.36    Proprietor's Plat  A plat as defined herein submitted by the owner
of the land being platted, or his agent, or other private entity, acting with
the consent of the owner.
   1.37    Resubdivision  Any subdivision of land that has previously been
included in a recorded plat. In appropriate context, the term may be used as a
verb referring to the act of preparing a plat of previously subdivided land.
   1.38    Right-of-way  The area measured between property lines, dedicated to
and accepted for public use and providing access to abutting properties.
   1.39    Roadway  That portion of the improved street intended for vehicular
traffic.
   1.40    Street  Is public property, not an alley, intended for vehicular
circulation. In appropriate context, the term "street" may refer to the right-
of-way bounded by the property lines of such public property, or may refer to
the paving installed within such right-of-way.
   1.41    Street, Collector  A street which carries traffic from a local
street to a major street and is so designated on the major street plan for the
planning area.
   1.42    Street, Dead End  A short street having one end open to vehicular
traffic and the other end terminated but not with a vehicular turnaround.
   1.43    Street, Local  A street which is used primarily for access to
abutting properties.
   1.44    Street, Major  A street of considerable continuity connecting
various sections of the city, and is so designated on the major street plan for
the planning area.
   1.45    Subdivider  Any person undertaking the subdivision or resubdivision
of a tract or parcel of land for the purpose of laying out a platted addition
or subdivision of land.
   1.46    Subdivision  The division of any parcel or tract of land, by either
repeated divisions or simultaneous division, into three (3) or more lots or
other divisions of land for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of
transfer of ownership or building development. A subdivision plat is not
required when land is divided by conveyance to a governmental agency for public
improvements. The term, when appropriate to the context, relates to the process
of subdividing or to the land subdivided, or the resubdivision of land
heretofore divided or platted into lots or other divisions of land; or, if a
new street is involved, any division of land; and as further defined in Chapter
354, Code of Iowa.
   1.47    Subdivision, Major  - Any subdivision other than a minor
subdivision.
   1.48    Subdivision, Minor  Any subdivision that creates not more than three
(3) parcels fronting an existing road, not involving any new road or street or
the extension of municipal facilities or the creation of any improvements or
the dedication of lands to the city, and not adversely affecting the remainder
of the parcel or adjoining property and not in conflict with any provision of
the Comprehensive Plan, Zoning Ordinance, or this ordinance may be classified
as a minor subdivision and must meet the appropriate provisions of this
ordinance.
   1.49    Subdivision Plat  Is a graphical representation of the subdivision
of land, prepared by a registered land surveyor, having a number or letter
designation for each lot within the plat and a succinct name or title that is
unique for the city where the land is located.
   1.50    Surveyor  A registered land surveyor, who engages in the practice of
land surveying pursuant to Chapter 114 of the Code of Iowa, authorized to
practice surveying as defined by the registration act of the State of Iowa.
   1.51    Tract  Means an aliquot part of a section, a lot within an official
plat, or a government lot.
   1.52    Utilities  Systems for the distribution or collection of water, gas,
electricity, wastewater, storm water, and telecommunications.
ARTICLE III
MINOR SUBDIVISION PROCEDURES AND REQUIREMENTS
   In lieu of a Major Subdivision (Preliminary and Final Plats), a land owner,
developer, subdivider or proprietor may be allowed to utilize a Minor
Subdivision procedure provided the request conforms to the definition contained
herein and the classification process outlined in Article I, Section 10. Minor
platting procedures are as follows:
Section 1. MINOR PLAT REQUIREMENTS. 
   The proprietor shall prepare the proposed minor subdivision plat and shall
furnish to the City Clerk all plans and information, including three (3) copies
of the final plat conforming in detail to the requirements set forth in this
ordinance. The minor plat submitted shall contain the names and addresses of
persons within a 200 feet radius of the proposed subdivision to who notice of
hearing will be sent. No plat shall be considered or acted upon by the City
Council without affording a hearing thereon, notice of the time and place of
which shall be sent by mail to such addresses not less than ten (10) days
before the date fixed therefore.
   Said plat shall contain such information as required by this ordinance,
specifically the requirements in Sections 2 and 3 of Article V, or as may be
specified by the Code of Iowa or the Zoning Administrator.
Section 2. REVIEW BY AGENCIES. 
   The City Clerk shall place the plat on the upcoming City Council meeting
agenda and immediately thereafter forward copies of the submitted plat to the
Mayor and City Council members, City Engineer, Building Inspector, City
Attorney and to such other agencies or persons as may be deemed appropriate and
necessary. By the first of the following month, the following reviews shall be
completed:
   2.1   The City Engineer shall notify the City Clerk that access onto the
city street can, or cannot, be provided and that other required public
improvements are, or are not, present.
   2.2   The City Engineer and/or the Public Works personnel shall notify the
City Clerk that the land so proposed to be subdivided will comply with all
applicable Sheldon, O Brien County, and State of Iowa standards, and that the
proposed or existing system of public improvements complies with applicable
Sheldon, O Brien County, and State of Iowa standards.
   2.3   Other agencies or persons shall inform the City Clerk on factors
deemed appropriate and necessary.
Section 3. PROCEDURES FOR MINOR SUBDIVISION. 
   3.1   Within twenty (20) working days following the date of receipt of an
application, or such additional period as the proprietor may authorize, the
Zoning Administrator may schedule a public hearing on the subdivision request
with the City Council. The City Council shall act upon the Minor Plat not more
than sixty (60) days after the initial receipt by the City Clerk.
   3.2   The City Council may approve or disapprove of the subdivision request,
or they may refer the request to the Planning and Zoning Commission for their
recommendation prior to considering the minor plat. If approved by the council,
the minor plat shall be certified by resolution. In the event that a minor
subdivision plat is not approved, the City Council shall state in writing how
the proposed plat is objectionable. The applicant has the right to appeal, to
district court, the failure of the council to issue final approval of the minor
plat as provided in this ordinance.
   2.3   The passage of a resolution by the City Council accepting the plat
shall constitute final approval for the area shown on the minor plat. The
proprietor shall cause such plat to be recorded as required by Chapter 354,
Code of Iowa, before the county shall recognize the plat as being in full force
and effect. The proprietor shall record the plat within sixty (60) days after
City Council approval and shall be responsible for all recording costs. In
addition, one (1) copy of the approved Minor Plat and adopting resolution as
well as the completed plat proceedings with any restrictive covenants shall be
submitted to the Zoning Administrator by the proprietor.
   3.4   This section shall not be applicable to a parcel of land of any size
which has previously had a subdivision severed from it. For definition purposes
of this section only, a parcel of land shall mean any sized contiguous piece of
property under same ownership as shown on the O Brien or Sioux County Auditor s
plat books as on the effective date of this ordinance.
ARTICLE IV
PRELIMINARY PLAT PROCEDURES & REQUIREMENTS
(Major Subdivision)
Section 1. PRE-APPLICATION.  
   Prior to the subdivision of any land the subdivider or his agent should
discuss informally with the Planning Commission the property proposed for
subdivision, with reference to these subdivision regulations and procedures,
zoning regulations and controls, and the city s comprehensive plan and other
related planning documents.
Section 2. PROCEDURE FOR PRELIMINARY PLAT APPROVAL. 
   In obtaining approval of a proposed subdivision and/or development by the
Planning Commission and City Council, the subdivider shall submit a preliminary
plat in accordance with the requirements hereinafter set forth and install
required improvements thereon.
   2.1   The subdivider shall first prepare and file with the city, three (3)
copies of a preliminary plat conforming in detail to the requirements set forth
in this ordinance, and upon filing, the zoning administrator shall forthwith
refer one (1) copy of the preliminary plat to the City Engineer and two (2)
copies to the commission.
   2.2   The City Engineer shall carefully examine the preliminary plat as to
its compliance with the laws and ordinances of the city, the existing street
system and good engineering practices, and shall, as soon as possible, submit
the findings to the Planning Commission.
   2.3   The commission, After receiving the City Engineer s report and
following review of the preliminary plat and other material submitted for
conformity thereof to these regulations, may confer with the subdivider on
changes deemed advisable and the kind and extent of such improvements to be
made. The commission shall, approve or reject the preliminary plat as
originally submitted or modified within forty-five (45) days after the date the
commission reviews the preliminary plat. If the commission does not act within
forty-five (45) days, the preliminary plat shall be deemed to be approved,
provided however, that the subdivider may agree to an extension of the time for
a period not to exceed sixty (60) days.
   2.4   If approved, the Planning Commission shall express its approval. If
disapproved, the Planning Commission shall express its disapproval and its
reasons therefore. The action of the Planning Commission shall be forwarded to
City Council.
   2.5   The City Council, upon receipt of the commission's recommendation, and
within sixty (60) days, or an extension thereof, shall by resolution grant
approval or reject the preliminary plat. If the preliminary plat is rejected,
the council shall advise the owner or developer of any changes that are desired
or should have consideration before approval will be given. Approval of the
preliminary plat by the council shall constitute approval to proceed with the
preparation of the final plat but shall not be deemed approval of the
subdivision.
   2.6   The City Council and the Planning Commission may request such
professional assistance as it deems necessary to properly evaluate the plats as
submitted
   2.7   Upon approval of the preliminary plat by the City Council, the
subdivider may proceed with the preparation of the final plat and detailed
construction drawings and specifications for the improvements required under
these regulations.
Section 3. REQUIREMENTS OF PRELIMINARY PLAT.  
   The preliminary plat of a subdivision is not intended to serve as a record
plat. Its purpose is to show, on a map, all facts needed to enable the
commission to determine whether the proposed layout of the land in question is
satisfactory from the standpoint of the public interest. The subdivider, or his
representative, may call at the city offices in advance of the preliminary plat
in order to discuss the proposed subdivision and in order to obtain information
as to the requirements necessary for approval of the plat.
   The preliminary plat shall be clearly marked Preliminary Plat and shall
show, or have attached thereto, the following:
   3.1   GENERAL. Title, scale, north point, date and official legal
description of the property being platted. The scale of the preliminary plat
shall not be more than one hundred (100) feet to one (1) inch (100 = 1 ). A
scale of other than one hundred (100) feet to one (1) inch may be used if prior
approval is obtained from the commission. The sheet size shall not exceed
twenty-four inches by thirty-six inches (24 x 36 ). Where more than one sheet
is required, the sheets shall show the number of the sheet and the total number
of sheets in the plat, and match lines indicating where other sheets adjoin.
The subdivider shall prepare and file with the zoning administrator three
copies of a preliminary plat.
   3.2   NAME. Proposed name of the subdivision that shall not duplicate or
resemble existing subdivision names in the City of Sheldon.
   3.3    OWNER. The name and address of the owner and the name, address, and
profession of the person preparing the plan.
   3.4   KEY MAP. A key map showing the general location of the proposed
subdivision in relation to surrounding developments.
   3.5   NEIGHBORS. The names and locations of adjacent subdivisions and the
names of owners and location of adjoining parcels of unplatted land. A list of
all owners of record of property and residents located within two hundred (200)
feet of the subdivision boundary shall be attached. A vicinity sketch at a
legible scale showing the relationship of the plat to its general surroundings.
   3.6   BOUNDARIES. Boundary lines, showing dimensions, bearing, angles and
references to section, townships and range lines or corners shall be indicated
by a heavy line.
   3.7   CONTOUR. Show contours at vertical intervals of not more than two (2)
feet if the general slope of the site is less than ten (10) percent and at
vertical intervals of not more than five (5) feet if the general slope is ten
(10) percent or greater, upon request of the zoning administrator or Planning
Commission.
   3.8   STREETS. Present and/or proposed names and locations of highways,
streets, alleys and sidewalks, with their rights-of-way, dedicated widths,
types and widths of surfaces and curbs.
   3.9   LOTS. Present and/or proposed layout of lots, showing the numbers,
dimensions, building setback lines, radii, chords and the square feet area of
lots that are irregular shaped.
   3.10   PUBLIC USE. Parcels of land proposed to be dedicated or reserved for
schools, parks, playgrounds, or other public, semi-public, or community
purposes, or shown for such purpose in the comprehensive plan or other adopted
plans.
   3.11   EASEMENTS. Present and/or proposed easements, showing location,
widths, purposes and limitations.
   3.12   UTILITIES. Present and/or proposed utility systems, including
sanitary and storm sewers, other drainage facilities, water lines, gas mains,
electric utilities, street lighting and telecommunication utilities, and other
facilities with the size, capacity and location of each.
   3.13   ZONING. Existing and proposed zoning classifications of the site and
adjoining property.
   3.14   FEE. The platting fee, as required by this ordinance.
   3.15   Any other pertinent information, as necessary.
   3.16   ACCOMPANYING MATERIAL
      a.    An attorney s opinion in duplicate showing that the fee title to
the subdivision land is in the owner's name as shown on the plat and showing
any encumbrances that may exist against said land.
      b.   A general summary description of any protective covenants or private
restrictions to be incorporated in the final plat.
      c.   Written statement by the appropriate officials of the availability
of gas and electricity to the proposed subdivision.
      d.   Written and signed statements explaining how and when the subdivider
proposes to provide and install all required improvements required by this
ordinance. Such statement shall acknowledge required inspections and approvals
by the City Council.
   Upon conditional approval of the preliminary plat, the owner of a new
subdivision or resubdivision shall not be permitted to sell any lots therein or
develop thereon until a final plat has been approved by the council and
officially recorded in the office of the County Recorder.
ARTICLE V
FINAL PLAT PROCEDURES & REQUIREMENTS
(Minor & Major Subdivision)
Section 1. PROCEDURE FOR FINAL PLAT APPROVAL.  
   In obtaining final approval of a proposed subdivision by City Council, the
subdivider shall submit a final plat in accordance with the requirements herein
set forth and install required improvements thereon.
   1.1   The final plat shall conform substantially to the preliminary plat as
approved; and, if desired by the subdivider it may constitute only that portion
of the approved preliminary plat which the subdivider proposes to record and
develop at the time, provided however that such portion conforms to all
requirements of this ordinance. The approval of the preliminary plat by the
council shall be null and void unless the final plat is presented to the City
Council within twelve (12) months after the date of approval of said
preliminary plat unless a time extension is applied for and granted by the
Planning Commission.
   1.2   Before submitting the final plat to the Planning Commission for
approval, the subdivider shall furnish to the city all plans and information,
including three (3) copies of the final plat conforming in detail to the
requirements set forth in this ordinance. The final plat submitted to the
Planning Commission shall contain the names and addresses of persons within 200
feet of the proposed subdivision to who notice of hearing will be sent. No plat
shall be considered by the Planning Commission or acted upon by the City
Council without affording a hearing thereon, notice of the time and place of
which shall be sent by mail to such addresses not less than ten (10) days
before the date fixed therefore.
   1.3   The Planning Commission shall then consider the final plat according
to the procedures set out for preliminary plats in Article IV, Section 2. If
the final plat is approved, the Planning Commission shall forward its
recommendation of approval to the City Council, together with a certified copy
of their resolution showing action of the Planning Commission.
   1.4   The City Council, within sixty (60) days after receiving the final
plat from the Planning Commission, shall determine whether the subdivision
conforms to the comprehensive plan and shall give consideration to the possible
burden of public improvements and to a balance of interest between the
proprietor, future purchasers, the public interest in the subdivision when
reviewing the proposed subdivision and when requiring the installation of
public improvements in conjunction with the approval of the subdivision. If the
final plat is found acceptable and in accordance with this ordinance, the City
Council shall accept the same. If said plat is disapproved by the City Council,
such disapproval shall be expressed in writing and point out the objections to
the plat as filed.
   1.5   The passage of a resolution by the City Council accepting the plat
shall constitute final approval of the platting of the area shown on the final
plat. The subdivider or owner shall cause such plat and a certified resolution
to be recorded in the office of the County Recorder of O Brien County, Iowa, as
provided in Chapter 354, Code of Iowa, and amendatory acts thereto and shall
file satisfactory evidence of such recording in office of the City Clerk before
the city shall recognize the plat as being in full force and effect.
   1.6   Final acceptance for recording purposes shall not constitute final
acceptance by the city of any improvements to be constructed. Improvements will
be accepted only after their construction has been completed, and no public
funds will be expended in the subdivision until such improvements have been
completed and accepted by the council.
Section 2. REQUIREMENTS OF FINAL PLAT. 
   Except for a final plat for a minor subdivision as set forth herein, no
final plat shall be considered by the governing body until and unless a
preliminary plat for the area included in the proposed final plat has been
approved and has not expired and become void as set forth in Section 1above.
The final plat shall be clearly marked final plat and shall show the following:
   2.1   GENERAL. The final plat shall be drawn at a scale of not more than
forty (40 ) feet to one (1 ) inch (40 = 1 ). A scale other than forty (40 )
feet to one (1 ) inch may be used if prior approval is obtained from the
Planning Commission. The sheet size shall not exceed twenty-four by thirty-six
inches (24 x36 ) or smaller than eight and one-half inches by eleven inches (8
x11 ) and shall be of a size acceptable to the County Recorder. Where more than
one sheet is required, the sheets shall show the number of the sheet and the
total number of sheets in the plat, and match lines indicating where other
sheets adjoin.
   2.2   TITLE OF SUBDIVISION. The title or name under which the subdivision is
to be recorded,
   2.3   OWNER. The name and address of the owner of the fee title to the real
estate contained within the subdivision, and the name, address, and profession
of the person preparing the plan.
   2.4   SCALE. A scale, a graphic bar scale, north arrow, and date on each
sheet.
   2.5   BENCHMARKS AND SURVEY MONUMENTS. Location, type, materials and size of
all monuments and markers including all United States, Iowa, County or other
official benchmarks, as required by Chapter 114A, Code of Iowa.
   2.6   SURVEY DATA. The linear dimensions in feet and decimals of a foot of
the subdivision boundary, lot lines, streets and alleys, and street center
lines. These should be exact and complete to include all distances, radii,
arches, chords, points of tangency and central angles. All distance, bearing,
curve notes for all curves includes in the plat, and other survey data, as
required by Chapter 114A, Code of Iowa.
   2.7   ADJOINING PROPERTIES. All adjoining properties shall be identified,
and where such adjoining properties are a part of a recorded subdivision, the
name of that subdivision shall be shown. If the subdivision platted is a
resubdivision of a part or the whole of a previously recorded subdivision,
sufficient ties shall be shown to controlling lines appearing on the earlier
plat to permit an overlay to be made. Resubdivision shall be labeled as such in
a subtitle following the name of the subdivision wherever the name appears on
the plat.
   2.8   BLOCK AND LOT NUMBERS. Lot numbers and dimensions.
   2.9   STREETS. Street names and clear designations of public alleys. Streets
that are continuations of present streets should bear the same name. If names
are required they should be distinctive and not unnecessarily similar to
existing street names. Street names may be required to conform to the city plan
or by council's direction. Street right-of-way lines with accurate dimensions
in feet and hundredths of feet. Plan and profiles of all streets and alleys at
a fifty (50) foot horizontal scale and five (5) foot vertical scale. Profiles
shall show location, size, and grade of all conduits, sewers, pipelines, etc.
to be placed under the streets and alleys. Profiles of east and west streets
shall be drawn so that the west end of the profile shall be at the left side of
the drawing. Profiles of north and south streets shall be drawn so that the
south end profile shall be at the left side of the drawing.
   2.10   PUBLIC LAND. Accurate dimensions for any property to be dedicated or
reserved for public use, and the purpose for which such property is dedicated
or reserved for public use.
   2.11   EASEMENTS. Any easement shown on the plat shall depict accurate
locations and descriptions of easements for utilities and any limitations on
such easements, and be confined to only those easements pertaining to public
utilities including gas, power, telephone, cable television, water, sewer;
easements for trails, bikeways, ingress and egress; and such drainage easements
as are deemed necessary for the orderly development of the land encompassed
within the plat.
   2.12   ERROR. The minimum unadjusted acceptable error of closure for all
subdivision boundaries shall be 1 foot in ten thousand (10,000) feet and shall
be 1 foot in five thousand (5,000) feet for any individual lot. Accurate
boundary lines, with dimensions to the nearest one-hundredth foot and angles,
which provide a survey of the tract.
   2.13   SURVEYOR S CERTIFICATE. A statement or certification by a registered
land surveyor of the State of Iowa that the plat was prepared by the surveyor
or under the surveyor's direct personal supervision, signed and dated by the
surveyor and bearing the surveyor s Iowa registration number or seal, and a
sealed certification of the accuracy of the plat by the registered land
surveyor who drew the plat.
Section 3. FINAL PLAT ATTACHMENTS.  
   The final plat shall have the following attached when presented to the clerk
for filling:
   3.1   DESCRIPTION. A correct legal description or metes and bounds
description of the subdivided land.
   3.2   ABSTRACT OF TITLE. A complete abstract of title and the opinion of a
practicing attorney showing that the fee title to the subdivision land is free
from encumbrances other than those secured by an encumbrance bond.
   3.3   OWNER CERTIFICATE. A certificate by the owner and his or her spouse,
if any, that the subdivision is platted with free consent, and is in accordance
with the desire of the owner and spouse. This certificate must be signed and
acknowledged by the owner and spouse before some officer authorized to take the
acknowledgments of deeds.
   3.4   COUNTY TREASURER CERTIFICATE. A certificate from the County Treasurer
that the subdivision land is free from unpaid taxes. Certificate to be signed
at time of plat recording.
   3.5   COUNTY RECORDER CERTIFICATE. A certificate from the County Recorder
that the title is free from all encumbrances other than those secured by an
encumbrance bond. Certificate to be signed at time of plat recording.
   3.6   COURT CERTIFICATE. A certificate from the Clerk of District Court that
the subdivision land is free from all judgments, attachments, or mechanics or
other liens of record. Certificate to be signed at time of plat recording.
   3.7   CERTIFICATE OF DEDICATION. A certificate of dedication to the city,
properly executed, for all streets intended as public streets, and for any
other property intended for public use, except for areas outside the corporate
limits.
   3.8   DRAINAGE PLANS. Drainage plans for the removal of storm water shall
require that storm water drainage can not exceed pre-development flow rates.
Grading shall be designed so that all surface water shall be conducted to a
street storm sewer or to a natural water course. No water course shall be
altered so as to divert surface drainage from one watershed to another. No
obstruction shall be permitted in natural water courses, unless such
obstruction meets with the approval of the council.
   3.9   ENGINEER S CERTIFICATE OF SATISFACTORY IMPROVEMENTS. An engineer s
certificate submitted on behalf of the owner or developer stating that all
required improvements required by this ordinance have been satisfactorily
completed in accordance with the construction plans as approved and in
substantial compliance with the approved preliminary plat. Prior to such
certification, as built plans and specifications of street improvements and
utilities showing location, size, and grade for all improvements shall have
been provided to the city engineer. In lieu thereof, the city may certify that
a performance bond guaranteeing completion has been approved by the city
attorney and filed with the city, or that the governing body has agreed that
the city will provide the necessary improvements and installations and assess
the costs against the subdivider of future property owners in the subdivision.
   3.10   RESOLUTION ACCEPTING IMPROVEMENTS. Where improvements have been
installed, the City Council may by resolution accept streets, easements, other
public lands, sanitary sewerage facilities and other improvements after receipt
of a written notice of a satisfactory final inspection and the posting of a
maintenance guarantee by the subdivider.
   3.11   FEE. The applicable fee, if any.
ARTICLE VI
DESIGN STANDARDS
Section 1. GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.  
   The following design standards shall be followed by all developers in
subdividing or resubdividing land. The standards and details of design herein
contained are intended only as minimum requirements so that the general
arrangement and layout of a subdivision may be adjusted to a wide variety of
circumstances. However, in the design and development of a plat, the subdivider
shall use standards consistent with the site conditions so as to assure an
economical, pleasant, and durable neighborhood.
Section 2. STREETS.
   2.1   All proposed plats and subdivisions shall conform to the Sheldon
Comprehensive Plan, and shall also conform to additional proposed street plans
as set out by the city. The arrangement, character, extent, width, grade and
location of all streets shall be considered in their relation to existing and
planned streets, to topographic conditions, to public convenience and safety.
   2.2   If any overall plan has been made by the Planning Commission for the
neighborhood in which the proposed subdivision is located, the street system of
the subdivision shall conform in general with the overall plan or street plan.
   2.3   The arrangement of streets in a subdivision shall either provide for
the continuation or appropriate projection of existing principal streets
(constructed or recorded) in surrounding areas, or conform to an approved
preliminary or neighborhood plan unless variations are recommended by the
Planning Commission to meet a particular situation where topographical or other
conditions make continuance or conformance to existing streets impracticable.
   2.4   Off-center street intersections will not be approved except in unusual
cases.
   2.5   Where the plat submitted covers only a part of the developer's plat,
the Planning Commission may require a sketch of the prospective future street
system in which the street system of the part submitted shall be considered in
the light of adjustments in connection with the street system of the part not
submitted.
   2.6   Subdivisions showing unplatted reserve strips or private streets
controlling access to public ways are prohibited, except where control of such
strips is placed with the city.
   2.7   Street intersections shall be laid out so as to intersect as nearly as
possible at right angles and no intersection shall be at an angle less than
sixty degrees (60 ). The intersection right-of-way lines at all streets
intersections shall be rounded by a minimum radius of twenty (20) feet, unless
a greater radius is required by the City Council. Detailed designs of
intersections may be required.
   2.8   Cul-de-sac streets are permitted where topography and other conditions
justify their use. Such streets shall not be longer than six hundred (600)
feet. Cul-de-sacs shall be provided at the closed end with a turnaround having
a street property line diameter of at least one hundred thirty (130) feet in
the case of residential subdivisions. The right-of-way width of the street
leading to the turnaround shall be a minimum of sixty (60) feet. The property
line(s) at the intersection of the turnaround and the lead-in portion of the
street shall be rounded at a radius of not less than one hundred fifty (150)
feet; or equal straight approach lines.
   2.9   When connecting street lines deflect from each other at any one point
by more than ten degrees (10 ), they shall be connected by a curve with a
radius adequate to insure sight distance of not less than two hundred (200)
feet.
   2.10   All newly platted streets shall be named in a manner conforming to
the prevailing street naming system. Streets that are in alignment with others
already existing, or with a street that may logically be extended although the
various portions may be at a considerable distance from each other, shall bear
the name of the existing streets. The proposed names of new streets shall not
duplicate or sound similar to existing street names. Street names shall be
subject to the approval of the City Council.
   2.11   The street pattern shall provide ease of circulation within the
subdivision as well as convenient access to adjoining streets, thoroughfares,
or unsubdivided land as may be required by the commission. In a case where a
street will eventually be extended beyond the plat, but is temporarily dead-
ended, an interim turnaround may be required.
   2.12   Streets and alleys shall be completed to grades that have been
officially determined or approved by the City Council. All streets shall be
graded to the full width of the right-of-way and adjacent side slopes graded to
blend with the natural ground level. The maximum grade shall not exceed six (6)
percent for main and secondary thoroughfares or ten (10) percent for minor or
local service streets. The grade alignment and resultant visibility, especially
at intersections, shall be worked out in detail to meet the approval of the
city.
   2.13   In general, streets shall be platted with appropriate regard for
topography, creeks, wooded areas, and other natural features that would lend
themselves to attractive treatment.
   2.14   Dedication of half streets will be discouraged. Where there exists a
dedicated or platted half street or alley adjacent to the tract to be
subdivided, it shall not be less than thirty (30) feet in width and whenever
subdivided property adjoins a half street, the remainder of the street shall be
dedicated.
   2.15   Where a new subdivision, except where justified by limiting
conditions, involves frontage on a heavy traffic way, the street layout shall
provide motor access to such frontage by one of the following means:
      a)    A parallel street, supplying frontage for lots backing onto the
trafficway.
      b)    A series of cul-de-sacs or short loops entered from and planned at
right angles to such a parallel street, with their terminal lots backing onto
the highway.
      c)   An access drive separated by a planting strip from the highway to
which a motor access from the drive is provided at points suitably spaced.
      d)   A service drive or alley at the rear of the lots. Where any one of
the above mentioned arrangements is used, deed covenants or other means shall
prevent any private residential driveways from having direct access to the
trafficway.
   2.16    A deed to the city shall be given for all streets before the same
will be accepted for city maintenance.
   2.17   Minimum rights-of-way and roadway widths shall be provided in
accordance with the Iowa Department of Transportation s SUDAS (Iowa Statewide
Urban Design Standards for Public Improvements) manual, and in accordance with
the street widths as defined by the City of Sheldon along with input from the
City Engineer.
   2.18   Other Considerations.
      a)   The street and alley layout shall provide access to all lots and
parcels of land within the subdivision.
      b)   Street jogs with centerline offsets of less than 150 feet shall be
avoided.
      c)   No dead-end streets or alleys will be permitted except at
subdivision boundaries or unless such streets are provided to connect with
future streets in adjacent land and are dedicated to the city.
      d)    Thoroughfare and collector streets in a subdivision shall extend
through to the boundaries thereof, unless a terminal point within the
subdivision is otherwise approved.
      e)   Intersection of more than two streets at a point shall not be
permitted.
Section 3. ALLEYS.
   Alleys may be required in business areas and industrial districts and except
where justified by unusual conditions alleys will not be approved in
residential districts.
   3.1   Alleys shall be provided in commercial and industrial districts,
except that the council may waive this requirement where other definite and
assured provision has been made for service access, such as off-street loading,
unloading and parking consistent with and adequate for the uses proposed.
   3.2   The minimum right-of-way width of any alley shall be twenty (20) feet.
A ten- foot cutoff shall be made at all acute and right angle alley
intersections.
   3.3   Dead end alleys shall be prohibited.
Section 4. EASEMENTS.
   4.1   Easements across lots or centered on rear or side lot lines of all
lots shall be provided for public and private utilities where necessary and
shall be at least ten (10) feet wide.
   4.2   Easements of greater width may be required for trunk lines, pressure
lines, open drainage courses or high voltage lines and shall be provided as
determined by the utility or City Council.
   4.3   Utility easements shall convey to the city, its successors and
assigns, the perpetual right within the areas shown on the plat and described
in the easement, to construct, reconstruct, operate and maintain electric lines
consisting of wires, cables, fiber optic lines, conduits, fixtures, anchors and
other similar equipment, including the right to trim or remove trees within
such areas where necessary to secure a clearance of four (4) feet from the
wires or poles, together with the right to extend to any telephone,
telecommunications, electric or power company, the right to use separately or
jointly with the city, areas included in the easement for the purposes stated
above.
   4.4    Whenever any stream or important surface water course is located in
an area that is being subdivided, the subdivider shall, at their own expense,
make adequate provision for widening the channel so that it will properly carry
the surface water, and shall provide and dedicate to the city an easement along
each side of the stream, which easement shall be for the purpose of widening,
improving, or protecting the stream and for future drainage purposes or
installation of public utilities. The waterway easement shall be adequate to
provide for these purposes, and said easement shall be a minimum of twenty (20)
feet on each side plus stream design width and a total width adequate to
provide any necessary channel straightening or relocation.
Section 5. BLOCKS.
   5.1   No block may be more than one thousand two hundred (1,200) feet or
less than three hundred (300) feet in length between the centerline of
intersecting streets, except as the City Council considers necessary to secure
efficient use of land or to achieve desired features of the street system.
   5.2   At street intersections, block corners shall be rounded with a radius
of not less than twenty (20) feet; unless at any one intersection a curve
radius has been previously established, then such radius shall be used as
standard.
   5.3   In blocks over seven hundred (700) feet in length, the city may
require at or near the middle of the block a public way or easement of not less
than twenty (20) feet, nor more than forty-five (45) feet in width for use as
an easement for public utilities.
   5.4   Residential blocks shall be deep enough to provide two (2) tiers of
lots of at least minimum depth, except where prevented by topographical
conditions or size of the property, in which case the Planning Commission may
recommend a single tier of lots of at least minimum depth to the City Council.
Section 6. LOTS.
   Generally, the lot arrangement and design shall be such that all lots will
provide satisfactory and desirable building sites properly related to
topography drainage, sanitation and the character of adjacent development.
   6.1   Minimum lot dimensions and sizes shall conform to the zoning
ordinance, unless the City Council, for special reasons including absence of
utilities, approves otherwise.
   6.2   No lot shall be more than four (4) times as deep as it is wide, nor
shall any lot average less than one hundred (100) feet deep.
   6.3   Each lot within a subdivision shall front on a publicly dedicated
street.
   6.4   Each lot shall be provided with no less than seventy (70) feet of
frontage to a street.
   6.5   Corner lots shall be not less than twenty (20) feet greater in width
than the minimum required interior lot width, so as to permit adequate building
setbacks on both front and side streets.
   6.7   Double frontage or through lots, other than corner lots, shall be
avoided except where it is essential to provide separation of residential
development from traffic arteries or to overcome specific disadvantages of
topography. The front and rear of double frontage lots shall be identified on
the plat along with building setback lines established on both frontages, and
no access will be allowed from the rear yard street.
   6.8   Building setback lines shall be shown on all lots intended for
residential, commercial and industrial uses. Such building lines shall not be
less than the requirements of the applicable district in the zoning ordinance.
Section 7. PLAT MARKERS OR MONUMENTS.
   7.1   Permanent plat markers or monuments shall be placed at all boundary
and block corners, angle points, points of curves in streets, lot corners and
all such intermediate points with a metal pin or pipe monuments three-fourths
( ) inch in diameter and twenty-four (24) inches long or suitable concrete
markers shall be driven flush with the finished grade as plat markers.
   7.2   A permanent bench mark shall be accessibly placed within the
subdivision, the elevation of which shall be referred to the U.S.G.S. datum and
accurately noted on the subdivision plat.
   7.3   Developer shall provide the city with GPS (Global Positioning System)
coordinates on all permanent plat or monument markers.
ARTICLE VII
GENERAL IMPROVEMENTS
Section 1. FIRE HYDRANTS.  
   Fire hydrants shall be placed so that no lot in a residential subdivision is
more than three hundred (300) feet from a fire hydrant, the distance to be
measured along street lines, provided water mains are available. The City
Council may require special spacing in commercial and industrial districts.
Section 2. NATURAL PLANTINGS.
   Trees and shrubs may be planted within the street right-of-way or utility or
drainage easements, where approved by the City Council. Plantings and fences at
intersections shall be so located as to maintain adequate sight distance
according to regulations identified in the Sheldon Zoning Ordinance. A screen
planting, extending the width of the property and not less than ten (10) feet
in width, prohibiting vehicular access may be required at the rear of all
double frontage lots and along expressways, freeways and major streets. A
planting plan of shrubs and trees for such screen planting shall be submitted
for approval with the plat.
Section 3. SUITABILITY OF THE LAND.
   No land shall be subdivided for residential purposes that is found to be
unsuitable for subdividing by reason of flooding, ponding, poor drainage,
adverse soil conditions, adverse geological formations, unsatisfactory
topography or other features likely to be harmful to the health, safety or
general welfare unless such suitable conditions are corrected to the
satisfaction of the city.
   3.1   If a subdivision is found to be unsuitable for any of the reasons
cited in this section the Planning and Zoning Commission or City Council shall
state its reasons in writing and afford the proprietor an opportunity to
present data regarding such unsuitability. Thereafter, the Planning and Zoning
Commission or City Council may re-affirm, modify or withdraw its determination
of unsuitability.
   3.2   All lots located within a floodplain shall contain adequate area above
the elevation of flooding for essential and planned installations. All land in
a subdivision that lies in a floodplain shall be:
   Shown on the individual lots in the preliminary plat, and
   Encouraged to remain as open space for use by all the lots in the
subdivision
   Shall comply with the Sheldon Zoning Ordinance or any other specific Flood
Plain Ordinance of the city
   3.3   Subdivisions (including mobile home parks) shall be consistent with
the need to minimize flood damages and shall have adequate drainage provided to
reduce exposure to flood damage. Development associated with subdivision
proposals shall meet the applicable performance standards.
Section 4. ADDITIONAL IMPROVEMENTS AND INSPECTION.
   4.1   The City Council may require the installation of recommended
improvements other than those set out in this section, constructed in
accordance with standards and specifications as approved and adopted by each
group. All other related subdivision improvements shall also be constructed in
accordance with the standards and specifications of the State of Iowa, where
applicable.
   4.2   Inspection shall be required for sanitary sewer systems, storm sewers,
curbs, gutters, subgrade, pavement and sidewalks and other improvements as
required. The City Council shall designate an appropriate official to be
responsible for the inspections. The subdivider shall notify the designated
inspector one week prior to the start of the construction, and upon completion
of the improvements the subdivider shall notify the inspector in writing.
   4.3   The subdivider shall be responsible for the installation and
construction of all improvements required by this ordinance, and shall warrant
the design, material and workmanship of such improvements, installation and/or
construction for a period of two (2) years from and after completion. Such
warrant shall be by bond or other acceptable collateral; shall be subject to
review by the city attorney; shall specifically assure the expedient repair or
replacement of defective improvements under warranty; and shall indemnify the
city from any and all costs or losses resulting from, contributed to, etc.,
such defective improvements.
   4.4   Before the City Council approves the final plat, all of the foregoing
improvements shall be constructed and accepted by formal resolution of the
council. Before passage of said resolution of acceptance, the zoning
administrator and/or City Engineer shall report that said improvements meet
city specifications and ordinances or other requirements and agreements between
the subdivider and the city.
Section 5. GUARANTEE. 
   The subdivider shall post one of the following guarantees identified below
with the City of Sheldon, ensuring said improvements will be constructed within
a period of two (2) years from final acceptance of the plat; Improvements will
be accepted only after their construction has been completed and no public
funds will be expended in the subdivision until such improvements have been
completed and accepted by the City of Sheldon.
   5.1   Performance Bond. The subdivider shall post with the City Council a
bond equal to the council s approved estimate of the cost of construction, in
favor of the City Council, guaranteeing satisfactory completion of all
improvements whether within the city or planning area, in a period not
exceeding two (2) years from the date of the bond. This bond is to be furnished
by a reputable bonding company maintaining an office in the State of Iowa. If a
performance bond is posted, such bond shall be subject to review by the City
Attorney prior to acceptance; and shall indemnify the City of Sheldon from any
and all costs or losses of the development and construction. However, if a
performance bond is posted, final acceptance of the plat will not constitute
final acceptance by the city of any improvements to be constructed.
   5.2   Cash Bond. The subdivider shall deposit in cash with the City Council
an amount equal to the council s approved estimate of the cost of construction
of all improvements. Progress payments may be made to the subdivider or the
contractor, as work progresses on the written order of the city.
   5.3   Special Assessments. In the case of partially dedicated streets,
streets not wholly within the proposed subdivision or streets where other
adjacent properly owners are involved, the subdivider may petition the City
Council to have the necessary improvements constructed and assessments levied
against the property.
   The council may waive the requirements for the construction and installation
of some or all of the improvements in cases of dedications of land or rights-
of-way to public use where such dedication is in excess of the needs of the
subdivision and is desired by a public agency in lieu of a purchase or
condemnation.
Section 6. ACCEPTANCE AND MAINTENANCE. 
   Upon completion of all improvements required, and upon submission of
satisfactory proof to the council or other public agency that such improvements
have met the standards and requirements of the city or other public agency and
are installed on public property, approved and recorded rights-of-way or
easements, the council shall by resolution accept the following portions of
such improvements for the purpose of ownership and maintenance by the city or
other public agency:
   a.   All hard surfaced streets, including curbs and gutters if installed
   b.   Alleys and alley approaches.
   c.   All water mains, associated valves, and fire hydrants.
   d.   That portion of a customer s water service line from the main T to the
curb stop located on the customer s property line.
   e.   Sewer mains, manholes and lift stations, but not including any portion
of a service line.
   f.   Stormwater retention practices and/or their associated catch basins.
   The City Engineer or other designated inspector shall make a final
inspection of all streets, utilities and other improvements as required. The
subdivider shall maintain all improvements for two (2) years after completion
as verified by the final inspection. Maintenance shall be guaranteed by cash
deposited with the City Council or by the posting of a maintenance bond in
favor of the council, both in the amount of five percent (5%) of the estimated
cost of the improvements. Thereafter, the city may maintain the improvements in
accordance with a duly adopted annual improvement and/or maintenance program
which may require special assessments from the individual property owners.
Section 7. RESUBDIVISIONS.
   The City Council may waive the requirements for the construction and
installation of some or all of the foregoing improvements in cases of
resubdivisions where only the size, shape and arrangement of the lots is being
changed and no new streets are required and in case of dedications of land or
rights-of-way to public use where such dedication is in excess of the needs of
the subdivision and is desired by a public agency in lieu of a purchase or
condemnation proceeding.
ARTICLE VIII
STREET & UTILITY IMPROVEMENTS
Section 1. UNAPPROVED STREETS.
   The city shall not accept, layout, open, improve, grade, pave, curb or light
any street or lay or authorize water mains or sewers or connections to be laid
in any street within any portion of the planning areas unless such street shall
have been accepted or opened as or shall otherwise have received the legal
status of a public street, unless such street corresponds with a street shown
on the comprehensive plan or with a street on a subdivision plat approved by
the City Council or otherwise acceptable to the board of supervisors. However,
the City Council may accept any street not shown on or not corresponding with a
street on the comprehensive plan or on any approved subdivision plat or an
approved street plat, provided the ordinance or other measure accepting such
street is first submitted to the city or county for its acceptance and ultimate
responsibility for maintenance according to subsequent capital improvements
programs.
Section 2. APPROVED STREETS.
   All plans, specifications, installation and construction required by this
ordinance shall be subject to the review, approval and inspection by the City
Engineer or other authorized city representative. The subdivider shall furnish
the City Engineer with a construction schedule prior to commencement of any
and/or all construction, and shall notify the city engineer not less than
twenty-four (24) hours in advance of readiness for required inspections.
   2.1   STREET GRADING. All streets and alleys within the platted area
dedicated for public use shall be brought to grade at the subdivider s cost as
approved by the City Council after receiving the report and recommendation of
the Planning Commission. All streets shall be a minimum of thirty (30) feet of
paved surface, unless otherwise allowed by City Council.
   2.2   CURB AND GUTTER. Curb and gutter shall be constructed on streets
proposed to be hard surfaced and as determined to be in the best interest of
the city or required by City Council upon recommendation of the Planning
Commission. Curb and gutter, if installed, shall be constructed of portland
cement concrete to the grade, designs and specifications as approved by the
City Council.
   2.3   SIDEWALKS. Sidewalks shall be provided where considered desirable by
the City Council for protection of the public. Sidewalks shall be constructed
according to the sidewalk standards as set forth in the Sheldon City Code of
Ordinances, Section 136.08, or have a sidewalk agreement approved by the Zoning
Administrator.
   2.4    STREET SIGNS. The developer shall provide the subdivision with
acceptable street signs at the intersection of all streets.
   2.5   STREET PAVING. Roadway surfacing widths shall be in conformance with
the standards established in the comprehensive plan and street plan, subject to
approval by the City Council, with the minimum specifications as follows:
 
Classification          Pavement Width Pavement Type
                        (min. feet)    (minimum)
Major street or Highway 44             Concrete or Asphalt
Two directional
Secondary Highway       24             Compacted Gravel
Collector Street        36             Bituminous
Local Street            26             Compacted Gravel
Pavement widths are subject to State of Iowa standards
 
   Streets not intended for paving shall have a minimum gravel surface
thickness of not less than four (4) inches, as may be required by the City
Council. Higher standards for the pavement of streets serving commercial and
industrial areas may be required.
Section 3. INFRASTRUCTURE IMPROVEMENTS.
   3.1   WATER LINES. The subdivider or developer shall connect with existing
water mains in accordance with the city and state standards and subject to
their supervision. The subdivider shall provide the subdivision with a complete
water supply system including hydrants, valves and other appurtenances which
shall be extended into and through the subdivision to the boundary lines, and
which shall provide a water connection for each lot, and shall be connected to
the city s water system. Fire hydrants shall be uniform throughout the
subdivision and shall meet the standards and design approved by the City
Council. All water mains that serve or in the opinion of the city shall serve
in the future for fire protection shall have a minimum diameter of six (6)
inches. Where oversized mains are required to serve other areas of the
watershed, the additional cost shall be borne by the city or assessed on an
equal basis to the properties served. Water service lines shall be installed to
the property line of all platted lots and terminated by a curb stop by the
developer.
   Where a public water supply is not available, each lot in a subdivision
shall be furnished with an individual water supply system with proper
provisions for the maintenance thereof. All lots serviced shall have a minimum
area of one-half acre and minimum lot width of one hundred (100) feet. The
design of any such system shall be subject to the approval of the State
Department of Health, or the county health officer, whichever is applicable.
   3.2   WASTEWATER SEWERS. The subdivider shall provide the subdivision with
wastewater sewage facilities. The subdivider shall connect or provide for the
connection to such wastewater sewer including all necessary pumping stations,
force mains, pumping equipment and other appurtenances, with a wastewater sewer
outlet or public treatment facility approved by the City Council. The developer
shall stub a sewer service line into each lot being developed. Wastewater
systems shall be approved by the City Council and the Iowa Department of
Natural Resources and such other agency or department of the state as shall
from time to time be designated and charged with the regulatory authority over
use, installation and maintenance of wastewater facilities. Where oversized
sewers are required to serve other areas of the watershed, the additional cost
shall be borne by the city or assessed on an area basis to the properties
served.
   Where a public sanitary sewer is not accessible, each lot in a subdivision
shall be serviced by either a disposal plant system or a septic tank with
proper provisions for the maintenance thereof. Any lot so serviced shall have a
minimum area of one-half acre and minimum lot width of one hundred (100) feet.
The design of either system shall be subject to the approval of the State
Department of Health, or county health officer, whichever is applicable.
   3.3    STORM WATER DRAINAGE. Adequate provisions shall be made for the
disposal of storm waters, subject to the approval of the City Council.
      a.   The subdivider shall provide the subdivision with adequate drains,
ditches, culverts, retention ponds, stormwater basins, complete bridges, storm
sewers, intakes, and manholes to provide for the collection and removal of all
surface water.
      b.   Where oversize storm sewers or drainage structures are required to
serve other areas of the watershed, the additional cost shall be borne by the
city or assessed on an area basis to the properties served.
      c.   Where a natural water course intersects a street or bridge, a
culvert shall be installed for the full width of the right-of-way and shall be
constructed in accordance with the standards and specifications adopted by the
City Council.
      d.   Driveway culverts shall be installed on major, collector and local
streets, shall have a minimum length of twenty (20) feet and shall be
constructed in accordance with the standards and specifications adopted by the
City Council.
      e.   Whenever drainage ditches are used they shall retain natural
topographic characteristics and be so designed that they do not present a
hazard to health, safety, life or property.
      f.   Drainage improvements shall maintain any natural watercourse and
shall prevent the collection of water in any low spot.
      g.   No lot shall be platted to obstruct the natural water flow.
      h.   Storm water drainage shall not exceed pre-development flow rates.
Section 4. ADDITIONAL UTILITY IMPROVEMENTS.
   The City Council may require that all utility lines except electric lines of
nominal voltage in excess of 15,000 volts, be installed underground. The
subdivider shall be responsible for making the necessary arrangements with the
utility companies for installation of such facilities. If overhead utility
lines or wires are permitted, they shall be placed in easements provided in the
rear of the lots, if reasonably possible. In the City Council s determination
on whether or not to require underground utilities, the council may consider
that soil, topographical, or other conditions make such installations within
the subdivision unreasonable or impractical. After grading is completed and
approved and before any pavement base is applied all of the in-street
underground work shall be completely installed and approved. All additional
utilities to be installed in a street shall be located in the grass between the
curb line and the street right-of-way line. Connections between the lots and
the utility lines shall be made without breaking into the wearing surface of
the streets, if possible.
ARTICLE IX
PUBLIC SPACE DEDICATIONS
Section 1. PARK, OPEN SPACE & PUBLIC USE DEDICATIONS.
   On a new subdivision, the subdivider shall be required to make available a
minimum of five percent (5%) of the net area of a residential subdivision or
Planned Unit Development for dedication to the lot owners or the City of
Sheldon, Iowa in the subdivision for parks, playgrounds, open space or other
public uses such as a school or other public facilities as determined by the
City Council of the City of Sheldon, Iowa. The subdivider shall meet with the
Planning and Zoning Commission prior to submission of the preliminary plat to
determine what area would be best suited to meet the needs of the lot owners or
City of Sheldon, Iowa for the parks, playgrounds, open space or other public
use.
Section 2. OTHER PUBLIC SPACE REGULATIONS.
   2.1   Public spaces shall, wherever possible, be located contiguous to other
such areas in adjacent subdivisions, in order to provide for maximum use of the
resulting area. Such areas shall be shown on the preliminary plat. The City
Council may not approve a site which is undesirable for such public or civic
uses.
   2.2   If the city s comprehensive plan requires a public open space larger
than five percent (5%) of the net area of the proposed subdivision, the
subdivider shall reserve the area in excess of the dedication requirement for
purchase by the appropriate public agency within one (1) year from the
endorsement date of the final plat. The purchase price of such land shall be
equivalent to the value of said land as established by the last available O
Brien County or Sioux County assessment rolls. After such time, the subdivider
may re-plat such acreage for their own purposes.
   2.3   Natural features, historic sites, and similar community assets shall
be preserved in parks and open spaces within the subdivision.
ARTICLE X
ADMINISTRATION, ENFORCEMENT, AND AMENDMENT
Section 1. FEES ESTABLISHED.  
   The council shall, from time to time establish, by resolution, fees for
review of plats. No plat for any subdivision or resubdivision shall be
considered filed with the City Clerk; unless and until said plat is accompanied
by the fee, as established by resolution of the City Council, as required by
this ordinance. However, this section shall not be interpreted as precluding
reimbursement to the board of supervisors for inspection or other services
rendered relative to proposed subdivision outside of the Sheldon corporate city
limits, but within the planning area.
   No fees shall be charged for public land plats submitted by a governmental
department of the city, plats submitted by any school board or plats of
property reserving or dedicating land to the city provided no other subdivision
of land is shown thereon.
Section 2. MODIFICATIONS (VARIANCES).  
   In the event that it can be demonstrated to the satisfaction of the City
Council that strict compliance with the requirements established by the
ordinance would result in extraordinary hardship to the subdivider or owner of
the property by imposing unreasonable restrictions on development of a tract of
land because of unusual topography or other conditions not created by the
subdivider, the Planning Commission may recommend and the City Council may
vary, modify or waive the requirements so that substantial justice may be done
and the public interest served and protected.
   It is provided that any specific variance, modification or waiver granted
under this provision shall in no way adversely affect the development, the
character of which shall be in conformance with recommended platting and
development practices in the general area of the proposed subdivision, will not
have the effect of nullifying the intent and purpose of this chapter and will
not interfere with carrying out the comprehensive plan of the planning area. In
no case shall any variation or modification be greater than the least variance
or modification of the requirements or have the effect of reducing the traffic
capacity of any street that is shown on the major street plan of the planning
area or be in conflict with the zoning ordinance and map. In granting variances
and modifications, the council may require such conditions as will, in its
judgment, secure substantially the objectives of the requirements so varied or
modified. Such variance and waivers may be granted only by the affirmative vote
of three-fourths ( ) of the members of the council.
Section 3. ENFORCEMENT.  
   In addition to other remedies and penalties prescribed by law, the
provisions of this ordinance shall not be violated subject to the following:
   3.1   No plat or subdivision of land in the City of Sheldon or the
extraterritorial jurisdictional area thereof (subject to exceptions as provided
in Chapter 354.14 Code of Iowa), shall be recorded or filed with the County
Auditor or County Recorder, nor shall any plat or subdivision have any validity
complies with the provisions of this ordinance and has been approved, in
writing on the plat, by the City Council as prescribed herein.
   3.2    No building permit shall be issued for construction on any lot,
parcel, or tract, where a subdivision is required by this ordinance, unless and
until a final plat of such subdivision has been approved and recorded in
accordance with this ordinance, and until the improvements required by this
ordinance have been accepted by the city.
   3.3    No public improvements over which the council has control shall be
made with city funds, nor shall any city funds be expended for street
maintenance, street improvements, or other services in any area that has been
subdivided after the date of adoption of this ordinance unless such subdivision
and streets have been approved in accordance with the provisions of this
ordinance and the street accepted by the City Council as a public street.
   3.4    No zoning compliance permit required by the zoning ordinance shall be
issued until, and unless, all improvements required by this ordinance have been
made in accordance with city plans and specifications and accepted by the City
Council.
Section 4. PENALTIES.  
   Any owner or agent of the land located within the platting jurisdiction of
the city, who knowingly or with intent to defraud, transfers, disposes or sells
or agrees to sell or negotiates to sell such land before such plat has been
approved, acknowledged and recorded as provided by this ordinance and Chapter
354, Code of Iowa, shall forfeit and pay a penalty of not more than five
hundred dollars ($500.00) each day for each lot so transferred, disposed of,
leased or offered for sale. Additionally, any building erected in violation of
this ordinance shall be deemed an unlawful structure and the zoning
administrator or other appropriate official may bring action to enjoin such
erection or cause it to be vacated or removed.
Section 5. AMENDMENTS.  
   Any provisions of these regulations may be changed, amended, supplemented,
modified or repealed from time to time by the City Council; provided, however,
that such amendments shall first be submitted to the Planning Commission for
review and study. The commission shall report within thirty (30) days after
which the council shall give notice of and hold a public hearing on the
proposed amendment. Such notice shall be published in a newspaper of general
circulation at least once, not less than four (4) or more than twenty (20) days
before the date of the public hearing. The amendment shall become effective
from and after its adoption and required publication.
Section 6. VALIDITY.  
   Should any section, provision or part of this ordinance be declared by the
courts to be invalid or unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the
validity of the ordinance as a whole or any section, provision, or part
thereof, other than the part so declared to be invalid or unconstitutional.
Section 7. EFFECTIVE DATE.  
   This ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after its adoption
and publication as required by law and as provided for in Chapter 380.6 and
380.7 of the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.6[1]; Sec. 380.7[3]; and Sec. 362.3)
Section 8. REPEALER.  
   No final plat of land within the force and effect of the zoning ordinance
shall be approved unless it conforms to this ordinance. Nothing contained
herein shall serve to abrogate, limit, repeal, or otherwise modify any other
ordinance or regulation except as expressly set forth herein. If any provision
of this ordinance conflicts with the provisions of any other ordinance,
regulation, or statute, the most restrictive applies.
Section 9. ADOPTION.
NOW THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF SHELDON
 
Passed and approved this  3rd  day of  March     , 2010.
 
                        Katricia Rider         
                     Mayor, City of Sheldon
 
Arlene Budden
Sheldon City Clerk
 
I hereby certify that the foregoing was published as Ordinance No.  10-3196  in
the City of Sheldon, Iowa on the  31st       day of  March , 2010.
 
EDITOR’S NOTE
The Subdivision Regulations for the City of Sheldon, adopted March 10, 2010,
by Ordinance No. O10-3195 and amendments thereto, contained in a separate
volume, are a part of this Code of Ordinances and are in full force and
effect. The following ordinances have been adopted amending the Subdivision
Regulations of the City and have not been codified herein, but are
specifically saved from repeal and are in full force and effect.
ORDINANCE ADOPTED ORDINANCE ADOPTED
 
