Code of Ordinances
of the
CITY OF Solon, Iowa
Prepared By:
Local Government Professional Services, Inc.
DBA Iowa Codification
P. O. Box 244
114 E 5th Street
Storm Lake, Iowa 50588
(641) 355-4072
www.sc-ic.com
CODE OF ORDINANCES OF THE CITY OF SOLON, IOWA
Adopted __________, 2026, by Ordinance No. _______
SUPPLEMENT RECORD
 
SUPPLEMENT                        ORDINANCES AMENDING CODE
Supp. No. Repeals, Amends or Adds Ord. No. Date Subject
 
 
CHAPTER 1
CODE OF ORDINANCES
 
1.01 Title                  1.08 Amendments
1.02 Definitions            1.09 Catchlines and Notes
1.03 City Powers            1.10 Altering Code
1.04 Indemnity              1.11 Severability
1.05 Personal Injuries      1.12 Right of Entry
1.06 Rules of Construction  1.13 General Standards for Action
1.07 Extension of Authority
 
1.01   TITLE.
This code of ordinances shall be known and may be cited as the Code of
Ordinances of the City of Solon, Iowa.
1.02   DEFINITIONS.
Where words and phrases used in this Code are defined in the Code of Iowa, such
definitions apply to their use in this Code unless such construction would be
inconsistent with the manifest intent of the Council or repugnant to the
context of the provision. Other words and phrases used herein have the
following meanings, unless specifically defined otherwise in another portion of
this Code or unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest
intent of the Council or repugnant to the context of the provision:
1.   “Alley” means a public right-of-way, other than a street, affording
secondary means of access to abutting property.
2.   “City” means the city of Solon, Iowa.
3.   “Clerk” means the city clerk of Solon, Iowa.
4.   “Code” means the specific chapter of this Code of Ordinances in which a
specific subject is covered and bears a descriptive title word (such as the
Building Code or a standard code adopted by reference).
5.   “Code of Ordinances” means the Code of Ordinances of the City of Solon,
Iowa.
6.   “Council” means the city council of Solon, Iowa.
7.   “County” means Johnson County, Iowa.
8.   “IAC” means the Iowa Administrative Code.
9.   “May” confers a power.
10.   “Measure” means an ordinance, amendment, resolution, or motion.
11.   “Must” states a requirement.
12.   “Occupant” or “tenant,” applied to a building or land, includes any
person who occupies the whole or a part of such building or land, whether alone
or with others.
13.   “Ordinances” means the ordinances of the City of Solon, Iowa, as embodied
in this Code, ordinances not repealed by the ordinance adopting this Code, and
those enacted hereafter.
14.   “Person” means an individual, firm, partnership, domestic or foreign
corporation, company, association or joint stock association, trust, or other
legal entity, and includes a trustee, receiver, assignee, or similar
representative thereof, but does not include a governmental body.
15.   “Public way” includes any street, alley, boulevard, parkway, highway,
sidewalk, or other public thoroughfare.
16.   “Shall” imposes a duty.
17.   “Sidewalk” means that surfaced portion of the street between the edge of
the traveled way, surfacing, or curb line and the adjacent property line,
intended for the use of pedestrians.
18.   “State” means the State of Iowa.
19.   “Statutes” or “laws” means the latest edition of the Code of Iowa, as
amended.
20.   “Street” or “highway” means the entire width between property lines of
every way or place of whatever nature when any part thereof is open to the use
of the public, as a matter of right, for purposes of vehicular traffic.
Words that are not defined in this Code or by the Code of Iowa have their
ordinary meaning unless such construction would be inconsistent with the
manifest intent of the Council, or repugnant to the context of the provision.
1.03   CITY POWERS.
The City may, except as expressly limited by the Iowa Constitution, and if not
inconsistent with the laws of the Iowa General Assembly, exercise any power and
perform any function it deems appropriate to protect and preserve the rights,
privileges, and property of the City and of its residents, and to preserve and
improve the peace, safety, health, welfare, comfort, and convenience of its
residents, and each and every provision of this Code shall be deemed to be in
the exercise of the foregoing powers and the performance of the foregoing
functions.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.1)
1.04   INDEMNITY.
The applicant for any permit or license under this Code, by making such
application, assumes and agrees to pay for any injury to or death of any person
or persons whomsoever, and any loss of or damage to property whatsoever,
including all costs and expenses incident thereto, however arising from or
related to, directly, indirectly, or remotely, the issuance of the permit or
license, or the doing of anything thereunder, or the failure of such applicant,
or the agents, employees, or servants of such applicant, to abide by or comply
with any of the provisions of this Code or the terms and conditions of such
permit or license, and such applicant, by making such application, forever
agrees to indemnify the City and its officers, agents, and employees, and
agrees to save them harmless from any and all claims, demands, lawsuits, or
liability whatsoever for any loss, damage, injury, or death, including all
costs and expenses incident thereto, by reason of the foregoing. The provisions
of this section shall be deemed to be a part of any permit or license issued
under this Code or any other ordinance of the City, whether expressly recited
therein or not.
1.05   PERSONAL INJURIES.
When action is brought against the City for personal injuries alleged to have
been caused by its negligence, the City may notify in writing any person by
whose negligence it claims the injury was caused. The notice shall state the
pendency of the action, the name of the plaintiff, the name and location of the
court where the action is pending, a brief statement of the alleged facts from
which the cause arose, that the City believes that the person notified is
liable to it for any judgment rendered against the City, and asking the person
to appear and defend. A judgment obtained in the suit is conclusive in any
action by the City against any person so notified, as to the existence of the
defect or other cause of the injury or damage, as to the liability of the City
to the plaintiff in the first named action, and as to the amount of the damage
or injury. The City may maintain an action against the person notified to
recover the amount of the judgment together with all the expenses incurred by
the City in the suit.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.14)
1.06   RULES OF CONSTRUCTION.
In the construction of this Code, the rules of statutory construction as set
forth in Chapter 4 of the Code of Iowa shall be utilized to ascertain the
intent of the Council, with the understanding that the term “statute” as used
therein will be deemed to be synonymous with the term “ordinance” when applied
to this Code.
1.07   EXTENSION OF AUTHORITY.
Whenever an officer or employee is required or authorized to do an act by a
provision of this Code, the provision shall be construed as authorizing
performance by a regular assistant, subordinate, or a duly authorized designee
of said officer or employee.
1.08   AMENDMENTS.
All ordinances that amend, repeal, or in any manner affect this Code shall
include proper reference to chapter, section, subsection, or paragraph to
maintain an orderly codification of ordinances of the City.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.2)
1.09   CATCHLINES AND NOTES.
The catchlines of the several sections of this Code, titles, headings (chapter,
section, and subsection), editor’s notes, cross references, and State law
references, unless set out in the body of the section itself, contained in this
Code of Ordinances, do not constitute any part of the law and are intended
merely to indicate, explain, supplement, or clarify the contents of a section.
1.10   ALTERING CODE.
It is unlawful for any unauthorized person to change or amend, by additions or
deletions, any part or portion of this Code, or to insert or delete pages, or
portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with this Code in any manner that will
cause the law of the City to be misrepresented.
1.11   SEVERABILITY.
If any section, provision, or part of this Code is adjudged invalid or
unconstitutional, such adjudication will not affect the validity of this Code
as a whole or any section, provision, or part thereof not adjudged invalid or
unconstitutional.
1.12   RIGHT OF ENTRY.
1.   Right of Entry. Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any
ordinance, or whenever there is reasonable cause to believe that there exists
an ordinance violation in any building or upon any premises within the
jurisdiction of the City, any authorized official of the City may, upon
presentation of proper credentials, enter such building or premises at all
reasonable times to inspect the same and to perform any duty imposed upon such
official by ordinance; provided, except in emergencies, such official shall
first give the owner or occupant, if they can be located after reasonable
effort, 24-hour written notice of the authorized official’s intention to
inspect. In the event the owner or occupant refuses entry, the official is
empowered to seek assistance from any court of competent jurisdiction in
obtaining such entry.
2.   Warrants. If consent to enter upon or inspect any building, structure, or
property pursuant to a municipal ordinance is withheld by any person having the
lawful right to exclude, the City officer or employee having the duty to enter
upon or conduct the inspection may apply to the Iowa District Court in and for
the County, pursuant to Section 808.14 of the Code of Iowa, for an
administrative search warrant. No owner, operator or occupant, or any other
person having charge, care, or control of any dwelling unit, rooming unit,
structure, building, or premises shall fail or neglect, after presentation of a
search warrant, to permit entry therein by the municipal officer or employee.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 808.14)
1.13   GENERAL STANDARDS FOR ACTION.
Whenever this Code grants any discretionary power to the Council or any
commission, board, or officer or employee of the City and does not specify
standards to govern the exercise of the power, the power shall be exercised in
light of the following standard: The discretionary power to grant, deny, or
revoke any matter shall be considered in light of the facts and circumstances
then existing and as may be reasonably foreseeable, and due consideration shall
be given to the impact upon the public health, safety, and welfare, and the
decision shall be that of a reasonably prudent person under similar
circumstances in the exercise of the police power.
CHAPTER 2
CHARTER
 
2.01 Title                              2.04 Number and Term of Council
2.02 Form of Government                 2.05 Term of Mayor
2.03 Powers and Duties of City Officers 2.06 Copies on File
2.01   TITLE.
This chapter may be cited as the charter of the City of Solon, Iowa. †
 
Notes
  † EDITOR’S NOTE: Ordinance No. 114 adopting a charter for the City was passed and
�approved by the Council in 1973 and was subsequently amended by Ordinance No.
  214.
2.02   FORM OF GOVERNMENT.
The form of government of the City is the Mayor- Council form of government.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.4)
2.03   POWERS AND DUTIES OF CITY OFFICERS.
The Council and Mayor and other City officers have such powers and shall
perform such duties as are authorized or required by State law and by the
ordinances, resolutions, rules, and regulations of the City.
2.04   NUMBER AND TERM OF COUNCIL.
The Council consists of five Council Members elected at large for overlapping
terms of four years.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 376.2)
2.05   TERM OF MAYOR.
The Mayor is elected for a term of four years.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 376.2)
2.06   COPIES ON FILE.
The Clerk shall keep an official copy of the charter on file with the official
records of the Clerk and the Secretary of State, and shall keep copies of the
charter available at the Clerk’s office for public inspection.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.1(3))
CHAPTER 3
CODE PENALTIES
 
3.01 Misdemeanor 3.02 Municipal Infraction
3.01   MISDEMEANOR.
1.   Whenever in this Code or in any City ordinance any act is prohibited or is
made or declared to be unlawful or an offense or whenever in this Code or in
any City ordinance the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any
act is declared to be unlawful, if the act is not declared to be a misdemeanor
or municipal infraction and if no specific penalty is provided therefore, the
violation of any such provision shall be deemed to be a misdemeanor punishable
by a fine of not to exceed the maximum amount of dollars as provided in Section
903.1(1) of the Code of Iowa, as amended.
2.   Whenever in this Code or in any City ordinance any act is prohibited and
is declared to be a misdemeanor or whenever in this Code or any City ordinance
the doing of any act is required and the failure to do such an act is declared
to be a misdemeanor, the violation of any such provision shall be punishable by
a fine not to exceed the maximum amount of dollars as provided in Section 903.1
(1) of the Code of Iowa, as amended.
3.02   MUNICIPAL INFRACTION.
     1.   Whenever in this Code or in any City ordinance any act is prohibited
and is declared to be a municipal infraction or whenever in this Code or in any
City ordinance the doing of any act is required and the failure to do that act
is declared to be a municipal infraction, the violation of any such provision
is punishable by a civil penalty of not more than $750.00 for each violation,
if the infraction is a repeat offense, by a civil penalty of not more than
$1,000.00 for each repeat offense. However, a municipal infraction which is
classified as an environmental violation or which arises from noncompliance
with a pretreatment standard or requirement, referred to in 40 C.F.R. 403.8, as
amended, by an industrial user may be punishable by a civil penalty of not more
than $1,000.00 for each day the violation exists or continues. Each day a
violation of provision of this Code or of a City ordinance continues shall be a
separate municipal infraction.
2.   In addition to seeking the imposition of a civil penalty as provided in
this section, the City Attorney may seek all other appropriate remedies allowed
by law in regard to the abatement, correction, or discontinuance of activities
which constitute municipal infractions. Municipal infractions may be initially
brought upon simple notice and if the person charged admits the violation, upon
payment of penalty to the City Treasurer and the performance of any act
required by law to be performed, such person shall not be further prosecuted or
assessed any costs or other expenses for such violation, and the City shall
retain all penalties thus collected. Where a municipal infraction is not
admitted upon simple notice by the person charged, or where the person charged
fails to perform any other act required to be performed, or both, an action
seeking a penalty shall be brought in State District Court. Any action seeking
a penalty for a municipal infraction, with or without additional relief, may be
initially brought in the State District Court. This section does no impose a
duty to initially charge all municipal infractions upon simple notice.
Municipal infractions that are not brought upon simple notice may be brought
pursuant to Section 364.22 of the Code of Iowa, and the civil citation shall
serve as notice that a civil offense has been committed.
3.   Any violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be a municipal
infraction. In addition to the provisions set out in this section herein, the
City may proceed in law or in equity against any person, firm, or corporation
for violations of any section or subsection of this chapter.
CHAPTER 5
OPERATING PROCEDURES
 
5.01 Oaths                 5.07 Conflict of Interest
5.02 Bonds                 5.08 Resignations
5.03 Powers and Duties     5.09 Removal of Appointed Officers and Employees
5.04 Books and Records     5.10 Vacancies
5.05 Transfer to Successor 5.11 Gifts
5.06 Meetings
5.01   OATHS.
The oath of office shall be required and administered in accordance with the
following:
1.   Qualify for Office. Each elected or appointed officer shall qualify for
office by taking the prescribed oath and by giving, when required, a bond. The
oath shall be taken, and bond provided, after such officer is certified as
elected but not later than noon of the first day that is not a Sunday or a
legal holiday in January of the first year of the term for which the officer
was elected.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 63.1)
2.   Prescribed Oath. The prescribed oath is: “I, (name), do solemnly swear
that I will support the Constitution of the United States and the Constitution
of the State of Iowa, and that I will faithfully and impartially, to the best
of my ability, discharge all duties of the office of (name of office) in Solon
as now or hereafter required by law.”
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 63.10)
3.   Officers Empowered to Administer Oaths. The following are empowered to
administer oaths and to take affirmations in any matter pertaining to the
business of their respective offices:
A.   Mayor.
B.   City Clerk.
C.   Members of all boards, commissions, or bodies created by law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 63A.2)
D.   City Administrator.
5.02   BONDS.
Surety bonds are provided in accordance with the following:
1.   Required. The Council shall provide by resolution for a surety bond or
blanket position bond running to the City and covering the Mayor, Clerk,
Treasurer, and such other officers and employees as may be necessary and
advisable except as allowed in Subsection 5.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 64.13)
2.   Bonds Approved. Bonds shall be approved by the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 64.19)
3.   Bonds Filed. All bonds, after approval and proper record, shall be filed
with the Clerk.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 64.23(6))
4.   Record. The Clerk shall keep a book, to be known as the “Record of
Official Bonds” in which shall be recorded the official bonds of all City
officers, elective or appointive.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 64.24(1)(a))
5.   Insurance Policy in Lieu of Bond. In lieu of a bond, a public officer
required to obtain a bond pursuant to Chapter 64 of the Code of Iowa may obtain
an insurance policy in an amount not less than the amounts required of a bond.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 64.3)
5.03   POWERS AND DUTIES.
Each municipal officer shall exercise the powers and perform the duties
prescribed by law and this Code, or as otherwise directed by the Council unless
contrary to State law or City charter.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13(4))
5.04   BOOKS AND RECORDS.
All books and records required to be kept by law or ordinance shall be open to
examination by the public upon request, unless some other provisions of law
expressly limit such right or require such records to be kept confidential.
Access to public records that are combined with data processing software shall
be in accordance with policies and procedures established by the City.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 22.2 and 22.3A)
5.05   TRANSFER TO SUCCESSOR.
Each officer shall transfer to their successor in office all books, papers,
records, documents, and property in the officer’s custody and appertaining to
that office.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13(4))
5.06   MEETINGS.
All meetings of the Council, any board or commission, or any multi- membered
body formally and directly created by any of the foregoing bodies shall be held
in accordance with the following:
1.   Definitions. The following terms are defined for use in this section.
A.   “Closed session” means a meeting to which all members of the public do not
have access as allowed by Section 21.5 of the Code of Iowa.
B.   “Hybrid meeting” means a meeting involving both remote participation and
in-person participation by members.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 21.8(4)(a))
C.   “Open session” means a meeting to which all members of the public have
access.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 21.2(3))
D.   “Remote participation” means real-time participation by a remotely located
individual in a meeting which is being held in a different physical location
using integrated audio, video, and other digital tools.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 21.8(4)(b))
E.   “Reasonable notice” means advising the news media who have filed a request
for notice with the governmental body and posting the notice on a bulletin
board or other prominent place which is easily accessible to the public and
clearly designated for that purpose at the principal office of the body holding
the meeting, or if no such office exists, at the building in which the meeting
is to be held.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 21.4(1))
F.   “Teleconference participation” means participation using audio conference
tools involving multiple participants in at least two separate locations.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 21.8(4)(c))
G.   “Virtual meeting” means a meeting involving real-time interaction using
integrated audio, video, and other digital tools, in which participants do not
share a physical location.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 21.8(4)(d))
2.   Notice of Meetings. Reasonable notice, as defined by State law, of the
time, date, and place of each meeting and its tentative agenda shall be given.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 21.4)
3.   Meetings Open. All meetings shall be held in open session unless closed
sessions are held as expressly permitted by State law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 21.3)
4.   Minutes. Minutes shall be kept of all meetings showing the date, time and
place, the members present, and the action taken at each meeting. The minutes
shall show the results of each vote taken and information sufficient to
indicate the vote of each member present. The vote of each member present shall
be made public at the open session. The minutes shall be public records open to
public inspection.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 21.3)
5.   Closed Session. A closed session may be held only by affirmative vote of
either two-thirds of the body or all of the members present at the meeting and
in accordance with
Chapter 21 of the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 21.5)
6.   Cameras and Recorders. The public may use cameras or recording devices at
any open session.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 21.7)
7.   Electronic Meetings. A governmental body shall provide for hybrid
meetings, teleconference participation, virtual meetings, remote participation,
and other hybrid options for the members of the governmental body to
participate in official meetings. A governmental body conducting a meeting
pursuant to this subsection shall comply with all of the provisions of
Chapter 21 of the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 21.8)
5.07   CONFLICT OF INTEREST.
A City officer or employee shall not have an interest, direct or indirect, in
any contract or job of work or material or the profits thereof or services to
be furnished or performed for the City, unless expressly permitted by law. A
contract entered into in violation of this section is void. The provisions of
this section do not apply to:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5)
1.   Compensation of Officers. The payment of lawful compensation of a City
officer, volunteer fire fighter as defined in Section 85.61 of the Code of
Iowa, emergency medical care provider as defined in Section 147A.1 of the Code
of Iowa, or employee holding more than one City office or position, the holding
of which is not incompatible with another public office or is not prohibited by
law. This subsection shall not be construed to prohibit nominal stipends,
compensation, incentives, or benefits for volunteer fire fighters or emergency
medical care providers.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5(3)(a))
2.   Investment of Funds. The designation of a bank or trust company as a
depository, paying agent, or for investment of funds.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5(3)(b))
3.   City Treasurer. An employee of a bank or trust company, who serves as
Treasurer of the City.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5(3)(c))
4.   Stock Interests. Contracts in which a City officer or employee has an
interest solely by reason of employment, or a stock interest of the kind
described in Subsection 8 of this section, or both, if the contracts are made
by competitive bid in writing, publicly invited and opened, or if the
remuneration of employment will not be directly affected as a result of the
contract and the duties of employment do not directly involve the procurement
or preparation of any part of the contract. The competitive bid qualification
of this subsection does not apply to a contract for professional services not
customarily awarded by competitive bid.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5(3)(e))
5.   Newspaper. The designation of an official newspaper.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5(3)(f))
6.   Existing Contracts. A contract in which a City officer or employee has an
interest if the contract was made before the time the officer or employee was
elected or appointed, but the contract may not be renewed.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5(3)(g))
7.   Volunteers. Contracts with volunteer firefighters or civil defense
volunteers.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5(3)(h))
8.   Corporations. A contract with a corporation in which a City officer or
employee has an interest by reason of stock holdings when less than five
percent of the outstanding stock of the corporation is owned or controlled
directly or indirectly by the officer or employee or the spouse or immediate
family of such officer or employee.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5(3)(i))
9.   Contracts. Contracts made by the City upon competitive bid in writing,
publicly invited and opened.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5(3)(d))
10.   Cumulative Purchases. Contracts not otherwise permitted by this section,
for the purchase of goods or services that benefit a City officer or employee,
if the purchases benefiting that officer or employee do not exceed a cumulative
total purchase price of $6,000.00 in a fiscal year.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5(3)(j))
11.   Franchise Agreements. Franchise agreements between the City and a utility
and contracts entered into by the City for the provision of essential City
utility services.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5(3)(k))
12.   Third Party Contracts. A contract that is a bond, note or other
obligation of the City and the contract is not acquired directly from the City
but is acquired in a transaction with a third party who may or may not be the
original underwriter, purchaser, or obligee of the contract.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5(3)(l))
5.08   RESIGNATIONS.
An elected officer who wishes to resign may do so by submitting a resignation
in writing to the Clerk so that it shall be properly recorded and considered. A
person who resigns from an elective office is not eligible for appointment to
the same office during the time for which the person was elected if, during
that time, the compensation of the office has been increased.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13(9))
5.09   REMOVAL OF APPOINTED OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES.
Except as otherwise provided by State or City law, all persons appointed to
City office or employment may be removed by the officer or body making the
appointment, but every such removal shall be by written order. The order shall
give the reasons, be filed in the office of the Clerk, and a copy shall be sent
by certified mail to the person removed, who, upon request filed with the Clerk
within 30 days after the date of mailing the copy, shall be granted a public
hearing before the Council on all issues connected with the removal. The
hearing shall be held within 30 days after the date the request is filed unless
the person removed requests a later date.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.15)
5.10   VACANCIES.
A vacancy in an elective City office during a term of office shall be filled in
accordance with Section 372.13(2) of the Code of Iowa.
5.11   GIFTS.
Except as otherwise provided in Chapter 68B of the Code of Iowa, a public
official, public employee or candidate, or that person’s immediate family
member, shall not, directly or indirectly, accept or receive any gift or series
of gifts from a “restricted donor” as defined in Chapter 68B and a restricted
donor shall not, directly or indirectly, individually or jointly with one or
more other restricted donors, offer or make a gift or a series of gifts to a
public official, public employee, or candidate.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 68B.22)
CHAPTER 6
CITY ELECTIONS
 
6.01 Nominating Method to Be Used 6.04 Preparation of Petition and Affidavit
6.02 Nominations by Petition      6.05 Filing; Presumption; Withdrawals;
                                  Objections
6.03 Adding Name by Petition      6.06 Persons Elected
6.01   NOMINATING METHOD TO BE USED.
All candidates for elective municipal offices shall be nominated under the
provisions of Chapter 45 of the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 376.3)
6.02   NOMINATIONS BY PETITION.
Nominations for elective municipal offices of the City may be made by
nomination paper or papers signed by not less than 25 eligible electors,
residents of the City.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 45.1)
6.03   ADDING NAME BY PETITION.
The name of a candidate placed upon the ballot by any other method than by
petition shall not be added by petition for the same office.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 45.2)
6.04   PREPARATION OF PETITION AND AFFIDAVIT.
Nomination papers shall include a petition and an affidavit of candidacy. The
petition and affidavit shall be substantially in the form prescribed by the
State Commissioner of Elections, shall include information required by the Code
of Iowa, and shall be signed in accordance with the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 45.3, 45.5, and 45.6)
6.05   FILING; PRESUMPTION; WITHDRAWALS; OBJECTIONS.
The time and place of filing nomination petitions, the presumption of validity
thereof, the right of a candidate so nominated to withdraw and the effect of
such withdrawal, and the right to object to the legal sufficiency of such
petitions, or to the eligibility of the candidate, shall be governed by the
appropriate provisions of Chapter 44 of the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 45.4)
6.06   PERSONS ELECTED.
The candidates who receive the greatest number of votes for each office on the
ballot are elected, to the extent necessary to fill the positions open.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 376.8(3))
CHAPTER 7
FISCAL MANAGEMENT
 
7.01 Purpose                      7.06 Budget Amendments
7.02 Accounting Officer           7.07 Accounting
7.03 Cash Control                 7.08 Financial Reports
7.04 Fund Control                 7.09 Capital Improvements Reserve Fund
                                  Established
7.05 Operating Budget Preparation 7.10 Setoff Program Provisions
7.01   PURPOSE.
The purpose of this chapter is to establish policies and provide for rules and
regulations governing the management of the financial affairs of the City.
7.02   ACCOUNTING OFFICER.
The Treasurer is the accounting officer of the City and is responsible for the
administration of the provisions of this chapter.
7.03   CASH CONTROL.
To ensure the proper accounting and safe custody of moneys the following shall
apply:
1.   Deposit of Funds. All monies or fees collected for any purpose by any City
officer shall be deposited through the office of the accounting officer. If any
said fees are due to an officer, they shall be paid to the officer by check
drawn by the accounting officer and approved by the Council only upon such
officer’s making adequate reports relating thereto as required by law,
ordinance, or Council directive.
2.   Deposits and Investments. All monies belonging to the City shall be
promptly deposited in depositories selected by the Council in amounts not
exceeding the authorized depository limitation established by the Council or
invested in accordance with the City’s written investment policy and State law,
including joint investments as authorized by Section 384.21 of the Code of
Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.21, 12B.10, and 12C.1)
7.04   FUND CONTROL.
There shall be established and maintained separate and distinct funds in
accordance with the following:
1.   Revenues. All monies received by the City shall be credited to the proper
fund as required by law, ordinance, or resolution.
2.   Expenditures. No disbursement shall be made from a fund unless such
disbursement is authorized by law, ordinance, or resolution, was properly
budgeted, and supported by a claim approved by the Council.
3.   Emergency Fund. No transfer may be made from any fund to the Emergency
Fund.
(545 IAC 2.5(2))
4.   Debt Service Fund. Except where specifically prohibited by State law,
monies may be transferred from any other City fund to the Debt Service Fund to
meet payments of principal and interest. Such transfers must be authorized by
the original budget or a budget amendment.
(545 IAC 2.5(3))
5.   Capital Improvements Reserve Fund. Except where specifically prohibited by
State law, monies may be transferred from any City fund to the Capital
Improvements Reserve Fund. Such transfers must be authorized by the original
budget or a budget amendment.
(545 IAC 2.5(4))
6.   Utility and Enterprise Funds. A surplus in a Utility or Enterprise Fund
may be transferred to any other City fund, except the Emergency Fund, by
resolution of the Council. A surplus may exist only after all required
transfers have been made to any restricted accounts in accordance with the
terms and provisions of any revenue bonds or loan agreements relating to the
Utility or Enterprise Fund. A surplus is defined as the cash balance in the
operating account or the unrestricted net position calculated in accordance
with generally accepted accounting principles, after adding back the net
pension and other postemployment benefits, liabilities, and the related
deferred inflows of resources and deducting the related deferred outflows of
resources, in excess of:
A.   The amount of the expenses of disbursements for operating and maintaining
the utility or enterprise for the preceding three months; and
B.   The amount necessary to make all required transfers to restricted accounts
for the succeeding three months.
(545 IAC 2.5(5))
7.   Balancing of Funds. Fund accounts shall be reconciled at the close of each
month and a report thereof submitted to the Council.
7.05   OPERATING BUDGET PREPARATION.
The annual operating budget of the City shall be prepared in accordance with
the following:
1.   Proposal Prepared. The accounting officer is responsible for preparation
of the annual budget detail, for review by the Mayor and Council and adoption
by the Council in accordance with directives of the Mayor and Council.
2.   Boards and Commissions. All boards, commissions, and other administrative
agencies of the City that are authorized to prepare and administer budgets must
submit their budget proposals to the accounting officer for inclusion in the
proposed City budget at such time and in such form as required by the Council.
3.   Submission to Council. The accounting officer shall submit the completed
budget proposal to the Council each year at such time as directed by the
Council.
4.   Annual Statement.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 24.2A(2))
A.   On or before 4:00 p.m. on March 5 of each year, the City shall file, with
the Department of Management, a report containing all necessary information for
the Department of Management to compile and calculate amounts required to be
included in the statement mailed under Paragraph B.
B.   Not later than March 15, the County Auditor, using information compiled
and calculated by the Department of Management shall send to each property
owner or taxpayer within the County, by regular mail, an individual statement
containing all of the required information as provided under Section 24.2(2)(b)
(1-10) of the Code of Iowa.
C.   The Department of Management shall prescribe the form for the report
required under Paragraph A, the statements to be mailed under Paragraph B, and
the public hearing notice required under Paragraph D.
D.   The Council shall set a time and place for a public hearing on the City’s
proposed property tax amount for the budget year and the City’s information
included in the statements under Paragraph B. The proposed property tax hearing
shall be set on a date on or after March 20 of the budget year immediately
preceding the budget year for which the tax is being proposed. At the hearing,
the Council shall receive oral or written testimony from any resident or
property owner of the City. This public hearing shall be separate from any
other meeting of the Council, including any other meeting or public hearing
relating to the City’s budget, and other business of the City that is not
related to the proposed property tax amounts and the information in the
statements shall not be conducted at the public hearing. After all testimony
has been received and considered, the governing body may decrease, but not
increase, the proposed property tax amount to be included in the City’s budget.
   (1)   Notice of the public hearing shall be published not less than four or
more than 20 days in a newspaper published at least once weekly and having
general circulation in the City. However, if the City has a population of 200
or less, publication may be made by posting in three public places in the City.
   (2)   Notice of the hearing shall also be posted and clearly identified on
the City’s internet site for public viewing beginning on the date of the
newspaper publication and shall be maintained on the City’s internet site with
all such prior year notices.
   (3)   Additionally, if the City maintains a social media account on one or
more social media applications, the public hearing notice or an electronic link
to the public hearing notice shall be posted on each such account on a date no
later than the date of publication of the notice.
   (4)   Failure of a newspaper to publish a required notice under this
paragraph shall not be considered a failure of a political subdivision to
provide required notice under this paragraph if all of the following conditions
are met:
      a.   Notice of the public hearing was provided to each property owner and
each taxpayer within the political subdivision in statements required under
Section 24.2A(2)(b) of the Code of Iowa..
      b.   The political subdivision can demonstrate to the County Auditor that
the political subdivision provided sufficient time for the newspaper to publish
the notice.
5.   Council Review. The Council shall review the proposed budget and may make
any adjustments it deems appropriate in the budget before accepting such
proposal for publication, hearing, and final adoption.
6.   Notice of Hearing. Following, and not until completion of requirements, of
Subsection 4 of this section, the Council shall set a time and place for public
hearing on the budget to be held before April 30 and shall publish notice of
the hearing not less than four or more than 20 days before the hearing. A
summary of the proposed budget and a description of the procedure for
protesting the City budget under Section 384.19 of the Code of Iowa, in the
form prescribed by the Director of the Department of Management, shall be
included in the notice. Proof of publication of the notice under this
subsection must be filed with the County Auditor.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.16(3))
7.   Copies of Budget on File. Not less than 20 days before the date that the
budget must be certified to the County Auditor and not less than 10 days before
the public hearing, the Clerk shall make available a sufficient number of
copies of the detailed budget to meet the requests of taxpayers and
organizations, and have them available for distribution at the offices of the
Mayor and Clerk and at the City library.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.16(2))
8.   Adoption and Certification. After the hearing, the Council shall adopt, by
resolution, a budget for at least the next fiscal year and the Clerk shall
certify the necessary tax levy for the next fiscal year to the County Auditor
and the County Board of Supervisors. The tax levy certified may be less than,
but not more than, the amount estimated in the proposed budget submitted at the
final hearing, unless an additional tax levy is approved at a City election.
Two copies each of the detailed budget as adopted and of the tax certificate
must be transmitted to the County Auditor.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.16(5))
7.06   BUDGET AMENDMENTS.
A City budget finally adopted for the following fiscal year becomes effective
July 1 and constitutes the City appropriation for each program and purpose
specified therein until amended as provided by this section.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.18)
1.   Program Increase. Any increase in the amount appropriated to a program
must be prepared, adopted, and subject to protest in the same manner as the
original budget.
(545 IAC 2.2)
2.   Program Transfer. Any transfer of appropriation from one program to
another must be prepared, adopted, and subject to protest in the same manner as
the original budget.
(545 IAC 2.3)
3.   Activity Transfer. Any transfer of appropriation from one activity to
another activity within a program must be approved by resolution of the
Council.
(545 IAC 2.4)
4.   Administrative Transfers. The accounting officer shall have the authority
to adjust, by transfer or otherwise, the appropriations allocated within a
specific activity without prior Council approval.
(545 IAC 2.4)
7.07   ACCOUNTING.
The accounting records of the City shall consist of not less than the
following:
1.   Books of Original Entry. There shall be established and maintained books
of original entry to provide a chronological record of cash received and
disbursed.
2.   General Ledger. There shall be established and maintained a general ledger
controlling all cash transactions, budgetary accounts and for recording
unappropriated surpluses.
3.   Checks. Checks shall be prenumbered and signed by the City Administrator,
Mayor, or Clerk following Council approval, except as provided by Subsection 5
of this section.
4.   Budget Accounts. There shall be established such individual accounts to
record receipts by source and expenditures by program and activity as will
provide adequate information and control for budgeting purposes as planned and
approved by the Council. Each individual account shall be maintained within its
proper fund and so kept that receipts can be immediately and directly compared
with revenue estimates, and expenditures can be related to the authorizing
appropriation. No expenditure shall be posted except to the appropriation for
the function and purpose for which the expense was incurred.
5.   Immediate Payment Authorized. The accounting officer is authorized to make
timely payment of certain bills of account for services or merchandise and
after having ascertained that said bills of account are correct and proper
obligations of the City, and without obtaining prior Council approval
therefore, and shall include the following classification of accounts:
A.   Utilities, including gas, telephone, and electricity;
B.   Payroll;
C.   Payroll taxes, including monthly withholding deposits and payments due on
quarterly reports for IPERS, FICA, and Sales Tax;
D.   Postage;
E.   Contract payments previously approved by Council;
F.   Legal publication expenses;
G.   Credit card accounts for vehicle gas;
H.   Bills submitted on a specific project previously approved by the Council;
I.   Membership dues;
J.   Interest coupons.
Any such payment made shall be reported to the Council for review and approval
with and in the same manner as other claims at the next meeting following such
payment.
6.   Utilities. The accounting officer shall perform and be responsible for
accounting functions of the municipally owned utilities.
7.08   FINANCIAL REPORTS.
The accounting officer shall prepare and file the following financial reports:
1.   Monthly Reports. There shall be submitted to the Council each month a
report showing the activity and status of each fund, program, sub-program, and
activity for the preceding month.
2.   Annual Report. Not later than December 1 of each year there shall be
published an annual report containing a summary for the preceding fiscal year
of all collections and receipts, all accounts due the City, and all
expenditures, the current public debt of the City, and the legal debt limit of
the City for the current fiscal year. The Annual Financial Report shall be
prepared on forms and pursuant to instructions prescribed by the Auditor of
State. Beginning with the Annual Financial Report published by December 1,
2025, each report shall include a list of bonds, notes, or other obligations
issued by the City during the most recently completed fiscal year, and the
applicable lists for other fiscal years beginning on or after July 1, 2024, for
which obligations remain unpaid, payable from any source, including the amount
of the issuance, the project or purpose of the issuance, whether the issuance
was approved at election, eligible to be subject to a petition for an election,
or was exempt from approval at election as the result of statutory exclusions
based on population of the City or amount of the issuance, and identification
of issuances from the fiscal year or prior fiscal years related to the same
project or purpose.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.22)
7.09   CAPITAL IMPROVEMENTS RESERVE FUND ESTABLISHED.
There is established a Capital Improvements Reserve Fund where moneys raised
pursuant to the 67.5 cents per thousand tax levy provided in Section 384.7 of
the Code of Iowa shall be accumulated and disbursed for the purpose of
constructing water systems improvements within the City. The Clerk is directed
to certify to the County Auditor a request to levy tax at the rate of 67.5
cents per thousand dollars of taxable value each year to be levied in addition
to any other levies duly certified by the City. This levy shall continue on an
annual basis until terminated as provided by law. Balances in the Capital
Improvements Reserve Fund are not unencumbered or unappropriated funds for the
purpose of reducing tax levies.
7.10   SETOFF PROGRAM PROVISIONS.
This section shall establish policies and procedures for the City pursuant to
Section 421.65 of the Code of Iowa, to allow the City to utilize and invoke the
setoff program provisions of the State for collection of debts owed to the City
and for which the City has provided the obligor with an opportunity to contest.
1.   Definitions. The following terms are defined for use in this section:
A.   “Department” means the State Department of Revenue.
B.   “Obligor” means a person, not including a public agency, who has been
determined to owe a qualifying debt.
C.   “Public agency” means a board, commission, department, including the
Department of Revenue, or other administrative office or unit of the State or
any other State entity reported in the Iowa Annual Comprehensive Financial
Report, or a political subdivision of the State, or an office or unit of a
political subdivision. Public agency does include the Clerk of the District
Court as it relates to the collection of a qualifying debt. Public agency does
not include the general assembly or Office of the Governor.
D.   “Public payment” means any claim a public agency owes to an obligor.
E.   “Qualifying debt” means any of the following:
   (1)   Any debt, which is assigned to the Department of Health and Human
Services, or which is owed to the Department of Health and Human Services for
unpaid premiums under Section 249A.3(2)(a)(1) of the Code of Iowa, or which
child support services is otherwise attempting to collect, or which foster care
services of the Department of Health and Human Services is attempting to
collect on behalf of a child receiving foster care provided by the Department
of Health and Human Services.
   (2)   Any debt which is in the form of a liquidated sum due, owing, and
payable to the Clerk of the District Court.
   (3)   Any liquidated sum certain, owning, and payable to a public agency,
with respect to which the public agency has provided the obligor an opportunity
to protest or challenge the sum in a manner in compliance with applicable law
and due process, and which has been determined as owing through the challenge
or protest, or for which the time period provided by the public agency to
challenge, or protest has expired.
2.   Memorandum of Understanding. The City shall enter into a memorandum of
understanding with the Department which shall outline the program guidelines
for use of the State Setoff Program.
3.   Qualifying Debt. The Clerk shall only certify to the Department qualifying
debt as approved by the Department through the completion of a qualifying debt
questionnaire and for which the City has provided appropriate documentation
showing the City’s legal authority for charging, implementing a fine or fee for
violation of, or imposing costs related to the abatement of certain conditions
when appropriate legal authority exists to the City. The qualifying debt
questionnaire may be updated from time to time as required by the City to add
or remove qualifying debt or as needed by the Department.
4.   Due Process. Prior to submission of a debt to the Department the City
shall provide the obligor due process as outlined in this section prior to the
submission of a debt:
A.   With respect to the qualifying debt, the City shall provide the obligor
with 15 days’ advance written notice to the obligor’s last-known address. Such
notice shall provide the obligor with a minimum period of 15 days in which they
may file an appeal in writing to the Clerk.
B.   Upon receipt of a written request for an appeal on a debt to be submitted
to the Setoff Program the Clerk shall schedule a hearing with the Council for
the next regularly scheduled meeting and notify the obligor of the hearing date
and time at least five days in advance of the hearing.
C.   At the time and date of the hearing, the Council shall hear any evidence
brought forth by the obligor and shall examine the City’s file regarding the
matter. The Council shall make a ruling upon a majority vote of the members in
attendance.
D.   If the qualifying debt is upheld by the Council and the debt has not yet
been paid by the obligor, the Clerk may certify the delinquency to the
Department pursuant to Section 421.65 of the Code of Iowa and the memorandum of
understanding between the City and the Department.
CHAPTER 8
INDUSTRIAL PROPERTY TAX EXEMPTIONS
 
8.01 Purpose                        8.06 Applications
8.02 Definitions                    8.07 Approval
8.03 Period of Partial Exemption    8.08 Exemption Repealed
8.04 Amounts Eligible for Exemption 8.09 Dual Exemptions Prohibited
8.05 Limitations
8.01   PURPOSE.
The purpose of this chapter is to provide for a partial exemption from property
taxation of the actual value added to industrial real estate by the new
construction of industrial real estate, research-service facilities,
warehouses, and distribution centers.
8.02   DEFINITIONS.
For use in this chapter the following terms are defined:
1.   “Actual value added” means the actual value added as of the first year for
which the exemption is received.
2.   “Distribution center” means a building or structure used primarily for the
storage of goods that are intended for subsequent shipment to retail outlets.
Distribution center does not mean a building or structure used primarily to
store raw agricultural products, used primarily by a manufacturer to store
goods to be used in the manufacturing process, used primarily for the storage
of petroleum products, or used for the retail sale of goods.
3.   “New construction” means new buildings and structures and includes new
buildings and structures that are constructed as additions to existing
buildings and structures. New construction does not include reconstruction of
an existing building or structure that does not constitute complete replacement
of an existing building or structure or refitting of an existing building or
structure unless the reconstruction of an existing building or structure is
required due to economic obsolescence and the reconstruction is necessary to
implement recognized industry standards for the manufacturing and processing of
specific products and the reconstruction is required for the owner of the
building or structure to continue competitively to manufacture or process those
products, which determination shall receive prior approval from the Council
upon the recommendation of the State Department of Economic Development.
4.   “Research-service facilities” means a building or group of buildings
devoted primarily to research and development activities, including (but not
limited to) the design and production or manufacture of prototype products for
experimental use and corporate research services that do not have a primary
purpose of providing on-site services to the public.
5.   “Warehouse” means a building or structure used as a public warehouse for
the storage of goods pursuant to Chapter 554, Article 7, of the Code of Iowa,
except that it does not mean a building or structure used primarily to store
raw agricultural products or from which goods are sold at retail.
8.03   PERIOD OF PARTIAL EXEMPTION.
The actual value added to industrial real estate by the new construction of
industrial real estate, research-service facilities, warehouses, and
distribution centers is eligible to receive a partial exemption from taxation
for a period of five years. The exemption shall also apply to the acquisition
of or improvement to machinery and equipment assessed as real estate pursuant
to Section 427A.1(1)(e) of the Code of Iowa, unless the machinery or equipment
is part of the normal replacement or operating process to maintain or expand
the existing operational status.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 427B.3)
8.04   AMOUNTS ELIGIBLE FOR EXEMPTION.
The amount of actual value added, which is eligible to be exempt from taxation,
shall be as follows:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 427B.3)
1.   For the first year, 75 percent.
2.   For the second year, 60 percent.
3.   For the third year, 45 percent.
4.   For the fourth year, 30 percent.
5.   For the fifth year, 15 percent.
8.05   LIMITATIONS.
The granting of the exemption under this chapter for new construction
constituting complete replacement of an existing building or structure shall
not result in the assessed value of the industrial real estate being reduced
below the assessed value of the industrial real estate before the start of the
new construction added.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 427B.3)
8.06   APPLICATIONS.
An application shall be filed for each project resulting in actual value added
for which an exemption is claimed.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 427B.4)
1.   The application for exemption shall be filed by the owner of the property
with the local assessor by February 1 of the assessment year in which the value
added is first assessed for taxation.
2.   Applications for exemption shall be made on forms prescribed by the
Director of Revenue and shall contain information pertaining to the nature of
the improvement, its cost, and other information deemed necessary by the
Director of Revenue.
8.07   APPROVAL.
A person may submit a proposal to the Council to receive prior approval for
eligibility for a tax exemption on new construction. If the Council resolves to
consider such proposal, it shall publish notice and hold a public hearing
thereon. Thereafter, at least 30 days after such hearing, the Council, by
ordinance, may give its prior approval of a tax exemption for new construction
if the new construction is in conformance with City zoning. Such prior approval
shall not entitle the owner to exemption from taxation until the new
construction has been completed and found to be qualified real estate.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 427B.4)
8.08   EXEMPTION REPEALED.
When in the opinion of the Council continuation of the exemption granted by
this chapter ceases to be of benefit to the City, the Council may repeal this
chapter, but all existing exemptions shall continue until their expiration.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 427B.5)
8.09   DUAL EXEMPTIONS PROHIBITED.
A property tax exemption under this chapter shall not be granted if the
property for which the exemption is claimed has received any other property tax
exemption authorized by law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 427B.6)
CHAPTER 10
URBAN RENEWAL
 
EDITOR’S NOTE
The following ordinances not codified herein, and specifically saved from
repeal, have been adopted establishing Urban Renewal Areas in the City and
remain in full force and effect.
ORDINANCE NO. ADOPTED          NAME OF AREA
318           October 17, 2002 2002 Addition to the Solon Urban Renewal Area
336           December 2, 2004 Amended the Urban Renewal Map
470           May 4, 2022      April 2022 Addition to the Solon Urban Renewal
                               Area
 
CHAPTER 11
URBAN REVITALIZATION
 
EDITOR’S NOTE
The following ordinances not codified herein, and specifically saved from
repeal, have been adopted designating Urban Revitalization Areas in the City
and remain in full force and effect.
ORDINANCE NO. ADOPTED         NAME OF AREA
341           January 6, 2005 Solon Revitalization Area
 
CHAPTER 15
MAYOR
 
15.01 Term of Office    15.04 Compensation
15.02 Powers and Duties 15.05 Voting
15.03 Appointments
 
15.01   TERM OF OFFICE.
The Mayor is elected for a term of four years.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 376.2)
15.02   POWERS AND DUTIES.
The powers and duties of the Mayor are as follows:
1.   Chief Executive Officer. Act as the chief executive officer of the City
and presiding officer of the Council, supervise all departments of the City,
except for supervisory duties delegated to the City Administrator, give
direction to department heads concerning the functions of the departments, and
have the power to examine all functions of the municipal departments, their
records and to call for special reports from department heads at any time.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.14(1))
2.   Proclamation of Emergency. Have authority to take command of the police
and govern the City by proclamation, upon making a determination that a time of
emergency or public danger exists. Within the City limits, the Mayor has all
the powers conferred upon the Sheriff to suppress disorders.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.14(2))
3.   Special Meetings. Call special meetings of the Council when the Mayor
deems such meetings necessary to the interests of the City.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.14(1))
4.   Mayor’s Veto. Sign, veto, or take no action on an ordinance, amendment, or
resolution passed by the Council. The Mayor may veto an ordinance, amendment,
or resolution within 14 days after passage. The Mayor shall explain the reasons
for the veto in a written message to the Council at the time of the veto.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.5 and 380.6(2))
5.   Reports to Council. Make such oral or written reports to the Council as
required. These reports shall concern municipal affairs generally, the
municipal departments, and recommendations suitable for Council action.
6.   Negotiations. Represent the City in all negotiations properly entered into
in accordance with law or ordinance. The Mayor shall not represent the City
where this duty is specifically delegated to another officer by law, ordinance,
or Council direction.
7.   Contracts. Whenever authorized by the Council, sign contracts on behalf of
the City.
8.   Professional Services. Upon order of the Council, secure for the City such
specialized and professional services not already available to the City. In
executing the order of the Council, the Mayor shall act in accordance with this
Code and the laws of the State.
9.   Licenses and Permits. Sign all licenses and permits that have been granted
by the Council, except those designated by law or ordinance to be issued by
another municipal officer.
10.   Nuisances. Issue written order for removal, at public expense, any
nuisance for which no person can be found responsible and liable.
11.   Absentee Officer. Make appropriate provision that duties of any absentee
officer be carried on during such absence.
15.03   APPOINTMENTS.
The Mayor shall appoint the Mayor Pro Tem. The Mayor also appoints, subject to
Council approval, the following officials:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.4)
1.   Library Board of Trustees.
2.   Historic Preservation Commission.
3.   Board of Appeals.
4.   Water Appeal Board.
5.   Weed Official.
In addition, the Mayor recommends individuals for the Council to appoint for
membership on the Planning and Zoning Commission.
15.04   COMPENSATION.
The salary of the Mayor is $1,920.00 per year and an additional $40.00 for each
Council meeting, special meeting, committee meeting, or Council event attended,
payable monthly, plus $375.00 per year, paid annually.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13(8))
15.05   VOTING.
The Mayor is not a member of the Council and shall not vote as a member of the
Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.4)
CHAPTER 16
MAYOR PRO TEM
 
16.01 Vice President of Council 16.03 Voting Rights
16.02 Powers and Duties         16.04 Compensation
16.01   VICE PRESIDENT OF COUNCIL.
The Mayor shall appoint a member of the Council as Mayor Pro Tem, who shall
serve as vice president of the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.14(3))
16.02   POWERS AND DUTIES.
Except for the limitations otherwise provided herein, the Mayor Pro Tem shall
perform the duties of the Mayor in cases of absence or inability of the Mayor
to perform such duties. In the exercise of the duties of the office the Mayor
Pro Tem shall not have power to appoint, employ, or discharge from employment
officers or employees that the Mayor has the power to appoint, employ, or
discharge without the approval of the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.14(3))
16.03   VOTING RIGHTS.
The Mayor Pro Tem shall have the right to vote as a member of the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.14(3))
16.04   COMPENSATION.
If the Mayor Pro Tem performs the duties of the Mayor during the Mayor’s
absence or disability for a continuous period of 15 days or more, the Mayor Pro
Tem may be paid for that period the compensation as determined by the Council,
based upon the Mayor Pro Tem’s performance of the Mayor’s duties and upon the
compensation of the Mayor.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13(8))
CHAPTER 17
CITY COUNCIL
 
17.01 Number and Term of Council 17.04 Council Meetings
17.02 Powers and Duties          17.05 Appointments
17.03 Exercise of Power          17.06 Compensation
17.01   NUMBER AND TERM OF COUNCIL.
The Council consists of five Council members elected at large for overlapping
terms of four years.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.4 and 376.2)
17.02   POWERS AND DUTIES.
The powers and duties of the Council include, but are not limited to the
following:
1.   General. All powers of the City are vested in the Council except as
otherwise provided by law or ordinance.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.2(1))
2.   Wards. By ordinance, the Council may divide the City into wards based upon
population, change the boundaries of wards, eliminate wards, or create new
wards.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13(7))
3.   Fiscal Authority. The Council shall apportion and appropriate all funds,
and audit and allow all bills, accounts, payrolls, and claims, and order
payment thereof. It shall make all assessments for the cost of street
improvements, sidewalks, sewers, and other work, improvement, or repairs that
may be specially assessed.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.2[1], 384.16, and 384.38(1))
4.   Public Improvements. The Council shall make all orders for the
construction of any improvements, bridges, or buildings.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.2(1))
5.   Contracts. The Council shall make or authorize the making of all
contracts. No contract shall bind or be obligatory upon the City unless
approved by the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Ch. 26)
6.   Employees. The Council shall authorize, by resolution, the number, duties,
term of office, and compensation of employees or officers not otherwise
provided for by State law or the Code.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13(4))
7.   Setting Compensation for Elected Officers. By ordinance, the Council shall
prescribe the compensation of the Mayor, Council members, and other elected
City officers, but a change in the compensation of the Mayor does not become
effective during the term in which the change is adopted, and the Council shall
not adopt such an ordinance changing the compensation of any elected officer
during the months of November and December in the year of a regular City
election. A change in the compensation of Council members becomes effective for
all Council members at the beginning of the term of the Council members elected
at the election next following the change in compensation.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13(8))
17.03   EXERCISE OF POWER.
The Council shall exercise a power only by the passage of a motion, a
resolution, an amendment, or an ordinance in the following manner:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.3(1))
1.   Action by Council. Passage of an ordinance, amendment, or resolution
requires a majority vote of all of the members of the Council. Passage of a
motion requires a majority vote of a quorum of the Council. A resolution must
be passed to spend public funds in excess of $100,000.00 on a public
improvement project, or to accept public improvements and facilities upon their
completion. Each Council member’s vote on a measure must be recorded. A measure
that fails to receive sufficient votes for passage shall be considered
defeated.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.4)
2.   Overriding Mayor’s Veto. Within 30 days after the Mayor’s veto, the
Council may pass the measure again by a vote of not less than two-thirds of all
of the members of the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.6(2))
3.   Measures Become Effective. Measures passed by the Council become effective
in one of the following ways:
A.   An ordinance or amendment signed by the Mayor becomes effective when the
ordinance or a summary of the ordinance is published, unless a subsequent
effective date is provided within the ordinance or amendment.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.6(1)(a))
B.   A resolution signed by the Mayor becomes effective immediately upon
signing.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.6(1)(b))
C.   A motion becomes effective immediately upon passage of the motion by the
Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.6(1)(c))
D.   If the Mayor vetoes an ordinance, amendment, or resolution and the Council
repasses the measure after the Mayor’s veto, a resolution becomes effective
immediately upon repassage, and an ordinance or amendment becomes a law when
the ordinance or a summary of the ordinance is published, unless a subsequent
effective date is provided within the ordinance or amendment.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.6(2))
E.   If the Mayor takes no action on an ordinance, amendment, or resolution, a
resolution becomes effective 14 days after the date of passage, and an
ordinance or amendment becomes law when the ordinance or a summary of the
ordinance is published, but not sooner than 14 days after the date of passage,
unless a subsequent effective date is provided within the ordinance or
amendment.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.6(3))
“All of the members of the Council” refers to all of the seats of the Council
including a vacant seat and a seat where the member is absent, but does not
include a seat where the Council member declines to vote by reason of a
conflict of interest.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.1(a))
17.04   COUNCIL MEETINGS.
Procedures for giving notice of meetings of the Council and other provisions
regarding the conduct of Council meetings are contained in Section 5.06.
Additional particulars relating to Council meetings are the following:
1.   Regular Meetings. The regular meetings of the Council are on the first and
third Wednesdays of each month at 5:30 p.m. at City Hall or at such other place
as determined by the Council. If such day falls on a legal holiday, the meeting
is held at a mutually agreeable time, as determined by the Council.
2.   Special Meetings. Special meetings shall be held upon call of the Mayor or
upon the request of a majority of the members of the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13(5))
3.   Quorum. A majority of all Council members is a quorum.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13(1))
4.   Rules of Procedure. The Council shall determine its own rules and maintain
records of its proceedings.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13(5))
5.   Compelling Attendance. Any three members of the Council can compel the
attendance of the absent members at any regular, adjourned, or duly called
meeting, by serving a written notice upon the absent members to attend at once.
17.05   APPOINTMENTS.
The Council shall appoint the following officials and prescribe their powers,
duties, compensation, and term of office:
1.   City Clerk.
2.   City Attorney.
3.   City Administrator.
4.   City Treasurer.
5.   Planning and Zoning Commission.
6.   Board of Adjustment.
7.   Zoning Officer.
17.06   COMPENSATION.
The salary of each Council member is $375.00 per year, paid annually, plus
$40.00 for each Council meeting, special meeting, committee meeting, or Council
event attended, payable quarterly.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13(8))
CHAPTER 18
CITY CLERK
 
18.01 Appointment and Compensation 18.08 Records
18.02 Powers and Duties: General   18.09 Attendance at Meetings
18.03 Publication of Minutes       18.10 Licenses and Permits
18.04 Recording Measures           18.11 Notification of Appointments
18.05 Other Publications           18.12 Elections
18.06 Authentication               18.13 City Seal
18.07 Certification
 
18.01   APPOINTMENT AND COMPENSATION.
The Council shall appoint by majority vote a Clerk to serve at the discretion
of the Council. The Clerk shall receive such compensation as established by
resolution of the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13(3))
18.02   POWERS AND DUTIES: GENERAL.
The Clerk (or, in the Clerk’s absence or inability to act, the Deputy Clerk)
has the powers and duties as provided in this chapter, this Code, and the law.
18.03   PUBLICATION OF MINUTES.
Within 15 days following a regular or special meeting of the Council, the Clerk
shall cause the minutes of the proceedings of the Council, including the total
expenditure from each City fund, to be delivered to a newspaper of general
circulation in the City for publication. The publication shall include a list
of all claims allowed and a summary of all receipts and shall show the gross
amount of the claims.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13(6))
18.04   RECORDING MEASURES.
The Clerk shall promptly record each measure considered by the Council and
record a statement with the measure, where applicable, indicating whether the
Mayor signed, vetoed, or took no action on the measure, and whether the measure
was repassed after the Mayor’s veto.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.7(1) and (2))
18.05   OTHER PUBLICATIONS.
The Clerk shall cause to be published all ordinances, enactments, proceedings,
and official notices requiring publication as follows:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.3)
1.   Time. If notice of an election, hearing, or other official action is
required by this Code or law, the notice must be published at least once, not
less than four or more than 20 days before the date of the election, hearing,
or other action, unless otherwise provided by law.
2.   Manner of Publication. A publication required by this Code or law must be
in a newspaper published at least once weekly and having general circulation in
the City.
18.06   AUTHENTICATION.
The Clerk shall authenticate all measures except motions with the Clerk’s
signature, certifying the time and manner of publication when required.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.7(4))
18.07   CERTIFICATION.
The Clerk shall certify all measures establishing any zoning district, building
lines, or fire limits and a plat showing the district, lines, or limits to the
recorder of the County containing the affected parts of the City.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.11)
18.08   RECORDS.
The Clerk shall maintain the specified City records in the following manner:
1.   Ordinances and Codes. Maintain copies of all effective City ordinances and
codes for public use.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.7(5))
2.   Custody. Have custody and be responsible for the safekeeping of all
writings or documents in which the City is a party in interest unless otherwise
specifically directed by law or ordinance.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13(4))
3.   Maintenance. Maintain all City records and documents (or accurate
reproductions) for at least five years except that ordinances, resolutions,
Council proceedings, records, and documents (or accurate reproductions)
relating to the issuance, cancellation, transfer, redemption, or replacement of
public bonds or obligations shall be kept for at least 11 years following the
final maturity of the bonds or obligations. Ordinances, resolutions, Council
proceedings, records, and documents (or accurate reproductions) relating to
real property transactions shall be maintained permanently.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13(3) and (5))
4.   Provide Copy. Furnish upon request to any municipal officer a copy of any
record, paper, or public document under the Clerk’s control when it may be
necessary to such officer in the discharge of such officer’s duty; furnish a
copy to any citizen when requested upon payment of the fee set by Council
resolution; under the direction of the Mayor or other authorized officer, affix
the seal of the City to those public documents or instruments that by this Code
are required to be attested by the affixing of the seal.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13(4) and (5) and 380.7(5))
5.   Filing of Communications. Keep and file all communications and petitions
directed to the Council or to the City generally. The Clerk shall endorse
thereon the action of the Council taken upon matters considered in such
communications and petitions.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13(4))
18.09   ATTENDANCE AT MEETINGS.
The Clerk shall attend all regular and special Council meetings and, at the
direction of the Council, the Clerk shall attend meetings of committees,
boards, and commissions. The Clerk shall record and preserve a correct record
of the proceedings of such meetings.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13(4))
18.10   LICENSES AND PERMITS.
The Clerk shall issue or revoke licenses and permits when authorized by this
Code, and keep a record of licenses and permits issued which shall show date of
issuance, license or permit number, official receipt number, name of person to
whom issued, term of license or permit, and purpose for which issued.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13(4))
18.11   NOTIFICATION OF APPOINTMENTS.
The Clerk shall inform all persons appointed by the Mayor or Council to offices
in the City government of their positions and the time at which they shall
assume the duties of their offices.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13(4))
18.12   ELECTIONS.
The Clerk shall perform the duties relating to elections in accordance with
Chapter 376 of the Code of Iowa.
18.13   CITY SEAL.
The City seal is in the custody of the Clerk and shall be attached by the Clerk
to all transcripts, orders, and certificates that it may be necessary or proper
to authenticate. The City seal is circular in form, in the center of which are
the words “SOLON, IOWA” and around the margin of which are the words “CITY
SEAL.”
[The next page is 147]
CHAPTER 19
CITY TREASURER
 
19.01 Appointment  19.03 Duties of Treasurer
19.02 Compensation 19.04 Boards and Commissions
 
19.01   APPOINTMENT.
The Treasurer is appointed by the Council to serve at the discretion of the
Council. In the Treasurer’s absence or inability to act, the Clerk, or Deputy
Clerk, has the powers and duties as provided in this chapter, this Code, and
State law.
19.02   COMPENSATION.
The Treasurer is paid such compensation as specified by resolution of the
Council.
19.03   DUTIES OF TREASURER.
The duties of the Treasurer are as follows:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13(4))
1.   Custody of Funds. Be responsible for the safe custody of all funds of the
City in the manner provided by law and Council direction.
2.   Record of Fund. Keep the record of each fund separate.
3.   Record Receipts. Keep an accurate record of all money or securities
received by the Treasurer on behalf of the City and specify the date, from
whom, and for what purpose received.
4.   Record Disbursements. Keep an accurate account of all disbursements,
money, or property, specifying date, to whom, and from what fund paid.
5.   Special Assessments. Keep a separate account of all money received by the
Treasurer from special assessments.
6.   Deposit Funds. Upon receipt of moneys to be held in the Treasurer’s
custody and belonging to the City, deposit the same in depositories selected by
the Council.
7.   Reconciliation. Reconcile depository statements with the Treasurer’s books
and certify monthly to the Council the balance of cash and investments of each
fund and amounts received and disbursed.
8.   Debt Service. Keep a register of all bonds outstanding and record all
payments of interest and principal.
9.   Other Duties. Perform such other duties as specified by the Council by
resolution or ordinance.
19.04   BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS.
The Treasurer is the Treasurer of the Library Board and pays out all money
under control of such Board on orders signed by the Chairperson and Secretary,
but receives no additional compensation for such services.
CHAPTER 20
CITY ATTORNEY
 
20.01 Appointment and Compensation 20.05 Review and Comment
20.02 Attorney for City            20.06 Provide Legal Opinion
20.03 Power of Attorney            20.07 Attendance at Council Meetings
20.04 Ordinance Preparation        20.08 Prepare Documents
 
20.01   APPOINTMENT AND COMPENSATION.
The Council shall appoint by majority vote a City Attorney to serve at the
discretion of the Council. The City Attorney shall receive such compensation as
established by resolution of the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13(4))
20.02   ATTORNEY FOR CITY.
The City Attorney shall act as attorney for the City in all matters affecting
the City’s interest and appear on behalf of the City before any court,
tribunal, commission, or board. The City Attorney shall prosecute or defend all
actions and proceedings when so requested by the Mayor or Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13(4))
20.03   POWER OF ATTORNEY.
The City Attorney shall sign the name of the City to all appeal bonds and to
all other bonds or papers of any kind that may be essential to the prosecution
of any cause in court, and when so signed the City shall be bound upon the
same.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13(4))
20.04   ORDINANCE PREPARATION.
The City Attorney shall prepare those ordinances that the Council may desire
and direct to be prepared and report to the Council upon all such ordinances
before their final passage by the Council and publication.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13(4))
20.05   REVIEW AND COMMENT.
The City Attorney shall, upon request, make a report to the Council giving an
opinion on all contracts, documents, resolutions, or ordinances submitted to or
coming under the City Attorney’s notice.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13(4))
20.06   PROVIDE LEGAL OPINION.
The City Attorney shall give advice or a written legal opinion on City
contracts and all questions of law relating to City matters submitted by the
Mayor or Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13(4))
20.07   ATTENDANCE AT COUNCIL MEETINGS.
The City Attorney shall attend meetings of the Council at the request of the
Mayor or Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13(4))
20.08   PREPARE DOCUMENTS.
The City Attorney shall, upon request, formulate drafts for contracts, forms,
and other writings that may be required for the use of the City.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13(4))
CHAPTER 21
CITY ADMINISTRATOR
 
21.01 Term of Office 21.03 Essential Job Duties and Responsibilities
21.02 Compensation    
 
21.01   TERM OF OFFICE.
The City Administrator shall be appointed by the Council and shall serve at
their direction and that of the Mayor until resignation of that person, or
their removal by the Council.
21.02   COMPENSATION.
The compensation for the City Administrator, including expenses, shall be fixed
by resolution of the Council.
21.03   ESSENTIAL JOB DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES.
1.   The duties of the City Administrator include, but are not limited to,
these areas:
A.   To supervise the enforcement and execution of this Code, policies, and
Council directives and to have general supervision and direction of the
administration of the City government.
B.   To attend all official meetings of the Council unless excused by the
Council or the Mayor, and be responsible for compliance of the open meeting
law.
C.   To be directly responsible to the Council for the administration of
municipal affairs as directed by that body. Council involvement in
administration initiated by the Council must be coordinated through the City
Administrator.
D.   To supervise and direct the official conduct of all non-elective officers,
departments, and employees of the City.
E.   To employ such assistants and other employees of the City for which the
Council has approved the positions generally and to discharge said assistants
or employees found incompetent or derelict in their duties, with approval of
the Council. Employment and discharge at department head level shall be subject
to review of the Council. The power to hire and discharge shall not apply to
the City Attorney and City Engineer, but the City Administrator shall report to
the individuals filling those positions, suggesting recommendations with regard
to their employment, all subject to grievance procedures of this Code.
F.   To obtain for the City, upon order of the Council, such specialized and
professional services deemed necessary by the Council and not already available
to the City.
G.   To supervise the construction, improvement, repair, maintenance, and
management of all City property capital improvements and undertakings of the
City, except as provided by the Council in a separate agreement. A report and
accounting of all such obligations, agreements, commitments, and contractual
relationships involving the City shall be maintained and a prompt periodic
reporting, in writing, shall be given to the Mayor and the Council advising of
the status of all such projects. In addition, in the event that there are any
major deviations from any agreements, the Council shall receive an immediate
report in order that the appropriate action can be taken.
H.   To make such investigations into the affairs and conduct of any
department, agency, officer, or employee under the supervision of the City
Administrator as is necessary or desirable or as so directed by the Council.
I.   To supervise the recording, issuing, and revocation of licenses and
permits and to sign the same when authorized by this Code.
J.   To keep the Council fully advised of the financial and other conditions of
the City and its future needs, jointly with the Clerk and Treasurer.
K.   To supervise the creation of periodic itemized financial reports in
writing for the Council.
L.   To develop proposed budget and present to Council by assembling the
department heads’ proposed annual departmental budgets, which proposals shall
include projected revenues, proposed expenditures, and salary requirements,
jointly with the Clerk and Treasurer.
M.   To conduct the business affairs of the City and cause accurate records to
be kept.
N.   To designate one or more employees to discharge the duties of the office
of City Administrator when the City Administrator is absent from their position
or when the position is vacant. Said designation shall be subject to Council
approval.
O.   To order to be abated any nuisance as established under this Code. Said
order shall be in writing.
P.   To direct the purchasing of all commodities, materials, supplies, capital
outlay, and services for all departments of the City that have been budgeted
and appropriated by appropriate resolution of the Council and to enforce a
program to determine that such purchases are received and are of the quality
and character called for.
Q.   To act as Zoning Officer and assist the Council and the Planning and
Zoning Commission in the carrying out of the Comprehensive Plan and to assist
in all other forms of planning with the City government and to initiate
municipal infractions.
R.   To furnish the goals as established by the Council and the plans therefor,
to citizens, businesses, community organizations and boards, or other
interested parties. In addition, said person shall coordinate actions of the
City with all other communities and regional groups, to be able to share
matters of mutual interest or concern.
1.   The City Administrator shall be in a position to receive all inquiries,
concerns, and complaints voiced through residents of the City, elected
officials, or other parties and to address, delegate, or refer the issue to the
Council as required.
2.   The City Administrator shall be charged to constantly work on methods of
improving municipal operations, including the adoption of programs that would
be beneficial to the City and to keep the Council advised of any new
developments which would be either beneficial or of some detriment to the City.
3.   The City Administrator shall perform such other duties as the Council may
direct.
4.   The City Administrator may be required and permitted to act as the Clerk.
CHAPTER 22
LIBRARY BOARD OF TRUSTEES
 
22.01 Public Library                   22.07 Expenditures
22.02 Library Trustees                 22.08 Annual Report
22.03 Organization of the Board        22.09 Injury to Books or Property
22.04 Powers and Duties                22.10 Theft
22.05 Contracting with Other Libraries 22.11 Notice Posted
22.06 Nonresident Use                   
 
22.01   PUBLIC LIBRARY.
There is established a free public library to be known as the Solon Public
Library. It is referred to in this chapter as the Library.
22.02   LIBRARY TRUSTEES.
The Mayor, with the approval of the Council, shall appoint seven persons to
constitute a Board of Library Trustees referred to in this chapter as “the
Board.” Any interested person of legal age is eligible for an appointment.
Three of the Board of Trustees must be persons residing within the Solon School
District boundaries outside of the City limits and four trustees must reside
within the City limits.
22.03   ORGANIZATION OF THE BOARD.
The organization of the Board shall be as follows:
1.   Term of Office. All appointments to the Board shall be for four years,
except to fill vacancies. Each term shall commence on January 1. Appointments
shall be made every year of one-fourth the total number or as near as possible,
to stagger the terms.
2.   Vacancies. The position of any resident trustee shall be vacated if such
member moves permanently from the City or School District, or if they are
absent without cause from six consecutive regular meetings of the Board, or if
they are removed for cause by the Mayor with the approval of the Council.
Vacancies in the Board shall be filled in the same manner as an original
appointment except that the new Trustee shall fill out the unexpired term for
which the appointment is made.
3.   Compensation. Trustees shall receive no compensation for their services.
22.04   POWERS AND DUTIES.
The Board shall have and exercise the following powers and duties:
1.   Officers. To meet and elect from its members a President, a Secretary, and
such other officers as it deems necessary. The City Treasurer shall serve as
Board Treasurer, but shall not be a member of the Board.
2.   Physical Plant. To have charge, control, and supervision of the Library,
its appurtenances, fixtures, and rooms containing the same.
3.   Charge of Affairs. To direct and control all affairs of the Library.
4.   Hiring of Personnel. To employ a Librarian, and authorize the Librarian to
employ such assistants and employees as may be necessary for the proper
management of the Library, and fix their compensation; provided, however, prior
to such employment, the compensation of the Librarian, assistants, and
employees shall have been fixed and approved by a majority of the members of
the Board voting in favor thereof.
5.   Removal of Personnel. To remove the Librarian, by a two-thirds vote of the
Board, and provide procedures for the removal of the assistants or employees
for misdemeanor, incompetence, or inattention to duty, subject however, to the
provisions of Chapter 35C of the Code of Iowa.
6.   Purchases. To select, or authorize the Librarian to select, and make
purchases of books, pamphlets, magazines, periodicals, papers, maps, journals,
other Library materials, furniture, fixtures, stationery, and supplies for the
Library within budgetary limits set by the Board.
7.   Use by Nonresidents. To authorize the use of the Library by nonresidents
and to fix charges therefor unless a contract for free service exists.
8.   Rules and Regulations. To make and adopt, amend, modify, or repeal rules
and regulations, not inconsistent with this Code and the law, for the care,
use, government, and management of the Library and the business of the Board,
fixing and enforcing penalties for violations.
9.   Expenditures. To have exclusive control of the expenditure of all funds
allocated for Library purposes by the Council, and of all moneys available by
gift or otherwise for the erection of Library buildings, and of all other
moneys belonging to the Library including fines and rentals collected under the
rules of the Board.
10.   Gifts. To accept gifts of real property, personal property, or mixed
property, and devises, and bequests, including trust funds; to take the title
to said property in the name of the Library; to execute deeds and bills of sale
for the conveyance of said property; and to expend the funds received by them
from such gifts, for the improvement of the Library.
11.   Enforce the Performance of Conditions on Gifts. To enforce the
performance of conditions on gifts, donations, devises, and bequests accepted
by the City by action against the Council.
12.   Record of Proceedings. To keep a record of its proceedings.
13.   County Historical Association. To have authority to make agreements with
the local County historical association where such exists, and to set apart the
necessary room and to care for such articles as may come into the possession of
the association. The Trustees are further authorized to purchase necessary
receptacles and materials for the preservation and protection of such articles
as are in their judgment of a historical and educational nature and pay for the
same out of funds allocated for Library purposes.
22.05   CONTRACTING WITH OTHER LIBRARIES.
The Board has power to contract with other libraries in accordance with the
following:
1.   Contracting. The Board may contract with any other boards of trustees of
free public libraries, with any other city, school corporation, private or
semiprivate organization, institution of higher learning, township, or County,
or with the trustees of any County library district for the use of the Library
by their respective residents.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.5 and Ch. 28E)
2.   Termination. Such a contract may be terminated at any time by mutual
consent of the contracting parties. It also may be terminated by a majority
vote of the electors represented by either of the contracting parties. Such a
termination proposition shall be submitted to the electors by the governing
body of a contracting party on a written petition of not less than five percent
in number of the electors who voted for governor in the territory of the
contracting party at the last general election. The petition must be presented
to the governing body not less than 40 days before the election. The
proposition may be submitted at any election provided by law which is held in
the territory of the party seeking to terminate the contract.
22.06   NONRESIDENT USE.
The Board may authorize the use of the Library by persons not residents of the
City or County in any one or more of the following ways:
1.   Lending. By lending the books or other materials of the Library to
nonresidents on the same terms and conditions as to residents of the City, or
County, or upon payment of a special nonresident Library fee.
2.   Depository. By establishing depositories of Library books or other
materials to be loaned to nonresidents.
3.   Bookmobiles. By establishing bookmobiles or a traveling library so that
books or other Library materials may be loaned to nonresidents.
4.   Branch Library. By establishing branch libraries for lending books or
other Library materials to nonresidents.
22.07   EXPENDITURES.
All money appropriated by the Council for the operation and maintenance of the
Library shall be set aside in an account for the Library. Expenditures shall be
paid for only on orders of the Board, signed by its President and Secretary.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.20 and 392.5)
22.08   ANNUAL REPORT.
The Board shall make a report to the Council immediately after the close of the
fiscal year. This report shall contain statements as to the condition of the
Library, the number of books added, the number circulated, the amount of fines
collected, and the amount of money expended in the maintenance of the Library
during the year, together with such further information as may be required by
the Council.
22.09   INJURY TO BOOKS OR PROPERTY.
It is unlawful for a person willfully, maliciously or wantonly to tear, deface,
mutilate, injure or destroy, in whole or in part, any newspaper, periodical,
book, map, pamphlet, chart, picture, or other property belonging to the Library
or reading room.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.1)
22.10   THEFT.
No person shall take possession or control of property of the Library with the
intent to deprive the Library thereof.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 714.1)
22.11   NOTICE POSTED.
There shall be posted in clear public view within the Library notices informing
the public of the following:
1.   Failure to Return. Failure to return Library materials for two months or
more after the date the person agreed to return the Library materials, or
failure to return Library equipment for one month or more after the date the
person agreed to return the Library equipment, is evidence of intent to deprive
the owner, provided a reasonable attempt, including the mailing by restricted
certified mail of notice that such material or equipment is overdue and
criminal actions will be taken, has been made to reclaim the materials or
equipment.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 714.5)
2.   Detention and Search. Persons concealing Library materials may be detained
and searched pursuant to law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 808.12)
CHAPTER 23
PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION
 
23.01 Planning and Zoning Commission 23.04 Compensation
23.02 Term of Office                 23.05 Powers and Duties
23.03 Vacancies                       
 
23.01   PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION.
The City Planning and Zoning Commission, hereinafter referred to as the
Commission, consists of seven members appointed by the Council. The Commission
members shall be residents of the City and shall not hold any elective office
in the City government.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 414.6 and 392.1)
23.02   TERM OF OFFICE.
The term of office of the members of the Commission shall be three years. The
terms of not more than one-third of the members will expire in any one year.
Terms will commence on January 1.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)
23.03   VACANCIES.
If any vacancy exists on the Commission, caused by resignation or otherwise, a
successor for the remainder of the term shall be appointed in the same manner
as the original appointee.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)
23.04   COMPENSATION.
All members of the Commission shall serve without compensation, except their
actual expenses, which shall be subject to the approval of the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)
23.05   POWERS AND DUTIES.
The Commission shall have and exercise the following powers and duties:
1.   Selection of Officers. The Commission shall choose annually at its first
regular meeting one of its members to act as Chairperson and another as Vice
Chairperson, who shall perform all the duties of the Chairperson during the
Chairperson’s absence or disability.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)
2.   Adopt Rules and Regulations. The Commission shall adopt such rules and
regulations governing its organization and procedure as it may deem necessary.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)
3.   Zoning. The Commission shall have and exercise all the powers and duties
and privileges in establishing the City zoning regulations and other related
matters and may from time to time recommend to the Council amendments,
supplements, changes, or modifications, all as provided by Chapter 414 of the
Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 414.6)
4.   Recommendations on Improvements. The design and proposed location of
public improvements shall be submitted to the Commission for its
recommendations prior to any actions being taken by the City for the
construction or placement of such improvements. Such requirements and
recommendations shall not act as a stay upon action for any such improvement if
the Commission, after 30 days’ written notice requesting such recommendations,
has failed to file the same.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)
5.   Review and Comment on Plats. All plans, plats, or re-plats of subdivisions
or re-subdivisions of land in the City or adjacent thereto, laid out in lots or
plats with the streets, alleys, or other portions of the same intended to be
dedicated to the public in the City, shall first be submitted to the Commission
and its recommendations obtained before approval by the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)
6.   Fiscal Responsibilities. The Commission shall have full, complete, and
exclusive authority to expend, for and on behalf of the City, all sums of money
appropriated to it and to use and expend all gifts, donations, or payments that
are received by the City for City planning and zoning purposes.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)
7.   Limitation on Entering Contracts. The Commission shall have no power to
contract debts beyond the amount of its original or amended appropriation as
approved by the Council for the present year.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)
8.   Annual Report. The Commission shall each year make a report to the Mayor
and Council of its proceedings, with a full statement of its receipts and
disbursements and the progress of its work during the preceding fiscal year.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)
CHAPTER 24
HISTORIC PRESERVATION COMMISSION
 
24.01 Purpose     24.03 Structure of the Historic Preservation Commission
24.02 Definitions 24.04 Powers of the Historic Preservation Commission
 
24.01   PURPOSE.
The purpose of this chapter is to:
1.   Promote the educational, cultural, economic, and general welfare of the
public through the recognition, enhancement, and perpetuation of sites and
districts of historical and cultural significance;
2.   Safeguard the City’s historic, aesthetic, and cultural heritage by
preserving sites and district of historic and cultural significance;
3.   Stabilize and improve property values;
4.   Foster pride in the legacy of beauty and achievements of the past;
5.   Protect and enhance the City’s attractions to tourists and visitors and
the support and stimulus to business thereby provided;
6.   Strengthen the economy of the City;
7.   Promote the use of sites and districts of historic and cultural
significance as places for the education, pleasure, and welfare of the people
of the City.
24.02   DEFINITIONS.
For purposes of this chapter, the following terms are defined:
1.   “Commission” means the City’s Historic Preservation Commission, as
established by this chapter.
2.   “Historic district” means an area which contains a significant portion of
buildings, structures, or other improvements which, considered as a whole,
possess integrity of location, design, setting, materials, workmanship,
feeling, and association, and which area as a whole:
A.   Embodies the distinctive characteristics of a type, period, or method of
construction, or represents the work of a master, or possesses high artistic
values, or represents a significant and distinguishable entity whose components
may lack individual distinction; or
B.   Is associated with events that have made significant contributions to the
broad patters of our local, State, or national history; or
C.   Possesses a coherent and distinctive visual character or integrity based
upon similarity of scale, design, color, setting, workmanship, materials, or
combinations thereof which is deemed to add significantly to the value and
attractiveness of properties within such area; or
D.   Is associated with the lives of person significant in our past; or
E.   Has yielded, or may be likely to yield, information important in
prehistory or history.
1.   “Historic site” means a structure or building which:
A.   Is associated with events that have made a significant contribution to the
broad patterns of our history; or
B.   Is associated with the lives of persons significant in our past; or
C.   Embodies the distinctive characteristics of a type, period or method of
construction, or represents the work of a master, or possesses high artistic
values, or represents a significant and distinguishable entity whose components
may lack individual distinction; or
D.   Has yielded, or may be likely to yield, information important in
prehistory or history.
24.03   STRUCTURE OF THE HISTORIC PRESERVATION COMMISSION.
1.   The Historic Preservation Commission consists of three members. Two
members of the Historic Preservation Commission must reside within the City
limits. One member must reside within the Solon School District but does not
have to reside within the City limits.
2.   Members of the Historic Preservation Commission shall be appointed by the
Mayor with the advice and consent of the Council. Members shall demonstrate a
positive interest in historic preservation, possessing interest or expertise in
architecture, architectural history, historic preservation, City planning,
building rehabilitation, conservation in general, or real estate.
3.   The Historic Preservation Commission members are appointed for staggered
terms of three years, from January 1 following the year of such appointment or
until their successors are appointed to serve for the term of three years.
4.   Members may serve for more than one term. Each member shall serve until
the appointment of a successor.
5.   Vacancies occurring in the Historic Preservation Commission, other than
expiration of term of office, shall be only for the unexpired portion of the
term of the member replaced.
6.   Vacancies shall be filled by the City according to the original selection
as aforesaid.
7.   Members shall serve without compensation.
8.   A simple majority of the Historic Preservation Commission shall constitute
a quorum for the transaction of business.
9.   The Historic Preservation Commission shall elect a Chairperson who shall
preside over all Commission meetings and elect a Secretary who shall be
responsible for maintaining written records of the Historic Preservation
Commission’s proceedings.
10.   The Commission shall meet at least three times a year.
24.04   POWERS OF THE HISTORIC PRESERVATION COMMISSION.
1.   The Historic Preservation Commission may conduct studies for the
identification and designation of historic districts and sites meeting the
definitions established by this chapter. (The necessary inventory forms and
procedures for their completion are available from the State Bureau of Historic
Preservation.) The Historic Preservation Commission may proceed at its own
initiative or upon a petition from any person, group, or association. The
Historic Preservation Commission shall maintain records of all studies and
inventories for public use.
2.   The Historic Preservation Commission may make a recommendation to the
State Bureau of Historic Preservation for the listing of an historic district
or site in the National Register of Historic Places and may conduct a public
hearing thereon.
3.   The Historic Preservation Commission may investigate and recommend to the
Council the adoption of ordinances designating historic sites and historic
districts if they qualify as defined herein.
4.   In addition to those duties and powers specified above, the Historic
Preservation Commission may, with Council approval:
A.   Accept unconditional gifts and donations of real and personal property,
including money, for the purpose of historic preservation;
B.   Acquire, by purchase, bequest, or donation, fee and lesser interests in
historic properties, including properties adjacent to or associated with
historic properties;
C.   Preserve, restore, maintain, and operate historic properties under the
ownership or control of the Historic Preservation Commission;
D.   Lease, sell, and otherwise transfer or dispose of historic properties
subject to rights of public access and other covenants and in a manner that
will preserve the property;
E.   Contract with State or federal government or other organizations;
F.   Cooperate with federal, State, and local governments in the pursuance of
the objectives of historic preservation;
G.   Provide information for the purpose of historic preservation to the
Council; and
H.   Promote and conduct an educational and interpretive program on historic
properties within its jurisdiction.
I.   To have exclusive control of the expenditure of all funds allocated for
historic preservation purposes by the Council.
J.   To conduct activities to preserve historic information on the City, and to
secure appropriate equipment and storage space for said information, with
Council approval.
CHAPTER 30
CONTRACT LAW ENFORCEMENT
30.01   CONTRACT LAW ENFORCEMENT.
The Council may contract with the County Sheriff or any other qualified lawful
entity to provide law enforcement services within the City, and the Sheriff or
such other entity shall have and exercise the powers and duties as provided in
said contract and as required by law or ordinance.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 28E.30)
CHAPTER 35
FIRE PROTECTION
35.01   JOINT AGREEMENT.
On June 6, 2016, the City and the Township entities of Big Grove, Cedar, and
Newport jointly formed a Fire Protection and Emergency Response Agency. Known
as Solon Tri-Township Emergency Response Agency, the Agency will provide fire
protection and emergency services within the City and designated township
areas. This agreement was signed and filed with the Secretary of State on June
13, 2016.
CHAPTER 36
HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCE SPILLS
 
36.01 Purpose                     36.05 Notifications
36.02 Definitions                 36.06 Police Authority
36.03 Cleanup Required            36.07 Liability
36.04 Liability for Cleanup Costs  
 
36.01   PURPOSE.
In order to reduce the danger to the public health, safety, and welfare from
the leaks and spills of hazardous substances, these regulations are promulgated
to establish responsibility for the treatment, removal, and cleanup of
hazardous substance spills within the City limits.
36.02   DEFINITIONS.
For purposes of this chapter the following terms are defined:
1.   “Cleanup” means actions necessary to contain, collect, control, identify,
analyze, clean up, treat, disperse, remove, or dispose of a hazardous
substance.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 455B.381(1))
2.   “Hazardous condition” means any situation involving the actual, imminent,
or probable spillage, leakage, or release of a hazardous substance onto the
land, into a water of the State, or into the atmosphere which creates an
immediate or potential danger to the public health or safety or to the
environment.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 455B.381(4))
3.   “Hazardous substance” means any substance or mixture of substances that
presents a danger to the public health or safety and includes, but is not
limited to, a substance that is toxic, corrosive, or flammable, or that is an
irritant or that generates pressure through decomposition, heat, or other
means. “Hazardous substance” may include any hazardous waste identified or
listed by the administrator of the United States Environmental Protection
Agency under the Solid Waste Disposal Act as amended by the Resource
Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976, or any toxic pollutant listed under
Section 307 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act as amended to January 1,
1977, or any hazardous substance designated under Section 311 of the Federal
Water Pollution Control Act as amended to January 1, 1977, or any hazardous
material designated by the Secretary of Transportation under the Hazardous
Materials Transportation Act.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 455B.381(5))
4.   “Responsible person” means a person who at any time produces, handles,
stores, uses, transports, refines, or disposes of a hazardous substance, the
release of which creates a hazardous condition, including bailees, carriers,
and any other person in control of a hazardous substance when a hazardous
condition occurs, whether the person owns the hazardous substance or is
operating under a lease, contract, or other agreement with the legal owner of
the hazardous substance.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 455B.381(7))
36.03   CLEANUP REQUIRED.
Whenever a hazardous condition is created by the deposit, injection, dumping,
spilling, leaking, or placing of a hazardous substance, so that the hazardous
substance or a constituent of the hazardous substance may enter the environment
or be emitted into the air or discharged into any waters, including
groundwaters, the responsible person shall cause the condition to be remedied
by a cleanup, as defined in the preceding section, as rapidly as feasible to an
acceptable, safe condition. The costs of cleanup shall be borne by the
responsible person. If the responsible person does not cause the cleanup to
begin in a reasonable time in relation to the hazard and circumstances of the
incident, the City may, by an authorized officer, give reasonable notice, based
on the character of the hazardous condition, said notice setting a deadline for
accomplishing the cleanup and stating that the City will proceed to procure
cleanup services and bill the responsible person for all costs associated with
the cleanup if the cleanup is not accomplished within the deadline. In the
event that it is determined that immediate cleanup is necessary as a result of
the present danger to the public health, safety, and welfare, then no notice
shall be required and the City may proceed to procure the cleanup and bill the
responsible person for all costs associated with the cleanup. If the bill for
those services is not paid within 30 days, the City Attorney shall proceed to
obtain payment by all legal means. If the cost of the cleanup is beyond the
capacity of the City to finance it, the authorized officer shall report to the
Council and immediately seek any State or federal funds available for said
cleanup.
36.04   LIABILITY FOR CLEANUP COSTS.
The responsible person shall be strictly liable to the City for all of the
following:
1.   The reasonable cleanup costs incurred by the City or the agents of the
City as a result of the failure of the responsible person to clean up a
hazardous substance involved in a hazardous condition.
2.   The reasonable costs incurred by the City or the agents of the City to
evacuate people from the area threatened by a hazardous condition caused by the
person.
3.   The reasonable damages to the City for the injury to, destruction of, or
loss of City property, including parks and roads, resulting from a hazardous
condition caused by that person, including the costs of assessing the injury,
destruction, or loss.
4.   The excessive and extraordinary cost incurred by the City or the agents of
the City in responding at and to the scene of a hazardous condition caused by
that person.
36.05   NOTIFICATIONS.
1.   A person manufacturing, storing, handling, transporting, or disposing of a
hazardous substance shall notify the State Department of Natural Resources and
the County Sheriff of the occurrence of a hazardous condition as soon as
possible but not later than six hours after the onset of the hazardous
condition or discovery of the hazardous condition. The County Sheriff shall
immediately notify the Department of Natural Resources.
2.   Any other person who discovers a hazardous condition shall notify the
County Sheriff’s Department, which shall then notify the Department of Natural
Resources.
36.06   POLICE AUTHORITY.
If the circumstances reasonably so require, the law enforcement officer or an
authorized representative may:
1.   Evacuate persons from their homes to areas away from the site of a
hazardous condition, and
2.   Establish perimeters or other boundaries at or near the site of a
hazardous condition and limit access to cleanup personnel.
No person shall disobey an order of any peace officer issued under this
section.
36.07   LIABILITY.
The City shall not be liable to any person for claims of damages, injuries, or
losses resulting from any hazardous condition, unless the City is the
responsible person as defined in Section
36.02(4).
CHAPTER 40
PUBLIC OFFENSES
 
40.01 Disturbing the Peace or Quiet 40.04 Fireworks Regulation
40.02 Discharge of Firearms         40.05 Smokefree Places
40.03 Urinating and Defecating       
 
40.01   DISTURBING THE PEACE OR QUIET.
It is unlawful for any person to disturb or aid in disturbing the peace or
quiet by operating or causing to be operated any radio, tape player, compact
disc player, loudspeaker, or any other electronic device, or by the blowing of
horns or the squealing of tires, either in a motor vehicle or separate
therefrom, so as to produce an audible sound measured at least 50 feet from the
source. Measurement of the audible sound shall be by auditory senses based upon
direct line of sight. No distinction shall be made between stopped, standing,
parked, or moving motor vehicles. Exempt from this section shall be the
following:
1.   Equipment used for political advertisements;
2.   Equipment used for public health and safety purposes;
3.   Parades, processions, or other public events;
4.   Live music provided, sponsored, or funded, in whole or in part, by a
governmental entity;
5.   Car or truck horns or similar devices when used to denote danger or a
warning or possible danger;
6.   An entity (including individuals, corporations, organizations) that has
obtained an exemption for the Council.
40.02   DISCHARGE OF FIREARMS.
No person shall discharge any gun, pistol, or other firearm within the City
limits. This prohibition does not apply to emergency protection of persons and
property on any individual’s own premises. Further, this section does not apply
to, nor shall it be construed to prevent any United States, State, County, or
peace officer from discharging any firearm in the execution of the officer’s
duties.
40.03   URINATING AND DEFECATING.
It is unlawful for any person to urinate or defecate onto any sidewalk, street,
alley, or other public way, or onto any public or private building, including
but not limited to, the wall, floor, hallway, steps, stairway, doorway, or
window thereof, or onto any public or private land.
40.04   FIREWORKS REGULATION.
The use or exploding of consumer or display fireworks, as defined by the Code
of Iowa, is hereby prohibited within the corporate limits of the City, except
on the following days and times:
1.   Consumer Fireworks. It is unlawful for any person to use or explode
consumer fireworks within the City outside of the following dates:
A.   State Code Dates. Allowed by Section 364.2(6) of the Code of Iowa:
   (1)   July 3 between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m.
      a.   Except when July 3 falls on a Saturday or Sunday preceding July 4,
in which fireworks shall be allowed between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 11:00
p.m.
   (2)   July 4 between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m.
   (3)   December 31 between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 12:30 a.m. on the
immediately following day.
B.   City Allowed Dates.
   (1)   July 2 between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m.
2.   Display Fireworks. It is unlawful for any person to use or explode any
display fireworks; provided, the Council may, upon application in writing,
grant a permit for the display of display fireworks by municipalities, fair
associations, amusement parks, and other organizations or groups of individuals
approved by the City when the display fireworks will be handled by a competent
operator, but no such permit shall be required for the display of display
fireworks at the Iowa State Fairgrounds by the State Fair Board, at
incorporated county fairs, or at district fairs receiving State aid. No permit
shall be granted hereunder unless the operator or sponsoring organization has
filed with the City evidence of insurance in the following amounts:
A.   Personal Injury:   $250,000.00 per person
B.   Property Damage:   $50,000.00
C.   Total Exposure:   $1,000,000.00
3.   Novelties. This section does not apply to novelties.
40.05   SMOKEFREE PLACES.
1.   There is hereby adopted by reference that certain state statute known as
Chapter 142D of the Code of Iowa, as amended, as “Smokefree Places” for the
City.
2.   The following definitions are added to Section 142D.2 of the Smokefree Air
Act:
A.   “Alternative nicotine product” means a product, not consisting of or
containing tobacco, that provides for the ingestion into the body of nicotine,
whether by chewing, absorbing, dissolving, inhaling, snorting or sniffing, or
by any other means. Alternative nicotine product does not include cigarettes,
tobacco products, or vapor products, or a product that is regulated as a drug
or device by the United States Food and Drug Administration under Chapter V, of
the federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act.
B.   “Vapor product” means any noncombustible product, which may or may not
contain nicotine, that employs a heating element, power source, electronic
circuit, or other electrical, chemical, or mechanical means, regardless of
shape or size, that can be used to produce vapor from a solution of other
substance. Vapor product includes any electronic cigarette, electronic cigar,
electronic cigarillo, electronic pipe, or similar product or device, and any
cartridge or other container of a solution or other substance, which may or may
not contain nicotine, that is intended to be used with or in an electronic
cigarette, electronic cigar, electronic cigarillo, electronic pipe, or similar
product or device. Vapor product does not include any product regulated as a
drug or device by the United States Food and Drug Administration, under Chapter
V of the federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act.
1.   It is unlawful for any person to use any alternative nicotine product or
any vapor product in any place where cigarettes are prohibited to be used.
CHAPTER 45
ALCOHOL CONSUMPTION AND INTOXICATION
 
45.01 Persons Under Legal Age 45.03 Open Containers in Motor Vehicles
45.02 Public Consumption or   45.04 Social Host
Intoxication
 
45.01   PERSONS UNDER LEGAL AGE.
As used in this section, “legal age” means 21 years of age or more.
1.   A person or persons under legal age shall not purchase or attempt to
purchase, consume, or individually or jointly have alcoholic beverages in their
possession or control; except in the case of any alcoholic beverage given or
dispensed to a person under legal age within a private home and with the
knowledge, presence, and consent of the parent or guardian, for beverage or
medicinal purposes or as administered to the person by either a physician or
dentist for medicinal purposes and except to the extent that a person under
legal age may handle alcoholic beverages during the regular course of the
person’s employment by a retail alcohol licensee, or wine or beer permittee
under State laws.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.47(3))
2.   A person under legal age shall not misrepresent the person’s age for the
purpose of purchasing or attempting to purchase any alcoholic beverage from any
retail alcohol licensee.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49(3))
45.02   PUBLIC CONSUMPTION OR INTOXICATION.
1.   As used in this section unless the context otherwise requires:
A.   “Arrest” means the same as defined in Section 804.5 of the Code of Iowa
and includes taking into custody pursuant to Section 232.19 of the Code of
Iowa.
B.   “Chemical test” means a test of a person’s blood, breath, or urine to
determine the percentage of alcohol present by a qualified person using devices
and methods approved by the Commissioner of Public Safety.
C.   “Peace officer” means the same as defined in Section 801.4 of the Code of
Iowa.
D.   “School” means a public or private school or that portion of a public or
private school that provides teaching for any grade from kindergarten through
Grade 12.
1.   A person shall not use or consume alcoholic liquor, wine, or beer upon the
public streets or highways. A person shall not use or consume alcoholic liquor
in any public place, except premises covered by a retail alcohol license. A
person shall not possess or consume alcoholic liquors, wine, or beer on public
school property or while attending any public or private school-related
function. A person shall not be intoxicated in a public place.
2.   A person shall not simulate intoxication in a public place.
3.   When a peace officer arrests a person on a charge of public intoxication
under this section, the peace officer shall inform the person that the person
may have a chemical test administered at the person’s own expense. If a device
approved by the Commissioner of Public Safety for testing a sample of a
person’s breath to determine the person’s blood alcohol concentration is
available, that is the only test that need be offered the person arrested. In a
prosecution for public intoxication, evidence of the results of a chemical test
performed under this subsection is admissible upon proof of a proper
foundation. The percentage of alcohol present in a person’s blood, breath, or
urine established by the results of a chemical test performed within two hours
after the person’s arrest on a charge of public intoxication is presumed to be
the percentage of alcohol present at the time of arrest.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.46)
45.03   OPEN CONTAINERS IN MOTOR VEHICLES.
[See Section
62.01(50) and (51).]
45.04   SOCIAL HOST.
A person who is the owner or lessee of, or who otherwise has control over,
property that is not a licensed premises shall not knowingly permit any person,
knowing or having reasonable cause to believe the person to be under the age of
18, to consume or possess on such property any alcoholic beverage. The
provisions of this subsection shall not apply to a landlord or manager of the
property or to a person under legal age who consumes or possesses any alcoholic
beverage in connection with a religious observance, ceremony, or rite.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.47)
CHAPTER 47
PARK REGULATIONS
 
47.01 Use of Drives Required   47.07 Fireworks and Explosives
47.02 Littering                47.08 Dogs and Pets
47.03 Hours                    47.09 Natural Environment
47.04 Alcoholic Beverages      47.10 Buildings and Improvements
47.05 Overnight Camping; Fires 47.11 Penalty
47.06 Special Use by Groups     
 
47.01   USE OF DRIVES REQUIRED.
No person shall drive any automobile, moped, or motorcycle in any portion of a
park except upon the established drives or roadways therein and such vehicles
shall be parked in designated areas only. No other motorized vehicles shall be
operated on park property.
47.02   LITTERING.
No person shall litter park grounds with any form of waste material.
47.03   HOURS.
Park hours shall be set by resolution of the Council from time to time.
47.04   ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES.
No person shall consume or possess an open or previously opened container
containing any alcoholic beverage, be under the influence of an alcoholic
beverage while in a public park and recreational facilities in conformance with
Chapter 45 providing, however, that the Council, may by resolution adopted from
time to time, provide special permission for the use of alcoholic beverages
under the rules and regulations promulgated by the City Administrator.
47.05   OVERNIGHT CAMPING; FIRES.
No overnight camping or ground fires shall be allowed in the City Parks unless
a special permit has been granted.
47.06   SPECIAL USE BY GROUPS.
1.   All persons or groups desiring to schedule a special use of City park
shelters for parties or other similar activities shall apply to the Clerk for a
reservation in accordance with the rules and regulation promulgated by the
Clerk from time to time.
2.   The City Administrator shall have the power to grant or deny applications
for reservations. The cost of any special meetings of the Council to review the
decision of the City Administrator shall be paid by the applicant.
47.07   FIREWORKS AND EXPLOSIVES.
No person shall use firearms, explosives, weapons, firecrackers, or fireworks
of any character in any public park, except as otherwise provided by this Code.
47.08   DOGS AND PETS.
No dog or pet shall be allowed to run at large in any public park. Any dog or
pet shall be deemed to be found running at large, unless the owner carries such
dog or pet or leads such dog or pet by chain, strap or rope, or keeps any such
dog or pet confined in an automobile. However, any dog or pet especially
trained to assist a blind or partially blind person and accompanying such
person shall not be deemed to be running at large, even though restraints as
described herein are not used. Such person shall keep the guide dog under
control and shall be liable for any damage done to the premises or facilities
by the dog or pet. Each owner or person in control of a dog shall be
responsible for the prompt removal and proper disposal of all fecal matter
deposited by the dog.
47.09   NATURAL ENVIRONMENT.
No person shall, in any manner, deface, injure, or disturb any tree, shrub, or
plant placed, standing, or growing. No unauthorized person shall pick or cut
any wild or cultivated flower. No person shall disturb birds or animals kept or
found in parks.
47.10   BUILDINGS AND IMPROVEMENTS.
No person shall, in any manner, deface, disturb, or interfere with any
building, structure, bench, table, equipment, apparatus, or other improvements
made in or about the parks.
47.11   PENALTY.
Any person who violates the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to the
penalties outlined in the Code of Iowa or by a municipal infraction.
CHAPTER 50
NUISANCE ABATEMENT PROCEDURE
 
50.01 Nuisances Prohibited 50.04 Abatement of Nuisances
50.02 Nuisances Defined    50.05 Request for Hearing and Appeal
50.03 Adult Establishments 50.06 Weeds
 
50.01   NUISANCES PROHIBITED.
The creation or maintenance of a nuisance is prohibited. In addition to other
remedies provided by law, violation of this chapter is a municipal infraction.
50.02   NUISANCES DEFINED.
Whatever is injurious to the senses, or an obstruction to the free use of
property so as essentially to interfere with the comfortable enjoyment of life
or property is a nuisance. Examples of nuisances are:
1.   All diseased animals running at large.
2.   All ponds or pools of stagnant water.
3.   Carcasses of animals not disposed of within 24 hours after death as
provided by law.
4.   Accumulations of refuse including junked, abandoned, or inoperable
vehicles.
5.   The pollution of any public well or cistern, stream, lake, canal, or body
of water by sewage, creamery, or industrial wastes, or other substances.
6.   All noxious weeds and other rank growth upon public or private property.
7.   Dense smoke, noxious fumes, gas and soot, or cinders, in unreasonable
quantities.
8.   All snow and ice not removed from public sidewalks 48 hours after the snow
and ice have ceased being deposited thereon.
9.   All trees, hedges, billboards, or other obstructions which prevent persons
from having a clear view of traffic approaching an intersection from cross
streets in sufficient time to bring a motor vehicle driven at a reasonable
speed to a full stop before the intersection is reached.
10.   All limbs of trees which are less than eight feet above the surface of
any public sidewalk or 15 feet above the surface of a public street.
11.   All wires which are strung less than 15 feet above the surface of the
ground.
12.   All buildings, walls, and other structures which have been damaged by
fire, decay, or otherwise to an extent exceeding one-half their original value
and which are so situated as to endanger the safety of the public.
13.   All explosives, inflammable liquids, and other dangerous substances
stored in any manner or in any amount other than that permitted by law.
14.   All use of display of fireworks except as permitted by law or this Code.
15.   Any unreasonably loud or unnecessary noises that meet the following:
A.   That can be heard from more than 50 feet away; and
B.   That noise unreasonably disturbs, injures or endangers the comfort,
repose, health, peace or safety of reasonable persons of ordinary sensitivity.
However, this subsection shall not apply to commercial or industrial businesses
in the City that are legally operating in the City under normal circumstances.
1.   Obstruction and excavations affecting the ordinary use by the public of
streets, alleys, sidewalks, or public grounds except under such conditions as
are permitted by this Code. This includes shrubs and bushes that are allowed to
encroach into public ways.
2.   Maintaining any violation of
Chapter 165.
3.   Failure to install sidewalk or other improvement required by the
subdivision ordinance or otherwise by this Code or any memorandum of agreement
with a developer or property owner.
4.   All weeds, vines, brush, dead or diseased trees, rank growth, or
objectionable vegetation which constitutes a health, safety, fire hazard, is
injurious to the senses, and objection to the free use of property or
interferes with the comfortable enjoyment of life or property.
50.03   ADULT ESTABLISHMENTS.
1.   As used in this section, “adult establishment” means any business that
provides nude or topless dancing or operates any other adult-oriented business.
2.   A public safety nuisance exists when it is established by clear and
convincing evidence that an owner, manager, employee, contemporaneous patron,
or guest of an adult establishment commits any of the following acts either on
the premises or in any parking lots or areas, including but not limited to
public rights of way, adjacent to the premises:
A.   Unlawfully discharges a firearm or uses an offensive weapon, as defined in
Section 724.1 of the Code of Iowa, regardless of whether it inflicts injury or
death.
B.   Assaults another person with a dangerous weapon as defined in section
702.7 of the Code of Iowa resulting in injury or death.
C.   Engages in a riot as defined in section 723.1 of the Code of Iowa on three
or more dates within a twelve-month period to which the police respond and
disperse a crowd. The participants need not be the same persons for each
incident.
3.   When the City Attorney believes a serious threat to the public safety
exists, the City Attorney or any other attorney on behalf of the City Attorney,
may file a suit in equity in the district court without bond seeking abatement
of the public safety nuisance arising from an adult establishment.
50.04   ABATEMENT OF NUISANCES.
1.   Notice to Abate Nuisance. Whenever the Mayor, peace officer, or the
Mayor’s designee finds that a nuisance exists, such officer shall cause to be
served upon the owner, agent, or occupant of the property on which the nuisance
is located, or upon the person causing or maintaining a nuisance, a written
notice to abate or to request a hearing as provided in Section 50.05.
Emergencies shall be controlled by Section 364.12(3) of the Code of Iowa.
2.   Contents of Notice. The notice to abate shall contain:
A.   An order to abate the nuisance or request a hearing within a stated time
which shall be reasonable under the circumstances.
B.   Location of nuisance, if stationary.
C.   Description of what constitutes the nuisance.
D.   Statement of the act or acts necessary to abate the nuisance.
E.   Statement that if the nuisance is not abated as directed and no request
for hearing is made within the time prescribed, the City will abate it and
assess the costs against the property for collection in the same manner as a
property tax.
1.   Service of Notice. The notice shall be served by certified mail to the
property owner as shown by the records of the County Auditor, or said notice
may be served by personal service.
2.   Abatement by City. If the person so neglects or fails to abate the
nuisance as directed, the Mayor, or other officers initiating the notice, may
cause the nuisance to be abated, keeping an accurate account of the expense
incurred. The expense account shall be fully itemized, verified, and filed with
the Clerk. Such expenses shall be paid by the City.
3.   Collection of Cost of Abatement. The Clerk shall mail a statement of the
total cost to the person failing to abide by the notice to abate, and if the
amount shown by the statement has not been paid within one month, the Clerk
shall certify the costs to the County Auditor and it shall then be collected
with, and in the same manner as, general property taxes.
50.05   REQUEST FOR HEARING AND APPEAL.
Any person ordered to abate a nuisance may have a hearing with the officer
ordering the abatement as to whether a nuisance exists. A request for a hearing
must be made in writing and delivered to the officer ordering the abatement
within the time stated in the notice, or it will be conclusively presumed that
a nuisance exists. If the officer finds that a nuisance exists, it must be
abated as ordered. At the conclusion of the hearing, the hearing officer shall
render a written decision as to whether a nuisance exists. If the officer finds
that a nuisance exists, the officer must order it abated within an additional
time which is reasonable under the circumstances. An appeal from this decision
may be had by immediately filing a written notice with the Council at a time
and place fixed by the Council. The findings of the Council shall be conclusive
and, if a nuisance is found to exist, it shall be ordered abated within a time
reasonable under the circumstances. An appeal to the Council shall be filed
with the Clerk within a time set for abating the nuisance or 10 days, whichever
is longer. The Council shall set a hearing on said appeal and shall mail a
notice of said hearing to the appellee at their last known address by regular
mail. The Council shall determine the appeal by passage of a resolution setting
forth whether or not such nuisance is found to exist and the factual basis
therefore, and, if the same is found to exist, the time is which the same shall
be abated. The finding of the Council shall be final unless a Notice of
Intention to Seek Judicial Review is filed with the Clerk within 10 days of the
Council’s determination. If a Petition for Judicial Review is not filed in the
District Court of the State within 20 days after the receipt of the Notice of
Intention to Seek Judicial Review the decision of the Council shall be final.
If the Council determines that it cannot provide a fair and impartial hearing,
it may designate and retain a hearing officer to hear said appeal. The hearing
officer shall be an attorney licensed to practice within the State. The hearing
officer shall establish the rules of procedure and shall render a written
decision within 10 days after submission of the case.
50.06   WEEDS.
1.   Purpose. The purpose of this section is to designate responsibility for
the removal of weeds and cutting of grasses within the City, to define as
nuisances and to provide for their abatement in order to provide for the safety
and preserve the health and welfare of the citizens of the City.
2.   Definitions. For the purposes of this section the following terms,
phrases, words, and their derivations shall have the meaning given herein.
A.   “Administrative cost” means the Weed Official shall charge an
administrative cost to be set by the Council by ordinance, from time to time,
reflecting the actual charge for dealing with each genuine complaint.
B.   “Chemical control” means application of a herbicide (weed killer) in
strict accordance with the directions on the product and the regulations of
Section 206 of the Code of Iowa and all additions that may be adopted.
C.   “Conservation area” means an area that is planted with ground cover plants
of a size and texture compatible with the environment and maintained
accordingly.
D.   “Developed lot or area” means an improved lot or area.
E.   “Enforcement period” means the enforcement period shall be at all times.
F.   “Ground cover” means plants with the growth and root capacity to cover and
stabilize an area of soil and to prevent erosion.
G.   “Natural area” means an area allowed to retain native plant material in a
natural prairie state.
H.   “Noxious weeds” means primary and secondary classes of weeds as defined by
the Code of Iowa and all additions to this list as so declared by the State
Secretary of Agriculture.
I.   “Parking” means that part of the street, avenue, or highway in the City
not covered by sidewalk and lying between the lot line and curb line; on
unpaved streets, that part of the street, avenue, or highway lying between the
long lines and that portion of the street usually traveled by vehicular
traffic.
J.   “Right-of-way” means the entire width of a platted street or alley in use
or undeveloped.
K.   “Soil erosion control” means a method of planting and cultivation, or lack
thereof, designed to retain soil and to prevent soil movement caused by natural
or man-made causes.
L.   “Undeveloped lot or area” means an unimproved lot or area.
M.   “Unmowed or untended area” means an area allowed to grow without care and
supervision or where weeds and grasses are more than the allowed height.
N.   “Weed Official” means the person designated by the Mayor to enforce this
section.
O.   “Weeds” means, as used in this chapter, any plants growing uncultivated
and out of context with the surrounding plant life when such plant has a seed
head formed or forming and with a height of nine inches or more, except as
otherwise provided in this chapter.
1.   Authority for Enforcement. The Mayor, or person designated by them, shall
be responsible for the enforcement of this section and shall have all the
necessary authority to carry out the enforcement of this section. Said designee
shall be known as the Weed Official.
2.   Interference with Weed Official. No person shall interfere with the Weed
Official or any appointed assistant while engaged in the enforcement of this
section.
3.   Nuisances. Except as provided elsewhere in the chapter, the following
provisions shall apply:
A.   Each owner and each person in the possession or control of any land shall
cut or otherwise destroy, in whatever manner prescribed by the Weed Official,
all noxious weeds thereon and shall keep said lands free of such growth.
B.   Each owner and each person in the possession or control of any property
shall be responsible to keep said lot, along with parking adjacent thereto,
alleys, public ways, or areas up to the center line of said ways free of any
noxious weeds and to keep all grasses, weeds, vines, brush, bushes, and noxious
weeds, or other growths on said lot mowed so that grasses, weeds, vines, brush,
bushes, and noxious weeds, or other growths less than nine inches in height.
However, grass and weeds located on undeveloped and unplatted property located
more than 100 feet from developed or platted property shall be mowed so that
grass and weeds are less than 18 inches in height.
C.   Each owner and each person in the possession or control of any land shall
not allow any plant growth of any sort to remain in such a manner as to render
the streets, alleys, or public ways adjoining said land unsafe for public
travel or in any manner so as to impede pedestrian or vehicular traffic upon
any public place or way.
D.   Where waterways or watercourses are found upon any developed or
undeveloped lot, the owner or person in possession or control shall keep the
flat or level part of the bank of said waterway free of any weeds and grasses
more than 18 inches in height. Should such waterways or watercourses be found
within the right-of-way of a street or alley, the adjacent property owner or
person in possession or control shall be responsible to keep the flat or
accessible portion of creek bank free of any weeds or grasses more than 18
inches in height.
E.   No owner and person in possession or control of any developed or
undeveloped lot shall allow growth or the accumulation of plant materials on
such lot to remain in such a state so as to constitute a fire hazard. In no
instance shall cut plant material accumulations be located within 150 feet of a
building, structure, recreation area (not including the width of any
intervening street), or within 125 feet of a street right-of-way.
1.   Natural Areas.
A.   Designations. The Weed Official, upon application of the owner or person
in possession or control of any lot, may designate such lot or portion thereof
or any adjacent undeveloped public way as a natural or conservation area. Prior
to designating such area, the Weed Official shall consider the following
factors: grade or incline of said tract, the difficulty to control or maintain
said tract, whether said tract is being maintained as either a soil erosion
control area or a conservation area. Any person affected by the designation or
lack thereof may appeal said determination to the Mayor or designee.
B.   Natural or Conservation Areas. Natural or conservation areas need not be
mowed and shall be left in their natural state, except that noxious weeds shall
be removed or controlled.
C.   Public Ways. Sidewalks or other public ways that lie adjacent to or extend
through a natural or conservation area must be open and free from any
obstructions to pedestrians or vehicular traffic.
1.   Annual Notice of Proposed Abatement of Growth. The Clerk shall give notice
by publication on or before the first day of June each year notifying property
owners or occupants in possession or control of lands within the City, of the
duty to maintain all grasses, weeds, vines, brush, bushes, and noxious weeds,
or other growths as required under this chapter. The notice will further state
that the City will cut or destroy such grasses, weeds, vines, brush, bushes,
and noxious weeds, or other growths and bill or assess the cost thereof to the
property owner or occupant in possession or control of lands and that the costs
will be assessed against the property in accordance with this chapter.
2.   Notice to Abate. In addition to any other remedy allowed by law, the Weed
Official may notify, in writing, the property owner or occupant in possession
or control of any land in the City upon which grasses, weeds, vines, brush,
bushes, and noxious weeds, or other growths exist in violation of this chapter.
Such written notice may be by certified mail or by personal service. Such
written notice need only be given once per calendar year. Such notice shall
include the following:
A.   That the property owner or occupant in possession or control of the land
is in violation of the City weed control regulations;
B.   That the property owner or occupant in possession or control of the land
is ordered to cut grasses, weeds, vines, brush, bushes, and noxious weeds, or
other growths within five days of the receipt of such notice;
C.   That if the property owner or occupant in possession or control of the
land does not cut the grasses, weeds, vines, brush, bushes, and noxious weeds,
or other growths, that the City or its authorized agent will cut the grasses,
weeds, vines, brush, bushes, and noxious weeds, or other growths and assess the
cost of the cutting, including a reasonable administrative fee, against the
owner or occupant in possession or control of the land;
D.   That the property owner or occupant in possession or control of the land
will be given an opportunity to pay the assessment, but if it is not paid, will
be assessed against the property for collection in the same manner as property
tax;
E.   That no further notice shall be given prior to removal of weeds during the
current calendar year;
F.   That the property owner or occupant in possession or control of the land
may request a hearing before the Council, or its designated representative,
within five days or the receipt of notice.
1.   Failure to Comply. In the event any property owner or occupant in
possession or control of lands fails to cut or destroy such grasses, weeds,
vines, brush, bushes, and noxious weeds, or other growths as above described,
the Weed Official shall cause to be destroyed such grasses, weeds, vines,
brush, bushes, and noxious weeds, or other growths as above described by
cutting or such other method including chemical control, as may be necessary to
make such destruction. The Weed Official, or designee, or any authorized
assistant, employee, contracting agents, or other representatives, are hereby
expressly authorized to enter upon private property at all reasonable hours for
the purpose of cutting, destroying, or removing such weeds in a manner not
inconsistent with terms of this chapter.
2.   Weed Abatement Costs. Upon completion of the weed abatement, the Weed
Official or the duly designated persons shall certify the cost and expenses as
provided by law against the property to be paid as required by law and bill the
costs plus a $45.00 administrative fee thereof to the property owner or
occupant in possession or control of lands within the City. In addition to the
administrative fee, the costs and expenses to be assessed against the property
for the cutting or destroying of grasses, weeds, vines, brush, bushes, and
noxious weeds, or other growths by persons designated in this section shall be
established by the following fee schedule:
Type Rate
Type                                                 Rate
Administrative fee per invoice                       $45.00
Hand mower per hour, one hour minimum, half hour     $35.00
increments thereafter
Riding mower per hour, one hour minimum, half hour   $50.00
increments thereafter
Tractor with brush hog, one hour minimum, half hour  $65.00
increments thereafter
Debris removal per hour, one hour minimum, half hour $40.00
increments thereafter
Any other costs incidental to abatement              Billed at actual expense
On costs not paid within 30 days, there will be an additional administrative
fee of $35.00. The second or subsequent violation of this chapter shall also
constitute a municipal infraction and shall be reviewed annually to ensure
all costs are recovered. If adjustments are required, Council may establish a
new fee schedule by resolution.
 
CHAPTER 51
JUNK AND JUNK VEHICLES
 
51.01 Definitions                       51.04 Exceptions
51.02 Junk and Junk Vehicles Prohibited 51.05 Notice to Abate
51.03 Junk and Junk Vehicles a Nuisance  
 
51.01   DEFINITIONS.
The following terms are defined for use in this chapter.
1.   “Junk” means all old or scrap copper, brass, lead, or any other non-
ferrous metal; old or discarded rope, rags, batteries, paper, trash, rubber,
debris, waste or used lumber, or salvaged wood; dismantled vehicles, machinery,
and appliances or parts of such vehicles, machinery, or appliances; iron,
steel, or other old or scrap ferrous materials; old or discarded glass,
tinware, plastic or old or discarded household goods or hardware. Neatly
stacked firewood located on a side yard or a rear yard is not considered junk.
2.   “Junk vehicle” means any vehicle legally placed in storage with the County
Treasurer or unlicensed and having any of the following characteristics:
A.   Broken Glass. Any vehicle with a broken or cracked windshield, window,
headlight or tail light, or any other cracked or broken glass.
B.   Broken, Loose, or Missing Part. Any vehicle with a broken, loose, or
missing fender, door, bumper, hood, steering wheel, or trunk lid.
C.   Habitat for Nuisance Animals or Insects. Any vehicle that has become the
habitat for rats, mice, snakes, or any other vermin or insects.
D.   Flammable Fuel. Any vehicle that contains gasoline or any other flammable
fuel.
E.   Inoperable. Any motor vehicle that lacks an engine or two or more wheels
or other structural parts, rendering said motor vehicle totally inoperable, or
that cannot be moved under its own power or has not been used as an operating
vehicle for a period of 30 days or more.
F.   Defective or Obsolete Condition. Any other vehicle that, because of its
defective or obsolete condition, in any other way constitutes a threat to the
public health and safety.
Mere licensing of such vehicle shall not constitute a defense to the finding
that the vehicle is a junk vehicle.
1.   “Vehicle” means every device in, upon, or by which a person or property is
or may be transported or drawn upon a highway or street, except devices moved
by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks, and
includes without limitation a motor vehicle, automobile, truck, motorcycle,
tractor, buggy, wagon, farm machinery, or any combination thereof.
51.02   JUNK AND JUNK VEHICLES PROHIBITED.
It is unlawful for any person to store, accumulate, or allow to remain on any
private property within the corporate limits of the City any junk or junk
vehicle.
51.03   JUNK AND JUNK VEHICLES A NUISANCE.
It is hereby declared that any junk or junk vehicle located upon private
property, unless excepted by Section
51.04, constitutes a threat to the health and safety of the citizens and is a
nuisance within the meaning of Section 657.1 of the Code of Iowa. If any junk
or junk vehicle is kept upon private property in violation hereof, the owner of
or person occupying the property upon which it is located shall be prima facie
liable for said violation.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12(3)(a))
51.04   EXCEPTIONS.
The provisions of this chapter do not apply to any junk or a junk vehicle
stored within:
1.   Structure. A garage or other enclosed structure; or
2.   Business Enterprise. A vehicle on the premises of a business enterprise
operated in a district properly zoned therefore, when necessary to the
operation of said business enterprise, as authorized under the City’s Zoning
ordinance.
51.05   NOTICE TO ABATE.
Upon discovery of any junk or junk vehicle located upon private property in
violation of Section 51.03, the City shall within five days initiate abatement
procedures as outlined in Chapter 50. Any violation of this chapter shall also
be a municipal infraction.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12(3)(a))
CHAPTER 55
ANIMAL PROTECTION AND CONTROL
55.01 Definitions                        55.14 Noisy Animals
55.02 Rabies Vaccination Tag and License 55.15 Impoundment
Tag
55.03 Licensing Requirements             55.16 Reclaiming Impounded Animals
55.04 Dogs At Large                      55.17 Proper Care
55.05 Liability for Damages              55.18 Cruel Treatment Prohibited
55.06 Enabling Animals to Leave Premises 55.19 Abandonment Prohibited
of Owner
55.07 Animals on Private Property        55.20 Motor Vehicle Striking an Animal
55.08 Animal Defecation on Public or     55.21 Poisonous Substances
Private Property
Regulated                                55.22 Sanitation of Premises
55.09 Animals in Business Zones          55.23 Riding Animals on Public Ways
55.10 Animals in Food Establishments     55.24 Animal Traps
55.11 Tying Animals                      55.25 Enforcement
55.12 Exceptions to Sections             55.26 Violation and Penalties
55.13 Chasing People or Vehicles          
 
55.01   DEFINITIONS.
For purposes of this chapter, the following terms are defined:
1.   “Animal” means any live vertebrate creature, domestic or wild, including
any dog, both male and female, and any cat, both male and female.
2.   “Animal control center” means any facility designated by the Council to
impound animals.
3.   “Bite” means any puncture, laceration, or any other break in the skin of a
human caused by an animal.
4.   “Board of Health” means the County Board of Health, or its
representatives.
5.   “Dog” means any male or female animal of the family “Canis familiaris,”
whether neutered or not.
6.   “Hearing ear dog” means any dog which is owned by a deaf or partially deaf
person, and which has been properly trained to aid its owner.
7.   “Humane Officer,” “Animal Control Officer,” or “Community Services
Officer” means any person designated by the State or its governmental
subdivisions and agencies, including, but not limited to, the Board of Health,
or any peace officer, or such person approved by the Council upon the
recommendation of the Mayor, to supervise or enforce any laws or regulations
governing the control, care, or conservation of animals.
8.   “Identification tag” means rabies vaccination tag for dogs or cats.
9.   “Kennel” means any premises wherein any person engages in the business of
boarding, breeding, buying, selling, letting for hire, or the training of dogs,
and is licensed by the State for such purpose.
10.   “Kennel dog” means dogs which are kept or raised solely for the purpose
of breeding or sale and which are kept in constant confinement in a kennel.
11.   “Neutered” means any animal which, through a surgical procedure, has been
rendered incapable of siring or bearing offspring.
12.   “Owner” means any person, partnership, or corporation owning, keeping, or
harboring one or more animals. An animal shall be deemed to be harbored if it
is fed or sheltered for seven consecutive days or more.
13.   “Seeing eye dog” means any dog which is owned by a legally declared blind
or partially sighted person and which has been properly trained at a special
school to guide its owner in going from place to place.
14.   “Stray” means any dog running at large with no indication of ownership.
55.02   RABIES VACCINATION TAG AND LICENSE TAG.
The owner of all dogs and cats six months old or older shall obtain a current
rabies vaccination for such animals from a licensed veterinarian and obtain a
tag evidencing the same. The vaccination tag shall be attached to a substantial
collar or harness on the animal by the owner and shall at all times be kept on
the animal for which the vaccination was given. It is a violation of this
chapter for any animal not to be vaccinated against rabies.
55.03   LICENSING REQUIREMENTS.
1.   Every owner of an animal over the age of six months shall procure an
animal license from the Clerk on or before May 1 of each year. The license fee
shall be due and payable between January 1 and May 1 of each year.
2.   The annual license fee for an animal license shall be fixed by the Council
by resolution.
3.   Before issuance of the license, the owner shall furnish a veterinarian’s
certificate showing that the animal for which the license is sought has a
current rabies vaccination.
4.   The Clerk shall deliver to the applicant, at the time of the receipt of a
completed application with fee paid in full, a metal tag with a serial number
and the year for which it is issued, which shall be recorded in a record book
maintained by the Clerk solely for the purpose of keeping a record of ownership
and the date of license issue or renewal. The metal tag shall be attached by
the owner to a substantial collar and during the term of the license shall be
at all times kept on the dog for which the license is issued.
5.   All licenses shall expire on December 31 of the year of issuance. The
license tag for one dog shall not be transferable to another dog.
6.   Any animal found running at large without the license tag attached to its
collar or harness shall be deemed unlicensed.
7.   Any person who provides a temporary home for an animal and is affiliated
with a licensed rescue organization shall be required to obtain a license for
the animal within one business day of receiving the animal, but the license
shall be provided at no cost.
55.04   DOGS AT LARGE.
1.   Dogs which are properly identified, as required by law, shall be deemed
under restraint if:
A.   The dog is on the premises of the owner, or a person given charge of the
dog by the owner, and is either:
   (1)   Accompanied by and obedient to the commands of the owner or the person
given such charge; or
   (2)   Confined on those premises by an adequate protective fence or by a
leash, cord, or chain that does not allow the dog to go beyond the owner’s real
property line.
B.   The dog is off the premises of the owner, and it is:
   (1)   Accompanied by and obedient to the commands of the owner or a
competent, responsible person; or
   (2)   On a leash, cord, or chain and under the control of a person competent
to restrain and control the dog; or
   (3)   Confined within a motor vehicle.
C.   It is properly housed in a veterinary hospital or kennel.
1.   Dogs shall be deemed to be at large if they do not have the necessary
identification tags, or if they are not under restraint by one of the methods
set forth in Subsection 1 of this section.
2.   Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, any animal shall be
deemed at large at any time when attacking persons, attacking domestic animals,
or destroying property. Furthermore, any female dog in heat shall be deemed at
large at any time, except:
A.   When housed in a building which is completely enclosed; or
B.   When housed in a veterinary hospital or kennel; or
C.   When on the premises of the owner; provided the area on which such animal
is located is completely enclosed by a fence or other structure having a height
of at least 42 inches;
D.   Nothing in these provisions, however, shall be construed as prohibiting
any owner of a female dog in heat from walking such animal with a leash, cord,
or chain, or from transporting such animal within a motor vehicle.
1.   Any owner of any dog which is found to be at large shall be in violation
of this section, and such violation shall be punishable in accordance with
Section 55.27 unless such dog has caused injury or damage to person or
property, wherein the same shall be a simple misdemeanor.
55.05   LIABILITY FOR DAMAGES.
The owner of an animal found to be at large pursuant to Section
55.04 shall be responsible for all damages to the injured party. A failure to
pay damages shall constitute a simple misdemeanor.
55.06   ENABLING ANIMALS TO LEAVE PREMISES OF OWNER.
It is unlawful for any person, except the owner or their agent, to open any
gate or door on any premises or otherwise to entice or enable any animal to
leave said premises.
55.07   ANIMALS ON PRIVATE PROPERTY.
No owner shall permit or allow their animal to be on private property not owned
by the owner of the animal without the permission of the person owning such
property or the person in charge thereof.
55.08   ANIMAL DEFECATION ON PUBLIC OR PRIVATE PROPERTY REGULATED.
1.   No owner or keeper shall suffer or permit any animal to defecate upon any
property other than that of animal owner or keeper without immediately causing
such defecation to be removed therefrom and properly disposed of.
2.   No owner or keeper of any animal shall appear with such animal on any
sidewalk, street, park, or other public area or on any private property neither
owned nor occupied by said person without the means or removal of any feces
left by the animal.
55.09   ANIMALS IN BUSINESS ZONES.
No owner shall permit or allow their animal to be in a C-R Commercial Retail or
C-G General Commercial District without meeting one of the following
conditions: under the direct and obedient command of a responsible person,
being connected to a leash, enclosed in an animal carrier, or confined in a
vehicle.
55.10   ANIMALS IN FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS.
No owner shall permit or allow their animal to be on or in any building, store,
restaurant, or tavern where food or food products are sold, prepared, or
dispensed to people other than the owner thereof.
55.11   TYING ANIMALS.
No owner shall permit or allow their animal to be tied by any person to a
utility pole, parking meter, building, structure, fence, sign, tree, shrub,
bush, or other object on public property, or tied on private property without
the consent of the owner or person in charge thereof.
55.12   EXCEPTIONS TO SECTIONS.
Sections
55.08 through
55.11 shall not apply to seeing eye dogs and hearing ear dogs while such dogs
are acting in such capacity.
55.13   CHASING PEOPLE OR VEHICLES.
No owner shall permit or allow their animal to run after or chase persons,
bicycles, autos, or other vehicles. A violation of this section shall be
punishable in accordance with Section 55.27, unless such dog has caused injury
or damage to person or property, wherein the same shall be a simple
misdemeanor.
55.14   NOISY ANIMALS.
No owner or person in control of any animal(s) shall permit their animal to
annoy or disturb other persons in the area, without justification, by excessive
or continuous barking, howling, or emitting other loud noises. Any violation of
this section may be a simple misdemeanor or filed as a municipal infraction
citation.
55.15   IMPOUNDMENT.
1.   Any dog or other animal at large in the City shall be taken by a Humane
Officer and impounded at an animal control center, such facility to be
designated by the Council, and be confined there in a humane manner.
2.   If, by an identifying tag, the owner of such dog or other animal can be
determined, the Humane Officer shall give written notice of the impoundment to
such owner. If the animal does not have a rabies vaccination tag, then such
written notice shall be given in not less than two days to the owner.
3.   All dogs found without a collar or similar identification shall be kept
for not less than five days unless sooner redeemed by the owner. Dogs with
identification shall be kept not less than seven days from the date of the
written notice to the owner unless sooner redeemed by the owner. At the
expiration of the required holding period, any animal not claimed or reclaimed
shall become the property of the City and shall be humanely disposed of or
given to an appropriate person or party for adoption.
4.   All other animals found without a license, collar, or similar
identification shall be kept for not less than three days unless sooner
redeemed by the owner. Other animals found with identification shall be kept
not less than seven days from the date of the written notice to the owner
unless sooner redeemed by the owner. At the expiration of the required holding
period, any animal not claimed or reclaimed shall become the property of the
City and shall be humanely disposed of or given to an appropriate person or
party for adoption.
5.   It shall be lawful for any person who finds an animal at large on public
or private property to seize and hold the animal. Any person so seizing and
holding an animal may restrain the animal on their premises by an adequate
protective fence or by a leash, cord, or chain that does not allow the animal
to go beyond their real property line. The person seizing and holding the
animal shall immediately notify the Humane Officer and shall be responsible for
the humane treatment of the animal while it is under that person’s custody.
55.16   RECLAIMING IMPOUNDED ANIMALS.
1.   With proper identification, the owner of an impounded animal shall be
entitled to resume possession of such animal before the disposal of such animal
by the City on the following conditions:
A.   They shall present proof of current identification tags(s), or they must
obtain such identification tags for such animal; and
B.   They must pay all penalties, fines, and all costs and charges incurred by
the City for the impoundment and care of their animal.
1.   Fees for the care of impounded animals shall be set by the Council and may
be revised as necessary.
55.17   PROPER CARE.
No owner shall fail to provide their animals with sufficient good and wholesome
food and water, proper shelter and protection from the weather, veterinary care
when needed to prevent suffering, and with humane care and treatment.
55.18   CRUEL TREATMENT PROHIBITED.
No person shall beat cruelly, ill-treat, torment, overload, overwork, or
otherwise abuse an animal, or cause, instigate, or permit any dogfight,
cockfight, bullfight, or other combat between animals, or between animals and
humans.
55.19   ABANDONMENT PROHIBITED.
No owner of an animal shall abandon such animal.
55.20   MOTOR VEHICLE STRIKING AN ANIMAL.
The operator of any motor vehicle which strikes a domestic animal shall stop at
once and render such assistance as may be possible and shall immediately report
such injury or death to the animal’s owner. In the event the owner cannot be
ascertained and located, such operator shall at once report the accident to the
Humane Officer.
55.21   POISONOUS SUBSTANCES.
No person shall expose any known poisonous substance, whether mixed with food
or not, so that the same shall be subject to be eaten by any animal; provided
that it shall not be unlawful for a person to expose on their own property
common rat poison mixed only with vegetable substances. This section shall not
apply to licensed pest control operators, or registered sanitarians or
representatives of the Board of Health.
55.22   SANITATION OF PREMISES.
All structures, pens, coops, or yards, wherein animals or fowl are confined,
shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition at all times, devoid of
vermin and free from offensive odors. The Humane Officer may, at any time,
inspect, or cause to be inspected, any structure or premises and issue any such
section and any other relevant or pertinent rule, regulation, or ordinance. It
shall be unlawful for any owner to fail to comply with such order. It shall be
a violation of this section to have the above occurred based upon any of the
following:
1.   Complaints of two or more persons of different households and verifiable
by one authorized City representative.
2.   Complaint of one person which is verified by two authorized City
representatives.
Any violation of this section shall be punishable in accordance with Section
55.27.
55.23   RIDING ANIMALS ON PUBLIC WAYS.
No person may ride any animal on any City sidewalk. No person may ride any
animal on any public ground, except on a public street, without first obtaining
written consent from the Animal Control Officer. No person may ride any animal
on the private property of another without first obtaining written consent to
do so from that property owner.
55.24   ANIMAL TRAPS.
No person may set traps in the City for the purpose of apprehending wild or
domesticated animals. This section does not prohibit:
1.   Trapping mice, rats, or other household vermin; or
2.   The setting of traps to destroy moles and other underground pests, so long
as the traps used may be triggered only by subsurface action; or
3.   The setting of traps in the line of duty by the Humane Officer, or with
written permission from and the supervision of the Humane Officer or licensed
pest control operators.
55.25   ENFORCEMENT.
The civil provisions of this chapter shall be enforced by the community
services officer or any police officer. It shall be a violation of this chapter
to interfere with, hinder, molest, or abuse such officer in the exercise of
such powers.
55.26   VIOLATION AND PENALTIES.
A violation of this chapter shall be deemed a simple misdemeanor with a
scheduled fine of $105.00 or may be filed as a municipal infraction with a
minimum fine of $250.00.
CHAPTER 57
DANGEROUS AND VICIOUS ANIMALS
 
57.01 Definitions                  57.03 Keeping of Vicious Animals Prohibited
57.02 Keeping of Dangerous Animals 57.04 Seizure, Impoundment, and Disposition
Prohibited
 
57.01   DEFINITIONS.
For purposes of this chapter, the following terms are defined:
1.   “Dangerous animal” means:
A.   Any animal which is not naturally tame or gentle, and which is of a wild
nature or disposition, and which is capable of killing, inflicting serious
injury upon, or causing disease among human beings or domestic animals, and
having known tendencies as a species to do so;
B.   Any animal declared to be dangerous by the County Board of Health or
Council; and
C.   The following animals, which are deemed to be dangerous per se:
   (1)   Lions, tigers, jaguars, leopards, cougars, lynx, and bobcats;
   (2)   Wolves, coyotes, and foxes;
   (3)   Badgers, wolverines, weasels, skunk, and mink;
   (4)   Raccoons;
   (5)   Bears;
   (6)   Monkeys and chimpanzees;
   (7)   Bats;
   (8)   Alligator and crocodiles;
   (9)   Scorpions;
   (10)   Snakes that are venomous, or constrictors;
   (11)   Gila monsters.
1.   “Vicious animal” means any animal, except for a dangerous animal per se,
as listed above, that has attacked, bitten, or clawed a person while running at
large and the attack was unprovoked; or, any animal that has exhibited vicious
tendencies in present or past conduct, including such that said animal:
A.   Has bitten more than one person during the animal’s lifetime; or,
B.   Has bitten one person on two or more occasions during the animal’s
lifetime; or,
C.   Has attacked any domestic animal or fowl without provocation on two or
more occasions, causing injury or death while off the property of the owner.
57.02   KEEPING OF DANGEROUS ANIMALS PROHIBITED.
No person shall keep, shelter, or harbor any dangerous animal as a pet, or act
as a temporary custodian for such animal, or keep, shelter, or harbor such
animal for any purpose or in any other capacity within the City except in the
following circumstances:
1.   The keeping of dangerous animals for exhibition to the public by a bona
fide traveling circus, carnival, exhibit, or show.
2.   The keeping of dangerous animals in a bona fide, licensed veterinary
hospital for treatment.
3.   Any dangerous animals under the jurisdiction of and in the possession of
the Iowa Department of Natural Resources, pursuant to Chapters 481A and 481B of
the Code of Iowa.
57.03   KEEPING OF VICIOUS ANIMALS PROHIBITED.
No person shall keep, shelter, or harbor for any reason within the City a
vicious animal except in the following circumstances:
1.   Animals under the control of a law enforcement or military agency.
2.   The keeping of guard dogs; however, guard dogs must be kept within a
structure or fixed enclosure at all times, and any guard dog found at large may
be processed as a vicious animal pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.
Any premises guarded by a guard dog shall be prominently posted with a sign
containing the wording “Guard Dog,” “Vicious Dog,” or words of similar import,
and the owner of such premises shall inform the Mayor or peace officer that a
guard dog is on duty at said premises.
57.04   SEIZURE, IMPOUNDMENT, AND DISPOSITION.
1.   In the event that a dangerous animal or vicious animal is found at large
and unattended upon public property, park property, public right-of-way, or the
property of someone other than its owner, thereby creating a hazard to person
or property, such animal may, in the discretion of the Mayor or peace officer,
be destroyed if it cannot be confined or captured. The City shall be under no
duty to attempt the confinement or capture of a dangerous animal or vicious
animal found at large, nor shall it have a duty to notify the owner of such
animal prior to its destruction.
2.   Upon the complaint of any individual that a person is keeping, sheltering,
or harboring a dangerous animal or vicious animal on premises in the City, the
Mayor or peace officer shall cause the matter to be investigated and if a er
investigation, the facts indicate that the person named in the complaint is
keeping, sheltering, or harboring a dangerous or vicious animal in the City,
the Mayor or peace officer shall order the person named in the complaint to
safely remove such animal from the City, permanently place the animal with an
organization or group allowed to possess dangerous or vicious animals, or
destroy the animal within three days of the receipt of such an order. Such
order shall be contained in a notice to remove the dangerous or vicious animal,
which notice shall be given in writing to the person keeping, sheltering, or
harboring the dangerous animal or vicious animal, and shall be served
personally or by certified mail. Such order and notice to remove the dangerous
animal or vicious animal shall not be required where such animal has previously
caused serious physical harm or death to any person, in which case the Mayor or
peace officer shall cause the animal to be immediately seized and impounded or
killed if seizure and impoundment are not possible without risk of serious
physical harm or death to any person.
3.   The order to remove a dangerous animal or vicious animal issued by the
Mayor or peace officer may be appealed to the Council. In order to appeal such
order, written notice of appeal must be filed with the Clerk within three days
after receipt of the order contained in the notice to remove the dangerous or
vicious animal. Failure to file such written notice of appeal shall constitute
a waiver of the right to appeal the order of the Mayor or peace officer.
4.   The notice of appeal shall state the grounds for such appeal and shall be
delivered personally or be certified mail to the Clerk. The hearing of such
appeal shall be scheduled within seven days of the receipt of the notice of
appeal. The hearing may be continued for good cause. After such hearing, the
Council may affirm or reverse the order of the Mayor or peace officer. Such
determination shall be contained in a written decision and shall be filed with
the Clerk within three days after the hearing or any continued session thereof.
5.   If the Council affirms the action of the Mayor or peace officer, the
Council shall order in its written decision that the person owning, sheltering,
harboring, or keeping such dangerous or vicious animal remove such animal from
the City, permanently place such animal with an organization or group allowed
to possess dangerous or vicious animals or destroy it. The decision and order
shall immediately be served upon the person against whom rendered in the same
manner as the notice of removal. If the original order of the Mayor or peace
officer is not appealed and is not complied with within three days of its
issuance, the Mayor or peace officer is authorized to seize, impound, or
destroy such dangerous or vicious animal. Failure to comply with an order of
the Mayor or peace officer issued pursuant to this chapter and not appealed, or
of the Council after appeal, constitutes a simple misdemeanor.
CHAPTER 60
ADMINISTRATION OF TRAFFIC CODE
 
60.01 Title                          60.05 Reports of Traffic Accidents
60.02 Definitions                    60.06 Peace Officer’s Authority
60.03 Administration and Enforcement 60.07 Obedience to Peace Officers
60.04 Power to Direct Traffic         
 
60.01   TITLE.
Chapters
60 through
70 may be known and cited as the “Solon Traffic Code” (and are referred to
herein as the “Traffic Code”).
60.02   DEFINITIONS.
Where words and phrases used in the Traffic Code are defined by State law, such
definitions apply to their use in said Traffic Code and are adopted by
reference. Those definitions so adopted that need further definition or are
reiterated, and other words and phrases used herein, have the following
meanings:
1.   “Business District” means the territory contiguous to and including the
following designated streets:
A.   Dubuque Street from Second Street to North Street; and
B.   Main Street from Cedar Street to West Street.
1.   “MPH” means miles per hour.
2.   “Park” or “parking” means the standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or
not, otherwise than temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged
in loading or unloading merchandise or passengers.
3.   “Peace officer” means every officer authorized to direct or regulate
traffic or to make arrests for violations of traffic regulations.
4.   “Pedestrian” means a person afoot or a person using a pedestrian
conveyance.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.1(51))
5.    “Pedestrian conveyance” means any human-powered device by which a
pedestrian may move other than by walking or by which a pedestrian may move
another person, including but not limited to a wheelchair, stroller,
skateboard, scooter, or other similar device. Pedestrian conveyance also
includes an electric personal assistive mobility device and any other device
used to move a person sitting or standing on the device regardless of whether
the device is powered by an electric motor, so long as the electric motor
produces less than 750 watts. Pedestrian conveyance does not include a bicycle.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.1(51A))
6.   “Residence district” means the territory contiguous to and including a
highway not comprising a business, suburban, or school district, where 40
percent or more of the frontage on such a highway for a distance of 300 feet or
more is occupied by dwellings or by dwellings and buildings in use for
business.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.1(63))
7.   “School district” means the territory contiguous to and including a
highway for a distance of 200 feet in either direction from a schoolhouse.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.1(70))
8.   “Stand” or “standing” means the halting of a vehicle, whether occupied or
not, otherwise than for the purpose of and while actually engaged in receiving
or discharging passengers.
9.   “Stop” means when required, the complete cessation of movement.
10.   “Stop” or “stopping” means when prohibited, any halting of a vehicle,
even momentarily, whether occupied or not, except when necessary to avoid
conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a peace
officer or traffic control sign or signal.
11.   “Suburban district” means all other parts of the City not included in the
business, school, or residence districts.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.1(78))
12.   “Traffic control device” means all signs, signals, markings, and devices
not inconsistent with this chapter, lawfully placed or erected for the purpose
of regulating, warning, or guiding traffic.
13.   “Vehicle” means every device in, upon, or by which any person or property
is or may be transported or drawn upon a highway. Vehicle does not include:
A.   Any device moved by human power, including a low-speed electric bicycle.
B.   Any device used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.
C.   Any personal delivery device operated pursuant to Chapter 321O of the Code
of Iowa.
D.   Any integral part of a truck tractor or road tractor which is mounted on
the frame of the truck tractor or road tractor immediately behind the cab and
which may be used to transport persons and property, but which cannot be drawn
upon the highway by the truck tractor or another motor vehicle.
E.   Any steering axle, dolly, auxiliary axle, or other integral part of
another vehicle which in and of itself is incapable of commercially
transporting any person or property but is used primarily to support another
vehicle.
(Code of Iowa, Section 321.1(90))
60.03   ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT.
Provisions of this Traffic Code and State law relating to motor vehicles and
law of the road are enforced by the peace officer.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13(4))
60.04   POWER TO DIRECT TRAFFIC.
A peace officer or, in the absence of a peace officer, any officer of the Fire
Department when at the scene of a fire, is authorized to direct all traffic by
voice, hand, or signal in conformance with traffic laws. In the event of an
emergency, traffic may be directed as conditions require, notwithstanding the
provisions of the traffic laws.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 102.4 and 321.236(2))
60.05   REPORTS OF TRAFFIC ACCIDENTS.
The driver of a vehicle involved in an accident within the limits of the City
shall file a report as and when required by the State Department of
Transportation. A copy of this report shall be filed with the City for the
confidential use of peace officers and shall be subject to the provisions of
Section 321.271 of the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.273)
60.06   PEACE OFFICER’S AUTHORITY.
A peace officer is authorized to stop a vehicle to require exhibition of the
driver’s license of the driver, to serve a summons or memorandum of traffic
violation, to inspect the condition of the vehicle, to inspect the vehicle with
reference to size, weight, cargo, log book, bills of lading, or other manifest
of employment, tires and safety equipment, or to inspect the registration
certificate, the compensation certificate, travel order, or permit of such
vehicle. A peace officer having probable cause to stop a vehicle may require
exhibition of the proof of financial liability coverage card issued for the
vehicle.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.492)
60.07   OBEDIENCE TO PEACE OFFICERS.
No person shall willfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order or
direction of any peace officer invested by law with authority to direct,
control, or regulate traffic.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.229)
CHAPTER 61
TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES
 
61.01 Traffic Control Devices 61.04 Crosswalks
61.02 Installation            61.05 Traffic Lanes
61.03 Compliance              61.06 Standards
 
61.01   TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES.
The Council shall establish and cause to be placed and maintained, appropriate
traffic control devices to indicate parking spaces and zones, no parking zones,
limited parking zones, reserved parking zones, loading zones, safety zones,
school zones, hospital zones, quiet zones, traffic zones other than the above,
truck routes, school stops, stop intersections, yield right-of-way
intersections, one-way streets, streets to be laned for traffic and play
streets. The Council shall also have the power to designate and indicate
intersections at which traffic shall be controlled by traffic signals;
intersections at which left turns, right turns, and U-turns shall be
prohibited; and intersections at which markers, buttons, or other indications
shall be placed to indicate the course to be traveled by vehicles traversing or
turning at such intersections.
61.02   INSTALLATION.
The Streets Supervisor, under direction of the Council, shall cause to be
placed and maintained traffic control devices to carry out the provisions of
the Traffic Code of the City under State law or to regulate, guide, or warn
traffic. The City shall keep a record of all such traffic control devices.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.254 and 321.255)
61.03   COMPLIANCE.
No driver of a vehicle shall disobey the instructions of any official traffic
control device placed in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, unless
at the time otherwise directed by a peace officer, subject to the exceptions
granted the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle under Section 321.231 and
321.231A of the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.256)
61.04   CROSSWALKS.
The Council is hereby authorized to designate and maintain crosswalks by
appropriate traffic control devices at intersections where, due to traffic
conditions, there is particular danger to pedestrians crossing the street or
road-way, and at such other places as traffic conditions require.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13(4) and 321.255)
61.05   TRAFFIC LANES.
Where traffic lanes have been marked on street pavements at such places as
traffic conditions require, it is unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to
fail or refuse to keep such vehicle within the boundaries of any such lane
except when lawfully passing another vehicle or preparatory to making a lawful
turning movement.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13(4) and 321.255)
61.06   STANDARDS.
Traffic control devices shall comply with standards established by The Manual
of Uniform Traffic Control Devices for Streets and Highways.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.255)
CHAPTER 62
GENERAL TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
 
62.01 Violation of Regulations 62.04 Clinging to Vehicle
62.02 Play Streets Designated  62.05 Quiet Zones
62.03 Vehicles on Sidewalks    62.06 Obstructing View at Intersections
 
62.01   VIOLATION OF REGULATIONS.
Any person who willfully fails or refuses to comply with any lawful order of a
peace officer or direction of a Fire Department officer during a fire, or who
fails to abide by the applicable provisions of the following Iowa statutory
laws relating to motor vehicles and the statutory law of the road is in
violation of this section. These sections of the Code of Iowa are adopted by
reference and are as follows:
1.   Section 321.17 – Misdemeanor to violate registration provisions.
2.   Section 321.32 – Registration card, carried and exhibited; exception.
3.   Section 321.37 – Display of plates.
4.   Section 321.38 – Plates, method of attaching, imitations prohibited.
5.   Section 321.57 – Operation under special plates.
6.   Section 321.67 – Certificate of title must be executed.
7.   Section 321.78 – Injuring or tampering with vehicle.
8.   Section 321.79 – Intent to injure.
9.   Section 321.91 – Limitation on liability; penalty for abandonment.
10.   Section 321.98 – Operation without registration.
11.   Section 321.99 – Fraudulent use of registration.
12.   Section 321.104 – Penal offenses against title law.
13.   Section 321.115 – Antique vehicles; model year plates permitted.
14.   Section 321.174 – Operators licensed; operation of commercial vehicles.
15.   Section 321.174A – Operation of motor vehicle with expired license.
16.   Section 321.180 – Instruction permits, commercial learner’s permits, and
chauffeur’s instruction permits.
17.   Section 321.180B – Graduated driver’s licenses for persons aged fourteen
through seventeen.
18.   Section 321.193 – Restrictions on licenses; penalty.
19.   Section 321.194 – Special minors’ restricted license.
20.   Section 321.208A – Operation in violation of out-of-service order;
penalties.
21.   Section 321.216 – Unlawful use of license and nonoperator’s
identification card; penalty.
22.   Section 321.216B – Use of driver’s license or nonoperator’s
identification card by underage person to obtain alcohol.
23.   Section 321.216C – Use of driver’s license or nonoperator’s
identification card by underage person to obtain tobacco, tobacco products
alternative nicotine products, vapor products, or cigarettes.
24.   Section 321.218 – Operating without valid driver’s license or when
disqualified; penalties.
25.   Section 321.219 – Permitting unauthorized minor to drive.
26.   Section 321.220 – Permitting unauthorized person to drive.
27.   Section 321.221 – Employing unlicensed chauffeur.
28.   Section 321.222 – Renting motor vehicle to another.
29.   Section 321.223 – Driver’s license inspection for motor vehicle rental.
30.   Section 321.224 – Record kept.
31.   Section 321.232 – Speed detection jamming devices; penalty.
32.   Section 321.234A – All-terrain vehicles, highway use.
33.   Section 321.235A – Electric personal assistive mobility devices.
34.   Section 321.235B – Low-speed electric bicycles.
35.   Section 321.247 – Golf cart operation on City streets.
36.   Section 321.257 – Official traffic control signal.
37.   Section 321.259 – Unauthorized signs, signals or markings.
38.   Section 321.260 – Interference with devices, signs, or signals; unlawful
possession; traffic signal preemption devices.
39.   Section 321.262 – Leaving scene of traffic accident prohibited; vehicle
damage only; removal of vehicles.
40.   Section 321.263 – Information and aid; leaving scene of personal injury
accident.
41.   Section 321.264 – Striking unattended vehicle.
42.   Section 321.265 – Striking fixtures upon a highway.
43.   Section 321.266 – Reporting accidents.
44.   Section 321.275 – Operation of motorcycles and motorized bicycles.
45.   Section 321.276 – Use of electronic communication device while driving;
text-messaging.
46.   Section 321.277 – Reckless driving.
47.   Section 321.277A – Careless driving.
48.   Section 321.278 – Drag racing prohibited.
49.   Section 321.281 – Actions against bicyclists.
50.   Section 321.284 – Open container in motor vehicles, drivers.
51.   Section 321.284A – Open container in motor vehicles, passengers.
52.   Section 321.288 – Control of vehicle; reduced speed.
53.   Section 321.295 – Limitation on bridge or elevated structures.
54.   Section 321.297 – Driving on right-hand side of roadways; exceptions.
55.   Section 321.298 – Meeting and turning to right.
56.   Section 321.299 – Overtaking a vehicle.
57.   Section 321.302 – Overtaking and passing.
58.   Section 321.303 – Limitations on overtaking on the left.
59.   Section 321.304 – Prohibited passing.
60.   Section 321.305 – One-way roadways and rotary traffic islands.
61.   Section 321.306 – Roadways laned for traffic.
62.   Section 321.307 – Following too closely.
63.   Section 321.309 – Towing.
64.   Section 321.310 – Towing four-wheel trailers.
65.   Section 321.312 – Turning on curve or crest of grade.
66.   Section 321.313 – Starting parked vehicle.
67.   Section 321.314 – When signal required.
68.   Section 321.315 – Signal continuous.
69.   Section 321.316 – Stopping.
70.   Section 321.317 – Signals by hand and arm or signal device.
71.   Section 321.318 – Method of giving hand and arm signals.
72.   Section 321.319 – Entering intersections from different highways.
73.   Section 321.320 – Left turns; yielding.
74.   Section 321.321 – Entering through highways.
75.   Section 321.322 – Vehicles entering stop or yield intersection.
76.   Section 321.323 – Moving vehicle backward on highway.
77.   Section 321.323A – Approaching certain stationary vehicles.
78.   Section 321.324 – Operation on approach of emergency vehicles.
79.   Section 321.324A – Funeral processions.
80.   Section 321.329 – Duty of driver; pedestrians crossing or working on
highways.
81.   Section 321.330 – Use of crosswalks.
82.   Section 321.332 – White canes restricted to blind persons.
83.   Section 321.333 – Duty of drivers.
84.   Section 321.340 – Driving through safety zone.
85.   Section 321.341 – Obedience to signal indicating approach of railroad
train or railroad track equipment.
86.   Section 321.342 – Stop at certain railroad crossings; posting warning.
87.   Section 321.343 – Certain vehicles must stop.
88.   Section 321.344 – Heavy equipment at crossing.
89.   Section 321.344B – Immediate safety threat; penalty.
90.   Section 321.354 – Stopping on traveled way.
91.   Section 321.359 – Moving other vehicle.
92.   Section 321.362 – Unattended motor vehicle.
93.   Section 321.363 – Obstruction to driver’s view.
94.   Section 321.364 – Preventing contamination of food by hazardous material.
95.   Section 321.365 – Coasting prohibited.
96.   Section 321.366 – Acts prohibited on fully-controlled access facilities.
97.   Section 321.367 – Following fire apparatus.
98.   Section 321.368 – Crossing fire hose.
99.   Section 321.369 – Putting debris on highway.
100.   Section 321.370 – Removing injurious material.
101.   Section 321.371 – Clearing up wrecks.
102.   Section 321.372 – Discharging pupils, stopping requirements; penalties.
103.   Section 321.381 – Movement of unsafe or improperly equipped vehicles.
104.   Section 321.381A – Operation of low-speed vehicles.
105.   Section 321.382 – Upgrade pulls; minimum speed.
106.   Section 321.383 – Exceptions; slow vehicles identified.
107.   Section 321.384 – When lighted lamps required.
108.   Section 321.385 – Head lamps on motor vehicles.
109.   Section 321.386 – Head lamps on motorcycles, motorized bicycles, and
all- terrain vehicles.
110.   Section 321.387 – Rear lamps.
111.   Section 321.388 – Illuminating plates.
112.   Section 321.389 – Reflector requirement.
113.   Section 321.390 – Reflector requirements.
114.   Section 321.392 – Clearance and identification lights.
115.   Section 321.393 – Color and mounting.
116.   Section 321.394 – Lamp or flag on projecting load.
117.   Section 321.395 – Lamps on parked vehicles.
118.   Section 321.398 – Lamps on other vehicles and equipment.
119.   Section 321.402 – Spot lamps.
120.   Section 321.403 – Auxiliary driving lamps.
121.   Section 321.404 – Signal lamps and signal devices.
122.   Section 321.404A – Light-restricting devices prohibited.
123.   Section 321.405 – Self-illumination.
124.   Section 321.408 – Back-up lamps.
125.   Section 321.409 – Mandatory lighting equipment.
126.   Section 321.415 – Required usage of lighting devices.
127.   Section 321.417 – Single-beam road-lighting equipment.
128.   Section 321.418 – Alternate road-lighting equipment.
129.   Section 321.419 – Number of driving lamps required or permitted.
130.   Section 321.420 – Number of lamps lighted.
131.   Section 321.421 – Special restrictions on lamps.
132.   Section 321.422 – Red light in front, rear lights.
133.   Section 321.423 – Flashing lights.
134.   Section 321.430 – Brake, hitch, and control requirements.
135.   Section 321.431 – Performance ability.
136.   Section 321.432 – Horns and warning devices.
137.   Section 321.433 – Sirens, whistles, air horns, and bells prohibited.
138.   Section 321.434 – Bicycle sirens or whistles.
139.   Section 321.436 – Mufflers, prevention of noise.
140.   Section 321.437 – Mirrors.
141.   Section 321.438 – Windshields and windows.
142.   Section 321.439 – Windshield wipers.
143.   Section 321.440 – Restrictions as to tire equipment.
144.   Section 321.441 – Metal tires prohibited.
145.   Section 321.442 – Projections on wheels.
146.   Section 321.444 – Safety glass.
147.   Section 321.445 – Safety belts and safety harnesses; use required.
148.   Section 321.446 – Child restraint devices.
149.   Section 321.449 – Motor carrier safety rules.
150.   Section 321.449A – Rail crew transport drivers.
151.   Section 321.449B – Texting or using a mobile telephone while operating a
commercial motor vehicle.
152.   Section 321.450 – Hazardous materials transportation regulations.
153.   Section 321.454 – Width of vehicles.
154.   Section 321.455 – Projecting loads on passenger vehicles.
155.   Section 321.456 – Height of vehicles.
156.   Section 321.457 – Maximum length.
157.   Section 321.458 – Loading beyond front.
158.   Section 321.460 – Spilling loads on highways.
159.   Section 321.461 – Trailers and towed vehicles.
160.   Section 321.462 – Drawbars and safety chains.
161.   Section 321.463 – Maximum gross weight; exceptions, penalties.
162.   Section 321.465 – Weighing vehicles and removal of excess.
163.   Section 321.466 – Increased loading capacity; reregistration.
62.02   PLAY STREETS DESIGNATED.
Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating any street or part thereof as
a play street, no person shall drive a vehicle upon any such street or portion
thereof except drivers of vehicles having business or whose residences are
within such closed area, and then any said driver shall exercise the greatest
care in driving upon any such street or portion thereof.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.255)
62.03   VEHICLES ON SIDEWALKS.
The driver of a vehicle shall not drive upon or within any sidewalk area except
at a driveway.
62.04   CLINGING TO VEHICLE.
No person shall drive a motor vehicle on the streets of the City unless all
passengers of said vehicle are inside the vehicle in the place intended for
their accommodation. No person riding upon any bicycle, coaster, roller skates,
in-line skates, sled, or toy vehicle shall attach the same or themselves to any
vehicle upon a roadway.
62.05   QUIET ZONES.
Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating a quiet zone, no person
operating a motor vehicle within any such zone shall sound the horn or other
warning device of such vehicle except in an emergency.
62.06   OBSTRUCTING VIEW AT INTERSECTIONS.
It is unlawful to allow any tree, hedge, billboard, or other object to obstruct
the view of an intersection by preventing persons from having a clear view of
traffic approaching the intersection from cross streets. Any such obstruction
is deemed a nuisance and in addition to the standard penalty may be abated in
the manner provided by Chapter 50.
CHAPTER 63
SPEED REGULATIONS
 
63.01 General                             63.04 Special Speed Zones
63.02 State Code Speed Limits             63.05 Minimum Speed
63.03 Parks, Cemeteries, and Parking Lots 63.06 Controlled Access Facilities
 
63.01   GENERAL.
Every driver of a motor vehicle on a street shall drive the same at a careful
and prudent speed not greater than nor less than is reasonable and proper,
having due regard to the traffic, surface and width of the street and of any
other conditions then existing, and no person shall drive a vehicle on any
street at a speed greater than will permit said driver to bring it to a stop
within the assured clear distance ahead, such driver having the right to
assume, however, that all persons using said street will observe the law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.285)
63.02   STATE CODE SPEED LIMITS.
The following speed limits are established in Section 321.285 of the Code of
Iowa and any speed in excess thereof is unlawful unless specifically designated
otherwise in this chapter as a special speed zone.
1.   Business District – 20 MPH.
2.   Residence or School District – 25 MPH.
3.   Suburban District – 45 MPH.
63.03   PARKS, CEMETERIES, AND PARKING LOTS.
A speed in excess of 15 MPH in any public park, cemetery, or parking lot,
unless specifically designated otherwise in this chapter, is unlawful.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236(5))
63.04   SPECIAL SPEED ZONES.
In accordance with requirements of the Iowa Department of Transportation, or
whenever the Council shall determine upon the basis of an engineering and
traffic investigation that any speed limit listed in Section
63.02 is greater or less than is reasonable or safe under the conditions found
to exist at any intersection or other place or upon any part of the City street
system, the Council shall determine and adopt by ordinance such higher or lower
speed limit as it deems reasonable and safe at such location. The following
special speed zones have been established:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.290)
1.   Special 20 MPH Speed Zones. The maximum speed of any vehicle in a school
district or zone shall be 20 MPH, except:
A.   On 180th Street along frontage of Solon High School, the speed limit shall
be 25 MPH.
63.05   MINIMUM SPEED.
A person shall not drive a motor vehicle at such a slow speed as to impede or
block the normal and reasonable movement of traffic, except when reduced speed
is necessary for safe operation, or in compliance with law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.294)
63.06   CONTROLLED ACCESS FACILITIES.
Speed limits on controlled access facilities are as specified in
Chapter 140.
CHAPTER 64
TURNING REGULATIONS
 
64.01 Turning at Intersections 64.03 Left Turn for Parking
64.02 U-Turns                   
 
64.01   TURNING AT INTERSECTIONS.
The driver of a vehicle intending to turn at an intersection shall do so as
follows:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.311)
1.   Both the approach for a right turn and a right turn shall be made as close
as practical to the right-hand curb or edge of the roadway.
2.   Approach for a left turn shall be made in that portion of the right half
of the roadway nearest the centerline thereof and after entering the
intersection the left turn shall be made so as to depart from the intersection
to the right of the centerline of the roadway being entered.
3.   Approach for a left turn from a two-way street into a one-way street shall
be made in that portion of the right half of the roadway nearest the centerline
thereof and by passing to the right of such centerline where it enters the
intersection. A left turn from a one- way street into a two-way street shall be
made by passing to the right of the centerline of the street being entered upon
leaving the intersection.
The Council may cause markers, buttons, or signs to be placed within or
adjacent to intersections and thereby require and direct, as traffic conditions
require, that a different course from that specified above be traveled by
vehicles turning at intersections, and when markers, buttons, or signs are so
placed, no driver of a vehicle shall turn a vehicle at an intersection other
than as directed and required by such markers, buttons, or signs.
64.02   U-TURNS.
It is unlawful for a driver to make a U-turn except at an intersection;
however, U-turns are prohibited within the Business District and at any
intersection where a sign prohibiting U-turns is posted in accordance with
Chapter 61.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236(9))
64.03   LEFT TURN FOR PARKING.
No person shall make a left hand turn, crossing the centerline of the street,
for the purpose of parking on said street.
CHAPTER 65
STOP OR YIELD REQUIRED
 
65.01 Stop or Yield                 65.04 Stop When Traffic is Obstructed
65.02 School Stops                  65.05 Pedestrians’ Right-of-Way
65.03 Stop Before Crossing Sidewalk  
 
65.01   STOP OR YIELD.
Every driver of a vehicle shall stop or yield as directed by traffic control
devices posted in accordance with
Chapter 61.
65.02   SCHOOL STOPS.
At any school crossing zone, every driver of a vehicle approaching said zone
shall bring the vehicle to a full stop at a point 10 feet from the approach
side of the crosswalk marked by an authorized school stop sign and thereafter
proceed in a careful and prudent manner until the vehicle shall have passed
through such school crossing zone.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.249)
65.03   STOP BEFORE CROSSING SIDEWALK.
The driver of a vehicle emerging from a private roadway, alley, driveway, or
building shall stop such vehicle immediately prior to driving onto the sidewalk
area and thereafter shall proceed into the sidewalk area only when able to do
so without danger to pedestrian traffic and shall yield the right-of-way to any
vehicular traffic on the street into which the vehicle is entering.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.353)
65.04   STOP WHEN TRAFFIC IS OBSTRUCTED.
Notwithstanding any traffic control signal indication to proceed, no driver
shall enter an intersection or a marked crosswalk unless there is sufficient
space on the other side of the intersection or crosswalk to accommodate the
vehicle.
65.05   PEDESTRIANS’ RIGHT-OF-WAY.
Where traffic control signals are not in place or in operation, the driver of a
vehicle shall yield the right-of-way, slowing down or stopping, if need be, to
so yield to a pedestrian or a person riding a bicycle crossing the roadway
within any marked crosswalk or within any unmarked crosswalk at an
intersection.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.327)
CHAPTER 66
LOAD AND WEIGHT RESTRICTIONS
 
66.01 Temporary Embargo                  66.04 Load Limits on Bridges
66.02 Permits for Excess Size and Weight 66.05 Truck Routes
66.03 Load Limits Upon Certain Streets    
 
66.01   TEMPORARY EMBARGO.
If the Council declares an embargo when it appears by reason of deterioration,
rain, snow, or other climatic conditions that certain streets will be seriously
damaged or destroyed by vehicles weighing in excess of an amount specified by
the signs, no such vehicles shall be operated on streets so designated by such
signs erected in accordance with
Chapter 61.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.471 and 472)
66.02   PERMITS FOR EXCESS SIZE AND WEIGHT.
The Council may, upon application and good cause being shown, issue a special
permit in writing authorizing the applicant to operate or move a vehicle or
combination of vehicles of a size or weight or load exceeding the maximum
specified by State law or the City over those streets or bridges named in the
permit which are under the jurisdiction of the City and for which the City is
responsible for maintenance.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.473 and 321E.2)
66.03   LOAD LIMITS UPON CERTAIN STREETS.
When signs are erected giving notice thereof, no person shall operate any
vehicle with a gross weight in excess of the amounts specified on such signs at
any time upon any of the streets or parts of streets for which said signs are
erected in accordance with
Chapter 61.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.473 and 475)
66.04   LOAD LIMITS ON BRIDGES.
Where it has been determined that any City bridge has a capacity less than the
maximum permitted on the streets of the City, or on the street serving the
bridge, the Council may cause to be posted and maintained signs, in accordance
with Chapter 61, on said bridge and at suitable distances ahead of the
entrances thereof to warn drivers of such maximum load limits, and no person
shall drive a vehicle weighing, loaded or unloaded, upon said bridge in excess
of such posted limit.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.471)
66.05   TRUCK ROUTES.
When truck routes have been designated in accordance with
Chapter 61, any motor vehicle exceeding established weight limits shall comply
with the following:
1.   Use of Established Routes. Every such motor vehicle having no fixed
terminal within the City or making no scheduled or definite stops within the
City for the purpose of loading or unloading shall travel over or upon those
streets within the City designated as truck routes and none other.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.473)
2.   Deliveries Off Truck Route. Any such motor vehicle, when loaded or empty,
having a fixed terminal, making a scheduled or definite stop within the City
for the purpose of loading or unloading shall proceed over or upon the
designated routes to the nearest point of its scheduled or definite stop and
shall proceed thereto, load or unload and return, by the most direct route to
its point of departure from said designated route.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.473)
3.   Employer’s Responsibility. The owner, or any other person, employing or
otherwise directing the driver of any vehicle shall not require or knowingly
permit the operation of such vehicle upon a street in any manner contrary to
this section.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.473)
CHAPTER 67
PEDESTRIANS
 
67.01 Walking in Street 67.03 Pedestrian Crossing
67.02 Hitchhiking       67.04 Use of Sidewalks
 
67.01   WALKING IN STREET.
Pedestrians shall at all times when walking on or along a street, walk on the
left side of the street.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.326)
67.02   HITCHHIKING.
No person shall stand in the traveled portion of a street for the purpose of
soliciting a ride from the driver of any private vehicle.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.331)
67.03   PEDESTRIAN CROSSING.
Every pedestrian crossing a roadway at any point other than within a marked
crosswalk or within an unmarked crosswalk at an intersection shall yield the
right-of-way to all vehicles upon the roadway.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.328)
67.04   USE OF SIDEWALKS.
Where sidewalks are provided it is unlawful for any pedestrian to walk along
and upon an adjacent street.
CHAPTER 68
ONE-WAY TRAFFIC
68.01   ONE-WAY TRAFFIC REQUIRED.
When appropriate signs are in place, as provided for in Chapter 61, vehicular
traffic, other than permitted cross traffic, shall move only in the direction
indicated on such signs.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236(4))
CHAPTER 69
PARKING REGULATIONS
 
69.01 Parking Limited or Controlled 69.07 Parking Prohibited
69.02 Park Adjacent to Curb         69.08 Persons with Disabilities Parking
69.03 Parking on One-Way Streets    69.09 Truck Parking Limited
69.04 Angle Parking                 69.10 Parking of Non-Motorized Trailers
                                    Restricted
69.05 Manner of Angle Parking       69.11 Snow Event
69.06 Parking for Certain Purposes  69.12 Controlled Access Facilities
Illegal
 
69.01   PARKING LIMITED OR CONTROLLED.
Parking of vehicles shall be controlled or limited where so indicated by
designated traffic control devices in accordance with
Chapter 61. No person shall stop, park, or stand a vehicle in violation of any
such posted parking regulations unless in compliance with the directions of a
peace officer.
69.02   PARK ADJACENT TO CURB.
No person shall stand or park a vehicle in a roadway other than parallel with
the edge of the roadway headed in the direction of lawful traffic movement and
with the right-hand wheels of the vehicle within 18 inches of the curb or edge
of the roadway except as hereinafter provided in the case of angle parking and
vehicles parked on the left-hand side of one-way streets.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.361)
69.03   PARKING ON ONE-WAY STREETS.
No person shall stand or park a vehicle on the left-hand side of a one-way
street other than parallel with the edge of the roadway headed in the direction
of lawful traffic movement and with the left-hand wheels of the vehicle within
18 inches of the curb or edge of the roadway except as hereinafter provided in
the case of angle parking.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.361)
69.04   ANGLE PARKING.
Angle or diagonal parking is prohibited on all City streets and alleys within
the City limits. Angle or diagonal parking is allowed in City parking lots,
parking facilities used in connection with City parks, and other areas
specifically marked and designated as allowing angle or diagonal parking.
69.05   MANNER OF ANGLE PARKING.
Upon those streets or portions of streets that have been signed or marked for
angle parking, no person shall park or stand a vehicle other than at an angle
to the curb or edge of the roadway or in the center of the roadway as indicated
by such signs and markings. No part of any vehicle or the load thereon, when
said vehicle is parked within a diagonal parking district, shall extend into
the roadway more than a distance of 16 feet when measured at right angles to
the adjacent curb or edge of roadway.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.361)
69.06   PARKING FOR CERTAIN PURPOSES ILLEGAL.
No person shall park a vehicle upon public property for more than 48 hours,
unless otherwise limited under the provisions of this chapter, or for any of
the following principal purposes:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236(1))
1.   Sale. Displaying such vehicle for sale.
2.   Repairing. For lubricating, repairing, or for commercial washing of such
vehicle except such repairs as are necessitated by an emergency.
3.   Advertising. Displaying advertising.
4.   Merchandise Sales. Selling merchandise from such vehicle except in a duly
established market place or when so authorized or licensed under this Code of
Ordinances.
69.07   PARKING PROHIBITED.
No one shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle except when necessary to avoid
conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a peace
officer or traffic control device, in any of the following places:
1.   Crosswalk. On a crosswalk.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358(5))
2.   Center Parkway. On the center parkway or dividing area of any divided
street.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236(1))
3.   Mailboxes. Within 20 feet on either side of a mailbox that is so placed
and so equipped as to permit the depositing of mail from vehicles on the
roadway.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236(1))
4.   Sidewalks. On or across a sidewalk.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358(1))
5.   Driveway. In front of a public or private driveway.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358(2))
6.   Intersection. Within an intersection or within 10 feet of an intersection
of any street or alley.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358(3))
7.   Fire Hydrant. Within five feet of a fire hydrant.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358(4))
8.   Stop Sign or Signal. Within 10 feet upon the approach to any flashing
beacon, stop or yield sign, or traffic control signal located at the side of a
roadway.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358(6))
9.   Railroad Crossing. Within 50 feet of the nearest rail of a railroad
crossing, except when parked parallel with such rail and not exhibiting a red
light.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358(8))
10.   Fire Station. Within 20 feet of the driveway entrance to any fire station
and on the side of a street opposite the entrance to any fire station within 75
feet of said entrance when properly sign posted.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358(9))
11.   Excavations. Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction
when such stopping, standing, or parking would obstruct traffic.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358(10))
12.   Double Parking. On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at
the edge or curb of a street.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358(11))
13.   Hazardous Locations. When, because of restricted visibility or when
standing or parked vehicles would constitute a hazard to moving traffic, or
when other traffic conditions require, the Council may cause curbs to be
painted with a yellow color and erect no parking or standing signs.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358(13))
14.   Churches, Nursing Homes, and Other Buildings. A space of 50 feet is
hereby reserved at the side of the street in front of any theatre, auditorium,
hotel having more than 25 sleeping rooms, hospital, nursing home, taxicab
stand, bus depot, church, or other building where large assemblages of people
are being held, within which space, when clearly marked as such, no motor
vehicle shall be left standing, parked or stopped except in taking on or
discharging passengers or freight, and then only for such length of time as is
necessary for such purpose.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.360)
15.   Alleys. No person shall park a vehicle within an alley in such a manner
or under such conditions as to leave available less than 10 feet of the width
of the roadway for the free movement of vehicular traffic, and no person shall
stop, stand, or park a vehicle within an alley in such a position as to block
the driveway entrance to any abutting property. The provisions of this
subsection do not apply to a vehicle parked in any alley that is 18 feet wide
or less, provided that said vehicle is parked to deliver goods or services.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236(1))
16.   Ramps. In front of a curb cut or ramp which is located on public or
private property in a manner which blocks access to the curb cut or ramp.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358(15))
17.   Area Between Lot Line and Curb Line. That area of the public way not
covered by sidewalk and lying between the lot line and the curb line, where
curbing has been installed.
18.   In More Than One Space. In any designated parking space so that any part
of the vehicle occupies more than one such space or protrudes beyond the
markings designating such space.
69.08   PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES PARKING.
The following regulations shall apply to the establishment and use of persons
with disabilities parking spaces:
1.   Establishment. Persons with disabilities parking spaces shall be
established and designated in accordance with Chapter 321L of the Code of Iowa
and Iowa Administrative Code, 661-18. No unauthorized person shall establish
any on-street persons with disabilities parking space without first obtaining
Council approval.
2.   Improper Use. The following uses of a persons with disabilities parking
space, located on either public or private property, constitute improper use of
a persons with disabilities parking permit, which is a violation of this Code:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321L.4(2))
A.   Use by an operator of a vehicle not displaying a persons with disabilities
parking permit.
B.   Use by an operator of a vehicle displaying a persons with disabilities
parking permit but not being used by a person issued a permit or being
transported in accordance with Section 321L.2(1)(b) of the Code of Iowa.
C.   Use by a vehicle in violation of the rules adopted under Section 321L.8 of
the Code of Iowa.
1.   Wheelchair Parking Cones. No person shall use or interfere with a
wheelchair parking cone in violation of the following:
A.   A person issued a persons with disabilities parking permit must comply
with the requirements of Section 321L.2A(1) of the Code of Iowa when utilizing
a wheelchair parking cone.
B.   A person shall not interfere with a wheelchair parking cone that is
properly placed under the provisions of Section 321L.2A(1) of the Code of Iowa.
69.09   TRUCK PARKING LIMITED.
No person shall park a motor vehicle of any type that exceeds seven feet in
height or eight feet in width or 20 feet in length in violation of the
following regulations. The provisions of this section shall not apply to
pickup, light delivery or panel delivery trucks, or recreational vehicles.
1.   Residential District. Excepting only when such vehicles are actually
engaged in loading or unloading or making local deliveries, no person shall
park or leave unattended such vehicle on any streets within a residential
district. When actually receiving or delivering merchandise or cargo such
vehicle shall be stopped or parked in a manner which will not interfere with
other traffic, and in no event shall said activities exceed a period of 48
hours.
2.   Noise. No such vehicle shall be left standing or parked upon any street,
alley, public or private parking lot, or drive of any service station between
the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. with the engine, auxiliary engine, air
compressor, refrigerating equipment, or other device in operation giving off
audible sounds which unreasonably disturbs, injures or endangers the comfort,
repose, health, peace, or safety of reasonable persons of normal sensitivities.
In no event shall any noise described above continue for 30 continuous minutes.
3.   Livestock. No such vehicle containing livestock shall be parked on any
street, alley, or highway for a period of time of more than 30 minutes.
69.10   PARKING OF NON-MOTORIZED TRAILERS RESTRICTED.
No person shall park a semi-trailer, special mobile equipment, trailer, trailer
coach, transporter or truck tractor, all of which are defined in Section 321.1
of the Code of Iowa, upon the public streets of the City.
69.11   SNOW EVENT.
To facilitate any snow and ice removal from any street or public way, the
following vehicle parking restrictions and conditions shall apply:
1.   The Mayor, Public Works Director, or City Administrator is authorized to
declare a snow emergency, as defined in the City’s Snow and Ice Control Policy,
that will cause enactment of these snow parking restrictions. During a
designated snow emergency, no vehicle shall be parked in or on any part of the
public street or right-of-way of a public street during snow removal
operations, or before such operations have removed or cleared accumulated snow
or ice from the street to each curb or shoulder edge, absent a showing of
sufficient hardship justifying an exception from said prohibition, the
sufficiency of which shall be at the sole discretion of the Public Works
Director or City Administrator. The registered owner of a non-excepted vehicle
parked in violation of this section shall be subject to Sections 70.03 and
70.06.
2.   No person shall park, abandon, or leave unattended any vehicle on Main
Street (County Highway F16), from Market Street (State Highway 1), west to West
Street, during the hours of 2:00 a.m. to 6:00 a.m. between November 1 and March
31.
69.12   CONTROLLED ACCESS FACILITIES.
Parking restrictions on controlled access facilities are as specified in
Chapter 140.
CHAPTER 70
TRAFFIC CODE ENFORCEMENT PROCEDURES
 
70.01 Arrest or Citation            70.04 Parking Violations: Vehicle
                                    Unattended
70.02 Scheduled Violations          70.05 Presumption in Reference to Illegal
                                    Parking
70.03 Parking Violations: Alternate 70.06 Impounding Vehicles
 
70.01   ARREST OR CITATION.
Whenever a peace officer has reasonable cause to believe that a person has
violated any provision of the Traffic Code, such officer may:
1.   Immediate Arrest. Immediately arrest such person and take such person
before a local magistrate; or
2.   Issue Citation. Without arresting the person, prepare in quintuplicate a
combined traffic citation and complaint as adopted by the Iowa Commissioner of
Public Safety, or issue a uniform citation and complaint utilizing a State-
approved computerized device.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 805.6 and 321.485)
70.02   SCHEDULED VIOLATIONS.
For violations of the Traffic Code that are designated by Section 805.8A of the
Code of Iowa to be scheduled violations, the scheduled fine for each of those
violations shall be as specified in Section 805.8A of the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 805.8 and 805.8A)
70.03   PARKING VIOLATIONS: ALTERNATE.
Uncontested violations of parking restrictions imposed by this Code shall be
charged upon a simple notice of a fine payable at the office of the Clerk. The
fine for each violation charged under a simple notice of a fine shall be in the
amount of $10.00 for all violations except improper use of a persons with
disabilities parking permit. If such fine is not paid within 30 days, it shall
be increased by $5.00. The fine for improper use of a persons with disabilities
parking permit is $100.00.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236(1)(b) and 321L.4(2))
70.04   PARKING VIOLATIONS: VEHICLE UNATTENDED.
When a vehicle is parked in violation of any provision of the Traffic Code, and
the driver is not present, the notice of fine or citation as herein provided
shall be attached to the vehicle in a conspicuous place.
70.05   PRESUMPTION IN REFERENCE TO ILLEGAL PARKING.
In any proceeding charging a standing or parking violation, a prima facie
presumption that the registered owner was the person who parked or placed such
vehicle at the point where, and for the time during which, such violation
occurred shall be raised by proof that:
1.   Described Vehicle. The particular vehicle described in the information was
parked in violation of the Traffic Code; and
2.   Registered Owner. The defendant named in the information was the
registered owner at the time in question.
70.06   IMPOUNDING VEHICLES.
1.   A peace officer is hereby authorized to remove, or cause to be removed, a
vehicle from a street, public alley, public parking lot, or highway to the
nearest garage or other place of safety, or to a garage designated or
maintained by the City, under the circumstances hereinafter enumerated:
A.   Disabled Vehicle. When a vehicle is so disabled as to constitute an
obstruction to traffic and the person or persons in charge of the vehicle are
by reason of physical injury incapacitated to such an extent as to be unable to
provide for its custody or removal.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236(1))
B.   Illegally Parked Vehicle. When any vehicle is left unattended and is so
illegally parked as to constitute a definite hazard or obstruction to the
normal movement of traffic.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236(1))
C.   Snow Removal. When any vehicle is left parked in violation of a ban on
parking during snow removal operations.
D.   Parked Over Limited Time Period. When any vehicle is left parked for a
continuous period in violation of any limited parking time. If the owner can be
located, the owner shall be given an opportunity to remove the vehicle.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236(1))
2.   Costs. In addition to the standard penalties provided, the owner or driver
of any vehicle impounded for the violation of any of the provisions of this
chapter shall be required to pay the reasonable cost of towing and storage.
CHAPTER 75
ATVS, UTVS, AND SNOWMOBILES
 
75.01 Purpose                    75.06 Negligence
75.02 Definitions                75.07 Accident Reports
75.03 General Regulations        75.08 Hours and Dates
75.04 Operation of Snowmobiles   75.09 Speed
75.05 Operation of ATVs and UTVs  
 
75.01   PURPOSE.
The purpose of this chapter is to regulate the operation of all-terrain
vehicles, off-road utility vehicles, and snowmobiles within the City.
75.02   DEFINITIONS.
For use in this chapter the following terms are defined:
1.   “All-terrain vehicle” or “ATV” means a motorized vehicle, with not less
than three and not more than six non-highway tires, that is limited in engine
displacement to less than 1,000 cubic centimeters and in total dry weight to
less than 1,200 pounds and that has a seat or saddle designed to be straddled
by the operator and handlebars for steering control.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321I.1)
2.   “Off-road motorcycle” means a two-wheeled motor vehicle that has a seat or
saddle designed to be straddled by the operator and handlebars for steering
control and that is intended by the manufacturer for use on natural terrain.
“Off-road motorcycle” includes a motorcycle that was originally issued a
certificate of title and registered for highway use under Chapter 321 of the
Code of Iowa, but which contains design features that enable operation over
natural terrain. An operator of an off-road motorcycle is also subject to the
provisions of this chapter governing the operation of all-terrain vehicles.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321I.1)
3.   “Off-road utility vehicle” or “UTV” means a motorized vehicle, with not
less than four and not more than eight non-highway tires or rubberized tracks,
that has a seat that is of bucket or bench design, not intended to be straddled
by the operator, and a steering wheel or control levers for control. “Off-road
utility vehicle” or “UTV” includes the following vehicles:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321I.1)
A.   “Off-road utility vehicle – Type 1” includes vehicles with a total dry
weight of 1,200 pounds or less and a width of 50 inches or less.
B.   “Off-road utility vehicle – Type 2” includes vehicles, other than Type 1
vehicles, with a total dry weight of 2,000 pounds or less and a width of 65
inches or less.
C.   “Off-road utility vehicle – Type 3” includes vehicles with a total dry
weight of more than 2,000 pounds or a width of more than 65 inches, or both.
An operator of an UTV is also subject to the provisions of this chapter
governing the operation of ATVs.
4.   “Snowmobile” means a motorized vehicle that weighs less than 1,000 pounds,
that uses sled-type runners or skis, endless belt-type tread with a width of 48
inches or less, or any combination of runners, skis, or tread, and is designed
for travel on snow or ice. “Snowmobile” does not include an all-terrain vehicle
that has been altered or equipped with runners, skis, belt-type tracks, or
treads.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321G.1)
75.03   GENERAL REGULATIONS.
No person shall operate an ATV, off-road motorcycle, or off-road utility
vehicle within the City in violation of Chapter 321I of the Code of Iowa or a
snowmobile within the City in violation of the provisions of Chapter 321G of
the Code of Iowa or in violation of rules established by the Natural Resource
Commission of the Department of Natural Resources governing their registration,
equipment and manner of operation.
(Code of Iowa, Ch. 321G and Ch. 321I)
75.04   OPERATION OF SNOWMOBILES.
The operators of snowmobiles shall comply with the following restrictions as to
where snowmobiles may be operated within the City:
1.   Streets. Snowmobiles shall be operated only upon streets that have not
been plowed during the snow season and on such other streets as may be
designated by resolution of the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321G.9(4)(a))
2.   Exceptions. Snowmobiles may be operated on prohibited streets only under
the following circumstances:
A.   Emergencies. Snowmobiles may be operated on any street in an emergency
during the period of time when and at locations where snow upon the roadway
renders travel by conventional motor vehicles impractical.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321G.9(4)(c))
B.   Direct Crossing. Snowmobiles may make a direct crossing of a prohibited
street provided all of the following occur:
   (1)   The crossing is made at an angle of approximately 90 degrees to the
direction of the street and at a place where no obstruction prevents a quick
and safe crossing;
   (2)   The snowmobile is brought to a complete stop before crossing the
street;
   (3)   The driver yields the right-of-way to all on-coming traffic that
constitutes an immediate hazard; and
   (4)   In crossing a divided street, the crossing is made only at an
intersection of such street with another street.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321G.9(2))
1.   Railroad Right-of-Way. Snowmobiles shall not be operated on an operating
railroad right-of-way. A snowmobile may be driven directly across a railroad
right-of-way only at an established crossing and notwithstanding any other
provisions of law may, if necessary, use the improved portion of the
established crossing after yielding to all oncoming traffic.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321G.13(1)(h))
2.   Trails. Snowmobiles shall not be operated on all-terrain vehicle trails
except where so designated.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321G.9(4)(f))
3.   Parks and Other City Land. Snowmobiles shall not be operated in any park,
playground, or upon any other City-owned property without the express
permission of the City. A snowmobile shall not be operated on any City land
without a snow cover of at least one-tenth of one inch.
4.   Sidewalk or Parking. Snowmobiles shall not be operated upon the public
sidewalk or that portion of the street located between the curb line and the
sidewalk or property line commonly referred to as the “parking” except for
purposes of crossing the same to a public street upon which operation is
authorized by this chapter.
5.   Rules. Rules for the operation of snowmobiles within the City shall be set
by resolution from time to time. Rules shall include hours of operation, speed
limits, an approved route through the City, signage and any other rule or
regulation deemed appropriate for the safe operation of snowmobiles and the
protection of the citizens. No person shall operate a snowmobile in violation
of the rules and regulations set forth in the resolution referred to above.
75.05   OPERATION OF ATVS AND UTVS.
The operators of ATVs and UTVs shall comply with the following restrictions as
to where ATVs and UTVs may be operated within the City:
1.   Streets. ATVs and UTVs may be operated on roadways or highways in
accordance with Section 321.234A of the Code of Iowa. A City may regulate the
operation of registered ATVs and UTVs and may designate streets under the
jurisdiction of the City within its corporate limits, and two-lane primary and
secondary road extensions in the City, which may be used for the operation of
such vehicles. In designating such streets, the City may authorize ATVs and
UTVs to stop at service stations or convenience stores along a designated
street.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321I.10(1) and (3))
2.   Trails. ATVs and UTVs shall not be operated on snowmobile trails except
where designated.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321I.10(4))
3.   Railroad Right-of-Way. ATVs and UTVs shall not be operated on an operating
railroad right-of-way. An ATV or UTV may be driven directly across a railroad
right-of-way only at an established crossing and notwithstanding any other
provisions of law may, if necessary, use the improved portion of the
established crossing after yielding to all oncoming traffic.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321I.14(1)(h))
4.   Parks and Other City Land. ATVs and UTVs shall not be operated in any
park, playground, or upon any other City-owned property without the express
permission of the City.
5.   Sidewalk or Parking. ATVs and UTVs shall not be operated upon the public
sidewalk or that portion of the street located between the curb line and the
sidewalk or property line commonly referred to as the “parking.”
6.   Direct Crossing. An ATV or UTV may make a direct crossing of a highway
that is not part of the interstate road system provided all of the following
occur:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321I.10(5))
A.   The crossing is made at an angle of approximately 90 degrees to the
direction of the highway and at a place where no obstruction prevents a quick
and safe crossing.
B.   The ATV or UTV is brought to a complete stop before crossing the shoulder
or main traveled way of the highway.
C.   The driver yields the right-of-way to all oncoming traffic which
constitutes an immediate hazard.
D.   In crossing a divided highway, the crossing is made only at an
intersection of such highway with another public street or highway.
E.   The crossing is made from a street, roadway, or highway on which the ATV
or UTV is authorized to operate to a street, roadway, or highway on which such
vehicle is authorized to operate.
75.06   NEGLIGENCE.
The owner and operator of an ATV, UTV, or snowmobile are liable for any injury
or damage occasioned by the negligent operation of the ATV, UTV, or snowmobile.
The owner of an ATV, UTV, or snowmobile shall be liable for any such injury or
damage only if the owner was the operator of the ATV, UTV, or snowmobile at the
time the injury or damage occurred or if the operator had the owner’s consent
to operate the ATV, UTV, or snowmobile at the time the injury or damage
occurred.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321G.18 and 321I.19)
75.07   ACCIDENT REPORTS.
Whenever an ATV, UTV, or snowmobile is involved in an accident resulting in
injury or death to anyone or property damage amounting to $1,500.00 or more,
either the operator or someone acting for the operator shall immediately notify
a law enforcement officer and shall file an accident report, in accordance with
State law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321G.10 and 321I.11)
75.08   HOURS AND DATES.
ATVs and UTVs may be operated on City streets during the following times and
dates:
1.   UTVs may be operated only between 4:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m.
75.09   SPEED.
No ATVs and UTVs shall be operated on any City street at a speed in excess of
the posted speed limit with maximum speed of 35 MPH.
CHAPTER 76
BICYCLES, SKATES, AND SKATEBOARDS
 
76.01 Scope of Regulations               76.08 Carrying Articles
76.02 Traffic Code Applies               76.09 Towing
76.03 Right-of-Way                       76.10 Riding on Sidewalks
76.04 Speed                              76.11 Restricted Use
76.05 Emerging from an Alley or Driveway 76.12 Parking
76.06 Double Riding Restricted           76.13 Equipment Requirements
76.07 Two Abreast Limit                  76.14 Special Penalty
 
76.01   SCOPE OF REGULATIONS.
These regulations shall apply to the use of in-line skates (roller blades),
roller skates, skateboards, scooters, and similar devices within the City
limits and whenever a bicycle is operated upon any street or upon any public
path set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles within the City limits,
subject to those exceptions stated herein.
76.02   TRAFFIC CODE APPLIES.
Every person riding a bicycle, skates, skateboards, scooters, or similar
devices upon a roadway shall be granted all of the rights and shall be subject
to all of the duties applicable to the driver of a vehicle by the laws of the
State declaring rules of the road applicable to vehicles or by the traffic code
of the City applicable to the driver of a vehicle, except as to those
provisions which by their nature can have no application. Whenever such person
dismounts from a bicycle, skates, skateboards, scooters, or similar devices,
the person shall be subject to all regulations applicable to pedestrians.
76.03   RIGHT-OF-WAY.
The user or passenger of a bicycle, skates, skateboards, scooters, or similar
devices shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian, motor vehicle, or any
other user of any street, sidewalk, or other public place, and shall not
interfere with the proper use of any sidewalk, street, or other public place by
any other person.
76.04   SPEED.
No person shall operate a bicycle, skates, skateboards, scooters, or similar
devices at a speed greater than is reasonable and prudent under the conditions
then existing.
76.05   EMERGING FROM AN ALLEY OR DRIVEWAY.
The operator of a bicycle, skates, skateboards, scooters, or similar devices
emerging from an alley, driveway, or building shall, upon approaching a
sidewalk or the sidewalk area extending across any alleyway, yield the right-
of-way to all pedestrians approaching on said sidewalk or sidewalk area, and
upon entering the roadway shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles
approaching on said roadway.
76.06   DOUBLE RIDING RESTRICTED.
A person propelling a bicycle shall not ride other than astride a permanent and
regular seat attached thereto. No bicycle shall be used to carry more persons
at one time than the number for which it is designed and equipped.
76.07   TWO ABREAST LIMIT.
Persons riding bicycles, skates, skateboards, scooters, or similar devices
shall not ride more than two abreast except on paths or parts of roadways set
aside for the exclusive use of bicycles. All bicycles, skates, skateboards,
scooters, or similar devices ridden on the roadway shall be kept to the right
and shall be operated as near as practicable to the right-hand edge of the
roadway.
76.08   CARRYING ARTICLES.
No person operating a bicycle shall carry any package, bundle, or article which
prevents the rider from keeping at least one hand upon the handle bars.
76.09   TOWING.
It is unlawful for any person riding a bicycle, skates, skateboards, scooters,
or similar devices to be towed or to tow any other vehicle upon the streets,
sidewalks, or alleys of the City.
76.10   RIDING ON SIDEWALKS.
The following shall apply to riding bicycles, skates, skateboards, scooters, or
similar devices on sidewalks:
1.   Prohibited Locations. When signs are erected on any sidewalk, roadway, or
public property prohibiting the riding of bicycles, skates, skateboards,
scooters, or similar devices thereon by any person, no person shall disobey the
signs
2.   Yield Right-of-way. Whenever any person is riding a bicycle, skates,
skateboard, scooter, or similar device upon a sidewalk, such person shall yield
the right-of- way to any pedestrian and shall give audible signal before
overtaking and passing.
3.   Business District. Bicycles, skates, skateboards, scooters, or similar
devices are prohibited from use on sidewalks in the Business District, as
defined in Section
60.02(1), except when used strictly for transportation purposes to and from
downtown businesses.
76.11   RESTRICTED USE.
The use of bicycles, skates, skateboards, scooters, or similar devices in
places not prohibited shall be done only in a careful and prudent manner and
not in a manner so as to cause or be likely to cause danger or injury to any
person or property.
76.12   PARKING.
No person shall park a bicycle upon a street other than upon the roadway
against the curb or upon the sidewalk in a rack to support the bicycle or
against a building or at the curb, in such a manner as to afford the least
obstruction to pedestrian traffic.
76.13   EQUIPMENT REQUIREMENTS.
Every person riding a bicycle, skates, skateboard, scooter, or similar devices
shall be responsible for providing and using equipment as provided herein:
1.   Lamps Required. Every bicycle when in use at nighttime shall be equipped
with a lamp on the front which shall emit a white light visible from a distance
of at least 300 feet to the front and with a lamp on the rear exhibiting a red
light visible from a distance of 300 feet to the rear, except that a red
reflector on the rear of a type which shall be visible from all distances from
50 feet to 300 feet to the rear when directly in front of lawful upper beams of
headlamps on a motor vehicle, may be used in lieu of a rear light.
2.   Reflective Clothing. Every person using skates, skateboards, scooters, or
similar devices at nighttime shall wear reflective clothing that is visible
from a distance of at least 100 feet.
3.   Brakes Required. Every bicycle shall be equipped with a brake which will
enable the operator to make the braked wheel skid on dry, level, clean
pavement.
76.14   SPECIAL PENALTY.
Any person violating the provisions of this chapter may, in lieu of the
scheduled fine for bicyclists or standard penalty provided for violations of
this Code, allow the person’s bicycle to be impounded by the City for not less
than five days for the first offense, 10 days for a second offense, and 30 days
for a third offense.
CHAPTER 78
GOLF CARTS
 
78.01 Purpose                           78.06 Equipment
78.02 Definitions                       78.07 Hours and Dates
78.03 Operation of Golf Carts Permitted 78.08 Travel Prohibited
78.04 Prohibited Streets                78.09 Occupant Load
78.05 Speed                             78.10 Proof of Financial Liability
                                        Coverage
 
78.01   PURPOSE.
The purpose of this chapter is to permit the operation of golf carts on certain
streets in the City as authorized by Section 321.247 of the Code of Iowa, as
amended. This chapter applies whenever a golf cart is operated on any street or
alley.
78.02   DEFINITIONS.
For purposes of this chapter, the following terms are defined:
1.   “Golf cart” means a three- or four- wheeled recreational vehicle generally
used for transportation of a person or persons in the sport of golf that is
limited in engine displacement of less than 800 cubic centimeters.
2.   “Operate” means to use or control the movement of the golf cart in any
manner or degree.
3.   “Operator” means the person who uses or controls the movement of the golf
cart.
4.   “Passenger” means a person who does not use or control the movement of the
golf cart but who merely rides on the golf cart.
5.   “Street” means that portion of the street or alley intended for vehicular
travel.
78.03   OPERATION OF GOLF CARTS PERMITTED.
Golf carts may be operated upon the streets of the City by persons possessing a
valid State operator’s license.
78.04   PROHIBITED STREETS.
Golf carts shall not be operated upon any City street which is a primary road
extension through the City. However, golf carts may cross such a primary road
extension. Market Street (State Highway 1) is hereby designated a primary road
extension in the City.
78.05   SPEED.
No golf carts shall be operated on any City street at a speed in excess of the
posted speed limit with maximum speed of 25 MPH.
78.06   EQUIPMENT.
Golf carts operated upon City streets shall be equipped with at least the
following:
1.   A slow moving vehicle sign affixed to the rear of a vehicle.
2.   A bicycle safety flag, the top of which shall be a minimum of five feet
from ground level.
3.   Adequate brakes.
4.   All equipment required by State code.
78.07   HOURS AND DATES.
Golf carts may be operated on City streets during the following times and
dates:
1.   Golf carts may be operated only between sunrise and sunset.
78.08   TRAVEL PROHIBITED.
It shall be unlawful to operate a golf cart in any public cemetery, park,
playground, or on any sidewalk or trail ,or any other publicly owned property
without express written permission from the City, public parking areas
excluded.
78.09   OCCUPANT LOAD.
It shall be unlawful to operate a golf cart in excess of the designed occupant
load thereof or ride on any portion not designed to carry passengers.
78.10   PROOF OF FINANCIAL LIABILITY COVERAGE.
No person shall operate a golf cart of any public street or alley without proof
of financial liability coverage for the vehicle.
CHAPTER 80
ABANDONED VEHICLES
80.01   STATE PROVISIONS.
The City hereby enacts and adopts Section 321.89 of the Code of Iowa, including
rules and regulations promulgated by the Department of Transportation in
connection therewith and as said section and rules are from time to time
amended.
CHAPTER 90
WATER SERVICE SYSTEM
90.01 Definitions                      90.13 Failure to Maintain
90.02 Superintendent’s Duties        90.14 Curb Valve
90.03 Mandatory Connections            90.15 Interior Valve
90.04 Abandoned Connections            90.16 Inspection and Approval
90.05 Permit                           90.17 Completion by the City
90.06 Fee for Permit                   90.18 Shutting Off Water Supply
90.07 Compliance with Plumbing Code    90.19 Operation of Curb Valve and
                                       Hydrants
90.08 Plumber Required                 90.20 Extensions
90.09 Excavations                      90.21 Water for Building or Construction
                                       Purposes
90.10 Tapping Mains                    90.22 Auxiliary Water Service to
                                       Industrial Users
90.11 Installation of Water Service    90.23 Auxiliary Water Service to
Pipe                                   Nonindustrial Users
90.12 Responsibility for Water Service  
Pipe
 
90.01   DEFINITIONS.
The following terms are defined for use in the chapters in this Code pertaining
to the Water Service System:
1.   “Combined service account” means a customer service account for the
provision of two or more utility services.
2.   “Customer” means, in addition to any person receiving water service from
the City, the owner of the property served, and as between such parties the
duties, responsibilities, liabilities, and obligations hereinafter imposed
shall be joint and several.
3.   “Superintendent” means the Supervisor of the City water system or any duly
authorized assistant, agent, or representative.
4.   “Water main” means a water supply pipe provided for public or community
use.
5.   “Water service pipe” means the pipe from the water main to the building
served.
6.   “Water system” or “water works” means all public facilities for securing,
collecting, storing, pumping, treating, and distributing water.
90.02   SUPERINTENDENT’S DUTIES.
The Superintendent shall supervise the installation of water service pipes and
their connection to the water main and enforce all regulations pertaining to
water services in the City in accordance with this chapter. This chapter shall
apply to all replacements of existing water service pipes as well as to new
ones. The Superintendent shall make such rules, not in conflict with the
provisions of this chapter, as may be needed for the detailed operation of the
water system, subject to the approval of the Council. In the event of an
emergency the Superintendent may make temporary rules for the protection of the
system until due consideration by the Council may be had.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13(4))
90.03   MANDATORY CONNECTIONS.
The owner of any house, building, or structure used for human habitation,
employment, or use, situated within the City, which abuts any street, alley, or
right-of-way which contains a public water main within one 100 feet of said
house, building, or structure, shall connect to the City water main within 60
days of notice from the City. Any such connection shall be in strict compliance
with the Water Service chapters of this Code of Ordinances.
1.   Upon written application by the owner, the City may, in its sole
discretion, extend the time period for mandatory connection for up to five
years,
2.   Within one year of connection to the City’s water system, the owner shall
plug or cap any wells on the owner’s property in strict compliance with
federal, state and local law and regulation.
90.04   ABANDONED CONNECTIONS.
When an existing water service is abandoned or a service is renewed with a new
tap in the main, all abandoned connections with the mains shall be turned off
at the corporation stop and made absolutely watertight.
90.05   PERMIT.
Before any person makes a connection with the public water system, a written
permit must be obtained from the City. The application for the permit shall
include a legal description of the property, the name of the property owner,
the name and address of the person who will do the work, and the general uses
of the water. If the proposed work meets all the requirements of this chapter
and if all fees required under this chapter have been paid, the permit shall be
issued. Work under any permit must be completed within 60 days after the permit
is issued, except that when such time period is inequitable or unfair due to
conditions beyond the control of the person making the application, an
extension of time within which to complete the work may be granted. The permit
may be revoked at any time for any violation of these chapters.
90.06   FEE FOR PERMIT.
Before any permit is issued, the person who makes the application shall pay
$100.00 for residential customers and $110.00 for commercial or industrial
customers to the Clerk to cover the cost of issuing the permit and supervising,
regulating, and inspection of the work.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84)
90.07   COMPLIANCE WITH PLUMBING CODE.
The installation of any water service pipe and any connection with the water
system shall comply with all pertinent and applicable provisions, whether
regulatory, procedural, or enforcement provisions, of the State Plumbing Code,
SUDAS and Solon’s Supplemental Specifications.
90.08   PLUMBER REQUIRED.
All installations of water service pipes and connections to the water system
shall be made by a State-licensed plumber.
90.09   EXCAVATIONS.
All trench work, excavation, and backfilling required in making a connection
shall be performed in accordance with the State Plumbing Code and the
provisions of
Chapter 135.
90.10   TAPPING MAINS.
All taps into water mains shall be made by or under the direct supervision of
the Superintendent and in accordance with the following:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13(4))
1.   Independent Services. No more than one house, building, or premises shall
be supplied from one tap unless special written permission is obtained from the
Superintendent and unless provision is made so that each house, building, or
premises may be shut off independently of the other.
2.   Sizes and Location of Taps. All mains six inches or less in diameter shall
receive no small than a one inch tap. Where a larger connection than a one-inch
tap is desired, two or more small taps or saddles shall be used, as the
Superintendent shall order. All taps in the mains shall be made in the top half
of the pipe, at least 18 inches apart. No main shall be tapped nearer than two
feet of the joint in the main.
3.   Corporation Stop. A brass corporation stop-, of the pattern and weight
approved by the Superintendent, shall be inserted in every tap in the main. The
corporation stop in the main shall be the same size as the service pipe.
4.   Location Record. An accurate and dimensional sketch showing the exact
location of the tap shall be filed with the Superintendent in such form as the
Superintendent shall require.
90.11   INSTALLATION OF WATER SERVICE PIPE.
Water service pipes from the main to the meter setting shall meet the standards
of SUDAS and the Solon Supplemental Specifications. The use of any other pipe
material for the service line shall first be approved by the Superintendent.
Pipe must be laid sufficiently waving-, and to such depth-, as to prevent
rupture from settlement or freezing.
90.12   RESPONSIBILITY FOR WATER SERVICE PIPE.
All costs and expenses incident to the installation, connection, and
maintenance of the water service pipe from the water main to the building
served, by said water service pipe, shall be borne by the owner. The owner
shall indemnify the City from any loss or damage that may be directly or
indirectly caused by the installation or maintenance of said water service pipe
by the owner or the owner’s representative. All customers shall also install
and maintain, at the owner’s expense, that portion of the water service pipe
from the lot or easement line to their premises, including the stop and waste
cock at the end of the building side of the water service pipe. The minimum
earth cover of the customer’s service shall be five feet. The City shall
determine, in its sole discretion, the size and type of water service pipe to
be installed.
90.13   FAILURE TO MAINTAIN.
When any portion of the water service pipe which is the responsibility of the
property owner becomes defective or creates a nuisance and the owner fails to
correct such nuisance, the City may do so and assess the costs thereof to the
property.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12(3)(a) and (h))
90.14   CURB VALVE.
There shall be installed within the public right-of-way a main shut- off valve
on the water service pipe of a pattern approved by the Superintendent. The
shut-off valve shall be constructed to be visible and even with the pavement or
ground.
90.15   INTERIOR VALVE.
There shall be installed a shut-off valve on every service pipe inside the
building as close to the entrance of the pipe within the building as possible
and so located that the water can be shut off conveniently. Where one service
pipe supplies more than one customer within the building, there shall be
separate valves for each such customer so that service may be shut off for one
without interfering with service to the others.
90.16   INSPECTION AND APPROVAL.
All water service pipes and their connections to the water system must be
inspected and approved in writing by the Superintendent before they are
covered, and the Superintendent shall keep a record of such approvals. If the
Superintendent refuses to approve the work, the plumber or property owner must
proceed immediately to correct the work. Every person who uses or intends to
use the municipal water system shall permit the Superintendent to enter the
premises to inspect or make necessary alterations or repairs at all reasonable
hours and on proof of authority.
90.17   COMPLETION BY THE CITY.
Should any excavation be left open or only partly refilled for 24 hours after
the water service pipe is installed and connected with the water system, or
should the work be improperly done, the City shall have the right to finish or
correct the work, and the Council shall assess the costs to the property owner
or the plumber. If the plumber is assessed, the plumber must pay the costs
before receiving another permit. If the property owner is assessed, such
assessment may be collected with and in the same manner as general property
taxes.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12(3)(a) and (h))
90.18   SHUTTING OFF WATER SUPPLY.
The Superintendent may shut off the supply of water to any customer because of
any violation of the regulations contained in these Water Service System
chapters that is not being contested in good faith. The supply shall not be
turned on again until all violations have been corrected and the Superintendent
has ordered the water to be turned on.
90.19   OPERATION OF CURB VALVE AND HYDRANTS.
It is unlawful for any person except the Superintendent to turn water on at the
curb valve, and no person, unless specifically authorized by the City, shall
open or attempt to draw water from any fire hydrant for any purpose whatsoever.
90.20   EXTENSIONS.
The City will construct extensions to its water lines to points within its
service area, but the City shall not be required to make such installations
unless the customer pays to the City the entire cost of the installation. All
line extensions shall be evidenced by a contract signed by the City and the
person advancing funds for the extensions. All decisions in connection with the
manner of installation of any extension and maintenance thereof shall remain in
the exclusive control of the City, and such extension shall be the property of
the City and no other person shall have any right, title, or interest therein.
90.21   WATER FOR BUILDING OR CONSTRUCTION PURPOSES.
Water for building or construction purposes will be furnished by meter
measurement, only after suitable deposit has been made, the minimum deposit
being $1,000.00; and the amount to be determined by the City depending upon the
size of the construction work contemplated. All water for building or
construction purposes, as set forth in the permit, must pass through one and
the same meter and backflow preventer. Water so supplied shall be discharged
through a hose or pipe directly upon material to be wet, or into a barrel or
other container, and in no case upon the ground or into or through a ditch or
trench, and all use of water by other than the applicant or use of water for
any purpose or upon any premises not so stated or described in the application
must be prevented by the applicant, or water service may be discontinued
without notice.
90.22   AUXILIARY WATER SERVICE TO INDUSTRIAL USERS.
The purpose of this section is to provide auxiliary water service to industrial
users when the water provided is not to be returned to the sewer system. The
water provided to an industrial user under this section would be in conjunction
with regular water service and to be used for only certain limited purposes
specifically authorized and approved by the Council.
1.   There is hereby created a new classification of water user to be known as
“auxiliary industrial user.” In order to qualify for this classification:
A.   The applicant must be an existing user of the water and sewer utility;
B.   The site upon which the applicant proposes to use water supplied under
this section shall be within the City limits and be zoned as an industrial
classification;
C.   The applicant must submit an application for approval to the Council
specifying the amount of water which may be consumed pursuant to this section,
the disposal method of the water so consumed, and any other information
required by the Council, in its discretion, to allow the City to determine
whether or not the classification of auxiliary industrial user should be
granted.
1.   When an applicant has been approved as an auxiliary industrial user, the
applicant shall purchase an additional water meter and said meter shall be
installed in a manner acceptable with the Superintendent in order to meter the
water consumed under this section and not returned to the City sewer system.
The applicant shall be billed for this water in the same manner and at the same
time as other billings for City utilities; provided, however, that there is no
additional charge for sewer service for water consumed under this section.
2.   The City may, by resolution, establish rules and procedures for
implementing this section including further detailed rules for the application,
establishing an application fee, and related matters.
90.23   AUXILIARY WATER SERVICE TO NONINDUSTRIAL USERS.
The purpose of this section is to provide auxiliary water service to
nonindustrial users when the water provided is not to be returned to the sewer
system. Uses contemplated for the water provided by the auxiliary service would
be watering gardens, shrubs, and lawns, filling swimming pools and similar
conforming uses. The water provided to a nonindustrial user under this section
would be in conjunction with regular water service and to be used for only
certain limited purposes specifically authorized and approved by the Council.
1.   There is hereby created a new classification of water user to be known as
“auxiliary nonindustrial user.” In order to qualify for this classification:
A.   The applicant must be an existing user of the water and sewer utility of
the City;
B.   The site upon which the applicant proposes to use water supplied under
this section shall be within the City limits and have a zoning classification
other than industrial;
C.   The applicant must submit an application for approval to the Council
specifying the amount of water which may be consumed pursuant to this section,
the disposal method of the water so consumed, and any other information
required by the Council, in its discretion, to allow the City to determine
whether or not the classification of auxiliary nonindustrial user should be
granted.
1.   When an applicant has been approved as an auxiliary nonindustrial user,
the applicant shall purchase an additional water meter and its appurtenances at
the applicant’s expense and said meter shall be installed in a manner
acceptable with the Superintendent in order to meter the water consumed under
this section and not returned to the City sewer system.
2.   For each month the applicant receives water as an auxiliary nonindustrial
user, there shall be a monthly minimum fee in the amount of $13.65 plus tax for
the first 1,500 gallons and $6.48 plus tax for each 1,000 gallons thereafter.
The applicant may request that the auxiliary nonindustrial service be
disconnected. There is no fee for disconnection. In the event the applicant
wishes to reconnect and begin receiving water again as an auxiliary
nonindustrial user, there shall be a connection fee of $50.00. All auxiliary
nonindustrial users of water shall be billed at the same rates and be subject
to the same rules and regulations as all other water service accounts except as
to the monthly minimum billing, disconnection and reconnection charges as
specifically provided in this section.
3.   The City may, by resolution, establish rules and procedures for
implementing this section including further detailed rules for the application,
establishing an application fee, and related matters.
CHAPTER 91
WATER METERS
 
91.01 Purpose                           91.06 Meter Costs
91.02 Water Use Metered                 91.07 Meter Repairs
91.03 Fire Sprinkler Systems; Exception 91.08 Right of Entry
91.04 Location of Meters                91.09 Testing of Meters
91.05 Meter Setting                     91.10 Register Head Wire Required
 
91.01   PURPOSE.
The purpose of this chapter is to encourage the conservation of water and
facilitate the equitable distribution of charges for water service among
customers.
91.02   WATER USE METERED.
All water furnished customers shall be measured through meters furnished by the
City and installed by the City.
91.03   FIRE SPRINKLER SYSTEMS; EXCEPTION.
Fire sprinkler systems may be connected to water mains by direct connection
without meters under the direct supervision of the Superintendent. No other
open, unmetered connection shall be incorporated in the system, and there shall
be no valves except a main control valve at the entrance to the building which
must be sealed open.
91.04   LOCATION OF METERS.
All meters shall be so located that they are easily accessible to meter readers
and repairmen and protected from freezing.
91.05   METER SETTING.
The property owner shall provide all necessary piping and fittings for proper
setting of the meter including a valve on the discharge side of the meter.
Meter pits may be used only upon approval of the Superintendent and shall be of
a design and construction approved by the Superintendent.
91.06   METER COSTS.
The full cost of any meter larger than that required for a single- family
residence shall be paid to the City by the property owner or customer prior to
the installation of any such meter by the City, or, at the sole option of the
City, the property owner or customer may be required to purchase and install
such meter in accordance with requirements established by the City.
91.07   METER REPAIRS.
Whenever a water meter owned by the City is found to be out of order the
Superintendent shall have it repaired. If it is found that damage to the meter
has occurred due to the carelessness or negligence of the customer or property
owner, or the meter is not owned by the City, then the property owner shall be
liable for the cost of repairs.
91.08   RIGHT OF ENTRY.
The Superintendent shall be permitted to enter the premises of any customer at
any reasonable time to read, remove, or change a meter.
91.09   TESTING OF METERS.
Upon written request of any customer, the meter serving the customer shall be
tested by the City pursuant to the City’s Meter Tests and Adjustment of Bills
for Meter Error Policy. The customer will be charged a fee of $25.00 for a one-
inch meter and $50.00 for a one and one-half to two-inch meter if the test
indicates meter accuracy within the limits of two percent slow. The meter test
fee for a test result for a meter that registers more than two percent fast
will be waived. Any customer who requests a meter test for a meter greater than
two-inches shall be charged the same fee charged to the City by an independent
testing company. The Superintendent is hereby authorized to make random,
unannounced checks of water meters within the City. It is the City’s goal to
check each meter within a two year period. All such random checks shall be at
the cost of the City. The Superintendent shall maintain a listed showing the
location and date of each random meter check.
91.10   REGISTER HEAD WIRE REQUIRED.
All structures having water service shall, in addition to the other
requirements of this chapter, also contain two register head wires from meter
location inside the structure to the outside. There should be a 12-inch minimum
wire for each wire protruding outside of the structure. The register head wire
shall be located in such area to make it accessible to the Superintendent to
obtain readings on water usage and to maintain the register head.
Specifications for the register head wires and their connection to the water
meter shall be made by resolution from time to time. No Occupancy Permit shall
be issued for any structure not containing two register head wires for which a
building permit was issued after November 2, 2000.
CHAPTER 92
WATER RATES
 
92.01 Service Charges           92.06 Lien for Nonpayment
92.02 Rates For Service         92.07 Lien Exemption
92.03 Service Outside the City  92.08 Lien Notice
92.04 Billing for Water Service 92.09 Customer Deposits
92.05 Service Discontinued      92.10 Discontinuance By Customer
 
92.01   SERVICE CHARGES.
Each customer shall pay for water service provided by the City based upon use
of water as determined by meters provided for in
Chapter 91. Each location, building, premises, or connection shall be
considered a separate and distinct customer whether owned or controlled by the
same person or not.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84)
92.02   RATES FOR SERVICE.
Water service shall be furnished at the following monthly rates within the
City:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84)
1.   First 1,500 gallons at $13.65 (minimum bill).
2.   All usage over 1,500 gallons at $6.48 per 1,000 gallons.
3.   Buildings which have multiple dwelling or commercial units but have only
one water meter shall be charged the minimum billing per unit; each building
shall receive credit for 1,500 gallons per unit. All usage over the credited
gallons shall be billed at $6.48 per one thousand gallons.
92.03   SERVICE OUTSIDE THE CITY.
No water service shall be provided to customers outside the City limits unless
said customer has signed a service contract agreeing to be bound by the
ordinances, rules, and regulations applying to water service as established by
the Council from time to time. Following the execution of said service
contract, water service shall be provided to the customer located outside the
corporate limits of the City at the rate of two times the rate set for
customers within the City limits.
92.04   BILLING FOR WATER SERVICE.
Water service shall be billed as part of a combined service account, payable in
accordance with the following:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84)
1.   Meters Read. The City shall remotely read the meters on the twenty-fifth
day of each month. If the twenty-fifth day falls on a weekend or a holiday, the
reading will be held on the next business day of the City.
2.   Bills Issued. Bills shall be sent to each customer each month no later
than the thirtieth day of the month.
3.   Bills Payable. Bill payments must be received by the Clerk no later than
the fifteenth day of the following month.
4.   Late Payment Penalty. Bills not paid when due shall be considered
delinquent. A late payment penalty of $10.00 shall be added to each delinquent
bill.
5.   Meter Readings Unavailable. Where a water meter has ceased to register or
meter reading cannot be obtained for whatever reason, the quantity of water
consumed for billing purposes shall be based on an average of the prior six
months’ consumption for that meter, and the conditions of water service
prevailing during the period in which the meter readings were unobtainable. In
the event the customer has not had six months’ prior service, the average shall
be based upon the prior consumption data available to the Clerk. The
Superintendent shall inspect and take a reading from the meter directly as
provided in Chapter 91 and account billing corrected as necessary.
6.   Leakage. No reduction will be made for leakage after the water has passed
through the meter.
7.   Delinquency. Bill payments not received by the Clerk by the thirtieth day
of the following month shall be considered delinquent. The Clerk shall
immediately send shut- off notices for delinquent accounts providing, in
addition to that information set forth in Section 92.05, that the recipient has
five working days from the date the notice is mailed by ordinary mail to remit
all amounts due or to request a hearing. Hearings requested under this section
shall be held by the Council at its next regularly scheduled meeting. Service
shall not be discontinued if a hearing is requested within the five-day period
set forth above.
92.05   SERVICE DISCONTINUED.
Water service to delinquent customers shall be discontinued or disconnected in
accordance with the following:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84)
1.   Notice. The Clerk shall notify each delinquent customer that service will
be discontinued or disconnected if payment of the combined service account,
including late payment charges, is not received by the date specified in the
notice of delinquency. Such notice shall be sent by ordinary mail to the
customer in whose name the delinquent charges were incurred and shall inform
the customer of the nature of the delinquency and afford the customer the
opportunity for a hearing prior to the discontinuance or disconnection.
2.   Notice to Landlords. If the customer is a tenant, and if the owner or
landlord of the property or premises has made a written request for notice, the
notice of delinquency shall also be given to the owner or landlord. If the
customer is a tenant and requests a change of name for service under the
account, such request shall be sent to the owner or landlord of the property if
the owner or landlord has made a written request for notice of any change of
name for service under the account to the rental property.
3.   Hearing. If a hearing is requested, the Council shall conduct an informal
hearing and shall make a determination as to whether the disconnection is
justified.
4.   Fees. A fee of $50.00 shall be charged before service is restored to a
delinquent customer. No fee shall be charged for the usual or customary trips
in the regular change of an occupancy of the property.
92.06   LIEN FOR NONPAYMENT.
The owner of the premises served and any lessee or tenant thereof shall be
jointly and severally liable for water service charges to the premises. Water
service charges remaining unpaid and delinquent shall constitute a lien upon
the property or premises served and shall be certified by the Clerk to the
County Treasurer for collection in the same manner as property taxes.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84)
92.07   LIEN EXEMPTION.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84)
1.   Water Service Exemption. The lien for nonpayment shall not apply to
charges for water service to a residential or commercial rental property where
water service is separately metered and the rates or charges for the water
service are paid directly to the City by the tenant, if the landlord gives
written notice to the City that the property is residential or commercial
rental property and that the tenant is liable for the rates or charges. The
City may require a deposit not exceeding the usual cost of 90 days of such
services to be paid to the City. When the tenant moves from the rental
property, the City shall refund the deposit if all service charges are paid in
full. The lien exemption does not apply to delinquent charges for repairs
related to any of the services.
2.   Other Service Exemption. The lien for nonpayment shall also not apply to
the charges for any of the services of sewer systems, stormwater drainage
systems, sewage treatment, solid waste collection, and solid waste disposal for
a residential rental property where the charge is paid directly to the City by
the tenant, if the landlord gives written notice to the City that the property
is residential rental property and that the tenant is liable for the rates or
charges for such service. The City may require a deposit not exceeding the
usual cost of 90 days of such services to be paid to the City. When the tenant
moves from the rental property, the City shall refund the deposit if all
service charges are paid in full. The lien exemption does not apply to
delinquent charges for repairs related to any of the services.
3.   Written Notice. The landlord’s written notice shall contain the name of
the tenant responsible for charges, the address of the residential or
commercial rental property that the tenant is to occupy, and the date that the
occupancy begins. Upon receipt, the City shall acknowledge the notice and
deposit. A change in tenant for a residential rental property shall require a
new written notice to be given to the City within 30 business days of the
change in tenant. A change in tenant for a commercial rental property shall
require a new written notice to be given to the City within 10 business days of
the change in tenant. A change in the ownership of the residential rental
property shall require written notice of such change to be given to the City
within 30 business days of the completion of the change of ownership. A change
in the ownership of the commercial rental property shall require written notice
of such change to be given to the City within 10 business days of the
completion of the change of ownership.
4.   Mobile Homes, Modular Homes, and Manufactured Homes. A lien for nonpayment
of utility services described in Subsections 1 and 2 of this section shall not
be placed upon a premises that is a mobile home, modular home, or manufactured
home if the mobile home, modular home, or manufactured home is owned by a
tenant of and located in a mobile home park or manufactured home community and
the mobile home park or manufactured home community owner or manager is the
account holder, unless the lease agreement specifies that the tenant is
responsible for payment of a portion of the rates or charges billed to the
account holder.
92.08   LIEN NOTICE.
A lien for delinquent water service charges shall not be certified to the
County Treasurer unless prior written notice of intent to certify a lien is
given to the customer in whose name the delinquent charges were incurred. If
the customer is a tenant and if the owner or landlord of the property or
premises has made a written request for notice, the notice shall also be given
to the owner or landlord. The notice shall be sent to the appropriate persons
by ordinary mail not less than 30 days prior to certification of the lien to
the County Treasurer.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84)
92.09   CUSTOMER DEPOSITS.
A deposit of $150.00 may be required from any new customer as determined by the
Clerk. The deposit shall be applied to any bill delinquent more than 30 days.
Upon discontinuance of service, any balance of such deposit shall be returned
to the customer without interest. Deposits may also be required of any customer
who is delinquent in the payment of bills for service for more than two
consecutive billing periods. If such deposit is not paid upon written request
after such delinquency, it shall be grounds for the termination of water
service after proper notice and hearing.
92.10   DISCONTINUANCE BY CUSTOMER.
Any customer desiring to discontinue the water service to said customer’s
premises for any reason must give notice of discontinuance in writing at the
City offices; otherwise, the customer shall remain liable for all water used
and service rendered by the City until the notice is received by the City.
CHAPTER 93
WATER CONSERVATION
 
93.01 Water Shortages 93.07 Base Allocation
93.02 Conditions      93.08 Appeal and Adjustment of the Base of
93.03 Water Watch     Allocation
93.04 Warning         93.09 Water Appeal Board
93.05 Emergency       93.10 Reduction In Flow of Water to Any Person
93.06 Penalties        
 
93.01   WATER SHORTAGES.
From time to time during and following drought conditions, or due to equipment
failure, or when the overall demand upon the City water supply system is so
great as to endanger the public health, safety, and welfare, the Public Works
Director or City Administrator may declare a public Water Watch, Water Warning,
or Water Emergency during which time the following measures and provisions
shall be in effect to produce an orderly and equitable reduction of water
consumption until the Public Works Director or City Administrator declares the
water shortage condition to be ended.
93.02   CONDITIONS.
A Water Watch, Water Warning, or Water Emergency may be declared when a water
shortage or equipment failure poses a potential threat to the ability of the
water system to meet the needs of its customers currently or in the foreseeable
future.
1.   Indicators of the need to impose a Water Watch, or Water Warning, include
system operating at 60 percent of pumping capacity; significant decrease in the
pumping water level of wells, or significant decrease in recovery rate of water
levels in wells.
2.   Indicators of the need to impose a Water Emergency include: severe system
emergencies such as a chemical spill or major system failure in feeder mains or
treatment plant, prolonged power outages, or loss of one or more system wells.
93.03   WATER WATCH.
Under a Water Watch, all customers of the City are encouraged to limit or
curtail all nonessential uses of water in order to conserve precious water
resources during the time of shortage. Customers may be encouraged to comply
with the following voluntary standards:
1.   No watering of lawns, shrubs, or gardens between the hours of 8:00 a.m.
and 8:00 p.m.
2.   No water should be used to fill private swimming pools, children’s wading
pools, reflecting pools, or any other outdoor pool or pond.
3.   No water should be used to wash vehicles, streets, parking lots,
driveways, sidewalks, or building exteriors.
4.   Residents and developers are encouraged to refrain from seeding or
sodding.
5.   No filling, flushing, or testing of water mains or distribution systems,
without the consent of the Public Works Director.
93.04   WARNING.
Under a Water Warning no person shall use potable processed water of the City
water service in any manner contrary to the following:
1.   Outdoor watering or irrigation of lawn is prohibited.
2.   Watering or irrigation of flower and vegetable gardens, recreational uses,
such as athletic fields, trees, and shrubs less than four years old and new
seedling or sod less than one year old is permitted once per week with an
application not to exceed one inch. Outdoor watering of any kind is prohibited
between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. daily.
3.   Car washing is prohibited except in commercial establishments that provide
that service.
4.   No water shall be used to fill private swimming pools, children’s wading
pools, reflecting pools, or any other outdoor pool or pond.
5.   No water shall be used to wash vehicles, streets, parking lots, driveways,
sidewalks, or building exteriors.
6.   No filling, flushing, or testing of water mains or distribution systems,
without the consent of the Public Works Director.
7.   Residents and developers are to refrain from seeding or sodding without
the consent of the Public Works Director.
Water reclaimed or recycled after some other primary use, such as water that
has been used for washing or cooling, may be used without restriction.
Additionally, water derived from sources other than the City water utility,
such as water condensed from the atmosphere by air conditioners or collected
from rain or snow or private cisterns, may be used without restrictions.
93.05   EMERGENCY.
Under a Water Emergency, base allocations will be in effect. No person shall
use potable processed water of the City in any manner contrary to the
following:
1.   All outside water use, except for domestic, sanitation, and fire, is
prohibited.
2.   All commercial and industrial uses of water not essential in providing
products or services are prohibited.
3.   Recreational and leisure water use, including lawn and other incidental or
recreational use, is prohibited.
4.   Water use not necessary for the preservation of life or the general
welfare of the community is prohibited.
93.06   PENALTIES.
The following penalties shall apply for violation of the Water Watch, Water
Warning, or Water Emergency use restrictions imposed under this section.
1.   First Violation. For a first violation, the City shall issue a written
notice of violation to the water user violating the water use restrictions
imposed during a Water Watch, Water Warning, or Water Emergency.
2.   Second Violation. For a second violation within a 12-month period, a
municipal infraction will be charged not to exceed $750.00.
3.   Subsequent Violations. For any subsequent violation within a 12-month
period, a municipal infraction violation will be charged not to exceed
$1,000.00 or severance of water service for a period not to exceed 30 days. The
City Water Department shall interrupt water service to that customer at the
premises at which the violation occurred. Services shall not be restored until
the customer has provided reasonable assurance that future violations of Water
Watch, Water Warning, or Water Emergency use restrictions will not occur.
Any customer charged with a violation of the Water Watch, Water Warning, or
Water Emergency use restrictions may request a hearing before the Water Appeal
Board. The Water Appeal Board may conclude that a violation did not occur or
that the circumstances under which the violation occurred warrant a complete or
partial mitigation of the penalty. Note: under a Water Emergency, use
restrictions will be in effect and, in addition, each customer will be afforded
a quarterly allocation of water.
93.07   BASE ALLOCATION.
The base allocation of water for residential use shall be 4,000 gallons per
household per billing period. For commercial, industrial, or institutional use,
the base allocation shall be established by resolution as a percentage of the
average water used during the previous winter (November through April).
93.08   APPEAL AND ADJUSTMENT OF THE BASE OF ALLOCATION.
Any person may file an appeal with the Water Appeal Board to adjust the base
allocation amount. The Water Appeal Board may grant an adjustment to the
appellant based upon the following criteria:
1.   For single-family residential use, the base allocation may be increased by
1,000 gallons per person per billing period for all individuals residing at the
appellant’s residence for a period of more than 30 days.
2.   For commercial, industrial, institutional, or other residential uses, the
base allocation may be increased based on factors appropriate to the individual
customer; such as usage, production, service, and occupancy data provided by
the customer.
93.09   WATER APPEAL BOARD.
A Water Appeal Board shall be appointed during any Water Warning or Water
Emergency. The Water Appeal Board shall consist of the Mayor, the City
Administrator, or the Public Works Director and three representatives of the
community who shall be appointed by the Mayor with approval of the Council. The
Water Appeal Board shall hear appeals of any action taken pursuant to a Water
Watch, Water Warning, or Water Emergency, except that, if a customer is charged
with a municipal infraction relating to this section, that proceeding shall be
conducted pursuant to Section 364.22 of the Code of Iowa.
93.10   REDUCTION IN FLOW OF WATER TO ANY PERSON.
The Public Works Director is authorized, after giving notice and opportunity
for hearing before the Water Appeal Board, to reduce the flow of water to any
person determined to be using water in any manner not in accordance with this
section during a Water Warning or Water Emergency.
CHAPTER 94
PRIVATE WELLS AND WATER SYSTEMS
 
94.01 Required Conditions 94.04 Loss of Exemption
94.02 Private Well Permit 94.05 Health and Safety Standards; Right of
                          Inspection
94.03 Renewals             
 
94.01   REQUIRED CONDITIONS.
Except as provided below, private wells and water systems shall not be
maintained by any person within the City. Private wells and water systems shall
be granted an exemption only if one of the following conditions exist:
1.   Location. If no part of a tract of land upon which a private well or water
system is proposed is within 300 feet of a City water main.
2.   Existing Well. A well in existence on the effective date of this ordinance
may continue to be used after a private well permit is obtained and as long as
the well is not in violation of any other provisions of Chapter 94 contained
herein.
3.   Monitoring Well. Wells used to monitor underground contamination in UST or
LUST areas shall be allowed.
94.02   PRIVATE WELL PERMIT.
All individuals or property owners who desire to construct or maintain a
private well or water system shall first secure from the Clerk a private well
permit. The contents of the permit application and the fee therefore shall be
set by the Council from time to time by resolution. Minimum requirements to
obtain a Private Well Permit include:
1.   Submission of Total Coliform Bacteria Count Test with results showing a
count of less than 300.
2.   Submission of a Nitrate Test with results showing less than 10 ppm.
3.   Inspection certificate from a certified well contactor affirming that the
well is in good operating condition and meets all minimum health and safety
standards.
94.03   RENEWALS.
Private well permits shall be renewed annually in the month of December. A
renewal application must be submitted to the Clerk with the renewal fee and the
following documents:
1.   Documents showing monthly Coliform Bacteria Count Tests with results of
each test showing a count of less than 300.
2.   Documents showing an annual Nitrate test done in November of the current
year with results of less than 10 ppm.
3.   Inspection certificate from a certified well contractor dated within the
prior three months affirming that the well is in good operating condition and
meets all minimum health and safety standards.
94.04   LOSS OF EXEMPTION.
A private well or water system shall lose its exemption and use of said well
shall cease and the well shall be plugged in accordance with rules of the State
Department of Natural Resources and the property then connected to the public
water system if any of the following conditions occur:
1.   If landowner chooses to sell said property.
2.   If the property is vacant for a period of longer than six months.
3.   If any one test required by the Private Well Permit has a result that
exceeds the allowed parameters.
4.   If repairs to the well are required including, but not limited to, repairs
to the casing, pump, well head, or service pipe from the wellhead to the
dwelling.
5.   Failure to apply for the annual renewal of the Private Well Permit.
94.05   HEALTH AND SAFETY STANDARDS; RIGHT OF INSPECTION.
All private wells and private water systems for which permits are granted
pursuant to this chapter shall meet all applicable City, County, State, and
federal rules, regulations, and laws. All permit holders, as a condition of
receiving a permit, grant to the City the right to enter the well owner’s
property solely to inspect and test any private well maintained upon the permit
holder’s property. In the event the private well or water system so inspected
and tested by the City does not meet applicable standards, the City shall
notify the well owner in writing of the failure to meet applicable standards.
The well owner shall have 90 days from the date of mailing the notice to
correct the problems. If the owner fails to timely correct the problems, the
permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall terminate without further notice
to the well owner, and the owner shall forthwith terminate use of the well and
the well shall be plugged in accordance with rules of the State Department of
Natural Resources and the property then connected to the public water system.
In the event a private well or water system cannot be brought up to applicable
standards in the time period allowed herein, and the well owner is not
otherwise connected to the City’s water system, the well owner shall connect to
the City water system within 180 days in accordance with this Code.
CHAPTER 95
WELLHEAD PROTECTION
95.01 Purpose                           95.11 Activities Relating to Toxic and
                                        Hazardous
95.02 Definitions                       Substances
95.03 Substances Regulated              95.12 Permit Procedures
95.04 Wellhead Protection Zone Maps and 95.13 Wellhead Protection Officer
Listing                                 Designated
95.05 Primary and Secondary Zones       95.14 Inspections
95.06 Determination of Location of      95.15 Transfer of Property
Properties Within
Zones                                   95.16 Building Permit Issuance
95.07 Regulations Governing Primary     95.17 Underground Tank Restrictions
Protection Zones
95.08 Regulations Governing Secondary   95.18 City Action for Injunctive Relief
Protection Zones
95.09 Exempt Activities                 95.19 Notice of Violation
95.10 Existing Uses                      
 
95.01   PURPOSE.
The purpose of this chapter is to institute land use regulations and
restrictions to protect the City’s water supply and well fields, restrict the
location of potential sources of contamination in close proximity to a public
water supply, and to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of
the residents of the City.
95.02   DEFINITIONS.
For purposes of this chapter, the following terms are defined:
1.   “Aquifer” means a rock formation, group of rock formations, or part of a
rock formation that contains enough saturated permeable material to yield
significant quantities of water.
2.   “Contamination” means the presence of any harmful or deleterious
substances in the water supply.
3.   “Groundwater” means subsurface water in the saturated zone from which
wells, springs, and groundwater runoff are supplied.
4.   “Hazardous substances” means those materials specified in Section
95.03.
5.   “Labeled quantities” means the maximum quantity of chemical as recommended
on the label, for specific applications.
6.   “Petroleum product” means fuels (gasoline, diesel fuels, kerosene, and
mixtures of these products), lubricating oils, motor oils, hydraulic fluids,
and other similar products.
7.   “Pollution” means the presence of any substance (organic, inorganic,
radiological, or biological) or condition (temperature, pH, turbidity) in water
that tends to degrade its quality so as to constitute a hazard or impair the
usefulness of the water.
8.   “Potable water” means water that is satisfactory for drinking, culinary,
and domestic purposes, meeting current drinking water standards.
9.   “Primary containment” means the first level of product-tight containment,
i.e., the inside portion of that container which comes into immediate contact
on its inner surface with the hazardous material being contained.
10.   “Public utility” means any utility (gas, water, sewer, electrical,
telephone, cable television, etc.) whether publicly owned or privately owned.
11.   “Regulated substance” means substances included under Section
95.03.
12.   “Secondary containment” means the level of product-tight containment
external to and separate from the primary containment. Secondary containment
shall consist of leakproof trays under containers, floor curbing, or other
containment systems and shall be of adequate size and design to handle all
spills, leaks, overflows, and precipitation until appropriate action can be
taken. The specific design and selection of materials shall be sufficient to
preclude any substance loss. Containment systems shall be sheltered so that the
intrusion of precipitation is effectively prevented.
13.   “Toxic substance” means any substance that has the capacity to produce
personal injury or illness to humans through ingestion, inhalation, or
absorption into the body.
14.   “Water pollution” means the introduction in any surface or underground
water of any organic or inorganic deleterious substance in such quantities,
proportions, and accumulations that are injurious to human, plant, animal, fish
and other aquatic life, property, or that unreasonably interferes with the
comfortable enjoyment of life of property or the conduct of business.
15.   “Well” means a pit or hole sunk into the earth to reach a resource supply
such as water.
16.   “Wellhead protection zone” means zones delineated by fixed radii around
wellheads, within which toxic substances will be regulated to protect the
quality of the underground resource.
95.03   SUBSTANCES REGULATED.
The materials regulated by this chapter consist of the following:
1.   Petroleum products as defined in Section
95.02.
2.   Substances listed in 40 CFR part 261, subparts C and D, of the Federal
Hazardous Waste List.
3.   Substances listed by the Iowa Labor Commissioner pursuant to Section
898.12 of the Code of Iowa (Hazardous Chemicals Risks - Right to Know).
95.04   WELLHEAD PROTECTION ZONE MAPS AND LISTING.
Wellhead protection zone maps and listing of locations and any amendments
thereto are incorporated by reference and made a part of this chapter. These
maps shall be on file at City Hall. At the time of adoption of the ordinance
codified in this chapter, the location of all wells in the City supplying
potable water to the City water system shall be located on the official
wellhead protection map with primary and secondary protection zones indicated.
Such maps shall be provided to the Clerk, Building Official, County Health
Department, and any other agency requesting the maps. The wellhead protection
zone maps may be updated on an annual basis. The basis for such an update may
include, but is not limited to, the following:
1.   Changes in the technical knowledge concerning the aquifer;
2.   Changes in permitted pumping capacity of City well fields;
3.   Addition or deletion of wells;
4.   Designation of new well fields.
95.05   PRIMARY AND SECONDARY ZONES.
The zones of protection indicated on the wellhead protection maps are as
follows:
1.   Primary Protection Zone. An area extending 200 feet radially from any well
supplying potable water to the City water system.
2.   Secondary Protection Zone. An area extending between 200 and 2,640 feet
radially from any well supplying potable water to the City water system.
95.06   DETERMINATION OF LOCATION OF PROPERTIES WITHIN ZONES.
In determining the location of properties within the zones depicted on the
wellhead protection zone maps, the following rules shall apply:
1.   Properties located wholly within one zone reflected on the applicable
wellhead protection zone map shall be governed by the restrictions applicable
to that zone.
2.   For properties having parts lying within more than one zone as reflected
on the applicable wellhead protection zone map, each part shall be governed by
the restrictions applicable to the zone in which it is located.
95.07   REGULATIONS GOVERNING PRIMARY PROTECTION ZONES.
1.   Permitted Uses. The following uses are permitted uses within the primary
protection zone (Zone A):
A.   Parks, provided there is no on-site waste disposal, or fuel storage tank
facilities associated within this use, and the Iowa Department of Natural
Resources (IDNR) Separation Distances From Wells for sources of contamination
is complied with;
B.   Playgrounds;
C.   Wildlife areas;
D.   Nonmotorized trails, such as biking, skiing, nature, and fitness trails.
1.   Prohibited Uses. The following uses are prohibited uses within the primary
protection zone (Zone A). Uses not listed are not considered permitted uses
unless specifically listed under Subsection 1, Subsection 3, or issued a permit
under Section
95.12:
A.   Wastewater treatment facilities;
B.   Septage or sludge spreading;
C.   Agricultural activities;
D.   Animal waste facilities;
E.   Animal confinement facilities;
F.   Animal waste landscaping;
G.   Gas stations;
H.   Asphalt products manufacturing;
I.   Electroplating facilities;
J.   Landfills or waste disposal facilities;
K.   Spray wastewater facilities;
L.   Junkyards or auto salvage yards;
M.   Pesticide, herbicide or fertilizer use, storage, mixing, handling, or
manufacturing facilities (excluding residential uses consistent with labeled
quantities);
N.   Hazardous and toxic materials storage and use;
O.   Hazardous and toxic waste facilities;
P.   Radioactive waste facilities;
Q.   Paint or coating manufacturing;
R.   Salt Storage.
1.   Uses Requiring Permits. The following uses are prohibited uses within the
primary protection zone (Zone A) unless a permit is granted by the Council for
such use as under Section . Uses not listed are not to be considered permitted
uses, unless specifically listed above under Subsection 1 or issued a permit
under Section
95.12:
A.   Sewered or unsewered residential uses;
B.   On-site private sewage systems;
C.   Underground storage tanks;
D.   Vehicle repair establishments, including auto body repair;
E.   Printing and duplicating businesses;
F.   Bus or truck terminals;
G.   Dry cleaning businesses;
H.   Exterminating businesses;
I.   Basement storage tanks;
J.   Repair shops for items other than vehicles;
K.   All commercial or industrial businesses not specifically listed elsewhere
in this chapter.
1.   Discharge of Hazardous Substances Prohibited. No person shall discharge or
cause or permit the discharge of a hazardous substance, in excess of labeled
quantities, to the soils, groundwater, or surface water within the primary
protection zone (Zone A). Any person knowing or having evidence of a discharge
shall report such information to the Wellhead Protection Officer.
95.08   REGULATIONS GOVERNING SECONDARY PROTECTION ZONES.
1.   Permitted Uses. The following uses are permitted in the secondary
protection zone (Zone B):
A.   All uses listed as permitted in the primary protection zone (Zone A);
B.   Sewered residential, commercial or industrial uses not prohibited under
Subsection 2;
C.   Aboveground storage tanks of 660 gallons or less;
D.   Basement storage tanks.
1.   Prohibited Uses. The following uses are prohibited uses within the
secondary protection zone (Zone B). Uses not listed are not considered
permitted uses unless they are specifically listed under Subsection 1,
specifically listed under Subsection 3, or issued a permit under Section 95.12:
A.   Landfills or waste disposal facilities;
B.   Spray wastewater facilities;
C.   Junkyards or auto salvage yards;
D.   Hazardous and toxic materials storage and use;
E.   Hazardous and toxic waste facilities;
F.   Radioactive waste facilities.
1.   Uses Requiring Permits. The following uses are prohibited within the
secondary protection zone (Zone B) unless a permit is issued for such use by
the Council as under Section
95.12. Uses not listed are not to be considered permitted uses unless
specifically listed under Subsection 1 or issued a permit under Section
95.12:
A.   Underground storage tanks of any size;
B.   Private sewage systems;
C.   Agricultural activities;
D.   Septage or sludge spreading;
E.   Animal waste landspreading;
F.   Animal waste facilities;
G.   Animal confinement facilities;
H.   Gas stations;
I.   Pesticide, herbicide or fertilizer use, storage, mixing, handling, or
manufacturing facilities (excluding residential uses consistent with labeled
quantities);
J.   Asphalt products manufacturing;
K.   Dry cleaning facilities;
L.   Electroplating facilities.
1.   Discharge of Hazardous Substances Prohibited. No person shall discharge or
cause or permit the discharge of a hazardous substance, in excess of labeled
quantities, to the soils, groundwater, or surface water within the secondary
protection zone (Zone B). Any person knowing or having evidence of a discharge
shall report such information to the Wellhead Protection Officer.
95.09   EXEMPT ACTIVITIES.
The following activities or uses are exempt from the provisions of this
chapter:
1.   The transportation of any hazardous substance through the well field
protection zones, provided the transporting vehicle is in transit;
2.   Silviculture uses and mosquito-control spraying, providing that such uses
shall comply with the Iowa Commercial and Public Pesticide Applicators and
Dealers Licensing through the Iowa Department of Agriculture. The use and
storage of herbicides and pesticides for silviculture uses is prohibited within
the primary protection zone (Zone A), but is allowed within the secondary
protection zone (Zone B);
3.   The use of any hazardous substance solely as fuel in a vehicle fuel tank
or as lubricant in a vehicle;
4.   Fire, police, emergency medical services, emergency management center
facilities, or public utility transmission facilities;
5.   Retail sales establishments that store and handle hazardous substances for
resale in their original unopened containers;
6.   Consumer products limited to use at a facility solely for janitorial or
minor maintenance purposes;
7.   Consumer products located in the home which are used for personal, family,
or household purposes;
8.   The storage and use of hazardous substances as a fuel or lubricant to
provide auxiliary power for emergency use to the well field, provided an
enclosed secondary containment system is provided for the hazardous substance;
9.   The use of water treatment chemicals connected with the operation of the
well.
95.10   EXISTING USES.
The use of structures or facilities existing at the time of the adoption of the
ordinance codified in this chapter may be continued even though such use may
not conform with the regulations of this chapter. However, such structure of
facility may not be enlarged, extended, reconstructed, or substituted
subsequent to adoption of said ordinance unless an exemption is granted by the
Council.
95.11   ACTIVITIES RELATING TO TOXIC AND HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCES.
Any person who engages in nonresidential activities relating to the storage,
handling, use, or production of any toxic or hazardous substances who is exempt
from this chapter by law shall not be subject to the restrictions contained
herein.
95.12   PERMIT PROCEDURES.
All written requests for permits allowed under Subsections 2 and 3 of Sections
95.07 and
95.08 of this chapter will be made in writing to the Council. Any permits
granted will be made conditional and may include environmental and safety
monitoring or a bond posted for future monitoring and cleanup costs. The permit
will be made void if environmental or safety monitoring indicate the facility
is emitting any releases of harmful contaminates to the surrounding
environment. The facility will be held financially responsible for all
environmental cleanup costs as under Section
36.04. The construction of new structures or the structural modification or
expansion of existing structures within the primary protection zone (Zone A)
requires Council approval conditional upon the City Engineer’s approval of the
site plan. Site plan review costs will be the responsibility of the owner.
95.13   WELLHEAD PROTECTION OFFICER DESIGNATED.
The Water and Sewer Supervisor is designated as the Wellhead Protection Officer
unless another person is specifically designated by the Council to supervise
the implementation and enforcement of this chapter.
95.14   INSPECTIONS.
1.   The Wellhead Protection Officer or inspector shall have the power and
authority to enter and inspect all buildings, structures, and land field zones
of influence for the purpose of making an inspection. Failure of a person
having common authority over a property to permit an inspection shall be
sufficient grounds and probable cause for a court of competent jurisdiction to
issue a search warrant to the Wellhead Protection Officer to inspect such
premises.
2.   In the event a building or structure appears to be vacant or abandoned,
and the owner cannot be readily contacted in order to obtain consent for an
inspection, the Wellhead Protection Officer or inspector may enter into or upon
any open or unsecured portion of the premises in order to conduct an inspection
thereof.
3.   The Wellhead Protection Officer or inspector may inspect each well field
annually and shall maintain an inventory, if applicable, of all hazardous
substances which exist in each well field zone. An emergency plan shall be
prepared and filed with the County Emergency Management Agency indicating the
procedures which will be followed in the event of spillage of a regulated
substance so as to control and collect all such spilled materials.
4.   It shall be the duty of all law enforcement officers to assist in making
inspection when such assistance is requested by the officer or inspector.
95.15   TRANSFER OF PROPERTY.
The City requires that all abandoned wells and cisterns be properly sealed
prior to finalization of property sales or transfers within the corporate
limits of the City.
95.16   BUILDING PERMIT ISSUANCE.
No building permits shall be issued which are a violation of this chapter or a
source of contamination for a City well, and no commercial or industrial
building permits shall be issued which are a violation of the IDNR Separation
Distances From Wells.
95.17   UNDERGROUND TANK RESTRICTIONS.
No new underground tanks will be allowed for auxiliary fuel storage in the
primary or secondary zones.
95.18   CITY ACTION FOR INJUNCTIVE RELIEF.
If any person who engages in nonresidential activities stores, handles, uses,
or produces toxic substances within the wellhead protection zones as indicated
on the wellhead protection zone maps, continues to operate in violation of the
provisions of this chapter, then the City may file an action for injunctive
relief in the court of jurisdiction.
95.19   NOTICE OF VIOLATION.
Whenever an officer or an inspector determines that there is a violation of
this chapter, said officer or inspector shall give notice thereof, which notice
shall:
1.   Be in writing;
2.   Be dated and signed by the officer or inspector;
3.   Specify the violation or violations;
4.   State that the violation(s) shall be corrected within a specified period
of time as issued in writing by the inspector.
CHAPTER 96
WATER SYSTEM CONNECTION FEE DISTRICT
 
96.01 Definitions                 96.05 Water Connection Applications
96.02 Water System Improvements   96.06 Schedule of Water Connection Fees
96.03 Water System Connection Fee 96.07 Effect of Schedule
District
96.04 Water Connection Fees       96.08 Violations
 
96.01   DEFINITIONS.
For purposes of this chapter, the following terms are defined:
1.   “Municipal waterworks system” means the facilities and services provided
by the City in providing drinking water, water service, and water for fire
protection to its customers and the City.
2.   “Water system connection fee district” means the geographic area
established in Section
96.03 within which a water connection fee shall be imposed.
3.   “Water system improvement” means the construction of a cooperative water
storage structure and municipal water supply well, proposed to be constructed
at 1749 Racine Avenue in the City, and related improvements to the municipal
waterworks system to be completed in the year 2017.
96.02   WATER SYSTEM IMPROVEMENTS.
In response to, and anticipation of, the demands placed upon the Municipal
Waterworks System by ongoing growth and development, the City recently
completed well improvements and is preparing to enter into a contract for the
construction of a new water storage tank and related system upgrades. The City
hereby finds that the water system improvements are necessary to provide
adequate capacity to supply water service to properties serving as the site for
new development in the City.
96.03   WATER SYSTEM CONNECTION FEE DISTRICT.
The Water System Connection Fee District is hereby established, and shall
include the following real property situated in the City:
All real property within the incorporated boundaries of the City of Solon as of
October 1, 2014, and all real property in the unincorporated areas lying within
two miles of said boundaries. All properties covered under existing agreements
relating to said improvements are excluded from the Water System Connection Fee
District.
96.04   WATER CONNECTION FEES.
Water connection fees are hereby established and shall be imposed on owners of
properties lying within the Water System Connection Fee District at the time of
application by said owners to connect their properties to the municipal
waterworks system.
96.05   WATER CONNECTION APPLICATIONS.
Applications by property owners within the Water System Connection Fee District
for connection of their property to the municipal waterworks system shall be
due at the time of submission of an application for a building permit relative
to the property for which the connection is sought.
96.06   SCHEDULE OF WATER CONNECTION FEES.
1.   Water connection fees shall be due at the time of submission of a Water
Connection Application as described in Section
96.05. Issuance of building permits have been paid in full.
2.   Fees shall be based upon an infrastructure cost estimate for the proposed
project improvements (the “Infrastructure Cost Estimate”) and an allocation of
the same based on the equitable costs of extending service from the Municipal
Waterworks System to the property for which connection is sought. From the
effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, fees shall be imposed
in the following amounts: †
A.   For single-family residential properties within the Water System
Connection Fee District - $1,922.23 per unit to be served by the connection to
the Municipal Waterworks System.
B.   For multi-family residential properties within the Water System Connection
Fee District - $617.87 per bedroom for each unit to be served by the connection
to the Municipal Waterworks System.
C.   For hotel or motel properties within the Water System Connection Fee
District - $411.91 per room to be served by the connection to the Municipal
Waterworks System.
D.   For school properties within the Water System Connection Fee District -
$54.92 per seat to be served by the connection to the Municipal Waterworks
System.
E.   For office buildings within the Water System Connection Fee District -
$54.92 per 200 SF of office space to be served by the connection to the
Municipal Waterworks System.
F.   For commercial or industrial properties within the Water System Connection
Fee District - the City will establish a cost per fixture unit (as defined in
the 2003 International Building Code) on the property based on the anticipated
daily water usage for the property. The cost per fixture unit will be based on
a rate of $5.49 per gallon of water.
1.   The Council reserves the right to grant variances from this schedule of
fees.
 
Notes
�† EDITOR’S NOTE: Ordinance No. 417, adopting a Water System Connection Fee
  District for the City, was passed and adopted on December 3, 2014.
96.07   EFFECT OF SCHEDULE.
The schedule of water connection fees detailed in Section 96.06 will be
reviewed annually by an engineering firm selected by the City for said purpose
and adjusted, as of January 1 of each year from and after January 1, 2015, in
accordance with the Engineering News Record Cost Index or to reflect actual
construction costs, as applicable, for the appropriate period of time and
thereafter shall be presented to the Council for approval. After approval of
the same by the Council, a copy of the most recent Infrastructure Cost
Estimate, as so adjusted, and the resulting allocation, certified by said
engineering firm, shall be available for public inspection at the office of the
Clerk during normal business hours. Each such adjusted Infrastructure Cost
Estimate shall apply and become effective for purposes of this chapter from and
after the date of approval by the Council of the ordinance codified in this
chapter.
96.08   VIOLATIONS.
Any person who violates the provisions of this chapter shall subject their
property to immediate discontinuance of water service until such violation has
been corrected by payment of the appropriate amount. Nothing herein shall
restrict the City from seeking any remedy in law or in equity against any
person or entity in violation of the provisions of this chapter.
CHAPTER 98
SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM
 
98.01 Purpose                   98.06 Service Outside the City
98.02 Definitions               98.07 Right of Entry
98.03 Superintendent            98.08 Use of Easements
98.04 Prohibited Acts           98.09 Special Penalties
98.05 Sewer Connection Required 98.10 Abandoned Sewer Lines
 
98.01   PURPOSE.
The purpose of the chapters of this Code pertaining to Sanitary Sewers is to
establish rules and regulations governing the treatment and disposal of
sanitary sewage within the City in order to protect the public health, safety,
and welfare.
98.02   DEFINITIONS.
For use in these chapters, unless the context specifically indicates otherwise,
the following terms are defined:
1.   “B.O.D.” (denoting Biochemical Oxygen Demand) means the quantity of oxygen
utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard
laboratory procedure in five days at 20 , expressed in milligrams per liter or
parts per million.
2.   “Building drain” means that part of the lowest horizontal piping of a
building drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste, and
other drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the
building sewer, beginning five feet (one and one-half meters) outside the inner
face of the building wall.
3.   “Building sewer” means that part of the horizontal piping from the
building wall to its connection with the main sewer or the primary treatment
portion of an on-site wastewater treatment and disposal system conveying the
drainage of one building site.
4.   “Combined sewer” means a sewer receiving both surface run-off and sewage.
5.   “Customer” means any person responsible for the production of domestic,
commercial, or industrial waste that is directly or indirectly discharged into
the public sewer system.
6.   “Garbage” means solid wastes from the domestic and commercial preparation,
cooking and dispensing of food, and from the handling, storage, and sale of
produce.
7.   “Industrial wastes” means the liquid wastes from industrial manufacturing
processes, trade, or business as distinct from sanitary sewage.
8.   “Inspector” means the person duly authorized by the Council to inspect and
approve the installation of building sewers and their connections to the public
sewer system; and to inspect such sewage as may be discharged therefrom.
9.   “Natural outlet” means any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake,
or other body of surface or groundwater.
10.   “On-site wastewater treatment and disposal system” means all equipment
and devices necessary for proper conduction, collection, storage, treatment,
and disposal of wastewater from four or fewer dwelling units or other
facilities serving the equivalent of 15 persons (1,500 gpd) or less.
11.   “pH” means the logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen ions
in grams per liter of solution.
12.   “Public sewer” means a sewer in which all owners of abutting properties
have equal rights, and is controlled by public authority.
13.   “Sanitary sewage” means sewage discharging from the sanitary conveniences
of dwellings (including apartment houses and hotels), office buildings,
factories, or institutions, and free from storm, surface water, and industrial
waste.
14.   “Sanitary sewer” means a sewer that carries sewage and to which storm,
surface, and groundwaters are not intentionally admitted.
15.   “Sewage” means a combination of the water-carried wastes from residences,
business buildings, institutions, and industrial establishments, together with
such ground, surface, and stormwaters as may be present.
16.   “Sewage treatment plant” means any arrangement of devices and structures
used for treating sewage.
17.   “Sewage works” or “sewage system” means all facilities for collecting,
pumping, treating, and disposing of sewage.
18.   “Sewer” means a pipe or conduit for carrying sewage.
19.   “Sewer service charges” means any and all charges, rates or fees levied
against and payable by customers, as consideration for the servicing of said
customers by said sewer system.
20.   “Slug” means any discharge of water, sewage, or industrial waste that in
concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds for any
period of duration longer than 15 minutes more than five times the average 24-
hour concentration or flows during normal operation.
21.   “Storm drain” or “storm sewer” means a sewer that carries storm and
surface waters and drainage but excludes sewage and industrial wastes, other
than unpolluted cooling water.
22.   “Superintendent” means the Supervisor of sewage works and/or of water
pollution control of the City or any authorized deputy, agent, or
representative.
23.   “Suspended solids” means solids that either float on the surface of, or
are in suspension in water, sewage, or other liquids, and that are removable by
laboratory filtering.
24.   “Watercourse” means a channel in which a flow of water occurs, either
continuously or intermittently.
98.03   SUPERINTENDENT.
The Superintendent shall exercise the following powers and duties:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13(4))
1.   Operation and Maintenance. Operate and maintain the City sewage system.
2.   Inspection and Tests. Conduct necessary inspections and tests to assure
compliance with the provisions of these Sanitary Sewer chapters.
3.   Records. Maintain a complete and accurate record of all sewers, sewage
connections, and manholes constructed showing the location and grades thereof.
98.04   PROHIBITED ACTS.
No person shall do, or allow, any of the following:
1.   Damage Sewer System. Maliciously, willfully, or negligently break, damage,
destroy, uncover, deface, or tamper with any structure, appurtenance, or
equipment that is a part of the sewer system.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.1)
2.   Surface Run-Off or Groundwater. Connect a roof downspout, sump pump,
exterior foundation drain, areaway drain, or other source of surface run-off or
groundwater to a building sewer or building drain that is connected directly or
indirectly to a public sanitary sewer.
3.   Manholes. Open or enter any manhole of the sewer system, except by
authority of the Superintendent.
4.   Objectionable Wastes. Place or deposit in any unsanitary manner on public
or private property within the City, or in any area under the jurisdiction of
the City, any human or animal excrement, garbage, or other objectionable waste.
5.   Septic Tanks. Construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank,
cesspool, or other facility intended or used for the disposal of sewage except
as provided in these chapters.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12(3)(f))
6.   Untreated Discharge. Discharge to any natural outlet within the City, or
in any area under its jurisdiction, any sanitary sewage, industrial wastes, or
other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in
accordance with subsequent provisions of these chapters.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12(3)(f))
98.05   SEWER CONNECTION REQUIRED.
The owners of any houses, buildings, or properties used for human occupancy,
employment, recreation or other purposes, situated within the City and abutting
on any street, alley, or right-of-way in which there is now located, or may in
the future be located, a public sanitary or combined sewer, are hereby required
to install, at such owner’s expense, suitable toilet facilities therein and a
building sewer connecting such facilities directly with the proper public
sewer, and to maintain the same all in accordance with the provisions of these
Sanitary Sewer chapters, such compliance to be completed within 30 days after
date of official notice from the City to do so provided that said public sewer
is located within 300 feet of the property line of such owner and is of such
design as to receive and convey by gravity such sewage as may be conveyed to
it. Billing for sanitary sewer service will begin the date of official notice
to connect to the public sewer.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12(3)(f))
(567 IAC 69.1(3))
98.06   SERVICE OUTSIDE THE CITY.
The owners of property outside the corporate limits of the City so situated
that it may be served by the City sewer system may apply to the Council for
permission to connect to the public sewer upon the terms and conditions
stipulated by resolution of the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.4(2) and (3))
98.07   RIGHT OF ENTRY.
The Superintendent and other duly authorized employees of the City bearing
proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all
properties for the purposes of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling,
and testing in accordance with the provisions of these Sanitary Sewer chapters.
The Superintendent or representatives shall have no authority to inquire into
any processes including metallurgical, chemical, oil, refining, ceramic, paper,
or other industries beyond that point having a direct bearing on the kind and
source of discharge to the sewers or waterways or facilities for waste
treatment.
98.08   USE OF EASEMENTS.
The Superintendent and other duly authorized employees of the City bearing
proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all private
properties through which the City holds a duly negotiated easement for the
purposes of, but not limited to, inspection, observation, measurement,
sampling, repair, and maintenance of any portion of the sewage works lying
within said easement. All entry and subsequent work, if any, on said easement,
shall be done in full accordance with the terms of the duly negotiated easement
pertaining to the private property involved.
98.09   SPECIAL PENALTIES.
The following special penalty provisions shall apply to violations of these
Sanitary Sewer chapters:
1.   Notice of Violation. Any person found to be violating any provision of
these chapters except Subsections 1, 3, and 4 of Section
98.04, shall be served by the City with written notice stating the nature of
the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory
correction thereof. The offender shall, within the period of time stated in
such notice, permanently cease all violations.
2.   Continuing Violations. Any person who shall continue any violation beyond
the time limit provided for in Subsection 1 hereof shall be in violation of
this Code of Ordinances. Each day in which any such violation shall continue
shall be deemed a separate offense.
3.   Liability Imposed. Any person violating any of the provisions of these
chapters shall become liable to the City for any expense, loss, or damage
occasioned the City by reason of such violation.
98.10   ABANDONED SEWER LINES.
When an existing sanitary sewer service is abandoned or a service is renewed
with a new connection in the main, all abandoned connections with the mains
shall be capped off and made absolutely watertight.
CHAPTER 99
BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS
 
99.01 Permit                           99.07 Sewer Tap
99.02 Permit Fee and Connection Charge 99.08 Inspection Required
99.03 Plumber Required                 99.09 Property Owner’s Responsibility
99.04 Excavations                      99.10 Abatement of Violations
99.05 Connection Requirements          99.11 Sump Pump and Drain Requirements
99.06 Interceptors Required
 
99.01   PERMIT.
No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connection with or opening into,
use, alter, or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof without first
obtaining a written permit from the City. The application for the permit shall
set forth the following information:
1.   The location and description of the property to be connected with the
sewer system.
2.   The purpose for which the sewer is to be used.
3.   Plans, specifications, or other information considered pertinent.
The permit shall require the owner to complete construction and connection of
the building sewer to the public sewer within 60 days after the issuance of the
permit, except that when a property owner makes sufficient showing that due to
conditions beyond the owner’s control or peculiar hardship, such time period is
inequitable or unfair, an extension of time within which to comply with the
provisions herein may be granted. Any sewer connection permit may be revoked at
any time for a violation of these chapters.
99.02   PERMIT FEE AND CONNECTION CHARGE.
The person who makes the application shall pay a fee in the amount of $25.00
for industrial connections and $5.00 for residential and commercial customers
to the Clerk to cover the cost of issuing the permit and supervising,
regulating, and inspecting the work. In addition, there shall be a connection
charge in the amount of $250.00 for residential customers or $500.00 for
commercial or industrial customers paid to reimburse the City for the costs of
the City to make sewer service available to the property served.
99.03   PLUMBER REQUIRED.
All installations of building sewers and connections to the public sewer shall
be made by a State-licensed plumber.
99.04   EXCAVATIONS.
All trench work, excavation, and backfilling required for the installation of a
building sewer shall be performed in accordance with the provisions of the
State Plumbing Code, SUDAS, Solon Supplementary Specifications, and the
provisions of
Chapter 135.
99.05   CONNECTION REQUIREMENTS.
Any connection with a public sanitary sewer must be made under the direct
supervision of the Superintendent pursuant to the requirements of the State
Plumbing Code, SUDAS, the Solon Supplementary Specifications, and other
applicable local, state and federal rules and regulations.
99.06   INTERCEPTORS REQUIRED.
Grease, oil, sludge, and sand interceptors shall be provided by gas and service
stations, convenience stores, car washes, garages, food establishments, and
other facilities when, in the opinion of the Superintendent, they are necessary
for the proper handling of such wastes that contain grease in excessive amounts
or any flammable waste, sand, or other harmful ingredients. Such interceptors
shall not be required for private living quarters or dwelling units. When
required, such interceptors shall be installed in accordance with the
following:
1.   Design and Location. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity as
specified in the State Plumbing Code, to be approved by the Superintendent, and
shall be located so as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and
inspection.
2.   Construction Standards. The interceptors shall be constructed of
impervious material capable of withstanding abrupt and extreme changes in
temperature. They shall be of substantial construction, watertight and equipped
with easily removable covers that shall be gastight and watertight.
3.   Maintenance. All such interceptors shall be maintained by the owner at the
owner’s expense and shall be kept in continuously efficient operations at all
times.
99.07   SEWER TAP.
Connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall be made at the “Y”
branch, if such branch is available at a suitable location. If no properly
located “Y” branch is available, a saddle “Y” shall be installed at the
location specified by the Superintendent. The public sewer shall be tapped with
a tapping machine and a saddle appropriate to the type of public sewer shall be
glued or attached with a gasket and stainless steel clamps to the sewer. At no
time shall a building sewer be constructed so as to enter a manhole unless
special written permission is received from the Superintendent and in
accordance with the Superintendent’s direction if such connection is approved.
99.08   INSPECTION REQUIRED.
All connections with the sanitary sewer system before being covered shall be
inspected and approved, in writing, by the Superintendent. As soon as all pipe
work from the public sewer to inside the building has been completed, and
before any backfilling is done, the Superintendent shall be notified and the
Superintendent shall inspect and test the work as to workmanship and material;
no sewer pipe laid underground shall be covered or trenches filled until after
the sewer has been so inspected and approved. If the Superintendent refuses to
approve the work, the plumber or owner must proceed immediately to correct the
work.
99.09   PROPERTY OWNER’S RESPONSIBILITY.
All costs and expenses incident to the installation, connection, and
maintenance of the building sewer, from the main to the building served, shall
be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the City from any loss or
damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the
building sewer.
99.10   ABATEMENT OF VIOLATIONS.
Construction or maintenance of building sewer lines, whether located upon the
private property of any owner or in the public right-of-way, which construction
or maintenance is in violation of any of the requirements of this chapter,
shall be corrected, at the owner’s expense, within 30 days after date of
official notice from the Council of such violation. If not made within such
time, the Council shall, in addition to the other penalties herein provided,
have the right to finish and correct the work and assess the cost thereof to
the property owner. Such assessment shall be collected with and in the same
manner as general property taxes.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12(3))
99.11   SUMP PUMP AND DRAIN REQUIREMENTS.
1.   All new construction, the building permits for which are received after
the effective date of the ordinance codified in this section and having a floor
level which at all points is below ground level, shall be serviced by a sump
pump and footing drains. This requirement may be waived by the City upon the
applicant’s showing that existing drainage conditions do not require
installation of sump pump. All such connections shall be inspected by the
Superintendent.
2.   In all new construction, plans for the installation of the sump pump and
footing drains shall be submitted with the building plans and shall be a
condition of approval of any plans. All the plans and construction of the sump
pumps and footing drains shall be done in such a manner as to comply with all
the requirements of this Code in disposing of all waters of any kind as well as
any sewage or waste.
3.   No existing structure in the City shall have a sump pump operated in such
manner so as to allow the drainage from the pump to flow into the sanitary
sewer system of the City. Violation of this provision shall be a municipal
infraction.
4.   The Superintendent is directed and authorized to compile a list of sump
pumps in existing structures within the City. The purpose of this list will be
to evaluate and monitor the discharge from the sump pumps to ensure that the
discharge shall not infiltrate the sanitary sewer system or otherwise create a
nuisance. The Superintendent is further directed and authorized to conduct
routine inspections of every existing structure within the City connected to
the sanitary sewer system to determine whether or not the structure has a sump
pump and, if so, whether the discharge from the sump pump is in conformity with
this Code.
CHAPTER 100
USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS
 
100.01 Stormwater                       100.06 Special Facilities
100.02 Surface Waters Exception         100.07 Control Manholes
100.03 Prohibited Discharges            100.08 Testing of Wastes
100.04 Restricted Discharges            100.09 Fat, Oil, Grease, Sand, and
                                        Petroleum Product Traps
100.05 Restricted Discharges; Powers of  
Superintendent
 
100.01   STORMWATER.
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any stormwater, surface
water, groundwater, roof run-off, sub-surface drainage, uncontaminated cooling
water, or unpolluted industrial process waters to any sanitary sewer.
Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to such sewers
that are specifically designated as combined sewers or storm sewers or to a
natural outlet approved by the Superintendent. Industrial cooling water or
unpolluted process waters may be discharged on approval of the Superintendent,
to a storm sewer, combined sewer, or natural outlet.
100.02   SURFACE WATERS EXCEPTION.
Special permits for discharging surface waters to a public sanitary sewer may
be issued by the Council upon recommendation of the Superintendent where such
discharge is deemed necessary or advisable for purposes of flushing, but any
permit so issued shall be subject to revocation at any time when deemed to be
in the best interests of the sewer system.
100.03   PROHIBITED DISCHARGES.
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the following
described waters or wastes to any public sewers:
1.   Flammable or Explosive Material. Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil,
or other flammable or explosive liquid, solid, or gas.
2.   Toxic or Poisonous Materials. Any waters or wastes containing toxic or
poisonous solids, liquids, or gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by
interaction with other wastes, to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment
process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, create a public nuisance, or
create any hazard in the receiving waters of the sewage treatment plant,
including but not limited to cyanides (CN) in excess of two milligrams per
liter as CN in the wastes as discharged to the public sewer.
3.   Corrosive Wastes. Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5 or
having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to
structures, equipment, and personnel of the sewage works.
4.   Solid or Viscous Substances. Solid or viscous substances in quantities or
of such size capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers, or other
interference with the proper operation of the sewage works such as, but not
limited to, ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags,
feathers, tar, plastics, wood, unground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure,
hair and fleshings, entrails and paper dishes, cups, milk containers, etc.,
either whole or ground by garbage grinders.
5.   Excessive B.O.D., Solids, or Flow.
A.   Any waters or wastes:
   (1)   Having a five-day biochemical oxygen demand greater than 213 parts per
million by weight; or
   (2)   Containing more than 235 parts per million by weight of suspended
solids; or
   (3)   Having    an ammonia nitrogen level greater than 30 mg/l; or
   (4)   Having a chemical oxygen demand (COD) level greater than 300 mg/l; or
   (5)   Having total organic carbon (TOC) level greater than 140 mg/l; or
   (6)   Having total Kjeldahli nitrogen (TKN) level greater than 30 mg/l; or
   (7)   Having total fats, oil, and grease (FOG) level greater than 400 mg/l;
or
   (8)   Having an average daily flow greater than two percent of the average
daily sewage flow of the City.
shall be subject to the review of the Superintendent.
B.   When necessary in the opinion of the Superintendent, the owner shall
provide, at the owner’s expense, such preliminary treatment as may be necessary
to:
   (1)   Reduce the biochemical oxygen demand to 213 parts per million by
weight; or
   (2)   Reduce the suspended solids to 235 parts per million by weight; or
   (3)   Reduce the ammonia nitrogen level to 30 mg/l; or
   (4)   Reduce the COD level to 300 mg/l; or
   (5)   Reduce the TOC level to 140 mg/l; or
   (6)   Reduce the TKN level to 30 mg/l; or
   (7)   Reduce the total of FOG to 400 mg/l, or
   (8)   Control the quantities or rates of discharge of such water or wastes..
C.   Plans, specifications, and any other pertinent information related to the
proposed preliminary treatment facilities shall be submitted for approval by
the Superintendent and Building Official, and no construction of such
facilities shall be commenced until said plans and specifications are approved
in writing.
100.04   RESTRICTED DISCHARGES.
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged the following described
substances, materials, waters, or wastes if it appears likely in the opinion of
the Superintendent that such wastes can harm either the sewers, sewage
treatment process, or equipment, have an adverse effect on the receiving stream
or can otherwise endanger life, limb, public property, or constitute a
nuisance. In forming an opinion as to the acceptability of these wastes, the
Superintendent will give consideration to such factors as the quantities of
subject wastes in relation to flows and velocities in the sewers, materials of
construction of the sewers, nature of the sewage treatment process, capacity of
the sewage treatment plant, degree of treatability of wastes in the sewage
treatment plant, and other pertinent factors. The substances restricted are:
1.   High Temperature. Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than 150
(65 ).
2.   Fat, Oil, Grease. Any water or waste containing fats, wax, grease, or
oils, whether emulsified or not, in excess of 100 milligrams per liter or 600
milligrams per liter of dispersed or other soluble matter.
3.   Viscous Substances. Water or wastes containing substances that may
solidify or become viscous at temperatures between 32 and 150 (0 to 65 ).
4.   Garbage. Any garbage that has not been properly shredded, that is, to such
a degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions
normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than one-half
inch in any dimension.
5.   Acids. Any waters or wastes containing strong acid iron pickling wastes,
or concentrated plating solution, whether neutralized or not.
6.   Toxic or Objectionable Wastes. Any waters or wastes containing iron,
chromium, copper, zinc, and similar objectionable or toxic substances; or
wastes exerting an excessive chlorine requirement, to such degree that any such
material received in the composite sewage at the sewage treatment works exceeds
the limits established by the Superintendent for such materials.
7.   Odor or Taste. Any waters or wastes containing phenols or other taste or
odor producing substances, in such concentrations exceeding limits that may be
established by the Superintendent as necessary, after treatment of the
composite sewage, to meet the requirements of State, federal, or other public
agencies of jurisdiction for such discharge to the receiving waters.
8.   Radioactive Wastes. Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life
or concentration as may exceed limits established by the Superintendent in
compliance with applicable State or federal regulations.
9.   Excess Alkalinity. Any waters or wastes having a pH in excess of 9.5.
10.   Unusual Wastes. Materials that exert or cause:
A.   Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids (such as, but not limited
to, Fullers earth, lime slurries, and lime residues) or of dissolved solids
(such as, but not limited to, sodium chloride and sodium sulfate).
B.   Excessive discoloration (such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and
vegetable tanning solutions).
C.   Unusual B.O.D., chemical oxygen demand, or chlorine requirements in such
quantities as to constitute a significant load on the sewage treatment works.
D.   Unusual volume of flow or concentration of wastes constituting “slugs” as
defined herein.
1.   Noxious or Malodorous Gases. Any noxious or malodorous gas or other
substance that, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, is capable
of creating a public nuisance or hazard to life or of preventing entry into
sewers for their maintenance and repair.
2.   Damaging Substances. Any waters, wastes, materials, or substances that
react with water or wastes in the sewer system to release noxious gases,
develop color of undesirable intensity, form suspended solids in objectionable
concentration, or create any other condition deleterious to structures and
treatment processes.
3.   Untreatable Wastes. Waters or wastes containing substances that are not
amenable to treatment or reduction by the sewage treatment processes employed,
or are amenable to treatment only to such degree that the sewage treatment
plant effluent cannot meet the requirements of other agencies having
jurisdiction over discharge to the receiving waters.
100.05   RESTRICTED DISCHARGES; POWERS OF SUPERINTENDENT.
If any waters or wastes are discharged or are proposed to be discharged to the
public sewers, which waters contain the substances or possess the
characteristics enumerated in Section 100.04 and which in the judgment of the
Superintendent may have a deleterious effect upon the sewage works, processes,
equipment, or receiving waters, or which otherwise create a hazard to life or
constitute a public nuisance, the Superintendent may:
1.   Rejection. Reject the wastes by requiring disconnection from the public
sewage system;
2.   Pretreatment. Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for
discharge to the public sewers;
3.   Controls Imposed. Require control over the quantities and rates of
discharge; or
4.   Special Charges. Require payment to cover the added cost of handling and
treating the wastes not covered by existing taxes or sewer charges under the
provisions of Chapter 102.
100.06   SPECIAL FACILITIES.
If the Superintendent permits the pretreatment or equalization of waste flows,
the design and installation of the plants and equipment shall be subject to the
review and approval of the Superintendent and subject to the requirements of
all applicable codes, ordinances, and laws. Where preliminary treatment or
flow-equalizing facilities are provided for any waters or wastes, they shall be
maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operation by the owner at
the owner’s expense.
100.07   CONTROL MANHOLES.
When required by the Superintendent, the owner of any property serviced by a
building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable control
manhole together with such necessary meters and other appurtenances in the
building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling, and measurement of the
wastes. Such manhole, when required, shall be accessibly and safely located,
and shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the
Superintendent. The manhole shall be installed by the owner at the owner’s
expense, and shall be maintained by the owner so as to be safe and accessible
at all times.
100.08   TESTING OF WASTES.
All measurements, tests, and analyses of the characteristics of waters and
wastes to which reference is made in this chapter shall be determined in
accordance with the latest edition of Standard Methods for the Examination of
Water and Wastewater, published by the American Public Health Association, and
shall be determined at the control manhole provided, or upon suitable samples
taken at said control manhole. In the event that no special manhole has been
required, the control manhole shall be considered to be the nearest downstream
manhole in the public sewer to the point at which the building sewer is
connected. Sampling shall be carried out by customarily accepted methods to
reflect the effect of constituents upon the sewage works and to determine the
existence of hazards to life, limb, and property. (The particular analyses
involved will determine whether a 24-hour composite of all outfalls of a
premises is appropriate or whether a grab sample or samples should be taken.
Normally, but not always, B.O.D. and suspended solids analyses are obtained
from 24-hour composites of all outfalls whereas pH’s are determined from
periodic grab samples.)
100.09   FAT, OIL, GREASE, SAND, AND PETROLEUM PRODUCT TRAPS.
1.   Maintenance Requirements.
A.   All users shall maintain fats, oils, grease (FOG) recovery system so that
discharges therefrom are in compliance with all applicable laws, rules, and
regulations. Users include but are not limited to owners, tenants, and
builders.
B.   All non-automobile service facility FOG traps recovery systems shall have
all floating material removed per a schedule approved by an authorized agent of
the City. All non-automobile service facility FOG traps and recovery systems
shall be completely pumped out annually or when the contents thereof exceed the
25% Rule, as established by the Wastewater Department. All automobile service
facility FOG traps and recovery systems shall be completely 100% pumped out
annually or when the contents exceed the 25% Rule. Routine maintenance, annual
maintenance, and maintenance due to exceeding the 25% Rule shall include
complete recovery of all contents, including floating materials, wastewater,
and bottom sludge and solids. The frequency of maintenance may be increased to
comply with the applicable daily maximum discharge limits the manufacturer’s
recommendation, or the 25% Rule. The frequency shall be as often as necessary
to prevent overflows of FOG from entering the City’s wastewater collection
system.
C.   The Pump-and-Return Method of decanting or discharging of removed waste or
wastewater back into the FOG recovery system is prohibited.
D.   Removal of floating material from a FOG trap of less than 50 gallons may
be performed by the owner of the FOG producing facility, provided said floating
material is properly disposed of in strict compliance with applicable law. Any
removal and hauling of FOG as a result of the complete pumping of a FOG trap
and all FOG recovery systems shall be performed by a professional liquid waste
hauler.
E.   If any FOG recovery system discharge wastes fails to meet the applicable
daily maximum limits, the City is authorized to require that the user repair,
replace, or upgrade its FOG recovery system at the sole expense of the user.
F.   No user may place an additive of any type into the FOG trap or FOG
recovery system.”
CHAPTER 101
ON-SITE WASTEWATER SYSTEMS
 
101.01 When Prohibited             101.06 Maintenance of System
101.02 When Required               101.07 Systems Abandoned
101.03 Compliance with Regulations 101.08 Disposal of Septage
101.04 Permit Required             101.09 Minimum Lot Area
101.05 Discharge Restrictions       
 
101.01   WHEN PROHIBITED.
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, it is unlawful to construct or
maintain any on-site wastewater treatment and disposal system or other facility
intended or used for the disposal of sewage.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12(3)(f))
101.02   WHEN REQUIRED.
When a public sanitary sewer is not available under the provisions of Section
98.05, every building wherein persons reside, congregate, or are employed shall
be provided with an approved on-site wastewater treatment and disposal system
complying with the provisions of this chapter.
(567 IAC 69.1(3))
101.03   COMPLIANCE WITH REGULATIONS.
The type, capacity, location, and layout of a private on-site wastewater
treatment and disposal system shall comply with the specifications and
requirements set forth by the Iowa Administrative Code 567, Chapter 69, and
with such additional requirements as are prescribed by the regulations of the
County Board of Health.
(567 IAC 69.1(3) and (4))
101.04   PERMIT REQUIRED.
No person shall install or alter an on-site wastewater treatment and disposal
system without first obtaining a permit from the County Board of Health.
101.05   DISCHARGE RESTRICTIONS.
It is unlawful to discharge any wastewater from an on-site wastewater treatment
and disposal system (except under an NPDES permit) to any ditch, stream, pond,
lake, natural or artificial waterway, drain tile or to the surface of the
ground.
(567 IAC 69.1(3))
101.06   MAINTENANCE OF SYSTEM.
The owner of an on-site wastewater treatment and disposal system shall operate
and maintain the system in a sanitary manner at all times and at no expense to
the City.
101.07   SYSTEMS ABANDONED.
At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a property served by an on-
site wastewater treatment and disposal system, as provided in Section
98.05, a direct connection shall be made to the public sewer in compliance with
these Sanitary Sewer chapters and the on-site wastewater treatment and disposal
system shall be abandoned and filled with suitable material.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12(3)(f))
101.08   DISPOSAL OF SEPTAGE.
No person shall dispose of septage from an on-site treatment system at any
location except an approved disposal site.
101.09   MINIMUM LOT AREA.
No permit shall be issued for any on-site wastewater treatment and disposal
system employing sub-surface soil absorption facilities where the area of the
lot is less than 1,500 square feet.
CHAPTER 102
SEWER SERVICE CHARGES
 
102.01 Sewer Service Charges Required 102.05 Private Water Systems
102.02 Sewer Rates Established        102.06 Payment of Bills
102.03 Consumptive Use                102.07 Lien for Nonpayment
102.04 Use of Rate Revenue            102.08 Special Agreements Permitted
 
102.01   SEWER SERVICE CHARGES REQUIRED.
Every customer shall pay to the City sewer service fees as hereinafter
provided.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84)
102.02   SEWER RATES ESTABLISHED.
1.   Each user shall pay for the services provided by the City based on use of
the treatment works as determined by water meter readings or other appropriate
methods acceptable to the City.
2.   For all users, monthly user charges shall be based on actual water usage,
except where a practical method of wastewater measurement is available.
3.   For each month after the publication and effective date of the ordinance
codified herein, each customer shall be charged a minimum monthly charge. Each
customer shall pay sewer service charges for the use and for the service
supplied by the municipal sanitary sewer system based upon the amount of water
consumed as follows:
A.   First 1,500 gallons or lesser amount per month at $16.07 (minimum charge).
B.   All usage over 1,500 gallons at $9.16 per one thousand gallons.
C.   Buildings which have multiple dwelling and/or commercial units but have
only one water meter shall be charged the minimum billing per unit; each
building shall receive credit for 1,500 gallons per unit. All usage over the
credited gallons shall be billed at $9.16 per one thousand gallons.
D.   For each month after the publication and effective date of the ordinance
codified herein, each customer shall be charged a Sewer Debt Fee of $15.00 for
the purpose of retiring debt associated with the Wastewater Treatment System.
E.   For each month after the publication and effective date of the ordinance
codified herein, each customer shall be charged a Debt Service Usage Fee of
$5.00 for the purpose of retiring debt associated with the Wastewater Treatment
System.
In no case shall the minimum service charge be less than $16.07 per month which
is necessary to retire the indebtedness, operation and maintenance, and reserve
necessary for maintaining the sanitary sewer facility.
1.   Any user who discharges toxic pollutants which cause an increase in the
cost of managing the effluent or the biosolids from the City’s treatment works,
or any user which discharges any substance which singly or by interaction with
other substances causes identifiable increases in the cost of operation,
maintenance, or replacement of the treatment work, shall pay for such increased
costs. The charge to each user shall be as determined by the Clerk.
2.   The City will review the user charge system at least every two years and
revise user charge rates as necessary to ensure that the system generates
adequate revenues to pay the costs of operation and maintenance including
replacement and that the system continues to provide for the proportional
distribution of operation and maintenance including replacement costs among
users.
102.03   CONSUMPTIVE USE.
1.   Any separate water meters may be installed, to measure water used but not
returned to the public sewer system, which will result in the sewer service
charge being waived. In the event any customer elects to continue to have a
separate water meter for said use and billing, the following conditions are
met:
A.   The customer agrees to pay the minimum monthly water bill plus the regular
water rates, as set forth in Section
102.02.
B.   The customer agrees to maintain a properly functioning backflow device and
have said device tested annually in accordance with the State Plumbing Code.
2.   Customers of new residential properties are eligible for a one-time sewer
bill credit for use of water to nurture grass after the ground has been seeded
or sodded, as is necessary for final stabilization of any remaining disturbed
area after construction. Upon written application, a credit for the sewer
portion of the bill of up to 25,000 gallons is available if:
A.   The seeding has already been completed or the sod has already been laid;
B.   The application is submitted within 30 days after the seeding is completed
or the sod is laid;
C.   The customer used the amount of water for which a credit is being
requested for watering and for no other purpose; and
D.   No other party has been given such a credit for the same property.
In the event any application submitted to the City contains erroneous
information, the credit will be disallowed and forfeited.”
102.04   USE OF RATE REVENUE.
The user charge system shall generate annual revenues to pay costs of annual
operation and maintenance, including replacement, and costs associated with
debt retirement of bonded capital associated with financing the treatment works
which the City may by ordinance designate to be paid by the user charge system.
That portion of the total user charge which is designated for operation and
maintenance, including replacement of the treatment works, shall be established
by this chapter. The portion of the total user charge collected which is
designated for operation and maintenance, including replacement, shall be
deposited in a separate non-lapsing fund known as the Operation, Maintenance,
and Replacement Fund. A fund designated as the Wastewater Treatment Works
Replacement Fund is also established, for the specific purpose of ensuring
replacement needs over the useful life of the wastewater treatment works. Where
sewer revenue bonds of the City are outstanding, the provision of the
resolution authorizing the issuance of bonds shall, in the event of conflict,
prevail over the provisions of this section.
102.05   PRIVATE WATER SYSTEMS.
Customers whose premises are served by a private water system shall pay sewer
charges based upon the water used as determined by the City either by an
estimate agreed to by the customer or by metering the water system at the
customer’s expense. Any negotiated or agreed-upon sales or charges shall be
subject to approval of the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84)
102.06   PAYMENT OF BILLS.
All sewer service charges are due and payable under the same terms and
conditions provided for payment of a combined service account as contained in
Section
92.04 of this Code. Sewer service may be discontinued or disconnected in
accordance with the provisions contained in Section
92.05 if the combined service account becomes delinquent, and the provisions
contained in Section
92.08 relating to lien notices shall also apply in the event of a delinquent
account.
102.07   LIEN FOR NONPAYMENT.
Except as provided for in Section 92.07 of this Code, the owner of the premises
served and any lessee or tenant thereof shall be jointly and severally liable
for sewer service charges to the premises. Sewer service charges remaining
unpaid and delinquent shall constitute a lien upon the property or premises
served and shall be certified by the Clerk to the County Treasurer for
collection in the same manner as property taxes.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84)
102.08   SPECIAL AGREEMENTS PERMITTED.
No statement in these chapters shall be construed as preventing a special
agreement, arrangement, or contract between the Council, and any industrial
concern whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character may be
accepted subject to special conditions, rate, and cost as established by the
Council.
CHAPTER 103
WASTEWATER SYSTEM CONNECTION FEE DISTRICT
 
103.01 Definitions                      103.05 Wastewater Connection
                                        Applications
103.02 Wastewater System Improvements   103.06 Schedule of Wastewater
                                        Connection Fees
103.03 Wastewater System Connection Fee 103.07 Effect of Schedule
District
103.04 Wastewater Connection Fees       103.08 Violations
 
103.01   DEFINITIONS.
For purposes of this chapter, the following terms are defined:
1.   “Municipal wastewater system” means the facilities and services provided
by the City in providing wastewater collection and treatment to its customers
and the City.
2.   “Wastewater System Connection Fee District” means the geographic area
established in Section
103.03 within which a wastewater connection fee shall be imposed.
3.   “Wastewater system improvements” means the construction of a wastewater
treatment facility, constructed on West Elm Street in the City, and related
improvements to the municipal wastewater system.
103.02   WASTEWATER SYSTEM IMPROVEMENTS.
In response to, and anticipation of, the demands placed upon the Municipal
Wastewater System by ongoing growth and development, the City has constructed
improvements to the wastewater treatment facility. The City hereby finds that
the wastewater system improvements are necessary to extend wastewater service
to properties serving as the site for new development in the City.
103.03   WASTEWATER SYSTEM CONNECTION FEE DISTRICT.
The Wastewater System Connection Fee District is hereby established, and shall
include the following real property situated in the City:
All real property within the incorporated boundaries of the City of Solon as of
October 1, 2014, and all real property in the unincorporated areas lying within
two miles of said boundaries. All properties covered under existing agreements
relating to said improvements are excluded from the Wastewater System
Connection Fee District.
103.04   WASTEWATER CONNECTION FEES.
Wastewater connection fees are hereby established and shall be imposed on
owners of properties lying within the Wastewater System Connection Fee District
at the time of application by said owners to connect their properties to the
Municipal Wastewater System.
103.05   WASTEWATER CONNECTION APPLICATIONS.
Applications by property owners within the Wastewater System Connection Fee
District for connection of their property to the Municipal Wastewater System
shall be due at the time of submission of an application for a building permit
relative to the property for which the connection is sought.
103.06   SCHEDULE OF WASTEWATER CONNECTION FEES.
1.   Wastewater connection fees shall be due at the time of submission of a
Wastewater Connection Application as described in Section
103.05. Issuance of building permits shall not occur until such time as any and
all fees have been paid in full.
2.   Fees shall be based upon an infrastructure cost estimate for the proposed
project improvements (the “Infrastructure Cost Estimate”) and an allocation of
the same based on the equitable costs of extending service from the Municipal
Wastewater System to the property for which connection is sought. From the
effective date of this chapter, fees shall be imposed in the following amounts:
A.   For single-family residential properties within the Wastewater System
Connection Fee District - $1,739.98 per unit to be served by the connection to
the Municipal Wastewater System.
B.   For multi-family residential properties within the Wastewater System
Connection Fee District - $599.28 per bedroom for each unit to be served by the
connection to the Municipal Wastewater System.
C.   For hotel or motel properties within the Wastewater System Connection Fee
District - $372.85 per room to be served by the connection to the Municipal
Wastewater System.
D.   For school properties within the Wastewater System Connection Fee District
- $49.71 per seat to be served by the connection to the Municipal Wastewater
System.
E.   For office buildings within the Wastewater System Connection Fee District
- $49.71 per 200 SF of office space to be served by the connection to the
Municipal Wastewater System.
F.   For commercial or industrial properties within the Wastewater System
Connection Fee District - the City will establish a cost per fixture unit (as
defined in the 2003 International Building Code) on the property based on the
anticipated daily water usage for the property. The cost per fixture unit will
be based on a rate of $4.97 per gallon of water.
1.   The Council reserves the right to grant variances from this schedule of
fees.
103.07   EFFECT OF SCHEDULE.
The schedule of wastewater connection fees detailed in Section 103.06 will be
reviewed annually by an engineering firm selected by the City for said purpose
and adjusted, as of January 1 of each year from and after January 1, 2015, in
accordance with the Engineering News Record Cost Index or to reflect actual
construction costs, as applicable, for the appropriate period of time and
thereafter shall be presented to the Council for approval. After approval of
the same by the Council, a copy of the most recent infrastructure cost
estimate, as so adjusted, and the resulting allocation, certified by said
engineering firm, shall be available for public inspection at the office of the
Clerk during normal business hours. Each such adjusted infrastructure cost
estimate shall apply and become effective for purposes of this chapter from and
after the date of approval by the Council of the ordinance codified in this
chapter.
103.08   VIOLATIONS.
Any person who violates the provisions of this chapter shall subject their
property to immediate discontinuance of wastewater service until such violation
has been corrected by payment of the appropriate amount. Nothing herein shall
restrict the City from seeking any remedy in law or in equity against any
person or entity in violation of the provisions of this chapter.
CHAPTER 104
NORTH TRUNK SEWER CONNECTION FEE DISTRICT
 
104.01 Definitions                    104.05 North Trunk Connection
                                      Applications
104.02 North Trunk Sewer Improvements 104.06 Schedule of North Trunk Connection
                                      Fees
104.03 North Trunk Connection Fee     104.07 Effect of Schedule
District
104.04 North Trunk Connection Fees    104.08 Violations
 
104.01   DEFINITIONS.
For purposes of this chapter, the following terms are defined:
1.   “Municipal wastewater system” means the facilities and services provided
by the City in providing wastewater collection and treatment to its customers
and the City.
2.   “North Trunk Sewer Connection Fee District” shall mean the geographic area
established in Section
104.03 of this chapter within which a wastewater connection fee shall be
imposed.
3.   “North trunk sewer improvements” means the construction of a sanitary
trunk sewer constructed along Mill Creek extending from the wastewater
treatment facility, located on West Elm Street in the City, to the east side of
State Highway 1.
104.02   NORTH TRUNK SEWER IMPROVEMENTS.
In response to, and anticipation of, the demands placed upon the Municipal
Wastewater System by ongoing growth and development, the City has constructed
improvements to the wastewater treatment facility. The City hereby finds that
the north trunk sewer improvements are necessary to extend wastewater service
to properties serving as the site for new development in the City..
104.03   NORTH TRUNK CONNECTION FEE DISTRICT.
The North Trunk Connection Fee District is hereby established, and shall
include the following real property situated in the City:
All real property within the incorporated boundaries of the City of Solon as of
October 1, 2014, and all real property in the unincorporated areas lying within
two miles of said boundaries. All properties covered under existing agreements
relating to said improvements are excluded from the North Trunk Sewer
Connection Fee District.
104.04   NORTH TRUNK CONNECTION FEES.
North trunk connection fees are hereby established and shall be imposed on
owners of properties lying within the North Trunk Sewer Connection Fee District
at the time of application by said owners to connect their properties to the
municipal wastewater system.
104.05   NORTH TRUNK CONNECTION APPLICATIONS.
Applications by property owners within the North Trunk Sewer Connection Fee
District for connection of their property to the Municipal Wastewater System
shall be due at the time of submission of an application for a building permit
relative to the property for which the connection is sought.
104.06   SCHEDULE OF NORTH TRUNK CONNECTION FEES.
1.   North trunk connection fees shall be due at the time of submission of a
Wastewater Connection Application as described in Section
104.05. Issuance of building permits shall not occur until such time as any and
all fees have been paid in full.
2.   Fees shall be based upon an infrastructure cost estimate for the proposed
project improvements (the “Infrastructure Cost Estimate”) and an allocation of
the same based on the equitable costs of extending service from the Municipal
Wastewater System to the property for which connection is sought. From the
effective date of this chapter, fees shall be imposed in the following amounts:
A.   For single-family residential properties within the North Trunk Sewer
Connection Fee District - $350.00 per unit to be served by the connection to
the North Trunk sewer.
B.   For multi-family residential properties within the North Trunk Sewer
Connection Fee District - $112.50 per bedroom for each unit to be served by the
connection to the North Trunk sewer.
C.   For hotel or motel properties within the North Trunk Sewer Connection Fee
District - $75.00 per room to be served by the connection to the North Trunk
sewer.
D.   For school properties within the North Trunk Sewer Connection Fee District
- $10.00 per seat to be served by the connection to the North Trunk sewer.
E.   For office buildings within the North Trunk Sewer Connection Fee District
- $10.00 per 200 SF of office space to be served by the connection to the North
Trunk sewer.
F.   For commercial or industrial properties within the North Trunk Sewer
Connection Fee District - the City will establish a cost per fixture unit (as
defined in the 2003 International Building Code) on the property based on the
anticipated daily water usage for the property. The cost per fixture unit will
be based on a rate of $0.25 per gallon of water.
1.   The Council reserves the right to grant variances from this schedule of
fees.
104.07   EFFECT OF SCHEDULE.
The schedule of North Trunk connection fees detailed in Section
104.06 will be reviewed annually by an engineering firm selected by the City
for said purpose and adjusted, as of January 1 of each year from and after
January 1, 2015, in accordance with the Engineering News Record Cost Index or
to reflect actual construction costs, as applicable, for the appropriate period
of time and thereafter shall be presented to the Council for approval. After
approval of the same by the Council, a copy of the most recent infrastructure
cost estimate, as so adjusted, and the resulting allocation, certified by said
engineering firm, shall be available for public inspection at the office of the
Clerk during normal business hours. Each such adjusted infrastructure cost
estimate shall apply and become effective for purposes of this chapter from and
after the date of approval by the Council of the ordinance codified in this
chapter.
104.08   VIOLATIONS.
Any person who violates the provisions of this chapter shall subject their
property to immediate discontinuance of wastewater service until such violation
has been corrected by payment of the appropriate amount. Nothing herein shall
restrict the City from seeking any remedy in law or in equity against any
person or entity in violation of the provisions of this chapter.
CHAPTER 105
SOLID WASTE CONTROL
 
105.01 Purpose                           105.07 Littering Prohibited
105.02 Definitions                       105.08 Toxic and Hazardous Waste
105.03 Sanitary Disposal Required        105.09 Waste Storage Containers
105.04 Health and Fire Hazard            105.10 Prohibited Practices
105.05 Open Burning Restricted           105.11 Sanitary Disposal Project
                                         Designated
105.06 Separation of Yard Waste Required  
 
105.01   PURPOSE.
The purpose of the chapters in this Code pertaining to Solid Waste Control and
Collection is to provide for the sanitary storage, collection, and disposal of
solid waste and, thereby, to protect the citizens of the City from such hazards
to their health, safety, and welfare as may result from the uncontrolled
disposal of solid waste.
105.02   DEFINITIONS.
For use in these chapters the following terms are defined:
1.   “Collector” means any person authorized to gather solid waste from public
and private places.
2.   “Discard” means to place, cause to be placed, throw, deposit, or drop.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 455B.361(1))
3.   “Dwelling unit” means any room or group of rooms located within a
structure and forming a single habitable unit with facilities that are used or
are intended to be used for living, sleeping, cooking, and eating.
4.   “Garbage” means all solid and semisolid, putrescible animal and vegetable
waste resulting from the handling, preparing, cooking, storing, serving, and
consuming of food or of material intended for use as food, and all offal,
excluding useful industrial by- products, and includes all such substances from
all public and private establishments and from all residences.
(567 IAC 100.2)
5.   “Landscape waste” means any vegetable or plant waste except garbage. The
term includes trees, tree trimmings, branches, stumps, brush, weeds, leaves,
grass, shrubbery, and yard trimmings.
(567 IAC 20.2)
6.   “Litter” means any garbage, rubbish, trash, refuse, waste materials, or
debris not exceeding 10 pounds in weight or 15 cubic feet in volume. Litter
includes, but is not limited, to empty beverage containers, cigarette butts,
food waste packaging, other food or candy wrappers, handbills, empty cartons,
or boxes.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 455B.361(2))
7.   “Owner” means, in addition to the record titleholder, any person residing
in, renting, leasing, occupying, operating, or transacting business in any
premises, and as between such parties the duties, responsibilities,
liabilities, and obligations hereinafter imposed shall be joint and several.
8.   “Refuse” means putrescible and non-putrescible waste, including but not
limited to garbage, rubbish, ashes, incinerator residues, street cleanings,
market and industrial solid waste, and sewage treatment waste in dry or
semisolid form.
(567 IAC 100.2)
9.   “Residential premises” means a single-family dwelling, duplex, and any
multiple-family dwelling where each unit has a front door directly to the
outside such as a side by side duplex or townhome style dwelling.
10.   “Residential waste” means any refuse generated on the premises as a
result of residential activities. The term includes landscape waste grown on
the premises or deposited thereon by the elements, but excludes garbage, tires,
trade wastes, and any locally recyclable goods or plastics.
(567 IAC 20.2)
11.   “Rubbish” means non-putrescible solid waste consisting of combustible and
non-combustible waste, such as ashes, paper, cardboard, tin cans, yard
clippings, wood, glass, bedding, crockery, or litter of any kind.
(567 IAC 100.2)
12.   “Sanitary disposal” means a method of treating solid waste so that it
does not produce a hazard to the public health or safety or create a nuisance.
(567 IAC 100.2)
13.   “Sanitary disposal project” means all facilities and appurtenances
(including all real and personal property connected with such facilities) that
are acquired, purchased, constructed, reconstructed, equipped, improved,
extended, maintained, or operated to facilitate the final disposition of solid
waste without creating a significant hazard to the public health or safety, and
which are approved by the Director of the State Department of Natural
Resources. “Sanitary disposal project” does not include a pyrolysis or
gasification facility as defined in Section 455B.301 of the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 455B.301)
14.   “Solid waste” means garbage, refuse, rubbish, and other similar discarded
solid or semisolid materials, including but not limited to such materials
resulting from industrial, commercial, agricultural, and domestic activities.
Solid waste may include vehicles, as defined by Section 321.1 of the Code of
Iowa. Solid waste does not include any of the following:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 455B.301)
A.   Hazardous waste regulated under the Federal Resource Conservation and
Recovery Act, 42 U.S.C. § 6921-6934.
B.   Hazardous waste as defined in Section 455B.411 of the Code of Iowa, except
to the extent that rules allowing for the disposal of specific wastes have been
adopted by the State Environmental Protection Commission.
C.   Source, special nuclear, or by-product material as defined in the Atomic
Energy Act of 1954, as amended to January 1, 1979.
D.   Petroleum contaminated soil that has been remediated to acceptable State
or federal standards.
E.   Steel slag which is a product resulting from the steel manufacturing
process and is managed as an item of value in a controlled manner and not as a
discarded material.
F.   Material that is legitimately recycled pursuant to Section 455D.4A of the
Code of Iowa.
G.   Post-use polymers or recoverable feedstocks that are any of the following:
(1)   Processed at a pyrolysis or gasification facility.
(2)   Held at a pyrolysis or gasification facility prior to processing to
ensure production is not interrupted.
1.   “Toxic and hazardous waste” means waste materials, including (but not
limited to) poisons, pesticides, herbicides, acids, caustics, pathological
waste, flammable or explosive materials, and similar harmful waste that
requires special handling and that must be disposed of in such a manner as to
conserve the environment and protect the public health and safety.
(567 IAC 100.2)
2.   “Yard waste” means any debris such as grass clippings, leaves, garden
waste, brush, and trees. Yard waste does not include tree stumps.
105.03   SANITARY DISPOSAL REQUIRED.
It is the duty of each owner to provide for the sanitary disposal of all refuse
accumulating on the owner’s premises before it becomes a nuisance. Any such
accumulation remaining on any premises for a period of more than 30 days shall
be deemed a nuisance and the City may proceed to abate such nuisances in
accordance with the provisions of
Chapter 50 or by initiating proper action in district court.
(Code of Iowa, Ch. 657)
105.04   HEALTH AND FIRE HAZARD.
It is unlawful for any person to permit to accumulate on any premises, improved
or vacant, or on any public place, such quantities of solid waste that
constitute a health, sanitation, or fire hazard.
105.05   OPEN BURNING RESTRICTED.
No person shall allow, cause, or permit open burning of combustible materials
where the products of combustion are emitted into the open air without passing
through a chimney or stack, except that open burning is permitted in the
following circumstances:
(567 IAC 23.2 and 100.2)
1.   Disaster Rubbish. The open burning of rubbish, including landscape waste,
for the duration of the community disaster period in cases where an officially
declared emergency condition exists, provided that the burning of any
structures or demolished structures is conducted in accordance with 40 CFR
Section 61.145.
(567 IAC 23.2(3)“a”)
2.   Trees and Tree Trimmings. The open burning of trees and tree trimmings at
a City-operated burning site, provided such burning is conducted in compliance
with the rules established by the State Department of Natural Resources.
(567 IAC 23.2(3)“b”)
3.   Flare Stacks. The open burning or flaring of waste gases, provided such
open burning or flaring is conducted in compliance with applicable rules of the
State Department of Natural Resources.
(567 IAC 23.2(3)“c”)
4.   Landscape Waste. The disposal by open burning of landscape waste
originating on the premises shall only be allowed on Tuesdays, Thursdays, and
Saturdays between the dates of April 1 through May 25, and October 1 through
November 25, from 7:00 a.m. through 7:00 p.m. However, the burning of landscape
waste produced in clearing, grubbing, and construction operations shall be
limited to areas located at least one-fourth mile from any building inhabited
by other than the landowner or tenant conducting the open burning. Rubber tires
shall not be used to ignite landscape waste.
5.   Recreational Fires. Open fires for cooking, heating, recreation, and
ceremonies, provided they comply with the limits for emission of visible air
contaminants established by the State Department of Natural Resources. Rubber
tires shall not be burned in a recreational fire.
(567 IAC 23.2(3)“e”)
6.   Training Fires. Fires set for the purpose of conducting bona fide training
of public or industrial employees in firefighting methods, provided that the
training fires are conducted in compliance with rules established by the State
Department of Natural Resources.
(567 IAC 23.2(3)“g”)
7.   Pesticide Containers and Seed Corn Bags. The disposal by open burning of
paper or plastic pesticide containers (except those formerly containing organic
forms of beryllium, selenium, mercury, lead, cadmium, or arsenic) and seed corn
bags resulting from farming activities occurring on the premises if burned in
accordance with rules established by the State Department of Natural Resources.
(567 IAC 23.2(3)“h”)
8.   Agricultural Structures. The open burning of agricultural structures if in
accordance with rules and limitations established by the State Department of
Natural Resources.
(567 IAC 23.2(3)“i”)
9.   Controlled Burning of a Demolished Building. The controlled burning of a
demolished building by the City, subject to approval of the Council, provided
that the controlled burning is conducted in accordance with rules and
limitations established by the State Department of Natural Resources.
(567 IAC 23.2(3) “j”)
10.   Variance. Any person wishing to conduct open burning of materials not
permitted herein may make application for a variance to the Director of the
State Department of Natural Resources.
(567 IAC 23.2(2))
105.06   SEPARATION OF YARD WASTE REQUIRED.
All yard waste shall be separated by the owner or occupant from all other solid
waste accumulated on the premises and shall be composted on the premises or
placed in bags with special yard waste stickers purchased from the City
attached and set out for collection. Regular trash shall not be placed in bags
with special yard waste stickers. Limbs and branches will be picked up with the
yard waste if they are cut into four-foot lengths and tied into bundles
weighing no more than 40 pounds.
105.07   LITTERING PROHIBITED.
No person shall discard any litter onto or in any water or land, except that
nothing in this section shall be construed to affect the authorized collection
and discarding of such litter in or on areas or receptacles provided for such
purpose. When litter is discarded from a motor vehicle, the driver of the motor
vehicle shall be responsible for the act in any case where doubt exists as to
which occupant of the motor vehicle actually discarded the litter.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 455B.363)
105.08   TOXIC AND HAZARDOUS WASTE.
No person shall deposit in a solid waste container or otherwise offer for
collection any toxic or hazardous waste. Such materials shall be transported
and disposed of as prescribed by the Director of the State Department of
Natural Resources.
(567 IAC 100.2)
(567 IAC 102.13(2) and 400 IAC 27.14(2))
105.09   WASTE STORAGE CONTAINERS.
Every person owning, managing, operating, leasing, or renting any premises,
dwelling unit, or any place where refuse accumulates shall use and maintain in
good order containers for refuse in accordance with the following:
1.   Container Specifications. Waste storage containers and recycle containers
shall be of sufficient capacity, fitted with fly-tight lid, leak proof, and
comply as follows:
A.   Residential. Each residential premises shall be provided two containers
known as carts. One cart will be for garbage and one cart of recycling. Carts
will be owned by the solid waste collector and assigned to each household. Bulk
storage containers are not permitted.
B.   Commercial. Every person owning, managing, operating, leasing, or renting
any commercial premises where an excessive amount of refuse accumulates and
where its storage in portable containers as required above is impractical,
shall maintain metal bulk storage containers approved by the City.
1.   Storage of Containers. Residential solid waste containers shall be stored
upon the residential premises. Commercial solid waste containers shall be
stored upon private property, unless the owner has been granted written
permission from the City to use public property for such purposes. The storage
site shall be well drained; fully accessible to collection equipment, public
health personnel, and fire inspection personnel. All owners of residential and
commercial premises shall be responsible for proper storage of all garbage and
yard waste to prevent materials from being blown or scattered around
neighboring yards and streets.
2.   Location of Containers for Collection. Containers for the storage of solid
waste awaiting collection shall be placed at the curb (or in the Main Street
business area or other designated area in the adjacent alley) by the owner or
occupant of the premises served. The Main Street business area and those areas
as approved by resolution of the Council are the only areas where alley pickup
is permitted. Bagged yard waste must be placed three to six feet from garbage
or other refuse. Containers or other solid waste placed at the curb line shall
not be so placed more than 12 hours in advance of the regularly scheduled
collection day and shall be promptly removed from the curb line following
collection.
3.   Nonconforming Containers. Solid waste placed in containers that are not in
compliance with the provisions of this section will not be collected.
4.   Stickers Required for Overflow Refuse. Residents shall purchase stickers
from the City which must be placed on bags and placed on top of the cart for
collection. Stickers may not be used in lieu of the cart program.
105.10   PROHIBITED PRACTICES.
It is unlawful for any person to:
1.   Unlawful Use of Containers. Deposit refuse in any solid waste containers
not owned by such person without the written consent of the owner of such
containers.
2.   Interfere with Collectors. Interfere in any manner with solid waste
collection equipment or with solid waste collectors in the lawful performance
of their duties as such, whether such equipment or collectors be those of the
City, or those of any other authorized waste collection service.
3.   Incinerators. Burn rubbish or garbage except in incinerators designed for
high temperature operation, in which solid, semisolid, liquid, or gaseous
combustible refuse is ignited and burned efficiently, and from which the solid
residues contain little or no combustible material, as acceptable to the
Environmental Protection Commission.
4.   Scavenging. Take or collect any solid waste that has been placed out for
collection on any premises, unless such person is an authorized solid waste
collector.
105.11   SANITARY DISPOSAL PROJECT DESIGNATED.
The sanitary landfill facilities operated by Johnson County are hereby
designated as the official “Public Sanitary Disposal Project” for the disposal
of solid waste produced or originating within the City.
CHAPTER 106
COLLECTION OF SOLID WASTE
 
106.01 Collection Service      106.06 Right of Entry
106.02 Collection Vehicles     106.07 Recycling
106.03 Loading                 106.08 Collector’s License
106.04 Frequency of Collection 106.09 Collection Fees
106.05 Bulky Rubbish           106.10 Lien for Nonpayment
 
106.01   COLLECTION SERVICE.
The collection of solid waste within the City shall be only by collectors
licensed by the City.
106.02   COLLECTION VEHICLES.
Vehicles or containers used for the collection and transportation of garbage
and similar putrescible waste or solid waste containing such materials shall be
leak-proof, durable, and of easily cleanable construction. They shall be
cleaned to prevent nuisances, pollution, or insect breeding and shall be
maintained in good repair.
(567 IAC 104.9)
106.03   LOADING.
Vehicles or containers used for the collection and transportation of any solid
waste shall be loaded and moved in such a manner that the contents will not
fall, leak, or spill therefrom, and shall be covered to prevent blowing or loss
of material. Where spillage does occur, the material shall be picked up
immediately by the collector or transporter and returned to the vehicle or
container and the area properly cleaned.
106.04   FREQUENCY OF COLLECTION.
All solid waste shall be collected from residential premises at least bi-weekly
each week and from commercial, industrial, and institutional premises as
frequently as may be necessary, but not less than once each week.
106.05   BULKY RUBBISH.
Bulky rubbish that is too large or heavy to be collected in the normal manner
of other solid waste may be collected by the collector upon request in
accordance with procedures established by the Council.
106.06   RIGHT OF ENTRY.
Solid waste collectors are hereby authorized to enter upon private property for
the purpose of collecting solid waste, as required by this chapter; however,
solid waste collectors shall not enter dwelling units or other residential
buildings.
106.07   RECYCLING.
It is hereby declared to be the policy of the City to encourage recycling of
solid waste. The City may contract for the collection of recyclables and may by
resolution provide additional rules and regulations governing recycling of
solid waste.
106.08   COLLECTOR’S LICENSE.
No person shall engage in the business of collecting, transporting, processing,
or disposing of solid waste other than waste produced by that person within the
City without first obtaining from the City an annual license in accordance with
the following:
1.   Application. Application for a solid waste collector’s license shall be
made to the Clerk and provide the following:
A.   Name and Address. The full name and address of the applicant and, if a
corporation, the names and addresses of the officers thereof.
B.   Equipment. A complete and accurate listing of the number and type of
collection and transportation equipment to be used.
C.   Collection Program. A complete description of the frequency, routes, and
method of collection and transportation to be used.
D.   Disposal. A statement as to the precise location and method of disposal or
processing facilities to be used.
1.   Insurance. No collector’s license shall be issued until and unless the
applicant, in addition to all other requirements set forth, shall file and
maintain with the City evidence of satisfactory public liability insurance
covering all operations of the applicant pertaining to such business and all
equipment and vehicles to be operated in the conduct thereof in the following
minimum amounts:
Bodily Injury:   $100,000.00 per person.
$300,000.00 per occurrence.
Property Damage:   $ 50,000.00
Each insurance policy required hereunder shall include as a part thereof
provisions requiring the insurance carrier to notify the City of the
expiration, cancellation, or other termination of coverage not less than 10
days prior to the effective date of such action.
2.   License Fee. A license fee in the amount of $10.00 shall accompany the
application. In the event the requested license is not granted, the fee paid
shall be refunded to the applicant.
3.   License Issued. If the Council, upon investigation, finds the application
to be in order and determines that the applicant will collect, transport,
process, or dispose of solid waste without hazard to the public health or
damage to the environment and in conformity with law and ordinance, the
requested license shall be issued to be effective for a period of one year from
the date approved.
4.   License Renewal. An annual license may be renewed simply upon payment of
the required fee, provided the applicant agrees to continue to operate in
substantially the same manner as provided in the original application, and
provided the applicant furnishes the Clerk with a current listing of vehicles,
equipment, and facilities in use.
5.   License Not Transferable. No license authorized by this chapter may be
transferred to another person.
6.   Owner May Transport. Nothing herein is to be construed so as to prevent
the owner from transporting solid waste accumulating upon premises owned,
occupied, or used by such owner, provided such refuse is disposed of properly
in an approved sanitary disposal project.
7.   Grading or Excavation Excepted. No license or permit is required for the
removal, hauling, or disposal of earth and rock material from grading or
excavation activities; however, all such materials shall be conveyed in tight
vehicles, trucks, or receptacles so constructed and maintained that none of the
material being transported spills upon any public right-of-way.
8.   Revocation of License. After giving a license 10 days written notice, the
Clerk may revoke any license issued under this chapter for any of the following
reasons:
A.   The licensee has made fraudulent or incorrect statements in the
application for the license, including any renewal thereof, to the City or
lawful representative of the City.
B.   The licensee has violated this Code of Ordinances or has otherwise
conducted business in an unlawful manner.
C.   The licensee has conducted business in such a manner as to endanger the
public health, safety, welfare, or public order.
The notice given to the licensee shall be in writing and served by ordinary
mail at the address listed in the licensee’s initial application. The licensee
may request a hearing before the Council and said request for hearing, if any,
shall be made by the licensee in writing to the Clerk within five days after
expiration of the 10-day notice period set forth above. The licensee shall be
responsible for all costs incurred by the City with regard to the requested
hearing.
106.09   COLLECTION FEES.
The collection and disposal of solid waste as provided by this chapter are
declared to be beneficial to the property served or eligible to be served and
there shall be levied and collected fees for the same, in accordance with the
following:
(Goreham vs. Des Moines, 1970, 179 NW 2nd, 449 (Iowa 1970))
1.   Refuse and Recycle Fees. The monthly fee for solid waste collection and
pickup of recyclable items for each dwelling unit of a multiple-family dwelling
as defined in residential premises shall have two choices as follows:
A.   Sixty-five gallon cart for weekly garbage pickup and weekly recycle pickup
for $18.50 per month.
B.   Thirty-five gallon cart of bi-weekly garbage pickup and weekly recycle
pickup for $12.50 per month.
1.   Payment of Bills. All fees are due and payable under the same terms and
conditions provided for payment of a combined service account as contained in
Section
92.04. Solid waste collection service may be discontinued in accordance with
the provisions contained in Section
92.05 if the combined service account becomes delinquent, and the provisions
contained in Section
92.08 relating to lien notices shall also apply in the event of a delinquent
account.
106.10   LIEN FOR NONPAYMENT.
Except as provided for in Section 92.07, the owner of the premises served and
any lessee or tenant thereof are jointly and severally liable for fees for
solid waste collection and disposal. Fees remaining unpaid and delinquent shall
constitute a lien upon the property or premises served and shall be certified
by the Clerk to the County Treasurer for collection in the same manner as
property taxes.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84)
CHAPTER 110
NATURAL GAS FRANCHISE
110.01 Franchise Granted           110.10 Information
110.02 Rights and Privileges       110.11 Applicable Regulations
110.03 Pipes and Mains             110.12 Term of Franchise
110.04 Construction and Management 110.13 Regulation and Enforcement
110.05 Excavation                  110.14 Franchise Fee
110.06 Utility Easement            110.15 Management Fees
110.07 Relocation Not Required     110.16 Termination
110.08 Relocation Reimbursement    110.17 Validity
110.09 Indemnification             110.18 Assignment
 
110.01   FRANCHISE GRANTED.
There is hereby granted to MidAmerican Energy Company, an Iowa corporation,
(hereinafter called “Company,”) and to its successors and assigns the right and
franchise to acquire, construct, erect, maintain, and operate in the City of
Solon, Iowa, (hereinafter called the “City,”) a gas distribution system, to
furnish natural gas along, under, and upon the right-of-way, streets, avenues,
alleys, and public places to serve customers within and without the City and to
furnish and sell natural gas to the City and its inhabitants. For the term of
this franchise, the Company is granted the right of eminent domain, the
exercise of which is subject to Council approval upon application by the
Company. This franchise shall be effective for a 25-year period from and after
the effective date of this ordinance. †
 
Notes
�† EDITOR’S NOTE: Ordinance No. 437, adopting a natural gas franchise for the
  City, was passed and adopted on July 19, 2017.
110.02   RIGHTS AND PRIVILEGES.
The rights and privileges hereby granted are subject to the restrictions and
limitations of Chapter 364 of the Code of Iowa, or as subsequently amended or
changed.
110.03   PIPES AND MAINS.
Company shall have the right to excavate in any public street for the purpose
of laying, relaying, repairing, or extending gas pipes, mains, conduits, and
other facilities provided that the same shall be so placed as not to
unreasonably interfere with any above or below-ground utility services or
facilities which have been or may hereafter be located by or under authority of
the City.
110.04   CONSTRUCTION AND MANAGEMENT.
The Company shall, excluding facilities located in private easements (whether
titled in Company exclusively or in Company and other entities), in accordance
with State law including Company’s tariff on file with and made effective by
the Iowa Utilities Board as may subsequently be amended (“Tariff,”) at its cost
and expense, locate and relocate its existing facilities or equipment in, on,
over, or under any public street or alley in the City in such a manner as the
City may reasonably require for the purposes of facilitating the construction,
reconstruction, maintenance, or repair of the street or alley. Relocation
expenses for other hard surfaces, including pedestrian and nonmotorized vehicle
pathways, will be paid by the City. If the City has a reasonable alternative
route for the street, alley, or public improvements or an alternative
construction method, which would not cause the relocation of the Company
installations, the City shall select said alternative route or construction
method. The City shall be responsible for surveying and staking the right-of-
way for City projects that require the Company to relocate Company facilities.
If requested, the City shall provide, at no cost to the Company, copies of its
relocation plan and profile and cross-section drawings. If tree and vegetation
removal must be completed by the City as part of the City’s project and are
necessary whether or not utility facilities must be relocated, the City, at its
own cost, shall be responsible for said removals. If the timing of the tree or
vegetation removal does not coincide with the Company facilities relocation
schedule and Company must remove trees or vegetation that are included in the
City’s portion of the project, the City shall either remove the material at its
cost or reimburse the Company for the expenses incurred to remove said
vegetation or trees. If project funds from a source other than the City are
available to pay for the relocation of utility facilities, the City shall
attempt to secure said funds and provide them to the Company to compensate the
Company for the costs of relocation.
110.05   EXCAVATION.
In making excavations in any streets, avenues, alleys, and public places for
the installation of gas pipes, conduits, or apparatus, Company shall not
unreasonably obstruct the use of the streets and shall replace the surface,
restoring it to the condition as existed immediately prior to excavation.
Company agrees any replacement of road surface shall conform to current City
Code regarding its depth and composition. The Company shall not be required to
restore or modify public right-of-way, sidewalks, or other areas in or adjacent
to the Company project to a condition superior to its immediate previously
existing condition or to a condition exceeding its previously existing
condition to the extent any alterations are required for the City to comply
with City, State, or federal rules, regulations, or laws.
110.06   UTILITY EASEMENT.
The City’s vacating a street, avenue, alley, public ground, or public right-of-
way shall not deprive the Company of its right to operate and maintain existing
facilities on, below, above, or beneath the vacated property. Prior to the City
abandoning or vacating any street, avenue, alley, or public ground where the
Company has facilities in the vicinity, the City shall provide Company with not
less than 60 days advance notice of the City’s proposed action and, upon
request, grant the Company a utility easement covering existing and future
facilities and activities.
110.07   RELOCATION NOT REQUIRED.
The Company shall not be required to relocate, at its cost and expense, Company
facilities in the public right-of-way that have been relocated at Company
expense at the direction of the City at any time during the previous 10 years.
110.08   RELOCATION REIMBURSEMENT.
Pursuant to relocation of Company facilities as may be required hereunder, if
the City orders or requests the Company to relocate its existing facilities or
equipment in order to directly or indirectly facilitate the project of a
commercial or private developer or other non-public entity, City shall
reimburse or the City shall require the developer or non-public entity to
reimburse the Company for the cost of such relocation as a precondition to
relocation. The Company shall not be required to relocate in order to
facilitate such private project at its expense.
110.09   INDEMNIFICATION.
The Company shall indemnify and save harmless the City from any and all claims,
suits, losses, damages, costs, or expenses, on account of injury or damage to
any person or property, to the extent caused or occasioned by the Company’s
negligence in construction, reconstruction, excavation, operation, or
maintenance of the natural gas facilities authorized by this franchise;
provided, however, that the Company shall not be obligated to defend,
indemnify, and save harmless the City for any costs or damages to the extent
arising from the negligence of the City, its officers, employees, or agents.
110.10   INFORMATION.
Upon reasonable request, the Company shall provide the City, on a project
specific basis, information indicating the horizontal location, relative to
boundaries of the right-of-way, of all equipment which it owns or over which it
has control that is located in the public right-of-way, including documents,
maps, and other information in paper or electronic or other forms
(“Information”). The Company and City recognize the Information may, in whole
or part, be considered a confidential record under State or federal law or
both. Upon receipt of a request from a third party for information concerning
information about the Company’s facilities within the City, the City will
promptly submit same to Company. If the Company believes any of the information
requested constitutes a trade secret which may otherwise be protected from
public disclosure by State or federal law, or otherwise exempt from disclosure
under the provisions of the Freedom of Information Act, the Federal Energy
Regulatory Commission Critical Energy Infrastructure requirements pursuant to
18 CFR 388.112 and 388.113, or Chapter 22 of the Code of Iowa, as such statutes
and regulations may be amended from time to time, then the Company shall
provide the City with a written explanation of the basis for such assertion of
confidentiality or exemption from disclosure within 10 days.
110.11   APPLICABLE REGULATIONS.
The Company shall extend its mains and pipes and operate and maintain the
system in accordance with the applicable regulations of the Iowa Utilities
Board or its successors and State law.
110.12   TERM OF FRANCHISE.
During the term of this franchise, the Company shall furnish natural gas in the
quantity and quality consistent and in accordance with the applicable
regulations of the Iowa Utilities Board, the Company’s tariff made effective by
the Iowa Utilities Board or its successors, and State law.
110.13   REGULATION AND ENFORCEMENT.
All reasonable and proper police regulations shall be adopted and enforced by
the City for the protection of the facilities of the Company.
110.14   FRANCHISE FEE.
A franchise fee of zero percent is imposed upon, and shall be collected from,
the natural gas customers of the Company receiving service and located within
the corporate limits of the City. The franchise fee shall be imposed upon the
gross receipts, minus uncollectible accounts, generated from sales of natural
gas and distribution service:
1.   The City agrees to modify the level of franchise fees imposed only once in
any 24-month period.
2.   The Company will commence collecting franchise fees on or before the first
Company billing cycle of the first calendar month following 90 days of receipt
of information required of the City to implement the franchise fee, including
the City’s documentation of customer classes subject to or exempted from City-
imposed franchise fee.
3.   The City shall be solely responsible for identifying customer classes
subject to or exempt from paying the City imposed franchise fee. The Company
shall have no obligation to collect franchise fees from customers in annexed
areas until and unless such ordinances have been provided to the Company by
certified mail. The Company shall commence collecting franchise fees in the
annexed areas no sooner than 60 days after receiving annexation ordinances from
the City.
4.   The Company shall not, under any circumstances, be required to return or
refund any franchise fees that have been collected from customers and remitted
to the City. In the event the Company is required to provide data or
information in defense of the City’s imposition of franchise fees, or the
Company is required to assist the City in identifying customers, or calculating
any franchise fee refunds for groups of or individual customers, the City shall
reimburse the Company for the expenses incurred by the Company to provide such
data or information.
110.15   MANAGEMENT FEES.
Upon implementation of a franchise fee, the City shall not, pursuant to Chapter
480A.6 of the Code of Iowa, impose or charge Company right-of-way management
fees for permits for Company construction, maintenance, repairs, excavation,
pavement cutting, or inspections of Company work sites and projects or related
matters.
110.16   TERMINATION.
Either City or Company (“party”) may terminate this franchise if the other
party shall be materially in breach of its provisions. Upon the occurrence of a
material breach, the non-breaching party shall provide the breaching party with
notification by certified mail specifying the alleged breach. The breaching
party shall have 60 days to cure the breach, unless it notifies the non-
breaching party, and the parties agree upon a shorter or longer period for
cure. If the breach is not cured within the cure period, the non-breaching
party may terminate this franchise. A party shall not be considered to be in
breach of this franchise if it has operated in compliance with State or federal
law. A party shall not be considered to have breached this franchise if the
alleged breach is the result of the actions of a third party or the other
party.
110.17   VALIDITY.
If any section, provision, or part of this chapter shall be adjudged to be
invalid or unconstitutional, such adjudication shall not affect the validity of
the chapter as a whole or any section, provision, or part thereof not adjudged
invalid or unconstitutional.
110.18   ASSIGNMENT.
This ordinance and the rights and privileges herein granted shall become
effective and binding upon its approval and passage in accordance with State
law and the written acceptance by the Company. The City shall provide Company
with an original signed and sealed copy of this ordinance within 10 days of its
final passage. The Company shall, within 30 days after the Council approval of
this ordinance, file in the office of the Clerk, its acceptance in writing of
all the terms and provisions of this ordinance. Following Council approval,
this ordinance shall be published in accordance with the Code of Iowa. The
effective date of this ordinance shall be the date of publication. In the event
that the Company does not file its written acceptance of this ordinance within
30 days after its approval by the Council this ordinance shall be void and of
no effect.
CHAPTER 111
ELECTRIC FRANCHISE
111.01 Franchise Granted                   111.09 Ordinances Repealed
111.02 Construction of Distribution System 111.10 Franchise Fee
111.03 Excavation                          111.11 Management Fees
111.04 Extend Distribution Lines           111.12 Term of Franchise
111.05 Right to Supply                     111.13 Expense of Publication
111.06 Applicability                       111.14 Validity
111.07 Indemnification                     111.15 Entire Agreement
111.08 Publication                          
 
111.01   FRANCHISE GRANTED.
The City hereby grants unto Interstate Power and Light Company, a State
corporation, its successors and assigns, herein called the Company, a non-
exclusive franchise and right, for a period of 25 years from and after the date
this chapter becomes effective, to erect, construct, reconstruct, maintain, and
operate within the corporate limits of said City, as the same now are or
hereafter may be located and extended, a power plant or plants for the
generation of electricity or a system or systems for the distribution of
electricity, whether said power plant or plants and distribution systems have
been theretofore or hereafter may be constructed, together with the franchise
and right to enter upon and to use and occupy the streets, avenues, alleys,
bridges, and other public places of said City as the same now are or hereafter
may be located or extended, for the purpose of constructing, reconstructing,
maintaining, and operating thereon, therein, thereunder, thereover, said
systems for the distribution of electricity, consisting of poles, wires,
cables, conduits, and other equipment, appurtenances, and construction
necessary or incident to said systems, and together with the franchise and
right to supply, distribute, and sell electric energy to said City and to the
inhabitants thereof and others within and without the corporate limits of said
City for any and all purposes, and upon such terms and conditions and under
such restrictions and regulations as are herein contained, and such other
reasonable rules and regulations as hereafter may be provided by the Iowa
Utilities Board or its successors. Also the right of eminent domain as provided
in Section 364.2 of the Code of Iowa. †
 
Notes
�† EDITOR’S NOTE: Ordinance No. 416, adopting an electric franchise for the
  City, was passed and adopted on July 2, 2014.
111.02   CONSTRUCTION OF DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM.
The construction of said distribution system shall be in accordance with the
specifications of the National Electrical Safety Code issued by the United
States Department of Commerce, Bureau of Standards, as approved by the rule-
making body having jurisdiction thereof. All poles, wires, cables, conduits,
and other equipment, appurtenances, and construction connected therewith shall
be located, erected, adjusted, and maintained so as not to interfere
unreasonably with any improvements the City may deem proper to make, or to
hinder unnecessarily or obstruct the free use of the streets, avenues, alleys,
bridges, or other public places.
111.03   EXCAVATION.
Whenever the Company, in erecting, constructing, or maintaining said
distribution systems, shall take up or disturb any pavement or sidewalk or make
any excavations in the streets, avenues, alleys, bridges, or public places of
said City, such excavations shall at once be refilled and pavement, sidewalk,
or other improvement replaced to the reasonable satisfaction of the City
officials.
111.04   EXTEND DISTRIBUTION LINES.
The Company shall extend its distribution lines for each applicant for light,
power, or electric current as provided by the most current extension rules
promulgated by the governing regulatory body.
111.05   RIGHT TO SUPPLY.
Said Company shall have the right to supply, distribute, and sell electricity
for any and all purposes to said City and to the inhabitants thereof, and to
charge therefor such just and reasonable rates as hereafter may be fixed and
determined by the rate-making body established under the laws of the State and
given jurisdiction thereof.
111.06   APPLICABILITY.
All of the provisions of this chapter shall apply to the successors or assigns
of the Company with the same force and effect as they do the Company itself.
111.07   INDEMNIFICATION.
The Company shall indemnify and hold harmless the City against any and all
causes of action, litigation, costs, or damages (and shall pay the City’s
reasonable attorney’s fees) which may arise through or by reason of the
construction, reconstruction, maintenance, and operations of said distribution
systems or other construction hereby authorized.
111.08   PUBLICATION.
The Company shall, within 60 days after the publication of this chapter,
signify in writing an acceptance of the grant therein, including the conditions
and restrictions herein expressed, and this chapter, and the franchise grants
herein, shall not be operative or binding until such acceptance is filled with
the Clerk.
111.09   ORDINANCES REPEALED.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances, insofar as they are indirect conflict
herewith, are hereby repealed.
111.10   FRANCHISE FEE.
If, during the term of this franchise, said City wishes to consider the
assessment of a franchise fee pursuant to State law, said Company shall offer
to amend this franchise consistent with said Company’s then current standard
terms and conditions for franchise fees.
111.11   MANAGEMENT FEES.
The City shall not, pursuant to Chapter 480A.6 of the Code of Iowa, impose or
charge right-of-way management fees upon the Company or fees for permits for
Company construction, maintenance, repairs, excavation, pavement, cutting, or
inspections of Company work sites and projects or related matters.
111.12   TERM OF FRANCHISE.
The term of the franchise granted by this chapter and the rights granted
thereunder shall continue for the period of 25 years from and after its
acceptance by the said Company, as herein provided.
111.13   EXPENSE OF PUBLICATION.
The expense of the publication of this chapter shall be paid by the Company.
111.14   VALIDITY.
If any section or provision of this chapter is held invalid by a court of
competent jurisdiction, such holding shall not affect the validity of any other
provisions of this chapter which can be given effect without the invalid
portion or portions and to this end each section and provision of this chapter
is severable.
111.15   ENTIRE AGREEMENT.
This chapter sets forth and constitutes the entire agreement between the
Company and the City with respect to the rights contained herein, and may not
be supplemented, superseded, modified, or otherwise amended without the written
approval and acceptance of the Company. Notwithstanding the foregoing, in no
event shall the City enact any ordinance or place any limitations, either
operationally or through the assessment of fees other than those approved and
accepted by the Company within this chapter, that create additional burdens
upon the Company, or which delay utility operations.
[The next page is 993]
CHAPTER 120
LIQUOR LICENSES AND WINE AND BEER PERMITS
 
120.01 License or Permit Required 120.04 Action by Council
120.02 General Prohibition        120.05 Prohibited Sales and Acts
120.03 Investigation              120.06 Amusement Devices
 
120.01   LICENSE OR PERMIT REQUIRED.
No person shall manufacture for sale, import, sell, or offer or keep for sale,
alcoholic liquor, wine, or beer without first securing a retail alcohol
license, wine permit, or beer permit in accordance with the provisions of
Chapter 123 of the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.22, 123.122, and 123.171)
120.02   GENERAL PROHIBITION.
It is unlawful to manufacture for sale, sell, offer, or keep for sale, possess,
or transport alcoholic liquor, wine, or beer except upon the terms, conditions,
limitations, and restrictions enumerated in Chapter 123 of the Code of Iowa,
and a license or permit may be suspended or revoked or a civil penalty may be
imposed for a violation thereof.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.2, 123.39, and 123.50)
120.03   INVESTIGATION.
Upon receipt of an application for a retail alcohol license, the Clerk may
forward it to the Police Chief, who shall then conduct an investigation and
submit a written report as to the truth of the facts averred in the
application. The Fire Chief may also inspect the premises to determine if they
conform to the requirements of the City. The Council shall not approve an
application for a license for any premises that does not conform to the
applicable law and ordinances, resolutions, and regulations of the City.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.30)
120.04   ACTION BY COUNCIL.
The Council shall either approve or disapprove the issuance of a retail alcohol
license, shall endorse its approval or disapproval on the application, and
shall forward the application with the necessary fee and bond, if required, to
the State Department of Revenue.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.32(2))
120.05   PROHIBITED SALES AND ACTS.
A person holding a retail alcohol license and the person’s agents or employees
shall not do any of the following:
1.   Sell, dispense, or give to any intoxicated person, or one simulating
intoxication, any alcoholic beverage.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49(1))
2.   Sell or dispense any alcoholic beverage on the premises covered by the
license, or permit its consumption thereon between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and
6:00 a.m. on any day of the week.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49(2)(b))
3.   Sell alcoholic beverages to any person on credit, except with a bona fide
credit card. This provision does not apply to sales by a club to its members,
to sales by a hotel or motel to bona fide registered guests, or to retail sales
by the managing entity of a convention center, civic center, or events center.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49(2)©)
4.   Employ a person under 18 years of age in the sale or serving of alcoholic
beverages for consumption on the premises where sold, except as follows:
A.   Definitions. For use in this subsection the following terms are defined as
follows:
   (1)   “Bar” means an establishment where one may purchase alcoholic
beverages for consumption on the premises and in which the serving of food is
only incidental to the consumption of those beverages.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 142D.2(1))
   (2)   “Restaurant” means eating establishments, including private and public
school cafeterias, which offer food to the public, guests, or employees,
including the kitchen and catering facilities in which food is prepared on the
premises for serving elsewhere, and including a bar area within a restaurant.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 142D.2(17))
B.   This subsection shall not apply if the employer has, on file, written
permission from the parent, guardian, or legal custodian of a person 16 or 17
years of age for the person to sell or serve alcoholic beverages for
consumption on the premises where sold. However, a person 16 or 17 years of age
shall not work in a bar as defined in Paragraph A.
   (1)   The employer shall keep a copy of the written permission on file until
the person is either 18 years of age or no longer engaged in the sale of or
serving alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises where sold.
   (2)   If written permission is on file in accordance with Paragraph B, a
person 16 or 17 years of age may sell or serve alcoholic beverages in a
restaurant as defined above in Paragraph A during the hours in which the
restaurant serves food.
C.   A person 16 or 17 years of age shall not sell or serve alcoholic beverages
under this subsection unless at least two employees 18 years of age or older
are physically present in the area where alcoholic beverages are sold or
served.
D.   If a person employed under this subsection reports an incident of
workplace harassment to the employer or if the employer otherwise becomes aware
of such an incident, the employer shall report the incident to the employee’s
parent, guardian, or legal custodian and to the Iowa Civil Rights Commission,
which shall determine if any action is necessary or appropriate under Chapter
216 of the Code of Iowa.
E.   An employer that employs a person under this subsection shall require the
person to attend training on prevention and response to sexual harassment upon
commencing employment.
F.   Prior to a person commencing employment under this subsection, the
employer shall notify the employer’s dramshop liability insurer, in a form and
time period prescribed by the Director, that the employer is employing a person
under this subsection.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49(2)(f))
1.   In the case of a retail wine or beer permittee, knowingly allow the mixing
or adding of alcohol or any alcoholic beverage to wine, beer, or any other
beverage in or about the permittee’s place of business.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49(2)(i))
2.   Knowingly permit any gambling, except in accordance with Iowa law, or
knowingly permit any solicitation for immoral purposes, or immoral or
disorderly conduct on the premises covered by the license.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49(2)(a))
3.   Knowingly permit or engage in any criminal activity on the premises
covered by the license.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49(2)(j))
4.   Keep on premises covered by a retail alcohol license any alcoholic liquor
in any container except the original package purchased from the Iowa Department
of Revenue and except mixed drinks or cocktails mixed on the premises for
immediate consumption. However, mixed drinks or cocktails that are mixed on the
premises and are not for immediate consumption may be consumed on the licensed
premises, subject to Section 123.49, Subsection 2, Paragraph D, Subparagraphs
(2), (3), and (4) of the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49(2)(d)(2), (3), and (4))
5.   Reuse for packaging alcoholic liquor or wine any container or receptacle
used originally for packaging alcoholic liquor or wine; or adulterate, by the
addition of any substance, the contents, or remaining contents of an original
package of an alcoholic liquor or wine; or knowingly possess any original
package that has been reused or adulterated.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49(2)(e))
6.   Allow any person other than the licensee or employees of the licensee to
use or keep on the licensed premises any alcoholic liquor in any bottle or
other container that is designed for the transporting of such beverages, except
as allowed by State law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49(2)(g))
7.   Sell, give, possess, or otherwise supply a machine that is used to
vaporize an alcoholic beverage for the purpose of being consumed in a vaporized
form.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49(2)(k))
8.   Permit or allow any person under 21 years of age to remain upon licensed
premises unless over 50 percent of the dollar volume of the business
establishment comes from the sale and serving of prepared foods. This provision
does not apply to holders of a Class “B” beer permit or an establishment
employee when employed in compliance with State law.
9.   Permit any person to carry from a licensed premises any open container of
beer, wine, or alcoholic beverage, including, but not limited to, bottles,
cans, glasses, mugs, and cups, except when such carry-out is related to and
necessary for custodial, maintenance, and other bona fide employment purposes;
provided, however, nothing contained herein shall prevent any person from
carrying from said licensed premises any open container of beer, wine, or
alcoholic beverage to any area on the licensee’s premises specifically
designated as an area for consuming said beverages.
120.06   AMUSEMENT DEVICES.
The following provisions pertain to electrical or mechanical amusement devices
possessed and used in accordance with Chapter 99B of the Code of Iowa. (Said
devices are allowed only in premises with a retail alcohol license, as
specifically authorized in said Chapter 99B.)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 99B.57)
1.   As used in this section, “registered electrical or mechanical amusement
device” means an electrical or mechanical device required to be registered with
the Iowa Department of Inspection and Appeals, as provided in Section 99B.53 of
the Code of Iowa.
2.   It is unlawful for any person under the age of 21 to participate in the
operation of a registered electrical or mechanical amusement device.
3.   It is unlawful for any person owning or leasing a registered electrical or
mechanical amusement device, or an employee of a person owning or leasing a
registered electrical or mechanical amusement device, to knowingly allow a
person under the age of 21 to participate in the operation of a registered
electrical or mechanical amusement device.
4.   It is unlawful for any person to knowingly participate in the operation of
a registered electrical or mechanical amusement device with a person under the
age of 21.
CHAPTER 121
CIGARETTE AND TOBACCO PERMITS
 
121.01 Definitions     121.07 Expiration
121.02 Permit Required 121.08 Refunds
121.03 Application     121.09 Persons Under Legal Age
121.04 City Approval   121.10 Self-Service Sales Prohibited
121.05 Fees            121.11 Permit Revocation
121.06 Issuance         
 
121.01   DEFINITIONS.
For use in this chapter the following terms are defined:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 453A.1)
1.   “Alternative nicotine product” means a product, not consisting of or
containing tobacco, that provides for the ingestion into the body of nicotine,
whether by chewing, absorbing, dissolving, inhaling, snorting, or sniffing, or
by any other means. “Alternative nicotine product” does not include cigarettes,
tobacco products, or vapor products, or a product that is regulated as a drug
or device by the United States Food and Drug Administration under Chapter V of
the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act.
2.   “Cigarette” means any roll for smoking made wholly or in part of tobacco,
or any substitute for tobacco, irrespective of size or shape and irrespective
of tobacco or any substitute for tobacco being flavored, adulterated, or mixed
with any other ingredient, where such roll has a wrapper or cover made of paper
or any other material. However, cigarette shall not be construed to include
cigars.
3.   “Department” means the State Department of Revenue.
4.   “Place of business” means any place where cigarettes, tobacco products,
alternative nicotine products, or vapor products are sold, stored, or kept for
the purpose of sale or consumption by a retailer.
5.   “Retailer” means every person who sells, distributes, or offers for sale
for consumption, or possesses for the purpose of sale for consumption,
cigarettes, alternative nicotine products, or vapor products, irrespective of
the quantity or amount or the number of sales, or who engages in the business
of selling tobacco, tobacco products, alternative nicotine products, or vapor
products to ultimate consumers.
6.   “Self-service display” means any manner of product display, placement, or
storage from which a person purchasing the product may take possession of the
product, prior to purchase, without assistance from the retailer or employee of
the retailer, in removing the product from a restricted access location.
7.   “State permit” means and includes all permits issued by the department
under Chapter 453A of the Code of Iowa except the permits issued to retailers
approved by cities and counties pursuant to Section 453A.13 and 453.47A of the
Code of Iowa.
8.   “Tobacco products” means the following: cigars; little cigars; cheroots;
stogies; periques; granulated, plug cut, crimp cut, ready rubbed, and other
smoking tobacco; snuff; cavendish; plug and twist tobacco; fine-cut and other
chewing tobaccos; shorts or refuse scraps, clippings, cuttings, and sweepings
of tobacco; and other kinds and forms of tobacco prepared in such manner as to
be suitable for chewing or smoking in a pipe or otherwise, or for both chewing
and smoking, but does not mean cigarettes.
9.   “Vapor product” means any noncombustible product, which may or may not
contain nicotine, that employs a heating element, power source, electronic
circuit, or other electronic, chemical, or mechanical means, regardless of
shape or size, that can be used to produce vapor from a solution or other
substance. “Vapor product” includes an electronic cigarette, electronic cigar,
electronic cigarillo, electronic pipe, or similar product or device, and any
cartridge or other container of a solution or other substance, which may or may
not contain nicotine, that is intended to be used with or in an electronic
cigarette, electronic cigar, electronic cigarillo, electronic pipe, or similar
product or device. “Vapor product” does not include a product regulated as a
drug or device by the United States Food and Drug Administration under Chapter
V of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act.
121.02   PERMIT REQUIRED.
1.   Retail Cigarette Permits. It is unlawful for any person, other than a
holder of a retail permit, to sell cigarettes, alternative nicotine products,
or vapor products at retail and no retailer shall distribute, sell, or solicit
the sale of any cigarettes, alternative nicotine products, or vapor products
within the City without a valid permit for each place of business. The permit
shall, at all times, be publicly displayed at the place of business so as to be
easily seen by the public and the persons authorized to inspect the place of
business.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 453A.13(1))
2.   Retail Tobacco Permits. It is unlawful for any person to engage in the
business of a retailer of tobacco, tobacco products, alternative nicotine
products, or vapor products at any place of business without first having
received a permit as a retailer for each place of business owned or operated by
the retailer.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 453A.47A(1))
A retailer who holds a retail cigarette permit is not required to also obtain a
retail tobacco permit. However, if a retailer only holds a retail cigarette
permit and that permit is suspended, revoked, or expired, the retailer shall
not sell any tobacco, tobacco products, alternative nicotine products, or vapor
products, during such time.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 453A.47A(4))
121.03   APPLICATION.
A retailer shall submit to the department an application on forms furnished by
the department, accompanied by the required fees and adequate bond as provided
in Section 453A.14, of the Code of Iowa. Applications, any supporting
documentation, and the associated fees shall be submitted electronically to the
department.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 453A.13(5))
121.04   CITY APPROVAL.
The City shall approve retail permit applications for applicants with a place
of business within the City limits. The City shall use the electronic portal of
the department to process retail permit applications.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 453A.13(2))
121.05   FEES.
The fee for a retail cigarette or tobacco permit shall be as follows:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 453A.13 and 453A.47A)
 
FOR PERMITS GRANTED DURING:    FEE:
July, August, or September     $75.00
October, November, or December $56.25
January, February, or March    $37.50
April, May, or June            $18.75
 
121.06   ISSUANCE.
Upon approval of a retail permit application by the City the department shall
issue the permit to the applicant on behalf of the City. Each permit issued
shall describe clearly the place of business for which it is issued and shall
be nonassignable.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 453A.13(9))
121.07   EXPIRATION.
All permits shall expire on June 30 of each year. A permit shall not be granted
or issued until the applicant has paid the fees to the department for the next
period ending on June 30.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 453A.13(3)(a))
121.08   REFUNDS.
A retailer may surrender an unrevoked permit and receive a refund from the
City, except during April, May, or June, in accordance with the schedule of
refunds as provided in Section 453A.13 or 453A.47A of the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, 453A.13 and 453A.47A)
121.09   PERSONS UNDER LEGAL AGE.
A person shall not sell, give, or otherwise supply any tobacco, tobacco
products, alternative nicotine products, vapor products, or cigarettes to any
person under 21 years of age. The provision of this section includes
prohibiting a person under 21 years of age from purchasing tobacco, tobacco
products, alternative nicotine products, vapor products, and cigarettes from a
vending machine. If a retailer or employee of a retailer violates the
provisions of this section, the Council shall, after written notice and
hearing, and in addition to the other penalties fixed for such violation,
assess the following:
1.   For a first violation, the retailer shall be assessed a civil penalty in
the amount of $300.00. Failure to pay the civil penalty as ordered under this
subsection shall result in automatic suspension of the permit for a period of
14 days.
2.   For a second violation within a period of two years, the retailer shall be
assessed a civil penalty in the amount of $1,500.00 or the retailer’s permit
shall be suspended for a period of 30 days. The retailer may select its
preference in the penalty to be applied under this subsection.
3.   For a third violation within a period of three years, the retailer shall
be assessed a civil penalty in the amount of $1,500.00 and the retailer’s
permit shall be suspended for a period of 30 days.
4.   For a fourth violation within a period of three years, the retailer shall
be assessed a civil penalty in the amount of $1,500.00 and the retailer’s
permit shall be suspended for a period of 60 days.
5.   For a fifth violation within a period of four years, the retailer’s permit
shall be revoked.
The Clerk shall give 10 days’ written notice to the retailer by mailing a copy
of the notice to the place of business as it appears on the application for a
permit. The notice shall state the reason for the contemplated action and the
time and place at which the retailer may appear and be heard.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 453A.2, 453A.22, and 453A.36(6))
121.10   SELF-SERVICE SALES PROHIBITED.
Except for the sale of cigarettes through a cigarette vending machine as
provided in Section 453A.36(6) of the Code of Iowa, a retailer shall not sell
or offer for sale tobacco, tobacco products, alternative nicotine products,
vapor products, or cigarettes through the use of a self-service display.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 453A.36A)
121.11   PERMIT REVOCATION.
Following a written notice and an opportunity for a hearing, as provided by the
Code of Iowa, the Council may also revoke a permit issued pursuant to this
chapter for a violation of Division I of Chapter 453A of the Code of Iowa or
any rule adopted thereunder. If a permit is revoked, a new permit shall not be
issued to the permit holder for any place of business, or to any other person
for the place of business at which the violation occurred, until one year has
expired from the date of revocation, unless good cause to the contrary is shown
to the Council. The Clerk shall report the revocation or suspension of a retail
permit to the Iowa Department of Revenue within 30 days of the revocation or
suspension.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 453A.22)
CHAPTER 122
PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS, AND TRANSIENT MERCHANTS
122.01 Purpose                  122.10 Time Restriction
122.02 Definitions              122.11 Revocation of License
122.03 License Required         122.12 Hearing
122.04 Application for License  122.13 Record and Determination
122.05 License Fees             122.14 Appeal
122.06 Bond Required            122.15 Effect of Revocation
122.07 License Issued           122.16 Rebates
122.08 Display of License       122.17 License Exemptions
122.09 License Not Transferable 122.18 Charitable and Nonprofit Organizations
 
122.01   PURPOSE.
The purpose of this chapter is to protect residents of the City against fraud,
unfair competition, and intrusion into the privacy of their homes by licensing
and regulating peddlers, solicitors, and transient merchants.
122.02   DEFINITIONS.
For use in this chapter the following terms are defined:
1.   “Peddler” means any person carrying goods or merchandise who sells or
offers for sale for immediate delivery such goods or merchandise from house to
house or upon the public street.
2.   “Solicitor” means any person who solicits or attempts to solicit from
house to house or upon the public street any contribution or donation or any
order for goods, services, subscriptions, or merchandise to be delivered at a
future date.
3.   “Transient merchant” means any person who engages in a temporary or
itinerant merchandising business and in the course of such business hires,
leases, or occupies any building or structure whatsoever, or who operates out
of a vehicle that is parked anywhere within the City limits. Temporary
association with a local merchant, dealer, trader, or auctioneer, or conduct of
such transient business in connection with, as a part of, or in the name of any
local merchant, dealer, trader, or auctioneer does not exempt any person from
being considered a transient merchant.
122.03   LICENSE REQUIRED.
Any person engaging in peddling, soliciting, or in the business of a transient
merchant in the City without first obtaining a license as herein provided is in
violation of this chapter.
122.04   APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.
An application in writing shall be filed with the Clerk for a license under
this chapter. Such application shall set forth the applicant’s name, permanent
and local address, and business address, if any. The application shall also set
forth the applicant’s employer, if any, and the employer’s address, the nature
of the applicant’s business, the last three places of such business, and the
length of time sought to be covered by the license. An application fee of $2.00
shall be paid at the time of filing such application to cover the cost of
investigating the facts stated therein.
122.05   LICENSE FEES.
In addition to the application fee identified in Section
122.04, the following license fees shall be paid to the Clerk prior to the
issuance of any license.
1.   Solicitors. In addition to the application fee for each person actually
soliciting (principal or agent), a fee for the principal of $10.00 per year.
2.   Peddlers or Transient Merchants.
A.   For one day   $5.00
B.   For one week   $10.00
C.   For up to six months   $20.00
D.   For one year or major part thereof   $25.00
122.06   BOND REQUIRED.
Before a license under this chapter is issued to a transient merchant, an
applicant shall provide to the Clerk evidence that the applicant has filed a
bond with the Secretary of State in accordance with Chapter 9C of the Code of
Iowa.
122.07   LICENSE ISSUED.
If the Clerk finds the application is completed in conformance with the
requirements of this chapter, the facts stated therein are found to be correct,
and the license fee paid, a license shall be issued immediately.
122.08   DISPLAY OF LICENSE.
Each solicitor or peddler shall keep such license in possession at all times
while doing business in the City and shall, upon the request of prospective
customers, exhibit the license as evidence of compliance with all requirements
of this chapter. Each transient merchant shall display publicly such merchant’s
license in the merchant’s place of business.
122.09   LICENSE NOT TRANSFERABLE.
Licenses issued under the provisions of this chapter are not transferable in
any situation and are to be applicable only to the person filing the
application.
122.10   TIME RESTRICTION.
All peddler’s and solicitor’s licenses shall provide that said licenses are in
force and effect only between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m.
122.11   REVOCATION OF LICENSE.
Following a written notice and an opportunity for a hearing, the Clerk may
revoke any license issued pursuant to this chapter for the following reasons:
1.   Fraudulent Statements. The licensee has made fraudulent statements in the
application for the license or in the conduct of the business.
2.   Violation of Law. The licensee has violated this chapter or has otherwise
conducted the business in an unlawful manner.
3.   Endangered Public Welfare, Health, or Safety. The licensee has conducted
the business in such manner as to endanger the public welfare, safety, order,
or morals.
The Clerk shall send the written notice to the licensee at the licensee’s local
address. The notice shall contain particulars of the complaints against the
licensee, the ordinance provisions or State statutes allegedly violated, and
the date, time, and place for hearing on the matter.
122.12   HEARING.
The Clerk shall conduct a hearing at which both the licensee and any
complainants shall be present to determine the truth of the facts alleged in
the complaint and notice. Should the licensee, or authorized representative,
fail to appear without good cause, the Clerk may proceed to a determination of
the complaint.
122.13   RECORD AND DETERMINATION.
The Clerk shall make and record findings of fact and conclusions of law, and
shall revoke a license only when upon review of the entire record the Clerk
finds clear and convincing evidence of substantial violation of this chapter or
State law.
122.14   APPEAL.
If the Clerk revokes or refuses to issue a license, the Clerk shall make a part
of the record the reasons for such revocation or refusal. The licensee, or the
applicant, shall have a right to a hearing before the Council at its next
regular meeting. The Council may reverse, modify, or affirm the decision of the
Clerk by a majority vote of the Council members present and the Clerk shall
carry out the decision of the Council.
122.15   EFFECT OF REVOCATION.
Revocation of any license shall bar the licensee from being eligible for any
license under this chapter for a period of one year from the date of the
revocation.
122.16   REBATES.
Any licensee, except in the case of a revoked license, shall be entitled to a
rebate of part of the fee paid if the license is surrendered before it expires.
The amount of the rebate shall be determined by dividing the total license fee
by the number of days for which the license was issued and then multiplying the
result by the number of full days not expired. In all cases, at least $5.00 of
the original fee shall be retained by the City to cover administrative costs.
122.17   LICENSE EXEMPTIONS.
The following are excluded from the application of this chapter.
1.   Newspapers. Persons delivering, collecting for, or selling subscriptions
to newspapers.
2.   Club Members. Members of local civic and service clubs, Boy Scout, Girl
Scout, 4-H Clubs, Future Farmers of America, and similar organizations.
3.   Local Residents and Farmers. Local residents and farmers who offer for
sale their own products.
4.   Students. Students representing the Solon Community School District
conducting projects sponsored by organizations recognized by the school.
5.   Route Sales. Route delivery persons who only incidentally solicit
additional business or make special sales.
6.   Resale or Institutional Use. Persons customarily calling on businesses or
institutions for the purposes of selling products for resale or institutional
use.
7.   Minor Businesses. An on-site transactional business traditionally operated
exclusively by a person under the age of 18, operated on an occasional basis
for no more than 89 calendar days in a calendar year.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.3(15))
122.18   CHARITABLE AND NONPROFIT ORGANIZATIONS.
Authorized representatives of charitable or nonprofit organizations operating
under the provisions of Chapter 504 of the Code of Iowa desiring to solicit
money or to distribute literature are exempt from the operation of Sections
122.04 and
122.05. All such organizations are required to submit to the Clerk in writing
the name and purpose of the cause for which such activities are sought, names
and addresses of the officers and directors of the organization, the period
during which such activities are to be carried on, and whether any commissions,
fees, or wages are to be charged by the solicitor and the amount thereof. If
the Clerk finds that the organization is a bona fide charity or nonprofit
organization, the Clerk shall issue, free of charge, a license containing the
above information to the applicant. In the event the Clerk denies the
exemption, the authorized representatives of the organization may appeal the
decision to the Council, as provided in Section
122.14.
CHAPTER 123
HOUSE MOVERS
 
123.01 House Mover Defined 123.07 Public Safety
123.02 Permit Required     123.08 Time Limit
123.03 Application         123.09 Removal by City
123.04 Bond Required       123.10 Protect Pavement
123.05 Insurance Required  123.11 Overhead Wires
123.06 Permit Issued        
 
123.01   HOUSE MOVER DEFINED.
A “house mover” means any person who undertakes to move a building or similar
structure upon, over or across public streets or property when the building or
structure is of such size that it requires the use of skids, jacks, dollies, or
any other specialized moving equipment.
123.02   PERMIT REQUIRED.
It is unlawful for any person to engage in the activity of house mover as
herein defined without a valid permit from the City for each house, building,
or similar structure to be moved. Buildings of less than 100 square feet are
exempt from the provisions of this chapter.
123.03   APPLICATION.
Application for a house mover’s permit shall be made in writing to the Clerk on
a form provided by the City. The application shall include:
1.   Name and Address. The applicant’s full name and address and, if a
corporation, the names and addresses of its principal officers.
2.   Building Location. An accurate description of the present location and
future site of the building or similar structure to be moved.
3.   Routing Plan. A routing plan approved by the Mayor, Street Supervisor, and
public utility officials. The route approved shall be the shortest route
compatible with the greatest public convenience and safety.
123.04   BOND REQUIRED.
The applicant shall post with the Clerk a penal bond in the minimum sum of
$5,000.00 issued by a surety company authorized to issue such bonds in the
State. The bond shall guarantee the permittee’s payment for any damage done to
the City or to public property, and payment of all costs incurred by the City
in the course of moving the building or structure.
123.05   INSURANCE REQUIRED.
Each applicant shall also file a certificate of insurance indicating that the
applicant is carrying public liability insurance in effect for the duration of
the permit covering the applicant and all agents and employees for the
following minimum amounts:
1.   Bodily Injury – $50,000.00 per person; $100,000.00 per accident.
2.   Property Damage – $50,000.00 per accident.
123.06   PERMIT ISSUED.
Upon approval of the application and filing of bond and insurance certificate
the Clerk shall issue a permit.
123.07   PUBLIC SAFETY.
At all times when a building or similar structure is in motion upon any street,
alley, sidewalk, or public property, the permittee shall maintain flag persons
at the closest intersections or other possible channels of traffic to the
sides, behind, and ahead of the building or structure. At all times when the
building or structure is at rest upon any street, alley, sidewalk, or public
property the permittee shall maintain adequate warning signs or lights at the
intersections or channels of traffic to the sides, behind, and ahead of the
building or structure.
123.08   TIME LIMIT.
No house mover shall permit or allow a building or similar structure to remain
upon any street or other public way for a period of more than 12 hours without
having first secured the written approval of the City.
123.09   REMOVAL BY CITY.
In the event any building or similar structure is found to be in violation of
Section
123.08, the City is authorized to remove such building or structure and assess
the costs thereof against the permit holder and the surety on the permit
holder’s bond.
123.10   PROTECT PAVEMENT.
It is unlawful to move any house or building of any kind over any pavement,
unless the wheels or rollers upon which the house or building is moved are at
least one inch in width for each 1,000 pounds of weight of such building. If
there is any question as to the weight of a house or building, the estimate of
the City as to such weight shall be final.
123.11   OVERHEAD WIRES.
The holder of any permit to move a building shall see that all telephone, cable
television, and electric wires and poles are removed when necessary and
replaced in good order, and shall be liable for the costs of the same.
CHAPTER 124
SURVEILLANCE CAMERAS IN CONVENIENCE STORES
 
124.01 Definitions                  124.03 Exemptions
124.02 Surveillance Camera Required  
 
124.01   DEFINITIONS.
For purposes of this chapter, the following terms are defined:
1.   “Consumer products” means all food which is subject to sales tax and all
food which is not subject to sales tax under Chapter 422 of the Code of Iowa,
except foods prepared for immediate consumption.
2.   “Convenience store” means any business which sells at retail both gasoline
and more than 20 consumer products and which routinely remains open for
business 12 hours or more a day.
3.   “Surveillance camera” means a video tape camera or similar video recording
device.
124.02   SURVEILLANCE CAMERA REQUIRED.
Every convenience store shall be equipped with a functioning surveillance
camera during the hours of its operation when the store is open to the public.
The surveillance camera shall be positioned so as to film all persons entering
establishment or all person approaching within five feet of the cash register.
124.03   EXEMPTIONS.
A business which is required to install a surveillance camera by this chapter
may apply to the Council for exemption from or modification to the provisions
of this chapter. The Council may exempt a business from such requirement or
modify the terms of this chapter if it finds that the business has or will
undertake alternate security procedures which are substantially equal to or
more effective in preventing criminal activity and in assisting in the
apprehension of the perpetrators of crime or for the protection of employees.
CHAPTER 125
HOTEL OR MOTEL TAX
 
125.01 Definitions   125.04 Collection
125.02 Tax Imposed   125.05 Use of Revenues
125.03 Tax Exemption  
 
125.01   DEFINITIONS.
For purposes of this chapter, the following terms are defined:
1.   “Lodging” means rooms, apartments, or sleeping quarters in a hotel, motel,
inn, public lodging house, rooming house, or manufactured or mobile home which
is tangible personal property, or in a tourist court, or in any place where
sleeping accommodations are furnished to transient guests for rent, whether
with or without meals. Lodging does not include rooms that are not used for
sleeping accommodations.
2.   “Nonprofit lodging provider” means a nonprofit entity which is exempt from
federal income taxation pursuant to Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue
Code that maintains an established facility that provides lodging to friends
and family of a hospital patient during a time of medical need of the patient.
3.   “Renting” or “rent” means a transfer of possession or control of lodging
for a fixed or indeterminate term for consideration and includes any kind of
direct or indirect charge for such lodging or its use.
4.   “Sales price” means the consideration for renting of lodging and means the
same as the term is defined in Section 423.1 of the Code of Iowa.
All other words and phrases used in this chapter and defined in Section 423.1
of the Code of Iowa have the meaning given them by Section 423.1 for the
purposes of this chapter.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 423A.2)
125.02   TAX IMPOSED.
There is hereby imposed a seven percent local hotel and motel tax upon the
sales price from the renting of lodging within the City.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 423A.4)
125.03   TAX EXEMPTION.
All of the following are exempted from the provisions of this chapter and from
the computation of any amount of tax imposed by Section
125.02:
1.   The sales price from the renting of lodging to a person where the lodging
is rented by the same person for a period of more than 31 consecutive days,
except as provided in Subsection 2.
2.   The sales price from the renting of lodging to a person where the lodging
is rented by the same person for the period beginning after 90 consecutive days
of rental by such person, if the rental is a room, apartment, or sleeping
quarter in a hotel, motel, inn, public lodging house, or rooming house, or in
any place where sleeping accommodations are furnished to a transient guest.
3.   The sales price of lodging furnished to the guests of a religious
institution if the property is exempt under Section 427.1(8) of the Code of
Iowa, and the purpose of renting is to provide a place for a religious retreat
or function and not place for transient guests generally.
4.   The sales price from the renting of sleeping rooms in dormitories and in
memorial unions at all universities and colleges located in the City.
5.   The sales price of lodging furnished to the guests of a nonprofit lodging
provider and the purpose of renting is to provide a place for the friends and
family of a hospital patient during a time of medical need of the patient and
the length of stay is based upon the needs of the friends, family, or patient.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 423A.5)
125.04   COLLECTION.
The tax imposed in this chapter shall be remitted by the person or company
liable for same to the State Director of Revenue in the manner required by
State law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 423A.6)
125.05   USE OF REVENUES.
All revenue received by the City from the imposition of the hotel and motel tax
shall be deposited in the General Fund of the City and shall be used as
follows:
1.   At least 50 percent of the revenue derived from the hotel and motel tax
shall be spent for the acquisition of sites for, or constructing, improving,
enlarging, equipping, repairing, operating, or maintaining of recreation,
convention, cultural, or entertainment facilities including, but not limited
to, memorial buildings, halls, and monuments, civic center convention
buildings, auditoriums, coliseums, and parking areas or facilities located at
those recreation, convention, cultural, or entertainment facilities or the
payment of principal and interest, when due, on bonds or other evidence of
indebtedness issued by the City for those recreation, convention, cultural, or
entertainment facilities; of for the promotion and encouragement of tourist and
convention business in the City and surrounding areas.
2.   The remaining revenues may be spent by the City for any City operation
authorized by law as a proper purpose for the expenditure within statutory
limitations of City revenue derived from ad valorem taxes.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 423A.7)
CHAPTER 135
STREET USE AND MAINTENANCE
 
135.01 Removal of Warning Devices 135.08 Burning Prohibited
135.02 Obstructing or Defacing    135.09 Excavations
135.03 Placing Debris On          135.10 Property Owner’s Responsibility for
                                  Maintenance
135.04 Playing In                 135.11 Failure to Maintain
135.05 Traveling On Barricaded    135.12 Dumping of Snow
Street or Alley
135.06 Use for Business Purposes  135.13 Driveway Culverts
135.07 Washing Vehicles            
 
135.01   REMOVAL OF WARNING DEVICES.
It is unlawful for a person to willfully remove, throw down, destroy, or carry
away from any street or alley any lamp, obstruction, guard, or other article or
things, or extinguish any lamp or other light, erected, or placed thereupon for
the purpose of guarding or enclosing unsafe or dangerous places in said street
or alley without the consent of the person in control thereof.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.1)
135.02   OBSTRUCTING OR DEFACING.
It is unlawful for any person to obstruct, deface, or injure any street or
alley in any manner.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.1)
135.03   PLACING DEBRIS ON.
It is unlawful for any person to throw or deposit on any street or alley any
glass, glass bottle, nails, tacks, wire, cans, trash, garbage, rubbish, litter,
offal, leaves, grass, or any other debris likely to be washed into the storm
sewer and clog the storm sewer, or any substance likely to injure any person,
animal, or vehicle.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.369)
135.04   PLAYING IN.
It is unlawful for any person to coast, sled, or play games on streets or
alleys, except in the areas blocked off by the City for such purposes.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12(2))
135.05   TRAVELING ON BARRICADED STREET OR ALLEY.
It is unlawful for any person to travel or operate any vehicle on any street or
alley temporarily closed by barricades, lights, signs, or flares placed thereon
by the authority or permission of any City official, police officer, or member
of the Fire Department.
135.06   USE FOR BUSINESS PURPOSES.
It is unlawful to park, store, or place, temporarily or permanently, any
machinery or junk or any other goods, wares, and merchandise of any kind upon
any street or alley for the purpose of storage, exhibition, sale, or offering
same for sale, without permission of the Clerk.
135.07   WASHING VEHICLES.
It is unlawful for any person to use any public sidewalk, street, or alley for
the purpose of washing or cleaning any automobile, truck equipment, or any
vehicle of any kind when such work is done for hire or as a business. This does
not prevent any person from washing or cleaning their own vehicle or equipment
when it is lawfully parked in the street or alley.
135.08   BURNING PROHIBITED.
No person shall burn any trash, leaves, rubbish, or other combustible material
in any curb and gutter or on any paved or surfaced street or alley.
135.09   EXCAVATIONS.
No person shall dig, excavate, or in any manner disturb any street, parking, or
alley except in accordance with the following:
1.   Permit Required. No excavation shall be commenced without first obtaining
a permit. A written application for such permit shall be filed with the City
and shall contain the following:
A.   An exact description of the property, by lot and street number, in front
of or along which it is desired to excavate;
B.   A statement of the purpose, for whom and by whom the excavation is to be
made;
C.   The person responsible for the refilling of said excavation and
restoration of the street or alley surface; and
D.   Date of commencement of the work and estimated completion date.
1.   Public Convenience. Streets and alleys shall be opened in the manner that
will cause the least inconvenience to the public and admit the uninterrupted
passage of water along the gutter on the street.
2.   Barricades, Fencing, and Lighting. Adequate barricades, fencing, and
warning lights meeting standards specified by the City shall be so placed as to
protect the public from hazard. Any costs incurred by the City in providing or
maintaining adequate barricades, fencing, or warning lights shall be paid to
the City by the permit holder or property owner. On all local streets, a
minimum of one 10-foot traffic lane must be provided around the excavation,
plainly marked for visibility by motorists. On all arterial, collector, and
industrial streets, a minimum of two 10-foot traffic lanes (two-way traffic)
must be provided around the excavation, plainly marked for visibility by
motorists. If this is not possible, then one 10-foot traffic lane will be
allowed, provided that two flagmen are employed, one at each end of the
section, to direct traffic. A minimum of two 10-foot lanes (two-way traffic)
must again be provided during the hours of darkness. No variations to this
requirement will be permitted without special written permission from the Mayor
or Streets Supervisor.
3.   Bond Required. The applicant shall post with the City a penal bond in the
minimum sum of $5,000.00 issued by a surety company authorized to issue such
bonds in the State. The bond shall guarantee the permittee’s payment for any
damage done to the City or to public property, and payment of all costs
incurred by the City in the course of administration of this section. In lieu
of a surety bond, a cash deposit of $5,000.00 may be filed with the City.
4.   Insurance Required. Each applicant shall also file a certificate of
insurance indicating that the applicant is carrying public liability insurance
in effect for the duration of the permit covering the applicant and all agents
and employees for the following minimum amounts:
A.   Bodily Injury - $50,000.00 per person; $100,000.00 per accident.
B.   Property Damage - $50,000.00 per accident.
1.   Restoration of Public Property. Streets, sidewalks, alleys, and other
public property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored to the
condition of the property prior to the commencement of the work, or in a manner
satisfactory to the City, at the expense of the permit holder or property
owner. It is the duty of the applicant to replace the street or pavement within
30 days from the date the permit is issued under methods approved by the City
except when the ground is frozen and then in backfill with sand.
2.   Backfilling. Materials used for backfill within the street right-of-way
shall be backrun sand, lime chips, or excavated material. In any excavation
directly under a street, alley, drive, or sidewalk surface, the backfill
material shall be compacted in one-foot lifts to 90 percent of modified proctor
density as determined by ASSHO T-180. Backfill material in excavations in all
other areas within the street right-of-way shall be compacted in one-foot lifts
to 85 percent of modified proctor density. Compaction requirements will be
enforced by use of in-place density testing procedures.
3.   Repair Specifications.
A.   Concrete Pavement. The pavement around the excavation shall be cut into
with a concrete saw in straight lines to form a rectangle around the hole with
two sides of the rectangle parallel with the centerline of the street. The saw
cut shall be made no closer than six inches from the farthest extremity of the
hole and should extend to a depth of one and one- half inches. The concrete
shall be removed from the inside of the saw cut to leave a true and vertical
face to the depth of the saw cut and a fairly rough but approximately vertical
face below the depth of the saw cut. The excavation shall be graded such that
replacement concrete is exactly the same thickness as the existing pavement.
Such replacement shall be at minimum standards as required by City
specifications. The excavation shall be filled with a dry, low-slump concrete,
puddled well, float finished, and broom textured. The concrete mix to be used
shall be Iowa Department of Transportation Type M-3 with a minimum slump of
three inches and a maximum of 28-day compressive strength of 4,000 psi. If the
ambient air temperature is forecast to fall below 32 degrees Fahrenheit during
the first 24 hours after the concrete is poured, protection by covering for the
first 36 hours according to the following schedule shall be provided:
 
Night Temperature Forecast Covering
Minimum 32 degrees F       1 layer of plastic or burlap
Minimum 25 degrees F       1 layer of plastic and 1 layer of burlap or 2 layers
                           of burlap
Below 25 degrees F         6 inches of straw and 2 layers of burlap*
*Equivalent commercial insulating material approved by the engineer may be
substituted.
 
The concrete patch shall remain closed to vehicular traffic for a minimum of 24
hours (36 hours if cold weather procedures are used). The City may elect to
test concrete for compressive strength. Linseed oil requirements as specified
in general design and construction standards shall apply.
B.   Asphaltic Concrete or Sealcoat Pavement. The pavement around the
excavation shall be cut with a concrete saw in straight lines to form a
rectangle around the hole with two sides of the rectangle parallel with the
centerline of the street. The saw cut shall be made no closer than one foot
from the farthest extremity of the hole and should extend to a depth of one and
one-half inches. The asphaltic concrete or sealcoat material shall be removed
from the inside of the saw cut to leave a true and vertical face to the depth
of the saw cut and a fairly rough but approximately vertical face below the
depth of the saw cut. The excavation shall be graded such that the total
thickness of the patch will be exactly the same as the existing asphalt or
layer of sealcoat, or a minimum of three inches, in accordance with the City’s
design and construction standards. Asphaltic concrete shall then be placed in
layers not to exceed three inches in depth per layer and compacted in place
using a steel roller or mechanical tamper. The compacted surface shall be free
of ridges, marks, or bumps and shall be subject to approval or disapproval by
the City. The type of asphaltic concrete mix to be used shall be State
Department of Transportation Type A hot mix with a minimum aggregate size of
three- fourths inch. The patch shall remain closed to vehicular traffic until
the asphaltic concrete has cooled sufficiently to carry loads without rutting
or shoving the surface.
1.   Inspection. All work shall be subject to inspection by the City. Backfill
shall not be deemed completed, and no resurfacing of any improved street or
alley surface shall begin, until such backfill is inspected and approved by the
City. The permit holder or property owner shall provide the City with notice at
least 24 hours prior to the time when inspection of backfill is desired.
2.   Completion by the City. Should any excavation in any street or alley be
discontinued or left open and unfinished for a period of 24 hours after the
approved completion date, or in the event the work is improperly done, the City
has the right to finish or correct the excavation work and charge any expenses
for such work to the permit holder or property owner.
3.   Responsibility for Costs. The permit holder or property owner shall bear
all costs and expenses incident to the excavation. The permit holder and owner
shall indemnify the City from any loss or damage that may directly or
indirectly be occasioned by such excavation.
4.   Notification. At least 48 hours prior to the commencement of the
excavation, excluding Saturdays, Sundays, and legal holidays, the person
performing the excavation shall contact the Statewide Notification Center and
provide the center with the information required under Section 480.4 of the
Code of Iowa.
5.   Permit Issued. Upon approval of the application, filing of bond and
insurance certificate, a permit shall be issued. A separate permit shall be
required for each excavation.
6.   Permit Exemption. No permit is required for the following:
A.   City employees in the regular performance of their duties;
B.   Persons under contract with the City and in special prosecution of their
contracts;
C.   After office hours, on Sundays and holidays, where the delay incident to
obtaining a permit would result in a loss or damage to the property and danger
to the public may result. On the next regular day of business, such excavation
must be reported to the Clerk and a permit secured.
135.10   PROPERTY OWNER’S RESPONSIBILITY FOR MAINTENANCE.
The abutting property owner shall maintain all property outside the lot and
property lines and inside the curb lines upon public streets and shall keep
such area in a safe condition, free from nuisances, obstructions, and hazards.
In the absence of a curb, such property shall extend from the property line to
that portion of the public street used or improved for vehicular purposes. The
abutting property owner shall not be required to remove diseased trees or dead
wood on the publicly owned property or right-of-way. Maintenance includes, but
is not limited to, timely mowing, trimming trees and shrubs, and picking up
litter and debris. The abutting property owner may be liable for damages caused
by failure to maintain the publicly owned property or right-of-way.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12(2)(c))
135.11   FAILURE TO MAINTAIN.
If the abutting property owner does not perform an action required under the
above section within a reasonable time, the City may perform the required
action and assess the cost against the abutting property for collection in the
same manner as a property tax.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12(2)(e))
135.12   DUMPING OF SNOW.
It is unlawful for any person to throw, push, or place or cause to be thrown,
pushed or placed, any ice or snow from private property, sidewalks, or
driveways onto the traveled way of a street or alley so as to obstruct gutters,
or impede the passage of vehicles upon the street or alley or to create a
hazardous condition therein; except where, in the cleaning of large commercial
drives in the Business District it is absolutely necessary to move the snow
onto the street or alley temporarily, such accumulation shall be removed
promptly by the property owner or agent. Arrangements for the prompt removal of
such accumulations shall be made prior to moving the snow.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12(2))
135.13   DRIVEWAY CULVERTS.
The property owner shall, at the owner’s expense, install any culvert deemed
necessary under any driveway or any other access to the owner’s property, and
before installing a culvert, permission must first be obtained from the City.
In the event repairs are needed at any time with respect to culverts, it shall
be the responsibility of the property owner to make such repairs, and, in the
event the owner fails to do so, the City shall have the right to make the
repairs. If the property owner fails to reimburse the City for the cost of said
repairs, the cost shall be certified to the County Treasurer and specially
assessed against the property as by law provided.
CHAPTER 136
SIDEWALK REGULATIONS
136.01 Purpose                               136.10 Barricades and Warning
                                             Lights
136.02 Definitions                           136.11 Failure to Repair or
                                             Barricade
136.03 Removal of Snow, Ice, and             136.12 Interference with Sidewalk
Accumulations                                Improvements
136.04 Property Owner’s Responsibility for 136.13 Encroaching Steps
Maintenance
136.05 City May Order Repairs                136.14 Openings and Enclosures
136.06 Sidewalk Construction Ordered         136.15 Fires or Fuel on Sidewalks
136.07 Permit Required                       136.16 Defacing
136.08 Failure to Obtain Permit              136.17 Debris on Sidewalks
136.09 Sidewalk Standards                     
 
136.01   PURPOSE.
The purpose of this chapter is to enhance safe passage by citizens on
sidewalks, to place the responsibility for the maintenance, repair,
replacement, or reconstruction of sidewalks upon the abutting property owner
and to minimize the liability of the City.
136.02   DEFINITIONS.
For use in this chapter the following terms are defined:
1.   “Broom finish” means a sidewalk finish that is made by sweeping the
sidewalk when it is hardening.
2.   “Established grade” means that grade established by the City for the
particular area in which a sidewalk is to be constructed.
3.   “One-course construction” means that the full thickness of the concrete is
placed at one time, using the same mixture throughout.
4.   “Owner” means the person owning the fee title to property abutting any
sidewalk and includes any contract purchaser for purposes of notification
required herein. For all other purposes, “owner” includes the lessee, if any.
5.   “Portland cement” means any type of cement except bituminous cement.
6.   “Sidewalk” means all permanent public walks in business, residential or
suburban areas.
7.   “Sidewalk improvements” means the construction, reconstruction, repair,
replacement, or removal of a public sidewalk or the excavating, filling, or
depositing of material in the public right-of-way in connection therewith.
8.   “Wood float finish” means a sidewalk finish that is made by smoothing the
surface of the sidewalk with a wooden trowel.
136.03   REMOVAL OF SNOW, ICE, AND ACCUMULATIONS.
It is the responsibility of the abutting property owners to remove snow, ice,
and accumulations promptly from the sidewalks. If the property owner does not
remove snow, ice, or accumulations within 48 hours after the snow and ice have
ceased being deposited thereon, the Street Commissioner may remove, or cause to
be removed, such snow or ice without notice to the property owners. The Street
Commissioner shall then return to the Council an itemized and verified
statement of expenditures of material and labor in making such removal, such
expense not to exceed the reasonable value thereof. The Clerk shall then cause
a notice of the facts shown in such verified statement to be given to all
persons liable for such expense, either by personal service or by mailing a
notice to the last known address of the person liable for such expense. Such
notice shall also state the time and place at which objections to such
assessment may be made, which time shall be at least 10 days after the service
or mailing of such notice. At the time and place designated in the notice, the
Council shall meet, hear, and consider all objections to the assessment and
shall correct all errors or omissions therein, and, after such consideration,
the Council shall adopt the corrected list as the amounts to be assessed
against the property therein described. After adoption of the list, the Council
shall assess the costs against the property owners for collection in the same
manner as a property tax. The abutting property owner may be liable for damages
caused by failure to remove snow, ice, and accumulations promptly from the
sidewalk.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12(2)(b) and (2)(e))
136.04   PROPERTY OWNER’S RESPONSIBILITY FOR MAINTENANCE.
The abutting property owner shall maintain in a safe and hazard-free condition
any sidewalk outside the lot and property lines and inside the curb lines or,
in the absence of a curb, any sidewalk between the property line and that
portion of the public street used or improved for vehicular purposes.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12(2)(c))
136.05   CITY MAY ORDER REPAIRS.
If the abutting property owner does not maintain sidewalks as required, the
Council may serve notice on such owner, by certified mail, requiring the owner
to repair, replace, or reconstruct sidewalks within a reasonable time and if
such action is not completed within the time stated in the notice, the Council
may require the work to be done and assess the costs against the abutting
property for collection in the same manner as a property tax.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12(2)(d) and (2)(e))
136.06   SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION ORDERED.
The Council may order the construction of permanent sidewalks upon any street
or court in the City and may specially assess the cost of such improvement to
abutting property owners in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 384 of
the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.38)
136.07   PERMIT REQUIRED.
No person shall remove, reconstruct, or install a sidewalk unless such person
has obtained a permit from the City and has agreed in writing that said
removal, reconstruction, or installation will comply with all ordinances and
requirements of the City for such work.
136.08   FAILURE TO OBTAIN PERMIT.
Whenever any sidewalk improvements are made that do not conform to the
provisions of this chapter and with the specifications, or when any sidewalk
improvements are made without a permit, the City Engineer or Streets Supervisor
shall serve notice to obtain a permit upon the property owner and upon the
contractor doing the work. If the sidewalk is in the course of construction,
the notice shall order the work to stop until a permit is obtained and the work
is corrected to comply with the specifications. If the sidewalk work has been
completed, the owner shall obtain a permit immediately and perform any needed
corrections within 10 days after the receipt of the permit. If the owner fails
to comply with this notice, the City Engineer or Streets Supervisor shall have
the work completed and the costs assessed to the property owner.
136.09   SIDEWALK STANDARDS.
The City Engineer or Streets Supervisor shall use the sidewalk specifications
standards as may be established by the Council from time to time by resolution.
All sidewalk improvements in public property, whether performed by the owner of
the abutting property or by the City, shall be performed under the supervision
and inspection of the City Engineer or Streets Supervisor, and in accordance
with the plans and specifications as may be adopted from time to time by
resolution.
136.10   BARRICADES AND WARNING LIGHTS.
Whenever any material of any kind is deposited on any street, avenue, highway,
passageway, or alley when sidewalk improvements are being made or when any
sidewalk is in a dangerous condition, it shall be the duty of all persons
having an interest therein, either as the contractor or the owner, agent, or
lessee of the property in front of or along which such material may be
deposited, or such dangerous condition exists, to put in conspicuous places at
each end of such sidewalk and at each end of any pile of material deposited in
the street, a sufficient number of approved warning lights or flares, and to
keep them lighted during the entire night and to erect sufficient barricades
both at night and in the daytime to secure the same. The party or parties using
the street for any of the purposes specified in this chapter shall be liable
for all injuries or damage to persons or property arising from any wrongful act
or negligence of the party or parties, or their agents or employees or for any
misuse of the privileges conferred by this chapter or of any failure to comply
with provisions hereof.
136.11   FAILURE TO REPAIR OR BARRICADE.
It is the duty of the owner of the property abutting the sidewalk, or the
owner’s contractor or agent, to notify the City immediately in the event of
failure or inability to make necessary sidewalk improvements or to install or
erect necessary barricades as required by this chapter.
136.12   INTERFERENCE WITH SIDEWALK IMPROVEMENTS.
No person shall knowingly or willfully drive any vehicle upon any portion of
any sidewalk or approach thereto while in the process of being improved or upon
any portion of any completed sidewalk or approach thereto, or shall remove or
destroy any part or all of any sidewalk or approach thereto, or shall remove,
destroy, mar, or deface any sidewalk at any time or destroy, mar, remove, or
deface any notice provided by this chapter.
136.13   ENCROACHING STEPS.
It is unlawful for a person to erect or maintain any stairs or steps to any
building upon any part of any sidewalk without permission by resolution of the
Council.
136.14   OPENINGS AND ENCLOSURES.
It is unlawful for a person to:
1.   Stairs and Railings. Construct or build a stairway or passageway to any
cellar or basement by occupying any part of the sidewalk, or to enclose any
portion of a sidewalk with a railing without permission by resolution of the
Council.
2.   Openings. Keep open any cellar door, grating, or cover to any vault on any
sidewalk except while in actual use with adequate guards to protect the public.
3.   Protect Openings. Neglect to properly protect or barricade all openings on
or within six feet of any sidewalk.
136.15   FIRES OR FUEL ON SIDEWALKS.
It is unlawful for a person to make a fire of any kind on any sidewalk or to
place or allow any fuel to remain upon any sidewalk.
136.16   DEFACING.
It is unlawful for a person to scatter or place any paste, paint, or writing on
any sidewalk.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.1)
136.17   DEBRIS ON SIDEWALKS.
It is unlawful for a person to throw or deposit on any sidewalk any glass,
nails, glass bottle, tacks, wire, cans, trash, garbage, rubbish, litter, offal,
or any other debris, or any substance likely to injure any person, animal, or
vehicle.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12(2))
CHAPTER 137
VACATION AND DISPOSAL OF STREETS
 
137.01 Power to Vacate                137.04 Findings Required
137.02 Planning and Zoning Commission 137.05 Disposal of Vacated Streets or
                                      Alleys
137.03 Notice of Vacation Hearing     137.06 Disposal by Gift Limited
 
137.01   POWER TO VACATE.
When, in the judgment of the Council, it would be in the best interest of the
City to vacate a street, alley, portion thereof, or any public grounds, the
Council may do so by ordinance in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12(2)(a))
137.02   PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION.
Any proposal to vacate a street, alley, portion thereof, or any public grounds
shall be referred by the Council to the Planning and Zoning Commission for its
study and recommendation prior to further consideration by the Council. The
Commission shall submit a written report including recommendations to the
Council within 30 days after the date the proposed vacation is referred to the
Commission.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)
137.03   NOTICE OF VACATION HEARING.
The Council shall cause to be published a notice of public hearing of the time
at which the proposal to vacate shall be considered.
137.04   FINDINGS REQUIRED.
No street, alley, portion thereof, or any public grounds shall be vacated
unless the Council finds that:
1.   Public Use. The street, alley, portion thereof, or any public ground
proposed to be vacated is not needed for the use of the public, and therefore,
its maintenance at public expense is no longer justified.
2.   Abutting Property. The proposed vacation will not deny owners of property
abutting on the street or alley reasonable access to their property.
137.05   DISPOSAL OF VACATED STREETS OR ALLEYS.
When in the judgment of the Council it would be in the best interest of the
City to dispose of a vacated street or alley, portion thereof or public ground,
the Council may do so in accordance with the provisions of Section 364.7 of the
Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.7)
137.06   DISPOSAL BY GIFT LIMITED.
The City may not dispose of real property by gift except to a governmental body
for a public purpose or to a fair.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 174.1(2)and 364.7(3))
EDITOR’S NOTE
EDITOR’S NOTE
The following ordinances, not codified herein and specifically saved from
repeal, have been adopted, vacating certain streets, alleys, or public
grounds and remain in full force and effect.
ORDINANCE NO. ADOPTED            ORDINANCE NO. ADOPTED
92            March 3, 1967                    
96            November 3, 1967                 
104           July 7, 1969                     
107           August 6, 1970                   
120           June 3, 1976                     
167           November 1, 1984                 
189           February 4, 1988                 
193           May 19, 1988                     
203           July 6, 1989                     
231           December 16, 1993                
278           January 21, 1999                 
293           May 18, 2000                     
297           June 15, 2000                    
372           February 1, 2007                 
458           September 16, 2020               
477           February 1, 2023                 
480           July 19, 2023                    
                                             
 
CHAPTER 138
STREET GRADES
 
138.01 Purpose and Definition 138.03 Record Maintained
138.02 Established Grades      
 
138.01   PURPOSE AND DEFINITION.
This chapter is designed to meet the requirements of the Code of Iowa for the
establishment of street grades. As used herein, “grade” means the longitudinal
reference lines, as established by ordinance of the Council, which designate
the elevation at which a street or sidewalk is to be built.
138.02   ESTABLISHED GRADES.
The grades of all streets, alleys, and sidewalks, which have been heretofore
established by ordinance, are hereby confirmed, ratified, and established as
official grades.
138.03   RECORD MAINTAINED.
The Clerk shall maintain a record of all established grades and furnish
information concerning such grades upon request.
EDITOR’S NOTE
EDITOR’S NOTE
The following ordinances not codified herein, and specifically saved from
repeal, have been adopted, establishing street or sidewalk grades and remain
in full force and effect.
ORDINANCE NO. ADOPTED ORDINANCE NO. ADOPTED
                                  
                                  
                                  
                                  
                                  
                                  
                                  
                                  
                                  
                                  
                                  
                                  
                                  
                                  
                                  
                                  
                                  
                                  
                                  
 
CHAPTER 139
NAMING OF STREETS
 
139.01 Naming New Streets      139.04 Official Street Name Map
139.02 Changing Name of Street 139.05 Revision of Street Name Map
139.03 Recording Street Names   
 
139.01   NAMING NEW STREETS.
New streets shall be assigned names in accordance with the following:
1.   Extension of Existing Street. Streets added to the City that are natural
extensions of existing streets shall be assigned the name of the existing
street.
2.   Resolution. All street names, except streets named as a part of a
subdivision or platting procedure, shall be named by resolution.
3.   Planning and Zoning Commission. Proposed street names shall be referred to
the Planning and Zoning Commission for review and recommendation.
139.02   CHANGING NAME OF STREET.
The Council may, by resolution, change the name of a street.
139.03   RECORDING STREET NAMES.
Following official action naming or changing the name of a street, the Clerk
shall file a copy thereof with the County Recorder, County Auditor, and County
Assessor.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 354.26)
139.04   OFFICIAL STREET NAME MAP.
Streets within the City are named as shown on the Official Street Name Map,
which is hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this chapter.
The Official Street Name Map shall be identified by the signature of the Mayor,
and bearing the seal of the City under the following words: “This is to certify
that this is the Official Street Name Map referred to in Section
139.04 of the Code of Ordinances of Solon, Iowa.”
139.05   REVISION OF STREET NAME MAP.
If in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, changes are made in
street names, such changes shall be entered on the Official Street Name Map
promptly after the change has been approved by the Council with an entry on the
Official Street Name Map as follows: “On (date), by official action of the City
Council, the following changes were made in the Official Street Name Map:
(brief description),” which entry shall be signed by the Mayor and attested by
the Clerk.
CHAPTER 140
CONTROLLED ACCESS FACILITIES
 
140.01 Exercise of Police Power 140.05 Permitted Access Points
140.02 Definition               140.06 Speed Limits
140.03 Right of Access Limited  140.07 Parking Restricted
140.04 Access Controls Imposed   
 
140.01   EXERCISE OF POLICE POWER.
This chapter shall be deemed an exercise of the police power of the City under
Chapter 306A of the Code of Iowa, for the preservation of the public peace,
health, safety, and for the promotion of the general welfare.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 306A.1)
140.02   DEFINITION.
The term “controlled access facility” means a highway or street especially
designed for through traffic, and over, from, or to which owners or occupants
of abutting land or other persons have no right or easement or only a
controlled right or easement of access, light, air, or view by reason of the
fact that their property abuts upon such controlled access facility or for any
other reason.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 306A.2)
140.03   RIGHT OF ACCESS LIMITED.
No person has any right of ingress or egress to or from abutting lands onto or
across any controlled access facility, except at such designated points at
which access is permitted.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 306A.4)
140.04   ACCESS CONTROLS IMPOSED.
There are hereby fixed and established controlled access facilities within the
City, described as follows:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 306A.3)
1.   Project No. FN-1-4(6)-21-52. On the Primary Road System extension
improvement, Project No. FN-1-4(6)-21-52, within the City, described as
follows:
Sta. 510+43.0 at the SCL to Sta. 564+06.6 at the NCL
regulating access to and from abutting properties along said highway all in
accordance with the plans for such improvement identified as Project No. FN-1-4
(6)-21-52, on file in the office of the Clerk.
140.05   PERMITTED ACCESS POINTS.
Points of access shall consist of access ways from abutting property to the
adjacent traffic lane or roadway and their locations shall be expressed in
terms of stations, each representing a distance of 100 feet, measured along the
centerline of the controlled access facility from the points of reference
stated in this section and identified as Project No. FN-1-4(6)-21-52, and are
permitted as follows:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 306A.4)
STATION SIDE OF STREET WIDTH USE OF DRIVE OR ENTRANCE
STATION SIDE OF STREET WIDTH USE OF DRIVE OR ENTRANCE
516+79  East           10    Farm Entrance
518+18  West           27    Stinocher Street
526+20  West           12    Field Entrance
526+38  East           10    Residential
527+57  West           14    Residential
528+96  West           25    5th Street
528+96  East           22    5th Street
529+75  East           80    Commercial
529+86  West           33    Commercial
530+55  West           13    Commercial
531+82  East           18    Residential
532+35  West           26    4th Street
532+76  East           10    Residential
533+17  West           120   Commercial
533+82  West           10    Alley
533+88  East           10    Residential
534+39  East           10    Residential
535+23  East           10    Residential
535+35  West           26    3rd Street
535+98  East           10    Residential
536+65  West           9     Residential
537+05  West           9     Residential
537+81  East           9     Residential
539+08  East           22    Residential
539+33  West           12    Residential
541+52  East           26    1st Street
541+52  West           26    1st Street
543+22  East           10    Residential
544+48  East           26    Short Street
544+51  West           26    Short Street
546+32  West           38    City Park Street
546+35  East           15    Commercial
547+12  East           15    Commercial
547+76  East           46    Main Street
547+76  West           65    Main Street
549+06  West           32    Commercial
549+94  West           16    Commercial
550+04  East           12    Residential
550+98  East           24    North Street
551+00  West           24    North Street
552+50  East           8     Residential
554+05  East           16    Residential
554+11  West           22    Elm Street
555+51  West           10    Residential
557+24  West           22    East Rock Street
558+76  East           10    Residential
 
140.06   SPEED LIMITS.
Speed limits on the following portions of Primary Road No. Iowa 382 are as
follows:
1.   55 mph from Sta. 115+20.4 (west corp. line) southeasterly to Sta. 121+00;
2.   55 mph from Sta. 121+00 to Sta. 124+00, westbound;
3.   35 mph from Sta. 121+00 to Sta. 124+00, eastbound;
4.   35 mph from Sta. 124+00 to Sta. 130+00, eastbound and westbound;
5.   35 mph from Sta. 124+00 to Sta. 130+00 eastbound and westbound (from the
western City limit to the boundary between Randall Park and Lakeview Elementary
School);
6.   25 mph from Sta. 130+00 to Sta. 139+86.1 (Iowa No. 261) eastbound and
westbound;
7.   25 mph from Sta. 121+00 to Sta. 124+00 eastbound and westbound (from the
library property line to the boundary between Randall Park and Lakeview
Elementary School).
140.07   PARKING RESTRICTED.
The parking of vehicles is prohibited on, along, or on either side of Primary
Road No. Iowa 1 within the corporate limits of the City, more particularly
described as follows:
Sta. 510+43.0 at the SCL to Sta. 564+06.6 at the NCL.
Parking shall also be prohibited on those streets intersecting with said
Primary Road on the lane approaching said intersection for a distance of 35
feet from the stop sign at the intersection and on the lane exiting from said
intersection for a distance of 35 feet beyond the far crosswalk at said
intersection.
CHAPTER 145
DANGEROUS BUILDINGS
 
145.01 Enforcement Officer          145.05 Conduct of Hearing
145.02 General Definition of Unsafe 145.06 Posting of Signs
145.03 Unsafe Building              145.07 Right to Demolish; Municipal
                                    Infraction
145.04 Notice to Owner              145.08 Costs
 
145.01   ENFORCEMENT OFFICER.
The Mayor is responsible for the enforcement of this chapter.
145.02   GENERAL DEFINITION OF UNSAFE.
All buildings or structures that are structurally unsafe or not provided with
adequate egress, or that constitute a fire hazard, or are otherwise dangerous
to human life, or that in relation to existing use constitute a hazard to
safety or health, or public welfare, by reason of inadequate maintenance,
dilapidation, obsolescence, or abandonment, are, for the purpose of this
chapter, unsafe buildings. All such unsafe buildings are hereby declared to be
public nuisances and shall be abated by repair, rehabilitation, demolition, or
removal in accordance with the procedure specified in this chapter.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 657A.1 and 364.12(3)(a))
145.03   UNSAFE BUILDING.
“Unsafe building” means any structure or mobile home meeting any or all of the
following criteria:
1.   Various Inadequacies. Whenever the building or structure, or any portion
thereof, because of:
A.   Dilapidation, deterioration, or decay;
B.   Faulty construction;
C.   The removal, movement, or instability of any portion of the ground
necessary for the purpose of supporting such building;
D.   The deterioration, decay, or inadequacy of its foundation; or
E.   Any other cause, is likely to partially or completely collapse.
1.   Manifestly Unsafe. Whenever, for any reason, the building or structure, or
any portion thereof, is manifestly unsafe for the purpose for which it is being
used.
2.   Inadequate Maintenance. Whenever a building or structure, used or intended
to be used for dwelling purposes, because of dilapidation, decay, damage,
faulty construction, or otherwise, is determined by any health officer to be
unsanitary, unfit for human habitation or in such condition that it is likely
to cause sickness or disease.
3.   Fire Hazard. Whenever any building or structure, because of dilapidated
condition, deterioration, damage, or other cause, is determined by the Fire
Marshal or Fire Chief to be a fire hazard.
4.   Abandoned. Whenever any portion of a building or structure remains on a
site after the demolition or destruction of the building or structure or
whenever any building or structure is abandoned for a period in excess of six
months so as to constitute such building or portion thereof an attractive
nuisance or hazard to the public.
145.04   NOTICE TO OWNER.
The enforcement officer shall examine or cause to be examined every building or
structure or portion thereof reported as dangerous or damaged and, if such is
found to be an unsafe building as defined in this chapter, the enforcement
officer shall give to the owner of such building or structure written notice
stating the defects thereof. This notice may require the owner or person in
charge of the building or premises, within 48 hours or such reasonable time as
the circumstances require, to commence either the required repairs or
improvements or demolition and removal of the building or structure or portions
thereof, and all such work shall be completed within 90 days from date of
notice, unless otherwise stipulated by the enforcement officer. If necessary,
such notice shall also require the building, structure, or portion thereof to
be vacated forthwith and not reoccupied until the required repairs and
improvements are completed, inspected, and approved by the enforcement officer.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12(3)(h))
1.   Notice Served. Such notice shall be served by sending by certified mail to
the owner of record, according to Section 364.12(3)(h) of the Code of Iowa, if
the owner is found within the City limits. If the owner is not found within the
City limits, such service may be made upon the owner by registered mail or
certified mail. The designated period within which said owner or person in
charge is required to comply with the order of the enforcement officer shall
begin as of the date the owner receives such notice.
2.   Hearing. Such notice shall also advise the owner that they may request a
hearing before the Council on the notice by filing a written request for
hearing within the time provided in the notice.
145.05   CONDUCT OF HEARING.
If requested, the Council shall conduct a hearing in accordance with the
following:
1.   Notice. The owner shall be served with written notice specifying the date,
time, and place of hearing.
2.   Owner’s Rights. At the hearing, the owner may appear and show cause why
the alleged nuisance shall not be abated.
3.   Determination. The Council shall make and record findings of fact and may
issue such order as it deems appropriate. †
 
Notes
  † EDITOR’S NOTE: Suggested forms of notice and of a resolution and order of the
  Council for the administration of this chapter are provided in the APPENDIX to
�this Code. Caution is urged in the use of this procedure. We recommend you
  review the situation with your attorney before initiating procedures and follow
  their recommendation carefully.
145.06   POSTING OF SIGNS.
The enforcement officer shall cause to be posted at each entrance to such
building a notice to read: “DO NOT ENTER. UNSAFE TO OCCUPY. CITY OF SOLON,
IOWA.” Such notice shall remain posted until the required demolition, removal
or repairs are completed. Such notice shall not be removed without written
permission of the enforcement officer and no person shall enter the building
except for the purpose of making the required repairs or of demolishing the
building.
145.07   RIGHT TO DEMOLISH; MUNICIPAL INFRACTION.
In case the owner fails, neglects, or refuses to comply with the notice to
repair, rehabilitate, or to demolish and remove the building or structure or
portion thereof, the Council may order the owner of the building prosecuted as
a violator of the provisions of this chapter and may order the enforcement
officer to proceed with the work specified in such notice. A statement of the
cost of such work shall be transmitted to the Council. As an alternative to
this action, the City may utilize the municipal infraction process to abate the
nuisance.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12(3)(h))
145.08   COSTS.
Costs incurred under Section 145.07 shall be paid out of the City treasury.
Such costs shall be charged to the owner of the premises involved and levied as
a special assessment against the land on which the building or structure is
located, and shall be certified to the County Treasurer for collection in the
manner provided for other taxes. In addition, the City may take any other
action deemed appropriate to recover costs incurred.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12(3)(h))
CHAPTER 146
MANUFACTURED AND MOBILE HOMES
 
146.01 Definitions                 146.03 Foundation Requirements
146.02 Conversion to Real Property  
 
146.01   DEFINITIONS.
For use in this chapter the following terms are defined:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 435.1)
1.   “Manufactured home” means a factory-built structure built under the
authority of 42 U.S.C. Sec. 5403 which was constructed on or after June 15,
1976, and is required by federal law to display a seal from the United States
Department of Housing and Urban Development.
2.   “Manufactured home community” means any site, lot, field, or tract of land
under common ownership upon which 10 or more occupied manufactured homes are
harbored, either free of charge or for revenue purposes, and includes any
building, structure, or enclosure used or intended for use as part of the
equipment of the manufactured home community.
3.   “Mobile home” means any vehicle without motive power used or so
manufactured or constructed as to permit its being used as a conveyance upon
the public streets and highways and so designed, constructed, or reconstructed
as will permit the vehicle to be used as a place for human habitation by one or
more persons; but also includes any such vehicle with motive power not
registered as a motor vehicle in the State. A mobile home means any such
vehicle built before June 15, 1976, which was not built to a mandatory building
code and which contains no State or federal seals.
4.   “Mobile home park” means any site, lot, field, or tract of land upon which
three or more mobile homes or manufactured homes, or a combination of any of
these homes, are placed on developed spaces and operated as a for-profit
enterprise with water, sewer or septic, and electrical services available.
The term “manufactured home community” or “mobile home park” is not to be
construed to include manufactured or mobile homes, buildings, tents, or other
structures temporarily maintained by any individual, educational institution,
or company on its own premises and used exclusively to house said entity’s own
labor or students. The manufactured home community or mobile home park shall
meet the requirements of any zoning regulations that are in effect.
146.02   CONVERSION TO REAL PROPERTY.
A mobile home or manufactured home that is located outside a manufactured home
community or mobile home park shall be converted to real estate by being placed
on a permanent foundation and shall be assessed for real estate taxes except in
the following cases:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 435.26)
1.   Retailer’s Stock. Mobile homes or manufactured homes on private property
as part of a retailer’s or a manufacturer’s stock not used as a place for human
habitation.
2.   Existing Homes. A taxable mobile home or manufactured home that is located
outside of a manufactured home community or mobile home park as of January 1,
1995, shall be assessed and taxed as real estate, but is exempt from the
permanent foundation requirement of this chapter until the home is relocated.
146.03   FOUNDATION REQUIREMENTS.
A mobile home or manufactured home located outside of a manufactured home
community or mobile home park shall be placed on a permanent frost-free
foundation system that meets the support and anchorage requirements as
recommended by the manufacturer or required by the State Building Code. The
foundation system must be visually compatible with permanent foundation systems
of surrounding residential structures. Any such home shall be installed in
accordance with the requirements of the State Building Code.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 103A.10 and 414.28)
CHAPTER 150
BUILDING NUMBERING
 
150.01 Definitions             150.05 Base Lines; Point of Beginning
150.02 Owner Requirements      150.06 Method of Numbering Streets
150.03 Building Numbering Plan 150.07 Long Blocks, Angular, or Irregular
                               Streets and Other Conflicts
150.04 Assignment of Numbers    
 
150.01   DEFINITIONS.
For use in this chapter, the following terms are defined:
1.   “Owner” means the owner of the principal building.
2.   “Principal building” means the main building on any lot or subdivision
thereof.
150.02   OWNER REQUIREMENTS.
Every owner shall comply with the following numbering requirements:
1.   Obtain Building Number. The owner shall obtain the assigned number to the
principal building from the Clerk.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12(3)(d))
2.   Display Building Number. The owner shall place or cause to be installed
and maintained on the principal building the assigned number in a conspicuous
place to the street in figures not less than two and one-half inches in height
and of a contrasting color with their background.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12(3)(d))
3.   Failure to Comply. If an owner refuses to number a building as herein
provided, or fails to do so for a period of 30 days after being notified in
writing by the City to do so, the City may proceed to place the assigned number
on the principal building and assess the costs against the property for
collection in the same manner as a property tax.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12(3)(h))
150.03   BUILDING NUMBERING PLAN.
Building numbers shall be assigned in accordance with the building numbering
plan on file in the office of the Clerk.
150.04   ASSIGNMENT OF NUMBERS.
Even numbers shall be assigned to the east side of all streets running north
and south, and odd numbers to the west side thereof. Even numbers shall be
assigned to the north side of all streets running east and west, and odd
numbers to the south side thereof. All building numbers shall be assigned by
the Clerk in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
150.05   BASE LINES; POINT OF BEGINNING.
The point of beginning or the center of the number system shall be the
intersection of Main Street and Iowa Street. Therefore, east or west streets
east of Iowa Street will be identified as “East,” and those west of Iowa Street
will be identified as “West.” North or south streets north of Main Street will
be identified as “North,” while those south of Main Street will be identified
as “South.”
150.06   METHOD OF NUMBERING STREETS.
Commencing at the base line or point of beginning, the first block shall be
known as the 100 block, and subsequent blocks or a distance equal thereto shall
be known consecutively in the hundreds. The first number shall be 100 or 102 on
one side of the street, as provided for in this chapter, and the first number
on the other side of the street shall be 101 or 103, and such numbers shall
increase consecutively as provided herein to the end of the block. The
numbering shall start anew in each succeeding block, or an equal distance
thereto, and in each instance, the first number shall be one hundred greater
than the first numbers on the preceding block. Half numbers shall be assigned
to all upstairs or basement entrances, such as “115½ West Main Street.”
Duplexes shall be assigned two consecutive even or odd numbers, such as 201,
203. Apartments should be identified by a single street address, such as “302
South Iowa Street, Apartment C.” Office buildings should be similarly
identified, but using a room or suite number, e.g., “Room 7 Jones Building, 103
West Main Street.”
150.07   LONG BLOCKS, ANGULAR, OR IRREGULAR STREETS AND OTHER CONFLICTS.
On any diagonal or curvilinear street, the directional street name is
determined by the predominant direction in which it runs, and the numbers are
assigned accordingly, changing to a new series, each time a grid line is
crossed. On loop streets, the numbers should be assigned consecutively,
clockwise around the loop, even though the loop may cross a grid line. Should a
conflict arise, due to long blocks, or other causes, the Clerk shall resolve
the same and determine the number to be assigned to any particular building.
CHAPTER 151
TREES
 
151.01 Definition            151.04 Trimming Trees To Be Supervised
151.02 Planting Restrictions 151.05 Disease Control
151.03 Duty To Trim Trees    151.06 Inspection and Removal
 
151.01   DEFINITION.
For use in this chapter, “parking” means that part of the street, avenue, or
highway in the City not covered by sidewalk and lying between the lot line and
the curb line or, on unpaved streets, that part of the street, avenue, or
highway lying between the lot line and that portion of the street usually
traveled by vehicular traffic.
151.02   PLANTING RESTRICTIONS.
No tree shall be planted in any parking or street except in accordance with the
following:
1.   Alignment. All trees planted in any street shall be planted in the parking
midway between the outer line of the sidewalk and the curb. In the event a curb
line is not established, trees shall be planted on a line 10 feet from the
property line.
2.   Spacing. Trees shall not be planted on any parking that is less than nine
feet in width, or contains less than 81 square feet of exposed soil surface per
tree. Trees shall not be planted closer than 20 feet from street intersections
(property lines extended) and 10 feet from driveways. If it is at all possible,
trees should be planted inside the property lines and not between the sidewalk
and the curb.
3.   Prohibited Trees. No person shall plant in any street any fruit-bearing
tree or any tree of the kinds commonly known as cottonwood, poplar, box elder,
Chinese elm, evergreen, willow, or black walnut.
4.   Approval. Planting of trees in any parking or street is subject to
approval by the Council.
151.03   DUTY TO TRIM TREES.
The owner or agent of the abutting property shall keep the trees on, or
overhanging the street, trimmed so that all branches will be at least 15 feet
above the surface of the street and eight feet above the sidewalks. If the
abutting property owner fails to trim the trees, the City may serve notice on
the abutting property owner requiring that such action be taken within five
days. If such action is not taken within that time, the City may perform the
required action and assess the costs against the abutting property for
collection in the same manner as a property tax.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12(2)(c) and (2)(e))
151.04   TRIMMING TREES TO BE SUPERVISED.
Except as allowed in Section
151.03, it is unlawful for any person to trim or cut any tree in a street or
public place unless the work is done under the supervision of the City.
151.05   DISEASE CONTROL.
Any dead, diseased, or damaged tree or shrub that may harbor serious insect or
disease pests or disease injurious to other trees is hereby declared to be a
nuisance.
151.06   INSPECTION AND REMOVAL.
The Council shall inspect or cause to be inspected any trees or shrubs in the
City reported or suspected to be dead, diseased, or damaged, and such trees and
shrubs shall be subject to the following:
1.   City Property. If it is determined that any such condition exists on any
public property, including the strip between the curb and the lot line of
private property, the Council may cause such condition to be corrected by
treatment or removal. The Council may also order the removal of any trees on
the streets of the City which interfere with the making of improvements or with
travel thereon. In no case shall the property owner be required to remove
diseased trees or dead wood on the publicly owned property or right-of-way.
2.   Private Property. If it is determined with reasonable certainty that any
such condition exists on private property and that danger to other trees or to
adjoining property or passing motorists or pedestrians is imminent, the Council
shall notify by certified mail the owner, occupant, or person in charge of such
property to correct such condition by treatment or removal within 14 days of
said notification. If such owner, occupant, or person in charge of said
property fails to comply within 14 days of receipt of notice, the Council may
cause the condition to be corrected and the cost assessed against the property.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12(3)(b) and (3)(h))
CHAPTER 152
STORMWATER DRAINAGE
 
152.01 Stormwater Drainage Fund Established 152.03 Periodic Review
152.02 Billing for Drainage Fee              
 
152.01   STORMWATER DRAINAGE FUND ESTABLISHED.
The purpose of this chapter is to provide for proper stormwater drainage
facilities within the City to protect the health, safety, and general welfare
of the residents. The Council specifically finds that stormwater runoff can
cause potentially hazardous situations for property and individuals and that
proper facilities should be constructed to prevent damage and injuries. A fund
is hereby established to collect moneys from all individuals currently
receiving water or sanitary sewer services to pay for stormwater drainage
projects for the benefit of the City, including, but not limited to, payments
on bonds and debt service thereof. It is intended that a stormwater drainage
fee be collected from each individual, whether commercial or residential,
receiving water or sanitary sewer services.
152.02   BILLING FOR DRAINAGE FEE.
There is hereby established a stormwater drainage charge in the amount of $0.50
per month. The charge shall be added to all accounts, whether residential or
commercial, receiving either City water or sanitary sewer services, whether
said account is currently established or to be established in the future. The
charge shall be adjusted so that a separate stormwater drainage charge shall be
collected from each user of the water or sanitary sewer facilities. Multiple
users billed through a single water meter shall be assessed the stormwater
drainage charge on the basis of the number of users connected to the systems,
not on the basis of a single account or a single water meter.
152.03   PERIODIC REVIEW.
The Council may, in five-year increments, commencing with the effective date of
the ordinance codified in this chapter, review the necessity of maintaining the
fund and the accompanying charge and may adjust the amount of the charge to
reflect the actual costs incurred by the City in protecting the community from
the hazards of unregulated stormwater drainage.
CHAPTER 153
SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEMS
 
153.01 Purpose       153.04 Requirements for Construction or Installation
153.02 Definitions   153.05 Violations and Penalties
153.03 Permitted SES  
 
153.01   PURPOSE.
The purpose of the regulations of this chapter is to balance the need for
clean, renewable energy resources with the need to protect the public health,
safety, and welfare. The regulations of this chapter are found to be necessary
to ensure that solar energy conversion systems are appropriately designed,
sited, and installed.
153.02   DEFINITIONS.
For use in this chapter, the definitions as set forth in this Code and the 2015
International Solar Energy Provisions, both as may be amended from time to
time, shall be controlling:
1.   “Kilowatt” (kW) means equal to 1,000 watts.
2.   “Large Solar Energy System” (LSESV) means a solar energy system that has a
nameplate rated capacity of over 15 kilowatts in electrical energy or 50 KBTU
of thermal energy for non-single-family residential uses and districts and
which is incidental and subordinate to a principal use on the same parcel. A
system is considered an LSES only if it applies electrical power or thermal
energy solely for use by the owner on the site, except that when a parcel on
which the system is installed also receives electrical power supplied by a
utility company, excess electrical power generated and not presently needed by
the owner for on-site use may be used by the utility company in accordance with
Section 199, Chapter 151.11(5) of the Iowa Administrative Code, as amended from
time to time.
3.   “Off grid” means an electrical system that is not connected to a utility
distribution grid.
4.   “Small Solar Energy System” (SSES) means a solar energy system that has a
nameplate rated capacity of up to 15 kilowatts in electrical energy or 50 KBTU
of thermal energy for residential uses and districts and that is incidental and
subordinate to a principal use on the same parcel. A system is considered SSES
only if it supplies electrical power or thermal energy solely for use by the
owner on the site, except that when a parcel on which the system is installed
also receives electrical power supplied by a utility company, excess electrical
power generated and not presently needed by the owner for on-site use may be
used by the utility company in accordance with Section 199, Chapter 15.11(5) of
the Iowa Administrative Code, as amended from time to time.
5.   “Solar access” means a property owner’s right to have sunlight shine on
their land.
6.   “Solar energy” means radiant energy received from the sun at wavelengths
suitable for heat transfer, photosynthetic use, or photovoltaic use.
7.   “Solar energy system, building integrated” means a solar photovoltaic
system that is constructed as an integral part of a principal or accessory
building and where the collector component maintains a uniform profile or
surface with the building’s vertical walls, window openings, and roofing. Such
a system is used in lieu of an architectural or structural component of the
building. A building integrated system may occur within vertical facades,
replacing glazing or other façade material; into semitransparent skylight
systems; into roofing systems, replacing traditional roofing materials; or
other building or structure envelope systems. To be considered a building
integrated solar energy system, the appearance of the collector components must
be consistent with the surrounding materials.
8.   “Solar energy system, building mounted” means a SES that is securely
fastened to any portion of a building roof, whether attached directly to a
principal or accessory building.
9.   “Solar energy system, ground mounted” means a SES that is not located on a
building and is installed on the ground.
10.   “Solar Energy System” (SES) means an aggregation of parts including the
base, supporting structure, photovoltaic or solar thermal panels, inverters and
accessory equipment such as utility interconnected and battery banks, in such
configuration as necessary to convert radiant energy from the sun into
mechanical or electrical energy.
11.   “Total system height for building mounted systems” means the height above
roof surface measured perpendicular to the roof specific to the installation on
a sloped roof or the height above the roof surface specific to the installation
on a flat roof.
12.   “Total system height for ground mounted system” means the height above
grade from the highest point, including the supporting structure, related
equipment, and the collector panels. Adjustable angle systems shall be measured
from the highest point when the system is at its maximum vertical extension.
13.   “Utility scale solar energy system” means a solar energy system that
supplies electrical power or thermal energy solely for use by off-site
consumers.
14.   “Watt” (W) means the International System of Units’ standard unit of
power, the equivalent of one joule per second.
153.03   PERMITTED SES.
The following solar energy systems (SES) are permitted in all zoning districts
within the City, subject to the stated limitations:
1.   A building integrated system.
2.   A building mounted system attached to the roof of an accessory or primary
structure.
3.   A ground mounted system as an accessory use or structure to a primary
structure see Section
167.07.
4.   Large solar energy systems (LSES) are not allowed in residential zones.
5.   Utility scale solar energy systems are not allowed.
153.04   REQUIREMENTS FOR CONSTRUCTION OR INSTALLATION.
1.   Building Permit Required. It shall be unlawful to construct, erect,
install, alter, or locate any solar energy system (SES) within the City, unless
approved with a building permit. The application for building permit shall
include:
A.   A site plan showing the location of the system on the site, the area of
the base of the system, and the total height of the system;
B.   Standard drawings, specifications of system components, and dimensional
representations of the system and all its parts, including the supporting frame
and footings;
C.   A line drawing of the electrical components in sufficient detail to allow
for a determination that the manner of installation conforms to the National
Electrical Code; and
D.   For systems to be mounted on existing buildings, an engineering analysis
showing sufficient structural capacity of the receiving structure to support
the SES per the applicable code regulations, certified by a State licensed
professional engineer.
1.   Compliance with All Governmental Regulations. The owner or operator of the
SES shall obtain any other permits required by other federal, State, and local
agencies or departments prior to erecting the system.
2.   Installation and Inspection. Installation shall be subject to inspection
by the City Building Inspector. Installation must be done according
manufacturer’s recommendations. All work must be completed according to the
applicable building, fire, and electrical codes. All electrical components must
meet code recognized test standards.
3.   Color. The color of the support base of the SES shall be a neutral color.
All surfaces shall be non-reflective to minimize glare that could affect
adjacent or nearby properties. Measures to minimize nuisance glare may be
required including modifying the surface material, placement, or orientation of
the system, and if necessary, adding screening to block glare.
4.   Lighting. No lighting other than required safety lights or indicators
shall be installed on the SES.
5.   Signage. No advertising or signage other than the manufacturer’s
identification logo shall be permitted on the SES.
6.   Maintenance. The SES shall be well maintained in an operational condition
that poses no potential safety hazard. Should the SES fall into disrepair and
be in such dilapidated condition that it poses a safety hazard or would be
considered generally offensive to the senses of the general public, the SES may
be deemed a public nuisance and will be subject to abatement as such.
7.   Displacement of Parking Prohibited. The location of the SES shall not
result in the net loss of minimum required parking.
8.   Utility Notification. No SES that generates electricity shall be installed
until evidence has been given that the utility company has been informed of and
is in agreement with the customer’s intent to install an interconnected
customer owned generator. Off-grid systems shall be exempt from this
requirement.
9.   Interconnection. The SES, if interconnected to a utility system, shall
meet the requirements for interconnection and operation as set forth by the
utility and the Iowa Utilities Board.
10.   Restriction on Use of Energy Generated. A SES shall be used exclusively
to supply electrical power or thermal energy for on-site consumption, except
that excess electrical power generated by the SES and not presently needed for
on-site use may be used by the utility company in accordance with Section 199,
Chapter 15.11(5) of the Iowa Administrative Code.
11.   Shutoff. A clearly marked and easily accessible shutoff for any SES that
generates electricity will be required as determined by the Building Inspector.
12.   Electromagnetic Interference. All SESs shall be designed and constructed
so as not to cause radio and television interference. If it is determined that
the SES is causing electromagnetic interference, the operator shall take the
necessary corrective action to eliminate this interference including relocation
or removal of the facilities, subject to the approval of the appropriate City
authority. A permit granting an SES may be revoked if electromagnetic
interference from the SES becomes evident.
13.   Solar Access Easements. The enactment of this section does not constitute
the granting of an easement by the City. The owner or operator may need to
acquire covenants, easements, or similar documentation to assure sufficient
solar exposure to operate the SES unless adequate accessibility to the sun is
provided by the site. Such covenants, easements, or similar documentation is
the sole responsibility of the owner or operator. Should the owner or operator
pursue a solar access easement, the extent of the solar access should be
defined and the easement document executed in compliance with the regulations
contained in Chapter 564A of the Code of Iowa, (access to solar energy).
14.   Removal. If the SES remains nonfunctional or inoperative for a
continuance period of one year, the system shall be deemed to be abandoned. The
owner or operator shall remove the abandoned system at their expense. Removal
of the system includes the entire structure, collector panels, and related
equipment from the property excluding foundations. Should the owner or operator
fail to remove the system, the SES will be considered a public nuisance and
will be subject to abatement as such.
15.   Nonconforming Systems. An SES that has been installed on or before the
effective date of this chapter and is in active use and does not comply with
any or all of the provisions of this chapter shall be considered a legal
nonconforming structure under the provisions of the Zoning Code.
16.   Unsafe Condition. Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to prevent the
strengthening or restoring to a safe condition of any SES or associated
building or structure, or any part thereof, declared to be unsafe by the
appropriate authority.
17.   Bulk Regulations.
A.   Location.
   (1)   No more than one SES may be placed on any zoned lot unless otherwise
specifically approved by the Council.
   (2)   No SES shall be constructed within 20 feet laterally from an overhead
electrical power line, excluding secondary electrical service lines or service
drops.
   (3)   Ground Mounted SES.
      a.   No part of an SES shall be located within or over drainage, utility,
or other established easements, or on or over property lines.
      b.   The SES shall be located in accordance with the regulations for
accessory use on structures in Zoning Code or not less than one foot from the
property line for every one- foot of the system height measured at its maximum
height, whichever is more restrictive.
      c.   An SES shall not be located in the front yard setback.
      d.   An SES shall not be located in any required buffer or setback as set
forth in Section 167.07.
      e.   An SES located on a zero-lot line lot shall comply with requirements
set forth in Section 167.07 and shall not be located in the required 10-foot
side yard.
      f.   No portion of an SES shall be located closer than six feet to the
principal building or to any other building or structure on the lot or
location. In addition, an SES shall not occupy more than 30 percent of the rear
yard.
      g.   The setback from underground electrical distribution lines shall be
at least five feet.
      h.   No SES shall be located which may obstruct vision between a height
of 30 inches and 10 feet on any corner lot within a vision triangle of 25 feet
formed by intersecting street right-of-way lines.
   (4)   Building Mounted SES.
      i.   The SES shall be set back not less than one foot from the exterior
perimeter of the roof for every one foot the system extends above the parapet
wall or roof surface.
      j.   Should the SES be mounted on an existing structure that does not
conform to current setback requirements, the SES shall be installed to meet the
current setback requirements applicable to the structure.
      k.   The SES shall be designed to minimize its visual presence to
surrounding properties and public thoroughfares. Panel arrangements shall take
into account the proportion of the roof surface, and panels shall be placed in
a consistent manner without gaps unless necessary to accommodate vents,
skylights, or equipment.
      l.   Access pathways for the SES shall be provided in accordance to all
applicable building, fire, and safety codes.
      m.   The SES shall be located in such a manner that fall protection
railings are not required or are not visible from the public thoroughfare.
   (5)   Building Integrated SES.
      n.   No setback required.
      o.   Access pathways for the SES shall be provided in accordance to all
applicable building, fire, and safety codes.
      p.   The SES shall be located in such a manner that fall protection
railings are not required or are not visible from the public thoroughfare.
A.   Height.
   (1)   Ground Mounted SES. The maximum height of the SES shall not exceed 18
feet in height as measured from existing grade.
   (2)   Building Mounted SES.
      a.   The collector panel surface and mounting system shall not extend
higher than 18 inches above the roof surface of a sloped roof.
      b.   The collector panel surface and mounting system shall not extend
higher than seven feet above the roof surface of a flat roof.
   (3)   Building Integrated SES. The collector panel shall maintain a uniform
profile or surface with the building’s vertical walls, window openings, and
roofing.
A.   Size.
   (1)   Size of the SES is calculated by measuring the total surface area of
the collector panels for the system.
   (2)   Building mounted SES system size will be determined by the available
roof area subject to the installation, minus the required setbacks or access
pathways.
   (3)   Building integrated SES system size will be determined by the
available building surface area subject to the installation, minus the required
access pathways.
153.05   VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES.
Any violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be a municipal
infraction. In addition to the provisions set out herein, the City may proceed
in law or in equity against any person, firm, or corporation for violation of
any section or subsection of this chapter.
CHAPTER 155
BUILDING CODE
 
155.01 Adoption        155.05 Rules and Guidelines for Issuance
155.02 Fees            155.06 Issuance Authority
155.03 Permit Required 155.07 Exceptions
155.04 Amendments       
 
155.01   ADOPTION.
Except as hereby limited or amended, there is hereby adopted in full as the
complete building code of the City for all structures not covered by the 2015
International Residential Code, those certain codes known as the 2015
International Building Code, the 2015 International Existing Building Code, and
the 2015 International Swimming Pool and Spa Code as prepared, edited, and
published by the International Code Council, Inc. Updates, amendments, and
revisions may be made by the Council from time to time by resolutions and any
resolution passed pursuant to this section shall be considered a part of this
chapter.
155.02   FEES.
A fee schedule for the issuance of building permits is on file in the office of
the Clerk. The fee schedule shall be amended from time to time by resolution
and shall reflect as nearly possible the City’s cost in the issuance and
administration of building permits and building inspection. All fees required
under this chapter shall be collected by the Clerk prior to the issuance of a
building permit.
155.03   PERMIT REQUIRED.
Building permits are required under the following circumstances:
1.   For the construction of all commercial establishments, including multi-
family dwelling units and accessory structures.
2.   For construction of residential dwellings including single- family
dwellings or duplex units and accessory structures.
3.   Any solar energy system
4.   See Section 105.2 Work Exempt from Permit.
155.04   AMENDMENTS.
1.   Section 101.1 of the 2015 International Building Code is hereby repealed.
Said selection shall be replaced with the following:
These regulations shall be known as the Building Code of Solon, Iowa
2.   Section 202 is hereby amended by adding the following sentence to the end
of the definition:
Basement areas finished, with a non-bearing partition or improvements for uses
other than storage, and mechanical space shall be considered habitable space..
3.   Section 101.4 is hereby amended to delete Section 101.4 in its entirety
and replacing it with the following:
101.4 Referenced Codes. The other codes listed in Section 101.4 through 101.4.7
and referenced elsewhere in this Code shall be considered part of the
requirements of this Code to the prescribed extent of each such reference.
101.4.1 Electrical. The provisions of the Electrical Code adopted by the State
Electrical Board shall apply to the installation of electrical systems,
including alterations, repairs, replacement, equipment, appliances, fixtures,
fittings, and appurtenances thereto.
101.4.2 Gas. The provisions of the 2015 International Fuel Gas Code shall apply
to the installation of gas piping from the point of delivery, gas appliances,
and related accessories as covered in this Code. These requirements apply to
gas piping systems extending from the point of delivery to the inlet
connections of appliances and the installation and operation of residential and
commercial gas appliances and related accessories.
101.4.3 Mechanical. The provisions of the State Mechanical Code shall apply to
the installation, alteration, repairs, and replacement of mechanical systems,
including equipment, appliances, fixtures, fittings, or appurtenances including
ventilating, heating, cooling, air-conditions and refrigeration systems,
incinerators, and other energy related systems.
101.4.4 Plumbing. The provisions of the State Plumbing Code shall apply to the
installations, alteration, repair, and replacement of plumbing systems,
including all equipment, appliance, fixtures, fitting, and appurtenances, and
where connected to a water or sewage system and all aspects of a medical gas
system. The provisions of the International Private Sewage Disposal Code shall
apply to private sewage disposal systems.
101.4.5 Reserved.
101.4.4 Fire Prevention. The provisions of the 2015 International Fire Code and
as amended in Chapter 157 shall apply to matters affecting or relating to the
structures, processes, and premises from the hazard of fire and explosion
arising from the storage, handling, or use of structures, materials, or
devices; from conditions hazardous to life, property, or public welfare in the
occupancy of structures or premises; and from the construction, extension,
repair, alteration, or removal of fire suppression and alarm systems or fired
hazards in the structure or on the premises from occupancy or operation.
101.4.7 Energy. The provisions of the State Energy Conservation Code shall
apply to all the matters governing the design and construction of buildings for
energy efficiency.
101.4.8 Existing Buildings. The provisions of the 2015 International Existing
Building Code shall apply to matters governing the repair, alteration, change
of occupancy, addition to and relocation of existing buildings.
4.   Sections 105.1 and 105.1.1, and 105.1.2 are hereby amended by deleting
them in their entirety and replacing with the following:
105.1 Required. Any owner or authorized agent who intends to construct,
enlarge, alter, repair, move, demolish, or change the occupancy of a building
or structure, or to erect, install, enlarge, alter, repair, remove, convert, or
replace any electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing system; the installation
of which is regulated by this Code, or to cause any such work to be done, shall
first make application to the Building Official and obtain the required permit.
105.1.1 Issuance of Permits. No permit shall be issued to an individual who
does not have a valid license to perform such work.
105.1.2 License Required.
a)   Iowa Workforce Development contractor license
b)   State electrical contractor license with a Class A master electrician for
all electrical work defined by the State licensing program.
c)    State master license for hydronic, mechanical, medical gas, and plumbing
work defined by State contractor licensing program.
d)   National Institute for certification in Engineering Technologies (NICET)
Level III for any person designing water- based fire protection system.
e)   National Institute for certification in Engineering Technologies (NICET)
Level III for any person designing fire alarm system.
f)    City sewer and water installed pre-approval.
5.   Section 110.3 is hereby amended by deleting it in its entirety and
replacing with the following:
The Building Official, upon notification, shall make the inspections set forth
in Sections 110.3.1 through 110.3.10
1)   Erosion control installed.
2)   Setback staking inspection.
110.3.1 Footing and Foundation Inspection. Footing and foundation inspections
shall be made after excavations for footing are complete and any required
reinforcing steel is in place. For concrete foundations, any required forms
shall be in place prior to inspection. Materials from the foundation shall be
on the job, except where concrete is ready mixed in accordance with ASTM C 94,
the concrete need not be on the job.
110.3.2 Concrete Slab and Under-Floor Inspection. Concrete slab and under- foot
inspections shall be made after in-slab or under-slab reinforcing steel and
building service equipment, conduit, piping accessories, and other ancillary
equipment items are in place, but before any concrete is placed or floor
sheathing installed, including the subfloor.
110.3.3 Lowest Floor Elevation. In flood hazard areas, upon placement of the
lowest floor, including the basement, and prior to further vertical
construction, the elevation certification required in Section 1612.5 shall be
submitted to the Building Official.
110.3.4 Frame Inspection. Framing inspections shall be made after the roof deck
or sheathing, all flaming, fire-blocking, and bracing are in place and pipes,
chimneys, and vents to be concealed are complete and the rough electrical,
plumbing, heating wires, pipes, and ducts are approved.
110.3.5 Fire-Resistant Penetrations. Protection of joints and penetrations in
fire resistance-related assemblies shall not be concealed from the view until
inspected and approved.
110.3.6 Other Inspections. In addition to the inspections specified above, the
Building Official is authorized to make or require other inspections of any
construction work to ascertain compliance with the provisions of this Code and
other laws that are enforced by the Department of Building Safety.
110.3.7 Special inspections. For special inspections, see Section 1704.
110.3.8 Final Inspection. The final inspection shall be made after all work
required by the building permit is completed.
101.3.9 Erosion Control Installation.
110.3.10 Setback staking inspection.
6.   Section 501.2 is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced with the
following:
501.2 Address Numbers. Approved numbers or address shall be placed on all
buildings in accordance with the Fire Code.
7.   Section 1008.3.5(5) is hereby amended by deleting references to “300 feet”
and replacing it with “50 feet.”
8.   Section 1013.6.2 is hereby amended by deleting in its entirety and
replacing with the following:
1013.6.2 Exit Sign Illumination. In new construction, or if an exit sign is
replaced, exit signs shall use an LED lighting system and be illuminated
internally. Exit signs shall have a battery backup unless an on-site generator
set is used. Luminance on the face of an exit sign shall have an intensity of
not less than 5.0 foot- candles (53.82 lux).
9.   Section 1013 is hereby amended by adding the following sections:
1013.7 Combination Lights. Combination exit sign or emergency light devices are
prohibited in all new construction.
1013.8 Separation of Emergency Lighting. In new construction, emergency
lighting shall be separated from the exit sign by a minimum of six feet.
1013.9 Self-Luminous and Photo Luminescent Exit Signs. Self-luminous and photo
luminescent exit signs are not allowed. Exception: Approval self- luminous or
photo luminescent exit may be allowed in tents by approval of the Fire
Official.
1013.10 Self-Testing Exit Signs and Emergency Lights. Exit signs or emergency
lights mounted higher than eight and one-half feet from floor level to the
bottom of the exit sign or emergency light or if the exit sign or emergency
light is mounted in a location where it cannot be manually tested, the exit
sign or emergency light shall be self testing and have a visual diagnostic
indicator.
10.   Section 1301.1.l is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced with the
following:
Section 1301.1.1 Criteria. Buildings shall be designed and constructed in
accordance with the State Energy Conservation Code.
11.   Chapter 18 is hereby amended by adding the following section:
1805.4.4 Foundation Drainage Discharge Lines Required. All industrial,
commercial, and residential buildings with foundations that retain earth and
enclose habitable or usable space located below grade are required by the
Building Code to install a foundation drainage system. The foundation drainage
system shall discharge by gravity or mechanical means into an approved
stormwater collection system. The foundation discharge line shall be a minimum
three-inch diameter and installed in accordance with all applicable standards.
1.   In all new construction, plans for the installation of said sump pump and
footing drains shall be submitted with the building plans and shall be a
condition of approval of any plans. In all said plans, and construction of said
sump pumps and footing drains, the plans and construction shall be done in such
a manner as to comply with all requirements of this in disposing of all waters
of any kind as well as any sewage or waste.
2.   Replacement of any part of the discharge line at any time requires
approval of the Building Official.
3.   No person shall discharge sump pumps in such a manner as to cause or allow
the discharge to flow into a sanitary sewer system, into a public street,
across a public right-of-way or across a public sidewalk.
4.   When sump pump discharge is creating a hazard or nuisance and the property
adjoins or abuts an established stormwater system of the City or a sump pump
discharge collection system installed by the City, it is the obligation of the
property owner of all property serviced by a sump pump to connect the sump pump
to the stormwater drainage system or sump pump discharge collection system.
Said connection shall be made under the requirements imposed by this chapter
relating to permits and service line connections.
12.   The 2015 International Building Code is hereby amended by adding the
following requirements:
A.   Key Lock Box Requirements. The following structures constructed after the
effective date of the ordinance codified in this section shall be equipped with
a key lock box at the main entrance or such other location as required by the
City:
   (1)   Commercial or industrial structures;
   (2)   Multi-family residential structures defined as three or more dwelling
units that have restricted access through locked doors and have a common
corridor for access to the living units;
   (3)   Commercial structures on the main floor and residential dwelling units
on second or above floors;
   (4)   Governmental structures and nursing care facilities.
   (5)   Structures used for bed and breakfasts and short-term rental
properties.
B.   General Requirements. All newly constructed structures subject to this
section shall have the key lock box installed and operational prior to the
issuance of an Occupancy Permit.
   (1)   The City shall designate the type of key lock box system to be
implemented within the City and shall have the authority to require all
structures to use the designated system.
   (2)   The key lock box shall be located at or near the main entrance to the
building or property. It shall be mounted at a height of six feet above final
grade or at such grade as designated by the City.
   (3)   The owner or operator of a structure required to have a key lock box
shall, at all times, keep a key in the lock box that will allow for access to
the structure.
   (4)   The City shall be authorized to implement rules and regulations for
the use of the lock box system.
   (5)   Any property owner or building owner failing to comply with the terms
of this section shall be subject to a municipal infraction or simple
misdemeanor citation.
   (6)   No existing structures shall be required to comply with this section
unless the structure is issued a building permit that would include the
location in which the key lock box would be placed.
Application. The Council shall provide rules and regulations for the use of the
key lock box system and said rules and regulations shall be updated, from time
to time, by resolution.
13.   The 2015 International Building Code is hereby amended by adding the
following section: Residential Telecommunications Infrastructure Standard TIA-
570- B.
A.   Installation Required. All residential structures constructed after the
effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter shall be wired to the
following standards.
   (1)   Installation of at least one RG-6 cable and two Category 5 cables from
the service provider’s point of connection to a demarcation point within the
building.
   (2)   Installation of at least one RG-6 and one Category 5 cable from the
demarcation point to each of the following locations: kitchens, bedrooms,
family rooms, great rooms, living rooms, dens, and study rooms.
   (3)   Installation of at least one 120-volt electrical duplex outlet within
six feet of the demarcation point
   (4)   Installation of one Custom 7 conductor VDC and Battery Alarm Cable
(UL2464 A WG Unshielded Multi Conductor) from the service provider’s point of
connection to the demarcation point within the building.
155.05   RULES AND GUIDELINES FOR ISSUANCE.
The Council shall, by resolution, fix rules and guidelines for the issuance of
building permits within the City. These rules and guidelines shall establish
the information to be supplied by the applicant to the City for the issuance of
building permits and the procedure followed by the City to ensure compliance
with this Code of Ordinances.
155.06   ISSUANCE AUTHORITY.
The Mayor, or Mayor Pro Tem and the Zoning Officer are authorized to issue
building permits and Zoning and Use Registration Permits upon compliance with
the laws of the City. The rules and guidelines for the issuance of building
permits passed by resolution of the Council to implement this chapter are made
a part of this chapter as if set out in full herein.
155.07   EXCEPTIONS.
A permit may be issued without charge for special cases upon approval by
resolution of the Council.
CHAPTER 156
INTERNATIONAL RESIDENTIAL CODE FOR ONE- AND TWO-FAMILY DWELLINGS
 
156.01 Short Title                    156.04 Availability of the Building Code
156.02 International Residential Code 156.05 Board of Appeals
Adopted
156.03 Amendments to International     
Residential Code
 
156.01   SHORT TITLE.
The ordinance codified in this chapter shall be known as the “Solon Residential
Code,” may be cited as such, and will be referred to as such herein in this
chapter. Any higher standards in the State statute or City ordinance shall be
applicable.
156.02   INTERNATIONAL RESIDENTIAL CODE ADOPTED.
Except as hereinafter modified, that certain building code known as the
International Residential Code, 2015 Edition, including Appendices E titled
“Manufactured Housing Used as Dwellings,” F titled “Radon Controlled Methods,”
H Titled “Patio Covers,” and K titled “Sound Transmission” as published by the
International Code Council in cooperation with the International Conference of
Building Officials, which codes are specifically incorporated by reference
shall be known as the Building Code. The provisions of said Building Code shall
control the design, construction, quality of materials, erection, installation,
addition, alteration, repair, location, relocation, replacement, removal,
demolition, use, and maintenance of buildings and other structures within the
incorporated limits of the City.
156.03   AMENDMENTS TO INTERNATIONAL RESIDENTIAL CODE.
Certain sections, and portions of sections, of the International Code for One-
and Two-Family Dwellings, 2015 edition, are modified as set forth in this
section:
1.   Section R101.1 is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced with the
following:
These provisions shall be known as the Residential Code for One- and Two-
Family Dwellings of the City, and shall be cited as such and will be referred
to herein as is “this Code 1.”
2.   Section R105.1 is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced with the
following:
R105.1 Required. Any owner or owner’s authorized agent who intends to
construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, demolish, or change the occupancy of a
building or structure, or to erect, install, enlarge, alter, repair, remove,
convert, or replace any electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing system, the
installation of which is regulated by this Code, or to cause any such work to
be done, shall first make application to the Building Official and obtain the
required permit.
R105.1.1 Issuance of Permits. No permit shall be issued to an individual who
does not have a valid license to perform such work, except for State’s
exemption for a homeowner that qualifies for a Homestead Tax Exemption.
R105.1.2 Licenses Required.
a)   Iowa Workforce Development contractor license.
b)   State electrical contractor license with a Class A master electrician for
all electrical work defined by the State contractor licensing program.
c)   State master license for hydronic, mechanical, medical gas, and plumbing
work defined by State contractor licensing program.
d)   National Institute for certification in Engineering Technologies (NICET)
Level III for any person designing water- based fire protection system.
e)   National Institute for certification in Engineering Technologies (NICET)
Level III for any person designing fire alarm system.
f)   City sewer and water installer pre-approval.
3.   Section R105.2 and Building Subsection of R105.2, are hereby amended by
deleting it in its entirety and replacing it with the following:
R105.2 Work Exempt from Permit. Permits shall not be required for the
following, exemption from permit requirements of this Code shall not be deemed
to grant authorization for any work to be done in any manner in violation of
the provisions of this Code or any other laws or ordinances of this
jurisdiction.
1.   One-story detached accessory structures used as tool and storage sheds,
playhouses, and similar uses, provided die floor area does not exceed 144
square feet.
2.   Fences not over six feet high.
3.   Retaining walls that are not over four feet (1,219 mm) in height and
retaining walls, regardless of height, that are deemed to be critical to the
stabilization of a building foundation or are an element of support to any
structure that will have a lice load equal to or greater than 40 psf or is
equal to or greater than eight feet in height measured from bottom of the
footing to the top of the wall are required to be designed by a Professional
Structural Engineer.
4.   Water tanks supported directly upon grade if the capacity does not exceed
5,000 gallons (18,927 L) and the ratio of height to diameter or width does not
exceed two to one.
5.   Sidewalks and driveways. City sidewalks and driveway approaches require a
City permit.
6.   Painting, papering, tiling, carpeting, cabinets, counter tops, and similar
finish work.
7.   Prefabricated swimming pools that are less than 24 inches (610 mm) deep.
8.   Swings and other playground equipment.
9.   Window awnings supported by an exterior wall which do not project more
than 54 inches (1,372 mm) from the exterior wall and do not require additional
support.
10.   Decks not exceeding 200 square feet (18.58 m^2) in area, that are not
more than 30 inches (762 mm) above grade at any point and do not serve the exit
door required by Section R311.4.
11.   Reapplication of shingles and roof sheathing provided less than 50
percent of the sheathing is replaced and other structural alterations are not
required.
12.   Reapplication of siding.
13.   Window replacement provided window opening sizes are not altered and
conforming rescue and escape windows are present in all sleeping rooms.
4.   Section R108.3 is hereby amended by deleting it in its entirety and
replacing it with the following:
R108.3 Building Permit Valuations. The applicant for a permit shall provide an
estimated permit value at the time of application. Permit valuations shall
include total value of work, including materials and labor, for which the
permit is being issued, such as electrical, gas, mechanical, plumbing
equipment, and permanent systems. The Building Official shall verify the
applicant’s valuation by using the most current Building Valuation Data Table
published in Building Safety Journal to determine the permit value. Final
building permit valuation shall be set by the Building Official.
5.   Section R301.2 is hereby amended by deleting Section R301.2 in its
entirety and replacing it with the following Section R301.2 and the
corresponding table as shown below:
R301.2 Climatic and Geographic Design Criteria. Buildings shall be constructed
in accordance with the provisions of this Code as limited by the provisions of
this section. Additional criteria shall be established by the local
jurisdiction and set forth in Table R301.2(1).
 
 
Table R301.2(1)
Climatic and Geographic Design Criteria Subject to Damage From
                                                             Ice
Ground Wind  Seismic             Frost                Winter Shield                 Air      Mean
Snow   Speed Design   Weathering Line   Termite Decay Design Under-   Flood Hazards Freezing Annual
Load   MPH   Category            Depth                Temp   layment                Index    Temp
                                                             Required
25     115   A        Severe     42     M-H     S-M   -5 F   Yes      8/22/         50 F     50 F
                                 inches                               02   2,000
 
6.   Section R302.2 is hereby amended by deleting it in its entirety and
replacing with the following:
R302.2 Townhouses. Each townhouse shall be considered a separate building and
shall be separated by fireresistance-rated wall assemblies meeting the
requirements of Section R302 for exterior walls. A common two-hour fire-
resistance-rated wall is permitted for townhouses if such walls do not contain
plumbing or mechanical equipment, ducts, or vents in the cavity of the common
wall. Electrical installations shall be installed in accordance with Chapters
33 through 42. Penetrations of electrical outlet boxes shall be in accordance
with Section R302.3.
7.   Section R302.S is hereby amended by deleting it in its entirety and
replacing with the following:
R302.5.1 Opening Protection. Openings from a private garage directly into a
room used for sleeping purposes shall not be permitted. Other openings between
the garage and residence shall be equipped with solid wood doors not less than
one and three-eighths inches, solid or honeycomb core steels doors not less
than one and three-eighths inches thick, or 20-minute fire-rated doors.
8.   The following sections shall be deleted from this code:
Delete R302.13 Fire Protection of Floors.
Delete R309.5 Fire Sprinklers, (re: garages).
Delete R312.2 Window fall protection.
Delete R313.2 One- and Two-Family Dwellings Automatic Fire Systems.
9.   Section R313.1 is hereby amended by deleting it in its entirety and
replacing with the following:
R313.1 Townhouse Automatic Fire Sprinkler Systems.
An automatic residential fire sprinkler system shall be installed in townhouses
with five or more units.Exceptions:An automatic residential fire sprinkler
system shall not be required when additions or alterations are made to existing
townhouses that do not have an automatic residential fire sprinkler system
installed.
10.   Section R317.1 is hereby amended by deleting it in its entirety and
replacing with the following:
R317.1 Location Required. Protection of wood and wood-based products from decay
shall be provided in the following locations by the use of naturally durable
wood or wood that is preservative-treated in accordance with AWPA UI for the
species, product, preservative, and end use. Preservatives shall be listed in
Section 4 of AWPA UI.
   1.   Wood joists or the bottom of a wood structural floor when closer than
18 inches (457 mm) or wood girders when closer than 12 inches (305 mm) to the
exposed ground in crawl spaces or unexcavated area located within the periphery
of building foundation.
   2.   All wood framing members that rest on concrete or masonry exterior
foundation walls and are less than eight inches (203 mm) from the exposed
ground.
   3.   Sills and sleepers on a concrete or masonry slab that is in direct
contact with the ground unless separated from such slab by an impervious
moisture barrier.4.   The ends of wood girders entering exterior masonry or
concrete walls having clearances of less than one-half inch (12.7 mm) on tops,
sides, and ends.
   5.   Wood siding, sheathing, and wall framing on the exterior of a building
having clearance of less than six inches (152 mm) from the ground or less than
two inches (51 mm) measured vertically from concrete steps, porch slabs, patios
slabs, and similar horizontal surfaces exposed to the weather and installed
with frost protection methods approved by the Building Official.
   6.   Wood structural members supporting moisture-permeable floors or roofs
that are exposed to the weather, such as concrete masonry slabs, unless
separated from such floors or roofs by an impervious moisture barrier.
   7.   Wood furring strips or other wood framing members attached directly to
the interior of exterior masonry walls or concrete walls below grade except
where an approved vapor retarder is applied between the wall and the furring
strips or framing members.
11.   Section 403.1(1) is hereby amended by deleting the table and replacing it
with the following table, named TABLE R403.1(1)
Minimum width of concrete, precast, or masonry footings (inches) Minimum two #4
reinforcement steel bars shall be placed continuously in the footing a minimum
of three inches from bottom, top, and sides of the footing.
 
        Load-Bearing Value of Soil (psf)
        1,500 psf                                             2,000 psf
        Conventional Light-Frame Construction                  
1 story 12                                                    12
2 story 15                                                    12
3 story                                                       
       4-inch brick veneer over light frame or 8-inch hollow  
        concrete masonry
1 story 12                                                    12
2 story 21                                                    16
3 story 32                                                    24
       8-inch solid or fully grouted masonry                  
1 story 16                                                    12
2 story 29                                                    21
3 story 42                                                    32
 
12.   Section R404.1.1 is hereby amended by adding the following exception:
   3.   Foundation walls with unbalanced lateral forces created by finish grade
(i.e. walkout basements) which are exempt by the Iowa Architectural Act shall
be designed by a licensed structural engineer or constructed in accordance with
the diagram attached hereto as Exhibit B.
13.   Delete Tables R404.1.2 (3) and R404.12 (8) and insert the following:
 
Minimum Vertical Reinforcement for Eight-Inch-Thick Concrete Wall
Wall                 Vertical Reinforcement Bar Size and Spacing
Less than 6-feet     Not
6 feet to 8 feet     #4 at 32 inches o.c.
9 feet to 10 feet    #4 at 10 inches o.c. #5 at 16 inches o.c. #6 at 22 inches
                     o.c.
Greater than 10 feet Design
 
14.   The following section is added to the 2015 International Residential
Code:
R406.3.5 Foundation Drainage Discharge Lines Required.
   1.   All industrial, commercial, and residential buildings with foundations
that retain earth and enclose habitable or usable space located below grade are
required by the Building Code to install a foundation drainage system. The
foundation drainage system shall discharge by gravity or mechanical means into
an approved stormwater collection system. The foundation discharge line shall
be a minimum three-inch diameter and installed in accordance with all
applicable standards.
   2.   In all new construction, plans for the installation of said sump pump
and footing drains shall be submitted with the building plans and shall be a
condition of approval of any plans, and construction shall be done in such a
manner as to comply with all the requirements of this in disposing of all
waters of any kind as well as any sewage or waste.
   3.   Replacement of any part of the discharge line at any time requires
approval of the Building Official.
   4.   No person shall discharge sump pumps in such a manner as to cause or
allow the discharge to flow into a sanitary sewer system, into a public street,
across a public right-of-way or across a public sidewalk.
   5.   When sump pump discharge is creating a hazard or nuisance and the
property adjoins or abuts an established stormwater system of the City or a
sump pump discharge collection system installed by the City, it is the
obligation of the property owner of all property serviced by a sump pump to
connect the sump pump to the stormwater drainage system or sump pump discharge
collection system. Said connection shall be made under the requirements imposed
by this chapter relating to permits and service line connections.
15.   The following section is hereby deleted:
Section R612 Windowsills.
156.04   AVAILABILITY OF THE BUILDING CODE.
An official copy of the Residential Code, including a certificate by the Clerk
as to its adoption and effective date thereof, is on file in the office of the
Clerk in the administration building, and shall be kept there on file. Copies
shall be available at the Department of Building Safety Public Inspection.
Additionally, of the International Building Code, 2015 edition, and the
International Residential Code for One- and Two-Family Dwellings, 2015 edition,
are available to the public at the Solon Public Library.
156.05   BOARD OF APPEALS.
1.   In order to hear and decide appeals of orders, decisions, or
determinations made by the Building Official relative to the application and
interpretation of the Building Code, there is hereby established a Board of
Appeals consisting of five members who are residents of the City and qualified
and experienced in training to pass on matters pertaining to building
construction and who are nor employees or officials of the City. The terms of
office for the members of the Board shall be staggered five-year terms, such
that only one regular term expires each year so as to provide continuity in
policy and personnel. Each term shalt commence on July 1. The Board of Appeals
shall be appointed by the Mayor with Council approval.
2.   Any person affected by any written notice or order of the Building
Official may appeal to the Board of Appeals. The appeal must be made in writing
and filed with the office of the Clerk within seven days of the written notice
or order from which the appeal is taken. The Board of Appeals shall have no
authority to waive the requirements of the Building Code.
3.   The Board of Appeals shall conduct a hearing following the filing of a
written notice of appeal within the established time limits. The Board of
Appeals shall set a time and place for the hearing. Notice of such hearing
shall be posted and be open to the public in compliance with the State open
meeting law. The applicant will be advised, in writing of such time and place
of hearing at least seven days prior to the date of the hearing. At the
hearing, the applicant shall have an opportunity to testify and present
evidence to show cause why the notice or order should be modified, extended, or
revoked. The Board of Appeals may sustain, overrule, modify, or revoke a notice
or order. A hearing may be continued from time to time for good cause at the
request of the applicant, City, or the Board. The burden of proof shall be on
the applicant.
4.   This section supersedes the establishment of an appellate board in the
Building Code and related codes incorporated by reference.
CHAPTER 157
INTERNATIONAL FIRE CODE
 
157.01 Purpose           157.04 Fees
157.02 Sections Revised  157.05 Amendments to the Fire Code
157.03 Geographic Limits  
 
157.01   PURPOSE.
That a certain document, one copy of which is on file in the office of the
Clerk being marked and designated International Fire Code, 2015 edition,
including Appendix Chapters B, C, D, E, F, G, H, I, K, L, as published by the
International Code Council, be and is hereby adopted as the Fire Code of the
City, in the State regulating and governing the safeguarding of life and
property from fire and explosion hazards arising from the storage, handling,
and use of hazardous substances, materials, and devices, and from conditions
hazardous to life or property in the occupancy of buildings and premises as
herein provided; providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees
therefore; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties,
conditions, and terms of said Fire Code on file in the office of the City are
hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in
this legislation, with the additions, insertions, deletions, and changes, if
any, prescribed in Section
157.02.
157.02   SECTIONS REVISED.
That the following sections are hereby revised:
Section 101.1. Insert: City of Solon.
Section 109.4. Insert: Municipal infraction, as prescribed in City Municipal
Code, Chapter 1.18; Municipal Infraction.
Section 111.4. Insert: $500.00, repeat offense $750.00.
Section 1103.5.3. Insert: Five years from date of notification.
157.03   GEOGRAPHIC LIMITS.
That the geographic limits referred to in certain sections of the 2015
International Fire Code are hereby established as follows:
Section 3404.2.9.6.1. The storage of Class I and Class II liquids in above-
ground tanks outside of buildings is prohibited in the entire City.
Exceptions: As approved by the Fire Chief.
Section 6104.2. The storage of liquefied petroleum gas is prohibited in the
entire City.
Exceptions: 1-1 and 1-2 Zoning Districts or as approved by the Fire Chief.
157.04   FEES.
Fees for inspections, re-inspections, plans review, acceptance testing,
permits, and other services related to enforcement of this Code shall be
established by the Council by resolution and paid to the Fire Department.
157.05   AMENDMENTS TO THE FIRE CODE.
The following sections are amended to read as follows:
Section 104.12. Add a new section to read as follows: The Code Official is
authorized to order an operation or use stopped or the evacuation of any
premises, building, or vehicle, or portion thereof, which has or is a fire,
life safety, or health hazard.
Section 105.2. Add a sentence to the end of the section to read as follows:
Application for an operational permit shall be submitted with all required
information not less than 14 days prior to the event requiring a permit.
Section 105.4. Add a sentence to the end of the section to read as follows: The
Fire Code Official ,at their discretion, shall send plans to an outside agency
for review. The Fire Code Official shall choose the plans review agency. The
applicant shall pay all fees associated with the plan review directly to the
outside agency. A Certificate of Occupancy shall not be issued until the review
fees have been paid.
Section 105.6. Add a sentence to the end of the section to read as follows: The
Fire Code Official, at their discretion, shall send plans for operational
permits requests to an outside agency for review. The Fire Code Official shall
choose the plans review agency. The applicant shall pay all fees associated
with the plan review directly to the outside agency. The permit shall not be
issued until the review fees have been paid.
Section 108. Delete in its entirety. See City Ordinance 99.18; Boards of
Appeals.
Section 202. Add a new definition to read as follows: Code Official. The Fire
Chief, the Assistant Fire Chief, or the Chief’s authorized representative.
Section 307. See also City Ordinance 8.12.020, Section 0, Open Burning.
Section 307.1.1. Delete the section and replace with: Prohibited burning.
Burning that is offensive or objectionable because of smoke or odor emissions
or when atmospheric conditions or local circumstances make such fires hazardous
shall be prohibited.
Section 3073. Delete the section and replace with: Extinguishment authority.
The Fire Code Official is authorized to order the extinguishment by the
responsible person or the Fire Department of any burning that creates or adds
to a hazardous or objectionable situation.
Section 312.3. Delete the words: or visually deter.
Section 401.9. Add a new section to read as follows: Building evacuation. Upon
activation of the building fire alarm system or upon notification by other
means of detecting and reporting unwanted lire, all building occupants shall
promptly evacuate the building. Building employees and tenants shall implement
the appropriate emergency plan and procedures. Exception: When the emergency
evacuation plan, as approved by the Fire Code Official, does not require the
immediate total evacuation of the building.
Section 405.2. Add to the end of the section as follows: Fire and evacuation
drills in Group E occupancies, daycares, and preschools shall be conducted in
accordance with Section 100.31 of the Code of Iowa. Emergency evacuation or
fire drills shall be conducted at least four times a year. Not less than two
drills shall be conducted between July 1 and December 31 of each year and not
less than two drills shall be conducted between January 1 and June 30 of each
year. The Fire Department shall conduct one of the two drills during July 1 and
December 31 and one of the two drills during January 1 and June 30 of each
year. The Fire Department emergency evacuation or fire drills shall be
unannounced.
Section 405.2. Table Add footnote e as follows: Group E occupancies, excluding
preschools and daycares shall conduct fire and evacuation drills at least four
times a year in accordance with Section 100.31 of the Code of Iowa. Footnote
shall be added to Group E occupancy frequency.
Section 503.1.1. Delete exception 1.1 and replace with: The dimension can be
increased up to 200 feet if the building is equipped throughout with an
approved NFPA 13 automatic sprinkler system.
Section 505.1. Delete the section and replace with: Approved numbers or
addresses shall be placed on all new and existing buildings in such a position
as to be plainly visible and legible from the street or road fronting the
property. Said numbers shall contrast with their background. Address numbers
and exterior suite numbers shall be in Arabic numerals or alphabet letters a
minimum of four inches in height with a minimum stroke width of one-half inch.
Where access is by means of a private road and the building cannot be viewed
from the public way, a monument, pole, or other sign or means shall be used to
identify the structure. Exterior address location for commercial buildings
shall be determined by the Code Official.
Exceptions:
1.   Monument signs shall have the address installed a minimum of 36 inches
from the ground.
2.   Addresses located 100 to 199 feet from the street shall have a minimum of
six inches in height with a minimum stroke width of one-half inch. Addresses
located 200 to 299 feet from the street shall have a minimum of eight inches in
height with a minimum stroke width of one inch. For each additional 100 feet
from the street, the number shall increase by an additional two inches in
height with the stroke increased proportionally. Measurements to determine the
minimum number or letter size shall be measured from the approved address
location to the center line of the street for which the premise is addressed.
Minimum height and minimum stroke may be increased by the Code Official.
3.   Interior suite numbers shall be a minimum of three inches in height.
Section 505.3. Add a new section to read as follows: Addresses for Buildings
under Construction. All new commercial and residential buildings under
construction shall have plainly visible addresses from the street. The
temporary address sign shall be approved and issued by the City Building
Department and be placed no further than 10 feet from the street. Additional
address signage may be required at the discretion of the Code Official.
Section 506.1. Add a sentence to the end of the section to read as follows: An
approved key box shall be installed in accordance to the City Ordinance 15.34,
Key Lock Box.
Section 5073. Delete the section and replace with: Fire Flow. Fire flow
requirements for buildings or portions of buildings shall be determined by
“Appendix B” of this Code.
Section 507.5.l. Delete exceptions 1 and 2.
Section 507.5.1.1. Delete section and add a new section to read as follows:
Fire Sprinkler System and Standpipe System Support. A fire hydrant shall be
located no more than 100 feet from a fire sprinkler or standpipe system
connection on hard surface, easily accessible by fire apparatus, and meeting
the approval of the Code Official.
Section 507.5.7. Add a new section to read as follows: Fire Hydrant
Installation.
Section 507.5.7.2. Add a new section to read as follows: Fire hydrant outlet
direction: All fire hydrants shall be positioned so that the four and one-half
inch connection is facing the street or driveway accessible to Fire Department
apparatus.
Section 507.5.73. Fire hydrants threads: All new fire hydrants within the
limits of the City shall have National Standard Threads (NST) on the two and
one-half inch connections and the four and one-half inch connection will have a
Storz connection.
Section 507.5.7.4. Flow: The minimum flow requirements for a water main serving
a fire hydrant is the rate of water-flow, at a residual pressure of 20 pounds
per square inch (20 psi) and for a specified duration, as specified in Appendix
B of this Code.
Section 507.5.7.5. Add a new section to read as follows: Fire Hydrant height:
Fire hydrants shall be installed a minimum of 18 inches from the nominal ground
level to the center of the lowest water outlet.
Section 510.1. Delete exceptions 1 and 2.
Section 605.10. Delete the section and replace with: Portable, electric, space
heaters. Portable electric space heaters shall comply with Sections 605.10.1
through 605.10.5.
Section 605.10.5. Add a new section to read as follows: Fully Enclosed.
Portable, electric space heaters shall be fully enclosed space heaters that by
design have no external surfaces that reach temperatures capable of igniting
materials placed against the surface.
Section 607.7. Add a sentence to the end of the section to read as follows: The
required elevator keys shall be secured in an approved elevator key box in an
approved location by the Fire Code Official.
Section 609.4. Delete the last sentence and replace with: Movement of new and
existing cooking appliances with caster(s) under a Type I hood shall be limited
by an approved floor mounted restraining device and flexible gas connector
installed in accordance with the connector and appliance manufacturer’s
instructions.
Section 609.5. Add a new section to read as follows: Required Separation. All
deep- fat fryers shall be installed with at least 16-inch space between the
fryer and surface flames from adjacent cooking equipment. Where a steel or
tempered glass baffle plate is installed at a minimum eight-inch height between
the fryer and surface flames to the adjacent appliance, the requirement for a
16-inch space shall not apply.
Section 609.6. Add a new section to read as follows: Kitchen Hood Exhaust Fan
Hinge Requirement. New and existing Type I hood kitchen hood exhaust or up
blast fans shall be installed with listed hinges, weatherproof electrical
cable, and hold open retainer for servicing and cleaning.
Section 803.11. Add a new section to read as follows: Maintenance. The interior
finish of buildings shall be maintained in accordance with the conditions of
original approval. Any change to the interior finish that is regulated by the
provisions of this Code or the Building Code shall be made in accordance with
all applicable requirements.
Section 806.1. Add a sentence to the end of the section to read as follows:
Natural or resin-bearing cut trees and natural decorative vegetation used in
buildings open to the general public shall be properly treated with an approved
flame retardant.
Section 806.1.1. Delete the section and replace with: Restricted Occupancies.
Natural cut trees shall be prohibited in Group A, B, E, 1-1, 1-2, 1-3, 14, M,
R-1, R-2, and R-4 occupancies.
Exceptions:
Trees located in areas protected by an approved automatic sprinkler system
installed in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1 or 903.3.1.2 shall not be
prohibited in Groups A, B, E, M, R-1, and R-2.
Trees shall be allowed within dwelling units in Group R-2 occupancies.
Section 807.5.2.1. Delete exceptions 1 and 2.
Section 901.2(a). Add a new section to read as follows: Water Based Fire
Protection Systems. Working plans submitted to the Fire Department for water-
based fire protection systems shall be stamped and approved by a qualified
person to be in compliance with applicable NFPA Standards and the Fire Code.
Any changes to the working plans shall be approved by a qualified person. A
qualified person shall have a minimum of National Institute for Certification
in Engineering Technologies (NICET) Level III certification for automatic
sprinkler system layout or be a licensed engineer with experience in life
safety system design. Other qualifications may be approved by the Code
Official.
Section 901.2(b). Add a new section to read as follows: Fire Alarm Systems.
Working plans submitted to the Fire Department by a qualified person for fire
alarm systems shall be stamped and approved by a qualified person to be in
compliance with applicable NFPA Standards and the Fire Code. Any changes to the
working plans shall be approved by a qualified person. A qualified person shall
have a minimum National Institute for Certification in Engineering Technologies
(NICET) Level III certification for fire alarm systems or be a licensed
engineer with experience in life safety system design. Other qualifications may
be approved by the Code Official.
Section 901.6.2.2. Add a new section to read as follows: Inspection Record
Submission. Contractors who perform installation, inspection, testing, or
maintenance services on fire and life safety systems are required to
electronically submit all installation and compliant and non-compliant
inspection reports to the Fire Department via a method approved by the Fire
Code Official within 30 calendar days of the installation or inspection date.
Reports submitted after 30 calendar days may incur late fees.
Section 901.7. Add a sentence to the end of the section to read as follows: A
person assigned to firewatch must walk through the building at least once every
30 minutes checking for fire or smoke. A firewatch must be continued until the
fire alarm system or fire protection system has been restored to normal
operating condition or the building has been evacuated. A competent adult
familiar with the building must conduct the firewatch. If a fire is discovered,
call 911 and immediately evacuate the building.
Section 9033.1.12. Delete the section and replace with: Bathrooms. Sprinkler
protection shall be provided in all bathrooms in NFPA 13 and NFPA 13R systems
regardless of the bathroom size.
Section 9033.53. Add a new section to read as follows: Water Supply Safety
Margin. Provide a minimum 10 percent but not less than five psi, safety margin
below the available water supply flow test curve at full system demand and
required hose stream allowances. Flow test must have been conducted within 90
days of the fire sprinkler plan submitted to the City and third-party reviewer
(if applicable).
Section 9033.5.4. Add a new section to read as follows: Fire Sprinkler Riser
Room. Fire sprinkler riser room shall be separated from electrical room and
have no electrical panels inside the rooms other than the outlets required for
the use of the fire sprinkler system or fire alarm panel. The fire sprinkler
riser room shall have an exterior access door and a floor drain. The room shall
have a hard, cleanable walking from the Fire Department access road.
Exception: Non-mixed-use R-2 Occupancies and approval by Code Official.
Section 903.43. Delete the section and replace with: Alarms. An approved
weatherproof horn or strobe device shall be mounted directly above the Fire
Department connection between seven and 10 feet in height above grade. The
water- flow alarm device shall be activated by water-flow equivalent to the
flow of a single sprinkler of the smallest orifice size installed in the
system. Approved and supervised audible visual notification appliances shall be
installed throughout each level of the interior of the building as required by
the Fire Code Official and NFPA 72.
Section 903.5. Add a sentence to the end of the section to read as follows: An
inspector’s test valve is required at the most remote location in each fire
sprinkler system or tenant or floor control valve space, for use at the
acceptance test and to remove air from the system after maintenance work is
done on the system.
Section 903.7. Add a new section to read as follows: Zones. Automatic sprinkler
system zones shall not exceed the area permitted by NFPA 13 or NFPA 13R and
shall provide a sprinkler control valve and water-flow device for each normally
occupied floor or normally occupied space in a multi-tenant building. Except by
approval of the Fire Code Official, all control valves shall be located in the
sprinkler system riser room.
Section 903.8. Add a new section to read as follows: Fire sprinkler for
canopies. A canopy covering a door that is required to be marked as an exit
shall be required to have fire sprinklers installed outside that door if the
canopy extends more than four feet out from the door and is 12 feet or less in
height from the ground regardless of whether the canopy is combustible or
noncombustible. Canopies that have vehicle access under them with door openings
shall be required to have fire sprinklers installed under the total canopy
regardless of whether he canopy is combustible or non-combustible. Exception:
If the Code does not require a building to have a fire sprinkler system,
Section 903.8 does not apply.
Section 904.12.2.1. Add a new section to read as follows: System Annunciation.
Commercial cooking automatic fire extinguishing systems installed in buildings
that do not have a fire alarm system, shall be connected to an approved audible
and visible emergency notification device to warn of system discharge. The horn
or strobe and signage shall be installed in location approved by the Fire Code
Official, typically in the kitchen.
Section 904.12.6.4. Add a new section to read as follows: Ventilation
Operation. The ventilation system shall shut down the make-up air to the hood
and continue to exhaust upon activation of the hood fire extinguishing system.
Supply air openings other than part of the hood system shall be a minimum of
six feet from any part of a Type 1 Hood. Supply air openings closer than six
feet must shut down upon activation of the extinguishing system. Exception:
Section 904.12.6.6 may be revoked if the fire extinguishing agent will not
perform to specifications due to exhausting requirements.
Section 905.1.1. Add a new section to read as follows: Delete all references to
Class II Standpipe System and replace with Class III Standpipe Systems.
Section 905.3.9. Add a new section to read as follows: Additional Standpipe
Systems: Additional standpipe systems may be added to new buildings or
structures as deemed necessary by the Code Official.
Section 905.9. Delete exception 2 without substitution.
Section 906.1. Delete the exception without substitution.
Section 906.3. Add a sentence to the end of the section to read as follows: The
minimum size and rating of any required portable fire extinguisher for Class A,
Class B, or Class C hazard shall be 51b, 2-A, 10-B C.
Section 907.1.4. Add a new section to read as follows: Fire alarm control
panels and fire alarm annunciator panels. Installation of fire alarm control
panels and fire alarm annunciator panels shall be installed in accordance with
Section 907.1.4.1 through Section 907.1.4.5.
Section 907.1.4.1. Add a new section to read as follows: Fire Alarm Panel
Height. Installation of fire alarm panels shall not exceed six feet in height
measured from the floor to the top of the panel. Exception: Panel height may be
altered by the Code Official.
Section 907.1.4.2. Add a new section to read as follows: Number of Fire Alarm
Control Panels in Buildings. Only one listed fire alarm control panel shall be
allowed per building and shall lock in the alarm until the system is reset and
shall not be canceled by the operation of an audible-alarm silencing switch.
This control panel shall only receive alarm signals from fire protection
equipment.
Section 907.1.4.3. Add a new section to read as follows: Combination Fire or
Security Alarm System Panels. A listed combination fire or security alarm
system panel that meets all the requirements of this Code and amendments may be
permitted by approval of the Fire Code Official. The fire or security panel
shall be capable of providing a signal that can differentiate between the fire
and security alarm.
Section 907.1.4.4. Add a new section to read as follows: Password or PIN
Protection Prohibited. Fire alarm control panels or fire alarm annunciator
panels that require a password or PIN to silence an alarm, supervisory, or
trouble signal or to reset an alarm, supervisory, or trouble signal shall be
prohibited.
Section 907.1.4.5. Add a new section to read as follows: Fire Alarm Annunciator
Panels. The Fire Code Official can require addition fire alarm annunciator
panels based on the size of building and access to the building, these panels
shall meet the requirements of Section 1907.1.4 and Section 907.2.
Section 907.2. Delete the section and replace with: Where required new
buildings and structures. An approved and addressable manual, automatic, or
manual and automatic fire alarm system installed in accordance with the
provisions of this Code and NFPA 72 shall be provided in new building and
structures in accordance with Sections 907.2.1 through 907.2.23 and provide
occupant notification in accordance with Section 907.10, unless other
requirements are provided by another section of this Code. A minimum of one
manual fire alarm box shall be provided in an approved location to initiate a
fire alarm signal for fire alarm system employing automatic fire detectors or
water-flow devices. Where other sections of this Code allow elimination of fire
alarm boxes due to sprinklers, a single fire alarm box shall be installed.
Exceptions:
The manual fire alarm box is not required for fire alarm systems dedicated to
elevator recall control and supervisory service.
The manual fire alarm box is required for Group R-2 occupancies to provide a
means for fire watch personnel to initiate an alarm during a sprinkler system
impairment event. The manual fire alarm box shall not be located in an area
that is accessible to the public.
Multi-tenant buildings required to have a manual or automatic fire alarms
system shall install one manual pull station per tenant space.
Section 907.2.1.2. add a new section to read as follows: Electrical Shunt for
Amplified Sound Conditions. Group A occupancies having an occupant load of 300
or more, electrical shunts shall be provided to de-energize the music or sound
systems upon fire alarm activation.
Section 907.2.11.2. Modify by adding a fourth location requirement as follows:
4) Supervised smoke detectors shall be installed in all common corridors and at
the top and bottom of all stairway enclosures in Groups R-2, R-4, and 1-
1 occupancies. In corridors, detectors shall be located within 15 feet of the
end of the corridor and in such a way that one detector is located for each 30
feet of corridor length or spaced as allowed by the Code.
Section 907.4.2. Add a sentence to the end of the section to read as follows:
Where, in the opinion of the Code Official, manual fire alarm boxes may be used
to cause false fire alarms, the Code Official is authorized to modify the
requirements for manual fire alarm boxes.
Section 907.5.23.4. Add a new section to read as follows: Alarm Signal
Deactivation. Both audible and visual appliances shall shut off when the signal
silence feature is activated on the fire alarm control panel or the fire alarm
annunciator panel. Exception: Exterior water-flow horn or strobe.
Section 907.6.43. Add a new section to read as follows: Zone and Address
Location Labeling. Fire alarm or annunciator panels shall have all zones and
address points plainly and permanently labeled as to their location on the
outside of the panel or on an easily readable map of the building map of the
building, if no display is present.
Section 907.6.6. Delete the section and replace with: Monitoring. Fire alarms
required by this chapter, the International Building Code, or the Code
Official, an approved UL listed Central Station service in accordance with NFPA
72 shall monitor fire alarm systems to provide for the immediate and automatic
notification of the Fire Department.
Exception: Monitoring by a supervising station is not required for:
Single- and multiple-station smoke alarms required by Section 907.2.11.
Smoke detectors in Group 1-3 occupancies.
Automatic sprinkler systems in one- and two-family dwellings.
Fire alarm systems in one- and two-family dwellings.
Section 907.6.63. Add a new section to read as follows: Each address point ID
shall have an alpha or numeric descriptor location. Alpha or numeric descriptor
locations are required to be reported to the Emergency Communications or
Dispatch Center upon activation of a water-flow tamper or alarm conditions as
specified by the Fire Code Official.
Section 907.10. Add a new section to read as follows: Approved Hold-Open
Devices. When installed in buildings that have a fire alarm system or sprinkler
system, all approved hold open devices shall release upon activation of a fire
alarm and sprinkler system water-flow activation.
Section 912.4.1. Delete the sentence and replace with: Locking Fire Department
Connection Caps. Locking Fire Department connections caps approved by the Fire
Department are required for all new construction that have a water-based fire
protective system and existing structures that have a water-based fire
protective system immediately after conducting the five-year obstruction and
maintenance testing or if one or more of the Fire Department caps are missing.
Section 912.8. Add a section to read as follows: Fire Department Connection
Height. The Fire Department connection shall be located not less than 18 inches
from the bottom of the cap(s) and not more than three feet from the top of the
cap(s) above the level of the adjacent grade or access level. Deviation from
this height may be granted by the Code Official for just cause.
Section 912.9. Add a section to read as follows: Size. Minimum Fire Department
connection size shall be 2VS inches National Standard Thread.
Section 1008.33. Delete number 5 and replace with: 5. Public restrooms with an
area greater than 50 square feet.
Section 1013.6.2. Delete the section and replace with: Exit Sign Illumination.
In new construction, or if an exit sign is replaced, exit signs shall use an
LED lighting system and be illuminated internally. Exit signs shall have a
battery backup unless an on-site generator set is used. Luminance on the face
of an exit sign shall have an intensity of not less than five point zero foot-
candles (53.82 lux).
Section 1013.7. Add a new section to read as follows: Combination Lights. In
new construction, combination exit sigh or emergency light devices shall not be
allowed.
Section 1013.8. Add a new section to read as follows: Separation of Emergency
Lighting. In new construction, emergency lighting shall be separated from the
exit sign by a minimum of six feet.
Section 1013.9. Add a new section to read as follows: Self-Luminous and
Photoluminescent Exit Signs. Self-luminous and photoluminescent exit signs are
not allowed.
Exception: Approved self-luminous or photoluminescent exit may be allowed in
tents by approval of the Code Official.
Section 1013.10. Add a new section to read as follows: Self-Testing Exit Signs
and Emergency Lights. Exit signs or emergency lights mounted higher than eight
and one-half feet from floor level to the bottom of the exit sign or emergency
light or if the exit sign or emergency light is mounted in a location where it
cannot be manually tested, the exit sign or emergency light shall be self-
testing and have a visual diagnostic indicator.
Section 1013.11. Add a new section to read as follows: Exit Signs and Emergency
Lights. Exit signs or emergency lights that are not self-testing and do not
have a visual diagnostic indicator shall be on a dedicated electrical circuit
for the purpose of conducting monthly and yearly testing requirements; the
circuits shall have lockable breakers.
Section 1013.12. Add a new section to read as follows: Additional Exit Signs.
Exit signs may be required at the discretion of the Code Official to clarify an
exit or exit access.
Section 1103.1.2. Add a new section to read as follows: Existing Fire Alarm
Systems Monitoring Requirements. Existing fire alarms systems that are
currently not monitored by an approved UL listed Central Station shall become
monitored within one year from receiving notice in accordance with Section
907.6.6.
Section 1103.13. Add a new section to read as follows: Existing Sprinkler
Systems Monitoring Requirements. Existing sprinkler systems shall have all
valves controlling the sprinkler system and water-flow electrically supervised
and monitored by an approved UL listed Central Station in accordance with
Sections 903.4 and 903.4.1 within one year from receiving notice.
Section 5003.113.6. Add a new section to read as follows: Tier II Reporting.
Facilities reporting hazardous chemical inventories in excess of their
Threshold Planning Quantities pursuant to Section 312 of the Emergency Planning
and Community Right to Know Act shall use an approved electronic “Emergency and
Hazardous Chemical Inventory” form or show reason to use paper forms and submit
the electronic or paper form prior to March 1 of each year.
Section 5601.1.3. Delete exception 4 and insert in lieu thereof: The
possession, storage, sale, handling, and use of gold star producing sparklers
on wires which contain no magnesium or chlorate or perchlorate, flitter
sparklers in paper tubes that do not exceed one-eighth of an inch in diameter,
toy snakes which contain no mercury or caps used in cap pistols.
Section 5704.2.9. Add a sentence to the end of the section to read as follows:
For above-ground storage tanks of 276 gallons capacity or more, the minimum
distance between such above-ground tanks and any Residential Zone boundary must
be at least 100 feet. If the above-ground tank is located in an approved vault,
the minimum separation distance from a Residential Zone boundary may be reduced
to no less than 50 feet.
Section 5704.3.11.1. Add a No. 4 to the end of the section to read as follows:
4. A minimum distance of 10 feet shall be maintained between underground tanks
and any Residential Zone boundary.
Section 5704.2.13.2.4. Add a section to read as follows: Existing Above-Ground
Tank Hazards. Existing above-ground tank installations, even if previously
approved, that are determined to constitute a hazard by the Fire Code Official,
shall not be continued in service. Unsafe tanks shall be removed as required by
the Fire Code Official and in accordance with this Code.
Section 5705.5.1. Add an exception to read as follows:
6. Corridor installations are prohibited in Group-E occupancies.
Section 45 Referenced Standards. Amend the NFPA referenced standards list to
reflect the most current NFPA editions.
Appendix D, Fire Apparatus Roads, Table D103.4. Delete 96 feet diameter cul-de-
sac and replace with public and private turnarounds shall be a minimum 100-foot
diameter cul-de-sac right-of-way with 70 foot diameter paved surface with no
obstructions or parking within the cul-de-sac.
Appendix D, Multiple-Family Residential Developments. Add Section D 106.4
multiple-family dwelling units are defined in this section as any dwelling unit
constructed under the International Building or Fire Code.
Appendix D, One- or Two-Family Residential Developments. Add a Section D 107.3
one- or two-family dwellings units are defined in this section as any dwelling
unit constructed under the International Residential Code.
CHAPTER 160
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT
 
160.01 Definitions                       160.08 General Floodplain (Overlay)
                                         District (GF)
160.02 Statutory Authority, Findings of  160.09 Shallow Flooding (Overlay)
Fact, and Purpose                        District (SF)
160.03 General Provisions                160.10 Appointment and Duties of Board
                                         of Adjustment
160.04 Administration                    160.11 Nonconforming Uses
160.05 Establishment of Zoning (Overlay) 160.12 Penalties for Violation
Districts
160.06 Floodway (Overlay) District (FW)  160.13 Amendments
160.07 Floodway Fringe (Overlay)          
District (FF)
 
160.01   DEFINITIONS.
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter shall
be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to
give this chapter its most reasonable application.
1.   “Appurtenant structure” means a structure which is on the same parcel of
the property as the principal structure to be insured and the use of which is
incidental to the use of the principal structure.
2.   “Base flood” means the flood having one percent chance of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year. (Also commonly referred to as the “100-year
flood.”)
3.   “Base flood elevation” (BFE) means the elevation floodwaters would reach
at a particular site during the occurrence of a base flood event.
4.   “Basement” means any enclosed area of a building which has its floor or
lowest level below ground level (subgrade) on all sides. Also see “lowest
floor.”
5.   “Board of Appeals” means the Council of the City.
6.   “Development” means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including (but not limited to) buildings or other structures, mining,
dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation, drilling operations or storage
of equipment or materials. Development does not include minor projects or
routine maintenance of existing buildings and facilities, as defined in this
section. It also does not include gardening, plowing, and similar practices
that do not involve filling or grading.
7.   “Enclosed area below lowest floor” means the floor of the lowest enclosed
area in a building when all the following criteria are met:
A.   The enclosed area is designed to flood to equalize hydrostatic pressure
during flood events with walls or openings that satisfy the provisions of
Section
160.07(2)(D)(1); and
B.   The enclosed area is unfinished (not carpeted, drywalled, etc.) and used
solely for low damage potential uses such as building access, parking, or
storage; and
C.   Machinery and service facilities (e.g., hot water heater, furnace,
electrical service) contained in the enclosed area are located at least one
foot above the base flood elevation; and
D.   The enclosed area is not a basement as defined in this section.
1.   “Existing construction” means any structure for which the start of
construction commenced before the effective date of the first floodplain
management regulations adopted by the community.
2.   “Existing factory-built home park or subdivision” means a factory-built
home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing
the lots on which the factory-built homes are to be affixed (including at a
minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either
final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the
effective date of the first floodplain management regulations adopted by the
community.
3.   “Expansion of existing factory-built home park or subdivision” means the
preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing
the lots on which the factory-built homes are to be affixed (including at a
minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either
final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
4.   “Factory-built home” means any structure, designed for residential use
which is wholly or in substantial part, made, fabricated, formed, or assembled
in manufacturing facilities for installation or assembly and installation, on a
building site. For the purpose of this chapter, factory-built homes include
mobile homes, manufactured homes, and modular homes; and also include
recreational vehicles which are placed on a site for greater than 180
consecutive days and not fully licensed for and ready for highway use.
5.   “Factory-built home park or subdivision” means a parcel or contiguous
parcels of land divided into two or more factory-built home lots for sale or
lease.
6.   “Five hundred (500) year flood” means a flood, the magnitude of which has
a two-tenths percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year or
which, on average, will be equaled or exceeded at least once every 500 years.
7.   “Flood” means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete
inundation of normally dry land areas resulting from the overflow of streams or
rivers or from the unusual and rapid runoff of surface waters from any source.
8.   “Flood Insurance Rate Map” (FIRM) means the official map prepared as part
of (but published separately from) the Flood Insurance Study which delineates
both the flood hazard areas and the risk premium zones applicable to the
community.
9.   “Flood Insurance Study” (FIS) means a report published by FEMA for a
community issued along with the community’s Flood Insurance Rate Map(s). The
study contains such background data as the base flood discharge and water
surface elevations that were used to prepare the FIRM.
10.   “Floodplain” means any land area susceptible to being inundated by water
as a result of a flood.
11.   “Floodplain management” means an overall program of corrective and
preventive measures for reducing flood damages and promoting the wise use of
floodplains, including (but not limited to) emergency preparedness plans, flood
control works, floodproofing and floodplain management regulations.
12.   “Floodproofing” means any combination of structural and nonstructural
additions, changes, or adjustments to structures, including utility and
sanitary facilities, which will reduce or eliminate flood damage to such
structures.
13.   “Floodway” means the channel of a river or stream and those portions of
the floodplains adjoining the channel, which are reasonably required to carry
and discharge flood waters or flood flows so that confinement of flood flows to
the floodway area will not cumulatively increase the water surface elevation of
the base flood by more than one foot.
14.   “Floodway fringe” means those portions of the Special Flood Hazard Area
outside the floodway.
15.   “Highest adjacent grade” means the highest natural elevation of the
ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.
16.   “Historic structure” means any structure that is:
A.   Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places,
maintained by the Department of Interior, or preliminarily determined by the
Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing of
the National Register.
B.   Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as
contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district
or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a
registered historic district.
C.   Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with
historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the
Interior.
D.   Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities
with historic preservation programs that have been certified by either:
   (1)   An approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the
Interior; or
   (2)   Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved
programs.
1.   “Lowest floor” means the floor of the lowest enclosed area in a building
including a basement except when the criteria listed in the definition of
enclosed area below lowest floor are met.
2.   “Maximum damage potential development” means hospitals and like
institutions; buildings or building complexes containing documents, data, or
instruments of great public value; buildings or building complexes containing
materials dangerous to the public or fuel storage facilities; emergency
response facilities, power installations needed in emergency or other buildings
or building complexes similar in nature or use.
3.   “Minor projects” means small development activities (except for filling,
grading, and excavating) valued at less than $500.00.
4.   “New construction” (new buildings, factory-built home parks, accessory
structures) means those structures or development for which the start of
construction commenced on or after the effective date of the first floodplain
management regulations adopted by the community.
5.   “New factory-built home park or subdivision” means a factory-built home
park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the
lots on which the factory-built homes are to be affixed (including at a
minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either
final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after
the effective date of the first floodplain management regulations adopted by
the community.
6.   “Recreational vehicle” means a vehicle which is:
A.   Built on a single chassis;
B.   Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal
projection;
C.   Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty
truck; and
D.   Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as a temporary
living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
1.   “Repetitive loss” means a structure covered by an NFIP flood insurance
policy that has incurred flood-related damages on two occasions during a 10-
year period on the date of the even for which a second claim is made, in which
the cost of repairing the flood damage, on average, equaled or exceed 25
percent of the market value of the structure at the time of each flood event.
2.   “Routine maintenance of existing buildings and facilities” means repairs
necessary to keep a structure in a safe and habitable condition that do not
trigger a building permit, provided they are not associated with a general
improvement of the structure or repair of a damaged structure. Such repairs
include:
A.   Normal maintenance of structures such as re-roofing, replacing roofing
tiles, and replacing siding.
B.   Exterior and interior painting, papering, tiling, carpeting, cabinets,
counter tops, and similar finish work.
C.   Basement sealing.
D.   Repairing or replacing damaged or broken window panes.
E.   Repairing plumbing systems, electrical systems, heating, or air
conditioning systems, and repairing wells or septic systems.
1.   “Special Flood Hazard Area” (SFHA) means the land within a community
subject to the base flood. This land is identified on the community’s Flood
Insurance Rate Map as Zone A, A1-30, AE, AH, AO, AR, or A99.
2.   “Start of construction” includes substantial improvement, and means the
date the development permit was issued, provided the actual start of
construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or
other improvement, was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start
means either the first placement or permanent construction of a structure on a
site, such as pouring of a slab or footings, the installation of pile, the
construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the
placement of a factory-built home on a foundation. Permanent construction does
not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading, and filling; nor does
it include the installation of streets or walkways; nor does it include
excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of
temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of
accessory buildings such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or
not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start
of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or
other structural part of the building, whether or not that alteration affects
the external dimensions of the building.
3.   “Structure” means anything constructed or erected on the ground or
attached to the ground, including (but not limited to) buildings, factories,
sheds, cabins, factory-built homes, storage tanks, grain storage facilities, or
other similar uses.
4.   “Substantial damage” means damage of any origin sustained by a structure
whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damage condition
would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before
the damage occurred. Volunteer labor and donated materials shall be included in
the estimated cost of repair.
5.   “Substantial improvement” means any improvement to a structure which
satisfies either of the following criteria:
A.   Any repair, reconstruction, or improvement of a structure, the cost of
which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure either:
   (1)   Before the start of construction of the improvement; or
   (2)   If the structure has been substantially damaged and is being restored,
before the damage occurred.
The term does not, however, include any project for improvement of a structure
to correct existing violations of State or local health, sanitary, or safety
code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement
official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions.
The term also does not include any alteration of a historic structure, provided
the alteration will not preclude the structure’s designation as a historic
structure.
B.   Any addition which increases the original floor area of a building by 25
percent or more. All additions constructed after the effective date of the
first floodplain management regulations adopted by the community shall be added
to any proposed addition in determining whether the total increase in original
floor space would exceed 25 percent.
1.   “Variance” means a grant of relief by a community from the terms of the
floodplain management regulations.
2.   “Violation” means the failure of a structure or other development to be
fully compliant with the community’s floodplain management regulations.
160.02   STATUTORY AUTHORITY, FINDINGS OF FACT, AND PURPOSE.
1.   Statutory Authority. The Legislature of the State of Iowa has in Chapter
414 of the Code of Iowa, as amended, delegated the power to cities to enact
zoning regulations to secure safety from flood and to promote health and the
general welfare.
2.   Findings of Fact.
A.   The flood hazard areas of the City are subject to periodic inundation
which can result in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards,
disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public
expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base
all of which adversely affect the public health, safety, and general welfare of
the community.
B.   These flood losses, hazards, and related adverse effects are caused by:
   (1)   The occupancy of flood hazard areas by uses vulnerable to flood
damages which create hazardous conditions as a result of being inadequately
elevated or otherwise protected from flooding; and
   (2)   The cumulative effect of obstructions on the floodplain causing
increases in flood heights and velocities.
C.   This chapter relies upon engineering methodology for analyzing flood
hazards which is consistent with the standards established by the Department of
Natural Resources.
1.   Statement of Purpose. It is the purpose of this chapter to protect and
preserve the rights, privileges, and property of the City and its residents and
to preserve and improve the peace, safety, health, welfare, and comfort and
convenience of its residents by minimizing those flood losses described in
Section 160.02(2)(A) with provisions designed to:
A.   Reserve sufficient floodplain area for the conveyance of flood flows so
that flood heights and velocities will not be increased substantially.
B.   Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety, or
property in times of flood or which cause excessive increases in flood heights
or velocities.
C.   Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including public facilities which
serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction or substantial improvement.
D.   Protect individuals from buying lands which may not be suited for intended
purposes because of flood hazard.
E.   Assure that eligibility is maintained for property owners in the community
to purchase flood insurance through the National Flood Insurance Program.
160.03   GENERAL PROVISIONS.
1.   Lands to Which Chapter Applies. The provisions of this chapter shall apply
to all lands within the jurisdiction of the City shown on the Official
Floodplain Zoning Map as being within the boundaries of the Floodway, Floodway
Fringe, General Floodplain, and Shallow Flooding (Overlay) Districts, as
established in Section 160.05.
2.   Establishment of Official Floodplain Zoning Map. The Flood Insurance Rate
Maps (FIRM) for Johnson County and Incorporated Areas, City of Solon, Panels
19103C0059F, 19103C0067F, 19103C0078F, 19103C0086F, dated December 26, 2025,
which were prepared as part of the Flood Insurance Study for Johnson County are
hereby adopted by reference and declared to be the Official Floodplain Zoning
Map. The flood profiles and all explanatory material contained with the Flood
Insurance Study are also declared to be a part of this chapter.
3.   Rules for Interpretation of District Boundaries. The boundaries of the
zoning district areas shall be determined by scaling distances on the Official
Floodplain Zoning Map. When an interpretation is needed as to the exact
location of a boundary, the Zoning Administrator shall make the necessary
interpretation. The Board of Adjustment shall hear and decide appeals when it
is alleged that there is an error in any requirement, decision, or
determination made by the Zoning Administrator in the enforcement or
administration of this chapter.
4.   Compliance. No structure or land shall hereafter be used, and no structure
shall be located, extended, converted, or structurally altered, without full
compliance with the terms of this chapter and other applicable regulations
which apply to uses within the jurisdiction of this chapter.
5.   Abrogation and Greater Restrictions. It is not intended by this chapter to
repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed
restrictions. However, where this chapter imposes greater restrictions, the
provision of this chapter shall prevail. All other ordinances inconsistent with
this chapter are hereby repealed to the extent of the inconsistency only.
6.   Interpretation. In their interpretation and application, the provisions of
this chapter shall be held to be minimum requirements and shall be liberally
construed in favor of the governing body and shall not be deemed a limitation
or repeal of any other powers granted by State statutes.
7.   Warning and Disclaimer of Liability. The standards required by this
chapter are considered reasonable for regulatory purposes. This chapter does
not imply that areas outside the designated Floodplain (Overlay) District areas
will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not create
liability on the part of the City, or any officer or employee thereof, for any
flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or on any
administrative decision lawfully made thereunder.
8.   Severability. If any section, clause, provision, or portion of this
chapter is adjudged unconstitutional or invalid by a court of competent
jurisdiction, the remainder of this chapter shall not be affected thereby.
160.04   ADMINISTRATION.
1.   Appointment, Duties, and Responsibilities of Administrator.
A.   The Zoning Administrator is hereby appointed to implement and administer
the provisions of this chapter and will herein be referred to as the
Administrator.
B.   Duties and responsibilities of the Administrator shall include (but not
necessarily be limited to) the following:
   (1)   Review all Floodplain Development Permit Applications to assure that
the provisions of this chapter will be satisfied.
   (2)   Review Floodplain Development Applications to assure that all
necessary permits have been obtained from federal, State, and local
governmental agencies including approval when required from the Department of
Natural Resources for floodplain construction.
   (3)   Record and maintain a record of:
      a.   The elevation (in relation to North American Vertical Datum 1988) of
the lowest floor (including basement) of all new or substantially improved
structures; or
      b.   The elevation to which new or substantially improved structures have
been floodproofed.
   (4)   Notify adjacent communities, counties, and the Department of Natural
Resources prior to any proposed alteration or relocation of a watercourse and
submit evidence of such notifications to the Federal Emergency Management
Agency.
   (5)   Keep a record of all permits, appeals, and such other transactions and
correspondence pertaining to the administration of this chapter.
   (6)   Submit to the Federal Insurance Administration an annual report
concerning the community’s participation, utilizing the annual report form
supplied by the Federal Insurance Administration.
   (7)   Notify the Federal Insurance Administration of any annexations or
modifications to the community’s boundaries.
   (8)   Review subdivision proposals to ensure such proposals are consistent
with the purpose of this chapter and advise the Board of Adjustment of
potential conflict.
   (9)   Maintain the accuracy of the community’s Flood Insurance Rate Maps
when:
      c.   Development placed within the Floodway (Overlay) District results in
any of the following:
      d.   i.   An increase in the base flood elevations; or
      e.   ii.   Alteration to the floodway boundary.
      f.   Development placed in Zones A, AE, AH, and A1-30 that does not
include a designated floodway that will cause a rise of more than one foot in
the base elevation; or
      g.   Development relocates or alters the channel.
Within six months of the completion of the development, the applicant shall
submit to FEMA all scientific and technical data necessary for a Letter of Map
Revision.
   (10)   Perform site inspections to ensure compliance with the standards of
this chapter.
   (11)   Forward all requests for variances to the Board of Adjustment for
consideration. Ensure all requests include the information ordinarily submitted
with applications as well as any additional information deemed necessary to the
Board of Adjustment.
1.   Floodplain Development Permit.
A.   Permit Required. A Floodplain Development Permit issued by the
Administrator shall be secured prior to any floodplain development (any manmade
change to improved and unimproved real estate, including but not limited to
buildings or other structures, mining, filling, grading, paving, storage of
materials and equipment, excavation, or drilling operations), including the
placement of factory-built homes.
B.   Application for Permit. Application shall be made on forms furnished by
the Administrator and shall include the following:
   (1)   Description of the work to be covered by the permit for which
application is to be made.
   (2)   Description of the land on which the proposed work is to be done
(i.e., lot, block, track, street address, or similar description) that will
readily identify and locate the work to be done.
   (3)   Location and dimensions of all structures and additions.
   (4)   Indication of the use or occupancy for which the proposed work is
intended.
   (5)   Elevation of the base flood.
   (6)   Elevation (in relation to North American Vertical Datum 1988) of the
lowest floor (including basement) of structures or of the level to which a
structure is to be floodproofed.
   (7)   For structures being improved or rebuilt, the estimated cost of
improvements and market value of the structure prior to the improvements.
   (8)   Such other information as the Administrator deems reasonably necessary
(e.g., drawings or a site plan) for the purpose of this chapter.
C.   Action on Permit Application. The Administrator shall, within a reasonable
time, make a determination as to whether the proposed floodplain development
meets the applicable standards of this chapter and shall approve or disapprove
the application. For disapprovals, the applicant shall be informed, in writing,
of the specific reasons therefore. The Administrator shall not issue permits
for variances except as directed by the Board of Adjustment.
D.   Construction and Use to Be as Provided in Application and Plans.
Floodplain Development Permits based on the basis of approved plans and
applications authorize only the use, arrangement, and construction set forth in
such approved plans and applications and no other use, arrangement, or
construction. Any use, arrangement, or construction at variance with that
authorized shall be deemed a violation of this chapter. The applicant shall be
required to submit certification by a professional engineer or land surveyor,
as appropriate, registered in the State, that the finished fill, structure
floor elevations, floodproofing, or other flood protection measures were
accomplished in compliance with the provisions of this chapter, prior to the
use or occupancy of any structure.
160.05   ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONING (OVERLAY) DISTRICTS. The floodplain areas
within the jurisdiction of this chapter are hereby divided into the following
districts:
1.   Floodway (Overlay) District (FW) - those areas identified as Floodway on
the Official Floodplain Zoning Map.
2.   Floodway Fringe (Overlay) District (FF) - those areas identified as Zone
AE on the Official Floodplain Zoning Map but excluding those areas identified
as Floodway.
3.   General Floodplain (Overlay) District (GF) - those areas identified as
Zone A on the Official Floodplain Zoning Map.
4.   Shallow Flooding (Overlay) District (SF) - those areas identified as Zone
AO or AH on the Official Floodplain Zoning Map.
The boundaries shall be as shown on the Official Floodplain Zoning Map. Within
these districts, all uses not allowed as permitted uses are prohibited unless a
variance to the terms of this chapter is granted after due consideration by the
Board of Adjustment.
160.06   FLOODWAY (OVERLAY) DISTRICT (FW).
1.   Permitted Uses. All development within the Floodway District shall be
permitted to the extent that they are not prohibited by any other ordinance (or
underlying zoning district) and provided they meet applicable performance
standards of the Floodway District.
2.   Performance Standards. All Floodway District uses allowed as a permitted
use shall meet the following standards.
A.   No development shall be permitted in the Floodway District that would
result in any increase in the base flood elevation. Consideration of the
effects of any development on flood levels shall be based upon the assumption
that an equal degree of development would be allowed for similarly situated
lands.
B.   All development within the Floodway District shall:
   (1)   Be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage.
   (2)   Use construction methods and practices that will minimize flood
damage.
   (3)   Use construction materials and utility equipment that are resistant to
flood damage.
C.   No development shall affect the capacity or conveyance of the channel or
floodway of any tributary to the main stream, drainage ditch, or any other
drainage facility or system.
D.   Structures, buildings, recreational vehicles, and sanitary and utility
systems, if permitted, shall meet the applicable performance standards of the
Floodway Fringe District, and shall be constructed or aligned to present the
minimum possible resistance to flood flows.
E.   Structures, if permitted, shall have a low flood damage potential and
shall not be for human habitation.
F.   Storage of materials or equipment that are buoyant, flammable, explosive,
or injurious to human, animal or plant life is prohibited. Storage of other
material may be allowed if readily removable from the Floodway District within
the time available after flood warning.
G.   Watercourse alterations or relocations (channel changes and modifications)
must be designed to maintain the flood carrying capacity within the altered or
relocated portion. In addition, such alterations or relocations must be
approved by the Department of Natural Resources.
H.   Any fill allowed in the floodway must be shown to have some beneficial
purpose and shall be limited to the minimum amount necessary.
I.   Pipeline river or stream crossings shall be buried in the streambed and
banks or otherwise sufficiently protected to prevent rupture due to channel
degradation and meandering or due to the action of flood flows.
160.07   FLOODWAY FRINGE (OVERLAY) DISTRICT (FF).
1.   Permitted Uses. All development within the Floodway Fringe District shall
be permitted to the extent that they are not prohibited by any other ordinance
(or underlying zoning district) and provided they meet applicable performance
standards of the Floodway Fringe District.
2.   Performance Standards. All development must be consistent with the need to
minimize flood damage and meet the following applicable performance standards.
Until a regulatory floodway is designated, no development may increase the base
flood elevation more than one foot. The applicant will be responsible for
providing the Department of Natural Resources with sufficient technical
information to make such determination.
A.   All development shall:
   (1)   Be designed and adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or
lateral movement.
   (2)   Use construction methods and practices that will minimize flood
damage.
   (3)   Use construction materials and utility equipment that are resistant to
flood damage.
B.   Residential Structures. All new or substantially improved residential
structures shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated a minimum
of one foot above the base flood elevation. Construction shall be upon
compacted fill which shall, at all points, be no lower than one foot above the
base flood elevation and extend at such elevation at least 18 feet beyond the
limits of any structure erected thereon. Alternate methods of elevating (such
as piers or extended foundations) may be allowed, subject to favorable
consideration by the Board of Adjustment, where existing topography, street
grades, or other factors preclude elevating by fill. In such cases, the methods
used must be adequate to support the structure as well as withstand the various
forces and hazards associated with flooding. All new residential structures
located in areas that would become isolated due to flooding of surrounding
ground shall be provided with a means of access that will be passable by
wheeled vehicles during the base flood. However, this criterion shall not apply
where the Administrator determines there is sufficient flood warning time for
the protection of life and property. When estimating flood warning time,
consideration shall be given to the criteria listed in 567-75.2(3), Iowa
Administrative Code.
C.   Nonresidential Structures. All new or substantially improved
nonresidential structures shall have the lowest floor (including basement)
elevated a minimum of one foot above the base flood elevation, or together with
attendant utility and sanitary systems, be floodproofed to such a level. When
floodproofing is utilized, a professional engineer registered in the State
shall certify that the floodproofing methods used are adequate to withstand the
flood depths, pressures, velocities, impact, and uplift forces and other
factors associated with the base flood; and that the structure, below the base
flood elevation is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the
passage of water. A record of the certification indicating the specific
elevation (in relation to North American Vertical Datum 1988) to which any
structures are floodproofed shall be maintained by the Administrator.
D.   All New and Substantially Improved Structures.
   (1)   Fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor (not including basements)
that are subject to flooding shall be designed to automatically equalize
hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit
of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified
by a registered professional engineer or meet or exceed the following minimum
criteria:
      a.   A minimum of two openings, with positioning on at least two walls,
having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot
of enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided.
      b.   The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above
grade.
      c.   Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other
coverings or devices, provided they permit the automatic entry and exit of
floodwaters.
Such areas shall be used solely for parking of vehicles, building access, and
low damage potential storage. Where the distance between the floor and ceiling
of the fully enclosed area below the lowest floor is five feet or more, the
applicant shall be required to sign and record with the County Recorder a Non-
Conversion Agreement that ensures the lower enclosed area remains compliant
with the criteria outlined in this subsection.
   (2)   New and substantially improved structures must be designed (or
modified) and adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral
movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads,
including the effects of buoyancy.
   (3)   New and substantially improved structures shall be constructed with
electric meter, electrical service panel box, hot water heater, heating, air
conditioning, ventilation equipment (including ductwork), and other similar
machinery and equipment elevated (or, in the case of nonresidential structures,
optionally floodproofed to) a minimum of one foot above the base flood
elevation.
   (4)   New and substantially improved structures shall be constructed with
plumbing, gas lines, water meters, gas meters, and other similar service
utilities either elevated (or in the case of nonresidential structures,
optionally floodproofed to) a minimum of one foot above the base flood
elevation or designed to be watertight and withstand inundation to such a
level.
A.   Factory-Built Homes.
   (1)   All new and substantially improved factory-built homes, including
those placed in existing factory-built home parks or subdivisions, shall be
elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the structure
is a minimum of one foot above the base flood elevation.
   (2)   All new and substantially improved factory-built homes, including
those placed in existing factory-built home parks or subdivisions, shall be
anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Anchorage systems
may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to
ground anchors as required by the State Building Code.
B.   Utility and Sanitary Systems.
   (1)   On-site wastewater disposal and water supply systems shall be located
or designed to avoid impairment to the system or contamination from the system
during flooding.
   (2)   All new and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system as well as
the discharge of effluent into flood waters. Wastewater treatment facilities
(other than on-site systems) shall be provided with a level of flood protection
equal to or greater than one foot above the base flood elevation.
   (3)   New or replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize
or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system. Water supply
treatment facilities (other than on-site systems) shall be provided with a
level of protection equal to or greater than one foot above the base flood
elevation.
   (4)   Utilities such as gas or electrical systems shall be located and
constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage to the system and the risk
associated with such flood damaged or impaired systems.
C.   Storage of Equipment and Materials. Storage of materials and equipment
that are flammable, explosive, or injurious to human, animal, or plant life is
prohibited unless elevated a minimum of one foot above the base flood
elevation. Other material and equipment must either be similarly elevated or:
   (1)   Not be subject to major flood damage and anchored to prevent movement
due to flood waters; or
   (2)   Be readily removable from the area within the time available after
flood warning.
D.   Flood Control Structures. Flood control structural works such as levees,
flood walls, etc. shall provide, at a minimum, protection from the base flood
with a minimum of three feet of design freeboard and shall provide for adequate
interior drainage. In addition, the Department of Natural Resources shall
approve structural flood control works.
E.   Watercourse Alterations. Watercourse alterations or relocations must be
designed to maintain the flood carrying capacity within the altered or
relocated portion. In addition, the Department of Natural Resources must
approve such alterations or relocations.
F.   Subdivisions. Subdivisions (including factory-built home parks and
subdivisions) shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damages and
shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood damage.
Development associated with subdivision proposals (including the installation
of public utilities) shall meet the applicable performance standards of this
chapter. Subdivision proposals intended for residential use shall provide all
lots with a means of access which will be passable by wheeled vehicles during
the base flood. Proposals for subdivisions greater than five acres or 50 lots
(whichever is less) shall include base flood elevation data for those areas
located within the Floodplain Fringe (Overlay) District.
G.   Accessory Structures to Residential Uses.
   (1)   Detached garages, sheds, and similar structures that are incidental to
a residential use are exempt from the base flood elevation requirements where
the following criteria are satisfied:
      a.   The structure shall be designed to have low flood damage potential.
Its size shall not exceed 600 square feet in size. Those portions of the
structure located less than one foot above the base flood elevation must be
constructed of flood-resistant materials.
      b.   The structure shall be used solely for low flood damage potential
purposes such as vehicle parking and limited storage. The structure shall not
be used for human habitation.
      c.   The structure shall be constructed and placed on the building site
so as to offer minimum resistance to the flow of floodwaters.
      d.   The structure shall be firmly anchored to resist flotation,
collapse, and lateral movement which may result in damage to other structures.
      e.   The structure’s service facilities such as electrical and heating
equipment shall be elevated or floodproofed to at least one foot above the base
flood elevation.
      f.   The structure’s walls shall include openings that satisfy the
provisions of Section
160.07(2)(D)(1).
   (2)   Exemption from the base flood elevation requirements for such a
structure may result in increased premium rates for flood insurance coverage of
the structure and its contents.
A.   Recreational Vehicles.
   (1)   Recreational vehicles are exempt from the requirements of Section
160.07(2)(E) regarding anchoring and elevation of factory- built homes when the
following criteria are satisfied.
      a.   The recreational vehicle shall be located on the site for less than
180 consecutive days, and
      b.   The recreational vehicle must be fully licensed and ready for
highway use. A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its
wheels or jacking system and is attached to the site only by quick disconnect
type utilities and security devices and has no permanently attached additions.
   (2)   Recreational vehicles that are located on the site for more than 180
consecutive days or are not ready for highway use must satisfy requirements of
Section
160.07(2)(E) regarding anchoring and elevation of factory-built homes.
   (3)   Any campground with overnight lodging shall have an evacuation plan
that includes the following:
      a.   Responsible parties for carrying out the evacuation plan.
      b.   Action stages that are based on stream levels, gage data, or weather
forecasts, as appropriate.
      c.   A detailed list of actions that need to be taken to ensure all
vehicles and campers are evacuated, including how notifications are to be
delivered.
A.   Pipeline Crossings. Pipeline river and stream crossings shall be buried in
the streambed and banks, or otherwise sufficiently protected to prevent rupture
due to channel degradation and meandering.
B.   Maximum Damage Potential Development. All new or substantially improved
maximum damage potential development shall have the lowest floor (including
basement) elevated a minimum of one foot above the elevation of the 500-year
flood, or together with attendant utility and sanitary systems, be floodproofed
to such a level. When floodproofing is utilized, a professional engineer
registered in the State shall certify that the floodproofing methods used are
adequate to withstand the flood depths, pressures, velocities, impact, and
uplift forces and other factors associated with the two-tenths percent annual
chance flood; and that the structure, below the two-tenths percent annual
chance flood elevation is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to
the passage of water. A record of the certification indicating the specific
elevation (in relation to North American Vertical Datum 1988) to which any
structures are floodproofed shall be maintained by the Administrator. Where a
two-tenths percent chance flood elevation data has not been provided in the
Flood Insurance Study, the Iowa Department of Natural Resources shall be
contacted to compute such data. The applicant will be responsible for providing
the Department of Natural Resources with sufficient technical information to
make such determinations.
160.08   GENERAL FLOODPLAIN (OVERLAY) DISTRICT (GF).
1.   Permitted Uses.
A.   All development within the General Floodplain District shall be permitted
to the extent that they are not prohibited by any other ordinance (or
underlying zoning district) and provided they meet the applicable performance
standards of the General Floodplain District.
B.   Any development which involves placement of structures, factory-built
homes, fill or other obstructions, storage of materials or equipment,
excavation or alteration of a watercourse shall be reviewed by the Department
of Natural Resources to determine:
   (1)   Whether the land involved is either wholly or partly within the
floodway or floodway fringe; and
   (2)   The base flood elevation.
The applicant shall be responsible for providing the Department of Natural
Resources with sufficient technical information to make the determination.
1.   Performance Standards.
A.   All development, or portions thereof, to be located in the floodway as
determined by the Department of Natural Resources shall meet the applicable
provisions and standards of the Floodway (Overlay) District (Section
160.06).
B.   All development, or portions thereof, to be located in the floodway fringe
as determined by the Department of Natural Resources shall meet the applicable
provisions and standards of the Floodway Fringe (Overlay) District (Section
160.07).
160.09   SHALLOW FLOODING (OVERLAY) DISTRICT (SF).
1.   Permitted Uses. All development within the Shallow Flooding District shall
be permitted to the extent that it is not prohibited by any other ordinance (or
underlying zoning district) and provided they meet the applicable performance
standards of the Shallow Flooding District.
2.   Performance Standards. The performance standards for the Shallow Flooding
District shall be the same as the performance standards for the Floodway Fringe
District with the following exceptions:
A.   In shallow flooding areas designated as an AO Zone on the Flood Insurance
Rate Map, the minimum floodproofing or flood protection elevation shall be
equal to the number of feet as specified on the FIRM (or a minimum of two feet
if no number is specified) above the highest natural grade adjacent to the
structure.
B.   In shallow flooding areas designated as an AH Zone on the Flood Insurance
Rate Map, the minimum floodproofing or flood protection elevation shall be
equal to the elevation as specified on the FIRM.
C.   In shallow flooding areas designated as either an AH or AO Zone on the
Flood Insurance Rate Map, drainage paths are required around structures on
slopes to adequately guide floodwaters around and away from proposed
structures.
160.10   APPOINTMENT AND DUTIES OF BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT.
1.   Appointment and Duties of Board of Adjustment. A Board of Adjustment is
hereby established which, hereinafter referred to as the Board, shall hear and
decide:
A.   Appeals; and
B.   Requests for variances to the provisions of this chapter, and shall take
any other action which is required of the Board.
1.   Appeals. Where it is alleged that there is any error in any order,
requirement, decision, or determination made by an administrative official in
the enforcement of this chapter, the aggrieved party may appeal such action.
The notice of appeal shall be filed with the Board and with the official from
whom the appeal is taken and shall set forth the specific reason for the
appeal. The official from whom the appeal is taken shall transmit to the Board
all the documents constituting the record upon which the action appealed from
was taken.
2.   Variance. The Board may authorize upon request in specific cases such
variances from the terms of this chapter that will not be contrary to the
public interest where, owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of
the provisions of this chapter will result in unnecessary hardship. Variances
granted must meet the following applicable standards.
A.   Variances shall only be granted upon:
   (1)   A showing of good and sufficient cause;
   (2)   A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in
exceptional hardship to the applicant; and
   (3)   A determination that the granting of the variance will not result in
increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary
public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public
or conflict with existing local codes or ordinances.
B.   Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any
increase in flood levels during the base flood would result. Consideration of
the effects of any development on flood levels shall be based upon the
assumption that an equal degree of development would be allowed for similarly
situated lands.
C.   Variances shall only be granted upon a determination that the variance is
the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief.
D.   In cases where the variance involves a lower level of flood protection for
structures than what is ordinarily required by this chapter, the applicant
shall be notified in writing over the signature of the Administrator that:
   (1)   The issuance of a variance will result in increased premium rates for
flood insurance up to amounts as high as $25.00 for $100.00 of insurance
coverage; and
   (2)   Such construction increases risks to life and property.
E.   All variances granted shall have the concurrence or approval of the
Department of Natural Resources.
1.   Hearings and Decisions of the Board.
A.   Hearings. Upon the filing with the Board of an appeal or a request for a
variance, the Board shall hold a public hearing. The Board shall fix a
reasonable time for the hearing and give public notice thereof, as well as due
notice to parties in interest. At the hearing, any party may appear in person
or by agent or attorney and present written or oral evidence. The Board may
require the appellant or applicant to provide such information as is reasonably
deemed necessary and may request the technical assistance or evaluation of a
professional engineer or other expert person or agency, including the
Department of Natural Resources.
B.   Decisions. The Board shall arrive at a decision on an appeal or variance
within a reasonable time. In passing upon an appeal, the Board may, so long as
such action is in conformity with the provisions of this chapter, reverse or
affirm, wholly or in part, or modify the order, requirement, decision, or
determination appealed from, and it shall make its decision, in writing,
setting forth the findings of fact and the reasons for its decision. In
granting a variance, the Board shall consider such factors as contained in this
section and all other relevant sections of this chapter and may prescribe such
conditions as contained in Section
160.10(4)(B)(2).
   (1)   Factors Upon Which the Decision of the Board Shall Be Based. In
passing upon applications for variances, the Board shall consider all relevant
factors specified in other sections of this chapter and:
      a.   The danger to life and property due to increased flood heights or
velocities caused by encroachments.
      b.   The danger that materials may be swept on to other land or
downstream to the injury of others.
      c.   The proposed water supply and sanitation systems and the ability of
these systems to prevent disease, contamination, and unsanitary conditions.
      d.   The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to
flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner.
      e.   The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to
the City.
      f.   The requirements of the facility for a floodplain location.
      g.   The availability of alternative locations not subject to flooding
for the proposed use.
      h.   The compatibility of the proposed use with existing development and
development anticipated in the foreseeable future.
      i.   The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and
floodplain management program for the area.
      j.   The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary
and emergency vehicles.
      k.   The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and sediment
transport of the flood water expected at the site.
      l.   The cost of providing governmental services during and after flood
conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities (sewer, gas,
electrical, and water systems), facilities, streets, and bridges.
      m.   Such other factors which are relevant to the purpose of this
chapter.
   (2)   Conditions Attached to Variances. Upon consideration of the factors
listed above, the Board may attach such conditions to the granting of variances
as it deems necessary to further the purpose of this chapter. Such conditions
may include, but not necessarily be limited to:
      n.   Modification of waste disposal and water supply facilities.
      o.   Limitation of periods of use and operation.
      p.   Imposition of operational controls, sureties, and deed restrictions.
      q.   Requirements for construction of channel modifications, dikes,
levees, and other protective measures, provided such are approved by the
Department of Natural Resources and are deemed the only practical alternative
to achieving the purpose of this chapter.
      r.   Floodproofing measures shall be designed consistent with the flood
protection elevation for the particular area, flood velocities, duration, rate
of rise, hydrostatic and hydrodynamic forces, and other factors associated with
the regulatory flood. The Board shall require that the applicant submit a plan
or document certified by a registered professional engineer that the
floodproofing measures are consistent with the regulatory flood protection
elevation and associated flood factors for the particular area.
      1.   Appeals to the Court. Any person or persons, jointly or severally,
aggrieved by any decision of the Board may present to a court of record a
petition, duly verified, setting forth that such decision is illegal, in whole
or in part, specifying the grounds of the illegality. Such petition shall be
presented to the court within 30 days after the filing of the decision in the
office of the Board.
160.11   NONCONFORMING USES.
1.   A structure or the use of a structure or premises which was lawful before
the passage or amendment of the ordinance codified in this chapter, but which
is not in conformity with the provisions of this chapter, may be continued
subject to the following conditions:
A.   If such use is discontinued for six consecutive months, any future use of
the building premises shall conform to this chapter.
B.   Uses or adjuncts thereof that are or become nuisances shall not be
entitled to continue as nonconforming uses.
C.   If any nonconforming use or structure is damaged by any means, including
flood, it shall not be reconstructed if the cost is more than 50 percent of the
market value of the structure before the damage occurred, unless it is
reconstructed in conformity with the provisions of this chapter. This
limitation does not include the cost of any alteration to comply with existing
State or local health, sanitary, building, or safety codes or regulations, or
the cost of any alteration of a structure listed on the National Register of
Historic Places, provided that the alteration shall not preclude its continued
designation.
1.   Except as provided in Section
160.11(1)(B), any use which has been permitted as a variance shall be
considered a conforming use.
160.12   PENALTIES FOR VIOLATION.
Violations of the provisions of this chapter or failure to comply with any of
the requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards established
in connection with grants of variances) shall constitute a municipal
infraction. Any person who violates this chapter or fails to comply with any of
its requirements shall upon conviction thereof be fined not more than $750.00.
Each day such violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. If
the infraction is a repeat offense, the violation shall be punishable by a
civil penalty of not more than $1,000.00 for each day a violation exists or
continues. Nothing herein contained prevents the City from taking such other
lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy violation.
160.13   AMENDMENTS.
The regulations and standards set forth in this chapter may from time to time
be amended, supplemented, changed, or repealed. No amendment, supplement,
change, or modification shall be undertaken without prior approval of the
Department of Natural Resources.
CHAPTER 165
ZONING REGULATIONS - GENERAL PROVISIONS AND DEFINITIONS
 
165.01 Title                              165.08 Changes in Official Zoning Map
165.02 Purpose                            165.09 Interpretation of District
                                          Boundaries
165.03 Conformity Required                165.10 Zoning of Newly Annexed Area
165.04 Minimum Requirements               165.11 Voluntary Annexation
165.05 Interpretation                     165.12 Involuntary Annexation
165.06 Proposed Use Not Covered in Zoning 165.13 Fee Schedule
Code
165.07 Official Zoning Map and Districts  165.14 Definitions
Established
 
165.01   TITLE.
Chapters
165 through 172 of this Code of Ordinances shall be known and may be cited as
the “Zoning Code of the City of Solon, Iowa.”
165.02   PURPOSE.
The purpose of the Zoning Code is to promote and protect the public health,
safety, order, convenience, prosperity, and general welfare; to conserve and
protect the value of property throughout the City; to encourage the most
appropriate use of land; to implement the City’s Comprehensive Plan’s goals and
policies through land use regulations; to provide for the economic, social, and
aesthetic advantages of orderly development through harmonious groupings of
compatible and complementary land uses and the application of appropriate
development standards; to facilitate the adequate provision of transportation,
water, sewage, schools, parks, and other public requirements in conjunction
with development; and to promote the general public safety by regulating
development of lands containing physical hazards and to minimize the adverse
environmental impacts of development.
165.03   CONFORMITY REQUIRED.
The use of premises and buildings in the City shall be in accordance with the
minimum standards established in the Zoning Code. No use or structure shall be
established, substituted, expanded, constructed, altered, moved, maintained, or
otherwise changed except in conformance with this Zoning Code. The following
rules for conformity shall apply:
1.   Creation of or changes to lot lines shall conform with the use provisions,
dimensional and other standards and procedures of the Zoning Code and the
Subdivision Regulations.
2.   All land uses and development authorized by this Zoning Code shall comply
with all other regulations or requirements herein, as well as any other
applicable local, State, or federal law.
3.   Where a difference exists between this Zoning Code and other City
regulations, the more restrictive requirements shall apply.
4.   Where more than one part of this Zoning Code applies to the same aspect of
a proposed use or development, the more restrictive requirements shall apply.
165.04   MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS.
In interpretation and application, the requirements set forth in this Zoning
Code shall be considered the minimum requirements necessary to accomplish the
purposes of this Code.
165.05   INTERPRETATION.
The use of premises and buildings in the City shall be in accordance with the
minimum standards.
1.   In case of inconsistency or conflict, any regulations, conditions, or
procedural requirements that are specific to an individual land use shall
supersede regulations, conditions, or procedural requirements of general
application.
2.   A land use includes the necessary structures to support the use unless
specifically prohibited or the context clearly indicates otherwise, subject to
other standards in this Code and any required permits for structures.
3.   Except for words and terms defined in this chapter, all words and terms
used in the Zoning Code shall have their customary meanings.
165.06   PROPOSED USE NOT COVERED IN ZONING CODE.
Any proposed use not covered in the Zoning Code as a permitted use or special
exception shall be first referred to the Planning and Zoning Commission for a
recommendation as to the proper district in which such use should be permitted
and the Zoning Code amended by the Council as provided in Chapter 166 before a
permit is issued for such proposed use.
165.07   OFFICIAL ZONING MAP AND DISTRICTS ESTABLISHED.
The City is divided into nine districts, designated as follows:
1.   A-1 Agricultural.
2.   R-1 Residential.
3.   R-2 Residential.
4.   R-3 Residential.
5.   R-4 Residential.
6.   C-R Retail Commercial.
7.   C-G General Commercial.
8.   C-H Highway Commercial.
9.   I-L Light Industrial.
The locations and boundaries of these districts are shown on the Official
Zoning Map, which, together with all explanatory matter thereon, is adopted by
reference and declared to be a part of the Zoning Code. The Official Zoning Map
shall be identified by the signature of the Mayor, attested by the Clerk under
the following statement: “This is to certify that this is the Official Zoning
Map referred to in
165.07 of the Ordinance Number 327 of the City of Solon, Iowa, passed July 1,
2004.” The Official Zoning Map or a true copy of the same shall be on file in
the office of the Clerk, and shall be final authority as to the current zoning
status of land, water areas, buildings, and other structures in the City.
165.08   CHANGES IN OFFICIAL ZONING MAP.
No changes in the Official Zoning Map shall be made except as may be required
by amendment to the Zoning Code under
Chapter 166. If required, such changes shall be promptly made and the ordinance
number, nature of change, and date of change shall be noted on the map. Any
unauthorized change of any kind whatsoever in the Official Zoning Map by any
person shall constitute a violation of the Zoning Code and is punishable as
provided in
Chapter 166.
EDITOR’S NOTE
EDITOR’S NOTE
The following ordinances have been adopted amending the Official Zoning Map
described in Sections
165.07 and
165.08 of this chapter and have not been included as a part of this Code of
Ordinances but have been specifically saved from repeal and are in full
force and effect.
ORDINANCE ADOPTED            ORDINANCE ADOPTED
328       August 19, 2004              
330       September 2, 2004            
331       September 2, 2004            
354       September 15, 2005           
356       November 3, 2005             
367       November 16, 2006            
378       September 20, 2007           
394       March 17, 2010               
404       May 2, 2012                  
408       September 19, 2012           
413       March 5, 2014                
420       February 18, 2015            
431       September 21, 2016           
433       February 1, 2017             
438       September 6, 2017            
439       December 4, 2019             
449       December 4, 2019             
468       August 18, 2021              
469       December 15, 2021            
482       March 6, 2024                
488       December 4, 2024             
489       December 4, 2024             
490       February 5, 2025             
                                     
 
165.09   INTERPRETATION OF DISTRICT BOUNDARIES.
Where uncertainties exist as to the location of any zone boundaries, the
following rules of interpretation, listed in priority order, shall apply:
1.   Where boundaries are indicated as paralleling the approximate centerline
of the street right-of-way, the zone shall extend to each abutting boundary of
the right-of-way. Non-road-related uses by abutting property owners, if allowed
in the right-of-way, shall meet the same zoning requirements regulating the
property owners lot.
2.   Where boundaries are indicated as following approximate lot lines, the
actual lot lines shall be considered the boundaries.
3.   Where boundaries are indicated as following lines of ordinary high water,
or government meander line, the lines shall be considered to be the actual
boundaries. If these lines should change, the boundaries shall be considered to
move with them.
4.   If none of the rules of interpretation described in Subsections 1 through
3 apply, then the zoning boundary shall be determined by map scaling.
165.10   ZONING OF NEWLY ANNEXED AREA.
The Council or court shall designate the zoning district or districts in which
such newly annexed territory shall be classified.
165.11   VOLUNTARY ANNEXATION.
All applications for voluntary annexation of land to the City shall, in
addition to the necessary requirements for annexation, designate the zoning
classification which the applicant wishes for subject property. Upon receipt
thereof, the application shall be referred to the Planning and Zoning
Commission for recommendation on both the annexation and requested zoning. The
Planning and Zoning Commission shall have the same time periods for its
consideration as in any rezoning matter. The Planning and Zoning Commission may
recommend approval of the requested zoning or the denial thereof. In the event
the Planning and Zoning Commission recommends denial, they shall make an
additional recommendation as to what zoning classification the Planning and
Zoning Commission would recommend. A copy of this recommendation shall be
forwarded to the applicant and shall be on the agenda for the next meeting of
the Council. The Council shall set the zoning matter for public hearing,
prescribing the same notice requirements as for a rezoning application and
shall specify the proposed zoning for consideration. If the Council approves
the zone, it shall be set by ordinance. No zoning classification not
recommended by the Planning and Zoning Commission shall become effective except
by the favorable vote of three-fourths of the members of the Council and no
voluntary annexation not recommended by the Planning and Zoning Commission
shall be approved by the Council except by a favorable vote of three-fourths of
the members of the Council. The resolution providing for annexation shall be
acted upon by the Council at the time of the public hearing on the zoning
classification.
165.12   INVOLUNTARY ANNEXATION.
Whenever, after a public hearing thereon, the Council determines that
involuntary annexation proceedings should be undertaken against lands to be
annexed, the matter shall be referred to the Planning and Zoning Commission for
its recommendation as to the zoning of the lands. Upon receipt of the
recommendation, the Council shall hold a public hearing thereon, prescribing
the regular notice for rezoning set forth in the Zoning Code. If the Council
approves the zoning, it shall adopt an ordinance setting forth the various
zoning classifications for the lands. The Council may approve a higher
classification or more restrictive classification than recommended by the
Planning and Zoning Commission after the hearing; but prior to approval of any
lower classification or less restrictive classification, the Council must send
the matter back to the Planning and Zoning Commission for action on the lower
classification. This may be done prior to the public hearing. In the event it
is returned subsequent to the public hearing, a new public hearing shall be
held thereon. If the Planning and Zoning Commission recommends against the
lower classification, it shall not become effective except by a favorable vote
of three-fourths of the members of the Council.
165.13   FEE SCHEDULE.
The Council shall by resolution, from time to time, issue a Fee Schedule
reflecting the City’s true cost in considering and administering requests to
rezone property and voluntary annexation petitions. The Fee Schedule shall
reflect the City’s true cost in evaluating, administering, and considering
these matters. The City’s cost shall include, but not be limited to:
publication, legal, surveying, or engineering fees, recording fees, service or
certified mail charges, or any other costs reasonably borne by the City in
connection with these matters.
165.14   DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of the Zoning Code, certain terms and words are defined as set
forth in this section. As used in the Zoning Code, the word “building” includes
the word “structure.”
1.   Words beginning with “A.”
A.   “Abutting” or “adjoining” means to touch along a border or bounding at a
point or line.
B.   “Accessory use or structure” means a use or structure subordinate to the
principal permitted use of a building or land on the same lot or parcel of
ground or contiguous lot under same ownership and serving a purpose customarily
incidental to the use of the principal building or use of land.
C.   “Adjacent” means property that is located within 300 feet of a property
line of a subject property.
D.   “Adult use business” means a sexually oriented business involving the
viewing, rental, sales of materials, or performances, the specified content of
which depicts or describes specified anatomical areas or specified sexual
activities. It does not include any play, opera, musical, or other dramatic
works that are not obscene, classes, seminars, or lectures held for serious,
scientific, or educational purposes that are not obscene, or exhibitors,
performances, expressions, or dances that are not obscene.
E.   “Alley” means an improved thoroughfare or right-of-way, whether public or
private, usually narrower than a street, that provides vehicular or other
access to an interior boundary of one or more lots, and is not designed for
general traffic circulation.
F.   “Alteration, structural” means any change in the supporting members of a
building such as bearing walls, columns, beams, or girders.
G.   “Apartment” means a room or suite of rooms used as the dwelling of a
family, including bath and culinary accommodations, located in a building in
which there are two or more such rooms or suites.
H.   “Apartment house” means a building arranged, intended, or designed to be
occupied by three or more families living independently of each other.
I.   “Applicant” means a property owner or any person or entity acting as an
agent for the property owner in an application for a development proposal,
permit, or approval.
1.   Words beginning with “B.”
A.   “Basement” means a story having part but not more than one-half its height
below grade. A basement is counted as a story for the purpose of height
regulation.
B.   “Bed and breakfast home” means a private single-family residence that
provides lodging and breakfast, said residence shall contain no more than four
guests’ rooms that will be used for lodging at the same time. There shall be
two spaces of off-street parking for the homeowners and one for each room used
as lodging. To qualify as a bed and breakfast home, the owner of record must
also reside in the residence or provide 24 hours on-site supervision during the
time that lodging occurs and may provide meals to guests at no additional
charge, and not provide meals to the public.
C.   “Billboard” means a sign, including both the supporting structural
framework and attached billboard faces, used principally for advertising a
business activity, use, product, or service unrelated to the primary use or
activity of the property on which the billboard is located; excluding off-
premises directional, or temporary real estate signs.
D.   “Billboard face” means that portion of a billboard, exclusive of its
structural support, on which changeable advertising copy is displayed, either
by affixing preprinted poster panels or by painting copy on location, sub-
classified as follows:
   (1)   Billboard Face I - a billboard face not exceeding a height of 14 feet
or a width of 48 feet; and
   (2)   Billboard Face II - a billboard face not exceeding a height of 12 feet
or a width of 24 feet.
E.   “Building” means any structure designed or built for the support,
enclosure, shelter, or protection of persons, animals, chattels, or property of
any kind.
F.   “Building, height of” means the vertical distance from the grade to the
highest point of the coping of a flat roof or to the deck line of a mansard
roof, or to the mean height level between eaves and ridge for gable, hip, and
gambrel roofs.
G.   “Building coverage” means the area of a lot that is covered by the total
horizontal surface area of the roof of a building.
H.   “Building envelope” means the area of a lot that delineates the limits of
where a building may be placed on the lot, based on setback, and other
requirements.
I.   “Building facade” means that portion of any exterior elevation of a
building extending from the grade of the building to the top of the parapet
wall or eaves, for the entire width of the building elevation.
1.   Words beginning with “C.”
A.   “Cellar” means a story having more than one-half of its height below
grade. A cellar is not included in computing the number of stories for the
purpose of height measurement.
B.   “Church” or “temple” means a place where religious services are conducted,
and including accessory uses in the primary or accessory buildings such as
religious education, reading rooms, assembly rooms, and residences for nuns and
clergy, but excluding facilities for training of religious orders.
C.   “Clearing” means the limbing, pruning, trimming, topping, cutting, or
removal of vegetation or other organic plant matter by physical, mechanical,
chemical, or other means.
D.   “Conditional Use Permit” means a permit granted by the City to locate a
non- permitted use on a particular property subject to conditions placed on the
use to ensure compatibility with nearby land.
1.   Words beginning with “D.”
A.   “Daycare” means an establishment for group care of adults or children,
including, but not limited to, child daycare services, adult daycare such as
adult day health centers or social daycare as defined by the Iowa State
Department of Social and Health Services, nursery schools for children under
minimum age for education in public schools, privately conducted kindergartens,
or pre-kindergartens when not a part of a public or parochial school, and
programs covering after-school care for school children.
B.   “Demolition” means to destroy or ruin on purpose to permanently remove.
C.   “Developer” means the person or entity who owns or holds purchase options
or other development control over property for which development activity is
proposed.
D.   “Development activity” means any construction or expansion of a building,
structure, or use, any change in use of a building or structure, or any change
in the use of land that creates additional demand for public facilities.
E.   “Development proposal” means any activities requiring a permit or other
approval from the City relative to the use or development of land.
F.   “Dwelling” means any building or portion thereof that is designed for use
exclusively for residential purposes.
G.   “Dwelling unit” means one or more rooms designed for occupancy by a person
or family for living and sleeping purposes, containing kitchen facilities and
rooms with internal accessibility, for use solely by the dwelling’s occupant,
including, but not limited to, bachelor, efficiency, and studio apartments,
factory-built housing, and mobile homes.
H.   “Dwelling unit, accessory” means a separate, complete dwelling unit
attached to or contained within the structure of the primary use or contained
within a separate structure that is accessory to the primary use of the
premises.
I.   “Dwelling unit, apartment” means a room or suite of rooms used as the
dwelling of a family, including bath and culinary accommodations, located in a
building in which there are two or more such rooms or suites.
J.   “Dwelling unit, duplex” means a building containing two separate,
complete, attached dwellings.
K.   “Dwelling unit, multiple” means a building designed for or occupied
exclusively by more than two families.
L.   “Dwelling unit, senior citizen assisted” means a building containing two
or more dwelling units restricted to occupancy by senior citizens, and
including, but not limited to, the following support services, as deemed
necessary:
   (1)   Food preparation and dining areas;
   (2)   Group activity areas;
   (3)   Medical supervision; and
   (4)   Similar activities.
M.   “Dwelling unit, single detached” means a detached building containing one
dwelling unit.
N.   “Dwelling unit, single-family” means a building designed for or occupied
by one family.
O.   “Dwelling unit, two-family” means a building designed for or occupied
exclusively by two families.
1.   Words beginning with “E.”
A.   “Eaves” means the lower border of a roof that overhangs the wall.
1.   Words beginning with “F.”
A.   “Family” means one or more persons occupying a premises and living as a
single housekeeping unit, whether or not related to each other by birth or
marriage, as distinguished from a group occupying a boardinghouse, lodging
house or hotel, as defined in this section.
B.   “Farm” means an area which is used for the growing of the usual farm
products such as vegetables, fruits, and grain, and their storage on the area,
as well as for the raising thereon of the usual farm poultry and farm animals.
The term “farming” includes the operating of such area for one or more of the
above uses with the necessary accessory uses for treating or storing the
produce; provided, however, the operation of any such accessory uses shall be
secondary to that of the normal farming activities and such accessory uses do
not include the feeding of garbage or offal to swine or other animals.
C.   “Fence” means a self-supporting manmade structure extending above ground
designed to define, restrict, or prevent movement across a boundary.
D.   “Frontage” means all the property on one side of a street between two
intersecting streets, crossing or terminating, measured along the line of the
street, or if the street is dead- ended, then all of the property abutting on
one side between an intersecting street and the dead-end of the street.
E.   “Front of building” means the side of building that distinctly includes
the front entrance façade of the building, as determined by Zoning Official at
time of building permit. The front of building does not necessarily mean the
side of the building where the owner or occupants most frequently enter.
1.   Words beginning with “G.”
A.   “Garage, private” means an accessory building designed or used for the
storage of not more than four motor-driven vehicles owned and used by the
occupants of the building to which it is accessory. Not more than one of the
vehicles may be a commercial vehicle of not more than two-ton capacity.
B.   “Garage, public” means a building, or portion thereof, other than a
private or storage garage, designed or used for equipping, servicing,
repairing, hiring, selling, or storing motor- driven vehicles.
C.   “Garage, storage” means a building, or portion thereof, designed or used
exclusively for term storage by pre-arrangement of motor-driven vehicles, as
distinguished from daily storage furnished transients, and at which motor fuels
and oils are not sold, and motor-driven vehicles are not equipped, repaired,
hired, or sold.
D.   “Grade” means the average level of the finished surface of the ground
abutting to the exterior walls of the building except when any wall
approximately parallels and is not more than five feet from a street line, then
the elevation of the street at the center of the wall adjoining the street
shall be grade.
1.   Words beginning with “H.”
A.   “Historic marker or plaque” means a sign, either freestanding or building-
mounted, and not exceeding four square feet in surface area, commemorating a
notable historic person or event associated with the building or site on which
the marker or plaque is located, or in the case of roadside historic markers,
in the immediate vicinity of the site on which the marker is located.
B.   “Home industry” means a limited-scale sales, service, or fabrication
activity undertaken for financial gain, which occurs in a dwelling unit or
residential accessory building, or in a barn or other resource accessory
building and is subordinate to the primary use of the premises as a residence
or farm.
C.   “Home occupation” means an occupation or a profession which:
   (1)   Is customarily carried on in a dwelling unit and does not occupy more
than 25 percent of one floor of the dwelling unit; and
   (2)   Is carried on by a member of the family residing in the dwelling unit;
and
   (3)   Is clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling unit
for residential purposes; and
   (4)   Does not employ more than one person outside the immediate family; and
   (5)   Has no exterior display, no exterior sign, no exterior storage of
materials, and no other exterior indication of the home occupation or variation
from the residential character of the principal building; and
   (6)   Produces no offensive noise, vibration, smoke, dust, odors, heat, or
glare.
D.   “Hotel” means any building or structure, equipped, used, or advertised as,
or held out to the public to be an inn, hotel, motel, motor inn or place, where
sleeping accommodations are furnished to transient guests for hire.
1.   Words beginning with “I.”
A.   “Impervious surface” means any non-vertical surface artificially covered
or hardened so as to prevent or impede the percolation of water into the soil
mantle, including, but not limited to: roof tops, swimming pools, paved or
graveled roads or parking areas, and excluding landscaping, surface water
retention or detention facilities, and pedestrian walkways six feet wide or
less.
B.   “Institution” means a building occupied by a nonprofit corporation or a
nonprofit establishment for public use.
1.   Words beginning with “J.”
2.   Words beginning with “K.”
A.   “Kennel” means a place where adult dogs are temporarily boarded for
compensation, whether or not for training. An adult dog is one of either sex,
altered or unaltered, that has reached the age of six months.
1.   Words beginning with “L.”
A.   “Loading space” means a space within the main building or on the same lot
providing for the standing, loading, or unloading of trucks, having a minimum
dimension of 12 by 35 feet and a vertical clearance of at least 14 feet.
B.   “Lot” means a parcel of land occupied or intended for occupancy by one
main building together with its accessory buildings officially approved and
having its principal frontage upon a dedicated street. The boundaries of the
lot shall be determined by its legal description of a lot of record.
C.   “Lot, corner” means a lot abutting upon two or more streets at their
intersection.
D.   “Lot, depth of” means the mean horizontal distance between the front and
rear lot lines.
E.   “Lot, interior” means a lot other than a corner lot.
F.   “Lot of record” means a lot which is a part of a subdivision, the plat of
which has been recorded in the office of the County Recorder.
G.   “Lot, through” means a lot other than a corner lot with frontage on more
than one street, other than an alley. Through lots with frontage on two streets
may be referred to as double-frontage lots.
H.   “Lot width” means the width of the lot measured at the building line and
at right angles to its depth; provided however, the width between side lot
lines at their foremost points (where the lot intersects with the street line
or front property line) may be 80 percent of the required lot width in the case
of lots on the turning circle of a cul-de-sac.
1.   Words beginning with “M.”
A.   “Microbrewery” means a brewery producing less than 15,000 barrels per
year.
B.   “Mitigation” means the use of any or all of the following actions listed
in descending order of preference:
   (1)   Avoiding the impact by not taking a certain action;
   (2)   Minimizing the impact by limiting the degree or magnitude of the
action by using appropriate technology or by taking affirmative steps to avoid
or reduce the impact;
   (3)   Rectifying the impact by repairing, rehabilitating, or restoring the
affected area;
   (4)   Reducing or eliminating the impact over time by preservation or
maintenance operations during the life of the development proposal;
   (5)   Compensating for the impact by replacing, enhancing, or providing
substitute; and
   (6)   Monitoring the impact and taking appropriate corrective measures.
1.   Words beginning with “N.”
A.   “Nonconformance” means any use, improvement, or structure established in
conformance with City or County rules and regulations in effect at the time of
establishment that no longer conforms to the range of uses permitted in the
site’s current zone or to the current development standards of the Zoning Code
due to changes in the Code or its application to the subject property.
1.   Words beginning with “O.”
2.   Words beginning with “P.”
A.   “Park” means a site designed or developed for recreational use by the
public including, but not limited to:
   (1)   Indoor facilities, such as:
      a.   Gymnasiums;
      b.   Swimming pools; or
      c.   Activity centers; and
   (2)   Outdoor facilities, such as:
      d.   Play fields;
      e.   Fishing areas; or
      f.   Picnic and related outdoor activity areas; and
   (3)   Areas and trails for:
      g.   Hikers;
      h.   Equestrians;
      i.   Bicyclists; or
      j.   Off-road recreational vehicle users.
A.   “Parking aisle” means that portion of the off-street parking area used
exclusively for the maneuvering and circulation of motor vehicles and in which
parking is prohibited.
B.   “Parking lot unit depth” means the linear distance within which one
parking aisle is flanked by accessible rows of parking stalls as measured
perpendicular to the parking aisle.
C.   “Parking space” means a surfaced area, enclosed in the main building or in
an accessory building, or unenclosed, having an area of not less than 180
square feet exclusive of driveways, permanently reserved for the temporary
storage of one automobile and connected with a street or alley by a surfaced
driveway which affords satisfactory ingress and egress for automobiles.
D.   “Parking space angle” means the angle measured from a reference line,
generally the property line or centerline of an aisle, at which motor vehicles
are to be parked.
E.   “Place” means an open unoccupied space or a public or private thoroughfare
other than a street or alley permanently reserved as the principal means of
access to abutting property.
F.   “Premises” means a parcel of land including the buildings located thereon.
G.   “Private” means solely or primarily for the use of residents or occupants
of the premises; e.g., a noncommercial garage used solely by residents or their
guests is a private garage.
H.   “Public utility” means a facility for the distribution or transmission of
services to an area, requiring location in the area to be served, including,
but not limited to:
   (1)   Telephone exchanges;
   (2)   Water pumping or treatment stations;
   (3)   Electrical switching substations;
   (4)   Water storage reservoirs or tanks;
   (5)   Municipal groundwater well-fields;
   (6)   Regional stormwater management facilities;
   (7)   Natural gas gate stations and limiting stations;
   (8)   Propane, compressed natural gas, and liquefied natural gas storage
tanks serving multiple lots or uses from which fuel is distributed directly to
individual users; and
   (9)   Sewer lift stations.
I.   “Public Works Director” means the manager of the City’s Public Works
Department, or their designee.
1.   Words beginning with “Q.”
2.   Words beginning with “R.”
A.   “Recreational vehicle (RV)” means a vehicle designed primarily for
recreational camping, travel, or seasonal use which has its own motive power or
is mounted on or towed by another vehicle, including, but not limited to:
   (1)   Travel trailer;
   (2)   Folding camping trailer;
   (3)   Park trailer;
   (4)   Truck camper;
   (5)   Park trailer;
   (6)   Motor home; and
   (7)   Multi-use vehicle.
B.   “Recreational vehicle parks” means the use of land upon which two or more
recreational vehicle sites, including hook up facilities, are located for
occupancy by the general public of recreational vehicles as temporary living
quarters for recreation or vacation purposes.
C.   “Retaining wall” means a wall not laterally supported at the top that
resists lateral soil load and other imposed loads.
1.   Words beginning with “S.”
A.   “Schools, elementary, and middle or junior high” means institutions of
learning offering instruction in the several branches of learning and study
required by the Education Code of the State in grades kindergarten through
nine, including associated meeting rooms, auditoriums, and athletic facilities.
B.   “Schools, preschool” means establishments providing exclusively
educational programs for pre-kindergarten or preschool children (ages two to
five), but excluding daycare as defined in Section
165.14(4)(A).
C.   “Schools, secondary or high school” means institutions of learning
offering instruction in the several branches of learning and study required by
the Education Code of the State in Grades Nine through 12, including associated
meeting rooms, auditoriums, and athletic facilities.
D.   “Setback” means the minimum required distance between a structure and a
lot line, access easement, or buffer line that is required to remain free of
structures.
E.   “Setback, interior” means the setback extending from the interior lot line
to a line parallel to and measured perpendicularly from the interior lot lines
at the depth prescribed for each zone.
F.   “Setback, street” means the setback extending from the street right-of-way
to a line parallel to and measured perpendicularly from the street right-of-
way, vehicle access easement, or the edge of a surface improvement which
extends beyond a right-of-way at the depth prescribed for each zone.
G.   “Short-term rentals” means the provision of lodging within apartment,
dwelling unit, or any other place where sleeping accommodations are furnished
to transient guests for rent for a period of less than 31 consecutive days.
There shall be one off-street parking space per bedroom.
H.   “Sidewalk café” means a restaurant that provides outdoor seating on public
property for the purpose of serving food and beverages.
I.   “Sign” means any structure or part thereof, or device attached thereto or
painted or represented thereon, which displays or includes any letter, word,
model, banner, flag, pennant, insignia, device, or representation used as, or
which is in the nature of an announcement, direction, or advertisement. The
word sign includes the word “billboard,” but does not include the flag,
pennant, or insignia of any nation, state, city, or other political unit, or of
any political, educational, charitable, philanthropic, civic, professional,
religious, or like campaign, drive, movement, or event.
J.   “Sign, animated” means any sign that includes action or motion or the
optical illusion of action or motion or color changes of all or any part of the
sign.
K.   “Sign, building” means any sign that is painted on, or attached directly
to or supported by, an exterior building wall, including facade signs, awning
signs, canopy signs, and marquees, but excluding window signs.
L.    “Sign, community bulletin board” means a permanent sign used to notify
the public of community events and public services, and which contains no
commercial advertising.
M.   “Sign, directional” means a sign designed to guide or direct pedestrian or
vehicular traffic to an area, place, or convenience, and may include incidental
graphics such as trade names and trademarks.
N.   “Sign, electronic message center” means an electronically or computer-
controlled reader board where different non-animated copy changes are shown on
a lamp bank or other electronic displays.
O.   “Sign frame” means an enclosing structure or case around a sign.
P.   “Sign, freestanding” means a sign standing directly upon the ground or
having one or more supports standing directly upon the ground, and being
detached from any building or similar structure.
Q.   “Sign, fuel price” means a sign utilized to advertise the price of
gasoline or diesel fuel.
R.   “Sign, incidental” means a sign, emblem, or decal designed to inform the
public of goods, facilities, or services available on the premises, and may
include, but not limited to, signs designating:
   (1)   Restrooms;
   (2)   Hours of operation;
   (3)   Acceptable credit cards;
   (4)   Property ownership or management;
   (5)   Phone booths; and
   (6)   Recycling containers.
S.   “Sign, indirectly illuminated” means a sign that is illuminated entirely
from an external artificial source.
T.    “Sign, mall” means a permanent sign that displays the name of a building,
building complex, or the occupants.
U.   “Sign, monument” means a freestanding sign that is above ground level and
is anchored to the ground by a solid base, with no open space between the sign
and the ground.
V.   “Sign mounting” means a support, backing, or setting for a sign.
W.   “Sign, nonconforming” means any existing permanent, legally erected, on-
premises sign which does not comply with the current requirements of
Chapter 168.
X.   “Sign, off-premises directional” means a sign which contains no
advertising of a commercial nature which is used to direct pedestrian or
vehicular traffic circulation to a facility, service, or business located on
other premises within 660 feet of the sign.
Y.   “Sign, on-premises” means a sign which displays a message which is
incidental to and directly associated with the use of the property on which it
is located.
Z.   “Sign, permanent residential development identification” means a
permanent, freestanding sign identifying the residential development upon which
the sign is located.
AA.   “Sign, pole” means an on-premises sign built on a freestanding frame,
mast, or pole(s) where the support encompasses less than 75 percent of the
width of the sign.
BB.   “Sign, portable” means a sign which is capable of being moved and is not
permanently affixed to the ground, a structure or building, such as an A-frame.
CC.   “Sign, projecting” means any sign, other than a flat wall sign, which is
attached to and projects vertically more than one foot from the wall of a
building or other structure.
DD.   “Sign, recommended face background colors” means colors recommended by
the City for use on the sign face background of mall signs, monument signs,
perimeter signs, and building signs. Sign recommended face background colors
include corresponding or related colors to those in the building’s color
palette.
EE.   “Sign, required frame colors” means colors required by the City for use
on the frames of mall signs, monument signs, perimeter signs, and building
signs. Sign required frame colors include those that match or blend with the
building’s color palette.
FF.   “Sign, window” means any sign located inside or on, affixed to, or
located within three feet of a window of a building, whether temporary or
permanent, lighted or unlighted, which may be viewed from the exterior of the
building. Merchandise located within three feet of a window is not included in
the definition unless the merchandise blocks more than one third of the window.
GG.   “Story” means that portion of a building, other than a cellar, included
between the surface of any floor and the surface of the floor next above it or,
if there is no floor above it, then the space between the floor and the ceiling
next above it.
HH.   “Story, half” means a partial story under a gable, hip, or gambrel roof,
the wall plates of which on at least two opposite exterior walls are not more
than three feet above the floor of such story, except that any partial story
used for residence purposes, other than for a janitor or caretaker or such
person’s family, or by a family occupying the floor immediately below it, shall
be deemed a full story.
II.   “Street” means a public thoroughfare which affords the principal means of
access to abutting property.
JJ.   “Street banner” means a temporary sign without mechanical or electrical
devices made of cloth or similar non-rigid materials suspended with rope or
cable over the public street right-of-way.
KK.   “Street frontage” means any portion of a lot or combination of lots which
directly abut a public right-of-way.
LL.   “Street or utility pole” means telephone, utility or electric, cable
television, or street light poles located within a public right-of-way.
MM.   “Structure” means anything constructed or erected which requires location
on the ground, but not including fences or walls used as fences less than six
feet in height, poles, lines, cables, or other transmission or distribution
facilities of public utilities.
NN.   “Substantial damage” means damage of any origin sustained by a structure
whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damage condition
would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before
the damage occurred.
OO.   “Substantial improvement” means any maintenance, repair, structural
modification, addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which
equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure either before
the maintenance, repair, modification, or addition is started or before the
damage occurred, if the structure has been damaged and is being restored.
PP.   “Swimming pool” means any structure intended for swimming or recreational
bathing that contains water over 24 inches deep. This includes in-ground,
above-ground, and on- ground swimming pools, hot tubs, and spas.
1.   Words beginning with “T.”
A.   “Temporary Use Permit” means a permit to allow a use of limited duration
or frequency, or to allow multiple related events over a specified period.
B.   “Trailer” means any structure used for living, sleeping, business, or
storage purposes, having no foundation other than wheels, blocks, skids, jacks,
horses, or skirtings and which has been or reasonably may be equipped with
wheels or other devices for transporting the structure from place to place. The
term trailer includes camp car and house car.
1.   Words beginning with “U.”
A.   “Use” means an activity or function carried out on an area of land, or in
a building or structure located thereon. Any use comprising the sole or main
use on the site is considered the primary use of the site. Any use subordinate
or incidental to the primary use on a site is considered an accessory use.
1.   Words beginning with “V.”
A.   “Variance” means an adjustment in the application of standards of the
Zoning Code to a particular property.
B.   “Vegetation” means any and all plant life growing at, below, or above the
soil surface.
1.   Words beginning with “W.”
2.   Words beginning with “X.”
3.   Words beginning with “Y.”
A.   “Yard” means an open space between a building and the adjoining lot lines
unoccupied and unobstructed by any portion of a structure from the ground
upward, except as otherwise provided herein. In measuring a yard for the
purpose of determining the width of a side yard, the depth of a front yard, or
the depth of the rear yard, the minimum horizontal distance between the lot
lines and the main building shall be used.
B.   “Yard, front” means a yard extending across the front of a lot and being
the minimum horizontal distance between the street or place line and the main
building or any projections thereof other than the projections of the usual
uncovered steps, uncovered balconies, or uncovered porch. On corner lots the
front yard shall be considered as parallel to the street upon which the lot has
its least dimension, except where owner may elect to place the front of
building on a street parallel to lot line having the greater dimension. In the
case of the front of building being placed on street parallel to lot line
having the greater dimension, required front and rear yard setbacks must be met
from that street’s place line.
C.   “Yard, rear” means a yard extending across the rear of a lot and being the
required minimum horizontal distance between the rear lot line and the rear of
the main building or any projections thereof other than the projections of
uncovered steps, unenclosed balconies, or unenclosed porches. On all lots the
rear yard shall be opposite of the front yard on the lot layout.
D.   “Yard, side” means a yard between the main building and the sideline of
the lot, extending from the required front yard to the required rear yard, and
being the minimum horizontal distance between a side lot line and the site of
the main building or any projections thereto.
1.   Words beginning with “Z.”
CHAPTER 166
ZONING REGULATIONS - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
 
166.01 Administration      166.04 Amendments to Code and Rezoning
166.02 Enforcement         166.05 Violations and Penalties
166.03 Board of Adjustment  
 
166.01   ADMINISTRATION.
The Council shall appoint a Zoning Officer to enforce the provisions of the
applicable City ordinances. It shall be the Zoning Officer’s duty to examine
all applications for permits, issue permits only for construction and uses
which are in accordance with the requirements of City ordinances, record, and
file all applications for permits with accompanying plans and documents, and
make such reports as the Council may require. Permits for construction and uses
that are a special exception or variance to requirements of the Zoning Code
shall be issued only upon order by the Board of Adjustment. Nothing herein
contained shall require any change in plans or construction of a lawful use,
the construction of which is started before the effective date of the Zoning
Code and which is complete within one year of such effective date. The Zoning
Code shall be enforced by the Zoning Officer who shall in no case, except under
a written order of the Board of Adjustment or the Council, issue any permit for
the erection or structural alteration of any building, or grant any Zoning and
Use Registration Permit for any building or land where the proposed erection,
structural alteration, or use thereof would be in violation of any provision of
this Code of Ordinances.
166.02   ENFORCEMENT.
1.   Duty to Enforce. It is the duty of the Zoning Official, with the aid of
other municipal departments, to enforce this Zoning Code.
2.   Zoning Certificates. Except as hereinafter provided, no permit pertaining
to the use of land or buildings shall be issued by any officer, department, or
employee of the City unless the application for such permit has been examined
by the Zoning Officer, indicating that the proposed building or structure
complies with all of the provisions of the Zoning Code. Any permit or
certificate issued in conflict with the provisions of the Zoning Code shall be
null and void.
3.   Occupancy Permits. No building or addition thereto, constructed after the
effective date of this Zoning Code, and no addition to a previously existing
building shall be occupied, and no land, vacant on the effective date of this
Zoning Code, shall be used for any purpose until an Occupancy Permit has been
issued by the Zoning Official. No change in a use, other than that of a
permitted use to another similar permitted use, shall be made until an
Occupancy Permit has been issued by the Zoning Official. Every Occupancy Permit
shall state that the use or occupancy complies with the provisions of this
Zoning Code.
A.   Every application for a building permit shall be deemed to be an
application for an Occupancy Permit. Every application for an Occupancy Permit
for a new use of land where no building permit is required shall be made
directly to the Zoning Official.
B.   Every application for a permit shall be accompanied by plans in duplicate
and plot plan drawn to scale in ink or blueprint, showing the actual shape and
dimensions of the lot to be built upon, the exact location, size, and height of
the building or structure to be erected or altered, the existing and intended
use of each building or part, the proposed number of families or household
units, and such other information with regard to the lot and neighboring lots
as may be necessary for the enforcement of this Zoning Code. One copy of such
plans shall be signed and returned to the applicant when approved by the Zoning
Official together with such permit as may be granted.
C.   Prior to building construction, lot pins based on actual survey shall be
set, and if disturbed by construction or grading shall be reset in proper
location. The requirements of a survey may be waived, however, where:
   (1)   The cost of the improvement is $3,000.00 or less, and
   (2)   The title holders of record for each adjoining property have given
written consent of the proposed improvement without a survey, and
   (3)   Based on the apparent location of the boundary line, the improvement
would not constitute an infraction of any zoning requirement.
D.   No Occupancy Permit for a building or a portion thereof, constructed after
the effective date of this Zoning Code, shall be issued until construction has
been completed and the premises inspected and certified by the Zoning Official
to be in conformity with the plans and specifications upon which the zoning
certificate was based. Pending the issuance of a regular certificate, a
temporary certificate may be issued to be valid for a period not to exceed six
months from its date during the completion of any addition or during partial
occupancy of the premises. Reasons in writing for refusal to issue an Occupancy
Permit must be forwarded to the applicant no later than 14 days after the
request for an Occupancy Permit.
1.   Penalties. Any person who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects, or refuses
to comply with any of the provisions of this Zoning Code shall be in violation
of this Code of Ordinances. Each day that a violation continues shall
constitute a separate offense.
2.   Remedies. In case any building or structure is erected, constructed,
reconstructed, altered, repaired, converted, or maintained, or any building,
structure, or land is used in violation of the provisions of this Zoning Code,
the City Attorney, in addition to other remedies under the Code of Iowa, is
hereby authorized to institute an action to enjoin, or any other appropriate
action or proceeding to prevent such erection, construction, reconstruction,
alteration, repair, conversion, maintenance, or use.
166.03   BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT.
1.   Creation, Membership, and Procedure. A Board of Adjustment is established.
The Board of Adjustment shall consist of five members to be appointed by the
Council for five-year terms. Members of the Board of Adjustment may be removed
from office by the Council for cause upon written charges and after public
hearings. Vacancies shall be filled by the Council for the unexpired term of
the member affected. The Board of Adjustment shall elect from its membership a
Chairperson.
2.   Meetings of the Board of Adjustment. The Board of Adjustment shall adopt
rules necessary to the conduct of its affairs, and in keeping with the
provisions of the Zoning Code. Meetings shall be held at the call of the
Chairperson and at such other times as the Board of Adjustment may determine.
The Chairperson or, in the absence of the Chairperson, the acting Chairperson
may administer oaths and compel attendance of witnesses. All meetings shall be
open to the public. The Board of Adjustment shall keep minutes of its
proceedings showing the vote of each member upon each question or, if absent or
failing to vote, indicating such fact, and shall keep records of its
examination and other official actions, all of which shall be a public record
and which shall be immediately filed in the office of the Clerk.
3.   Applications, Appeals, and Hearings.
A.   An application to the Board of Adjustment, in cases in which it has
original jurisdiction under the provisions of this chapter, may be taken by any
property owner, including a tenant, or by any governmental officer, department,
board, or bureau. Such application shall be filed with the Zoning Official,
together with a fee as established by resolution of the Council, who shall
transmit the same, together with all the plans, specifications, and other
papers pertaining to the application, to the Board of Adjustment. Should the
application be withdrawn prior to the publication of legal notice thereon, such
fee will be returned upon written request of the applicant.
B.   Appeals to the Board of Adjustment concerning interpretation or
administration of the Zoning Code may be taken by any person aggrieved or by
any officer, department, board, or bureau of the governing body of the City
affected by any decision of the Administrative Official. Such appeals shall be
taken within a reasonable time, not to exceed 10 days, by filing with the
Administrative Official and with the Board of Adjustment a notice of appeal
specifying the grounds thereof. The Administrative Official shall forthwith
transmit to the Board of Adjustment all papers constituting the record upon
which the action appealed from was taken. The Board of Adjustment shall fix a
reasonable time of appeal (not exceeding 30 days), give public notice thereof
as well as due notice to the parties in interest, and decide the same within a
reasonable time (not exceeding 15 days from the hearing date). At the hearing,
any party may appear in person or by agent or engineer. A fee of $10.00 shall
be paid to the Administrative Official at the time the notice of appeal is
filed, which the Administrative Official shall forthwith pay over to the credit
of the general revenue fund of the City.
C.   Stay of Proceedings. An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the
action appealed from, unless the Administrative Official from whom the appeal
is taken certifies to the Board of Adjustment, after the notice of appeal is
filed with said official, that by reason of facts stated in the certificate, a
stay would, in the opinion of such official, cause imminent peril to life and
property. In such case, proceedings shall not be stayed other than by a
restraining order which may be granted by the Board of Adjustment or by a court
of record on application, on notice to the Administrative Official from whom
the appeal is taken and on due cause shown.
1.   Powers of the Board of Adjustment. The Board of Adjustment shall have the
following powers and duties.
A.   Administrative Review. The Board of Adjustment shall hear and decide
appeals where it is alleged there is error in any order, requirement, decision,
or determination made by the Administrative Official in the enforcement of the
Zoning Code.
B.   Conditional Use Permits. A Conditional Use Permit shall be obtained for
certain uses which may be harmonious under special conditions and in specific
locations within a zone, but may not be allowed under the general conditions of
the zone as stated in the Zoning Code.
   (1)   Application. All Conditional Use Permit applications shall be
submitted to the Zoning Official. All applications shall be accompanied by
maps, drawings, statements, or other documents as required by the Board of
Adjustment. An appropriate fee, as set by resolution of the Council, shall be
collected at the time of submittal.
   (2)   Public Hearing. Prior to the approval, amending, or denial of a
Conditional Use Permit, a public hearing shall be held by the Board of
Adjustment. Upon the completion of said public hearing, the Board of Adjustment
shall render a decision within 10 working days.
   (3)   Determination. The Board of Adjustment, or the Council on appeal,
shall have the authority to impose mitigation conditions and safeguards as
deemed necessary to protect and enhance the health, safety, and welfare of the
surrounding area. The authorization of Conditional Use Permits shall not be
made unless the evidence presented is such to establish the following:
      a.   Such use will not, under the specific circumstances of the
particular case, be detrimental to the health, safety, or general welfare of
the surrounding area, and the proposed use is necessary or desirable and
provides a service or facility that contributes to the general well-being of
the surrounding area.
      b.   Such use will comply with the regulations and conditions specified
under the Zoning Code for such use.
      c.   The Board of Adjustment shall itemize, describe, or justify, then
have recorded and filed in writing, the conditions imposed on the use.
   (4)   Expiration and Revocation. Any granted Conditional Use Permit shall
become null and void within one year of the date of approval if not exercised.
A Conditional Use Permit shall be considered exercised when the use has been
established or when a building permit has been issued and substantial
construction accomplished. If such permit is abandoned or discontinued for a
period of one year, it may not be reestablished unless authorized by the Board
of Adjustment, or Council on appeal. A Conditional Use Permit may be revoked if
the applicant fails to comply with the imposed conditions.
   (5)   Adjustments. An adjustment to an approved Conditional Use Permit shall
be submitted to the Zoning Official accompanied by supporting information. The
Board of Adjustment shall review the adjustment and may grant, deny, or amend
such adjustment and impose conditions deemed necessary.
A.   Variances. The Board of Adjustment shall have the powers and duties to
authorize, upon appeal in specific cases, such variances from the terms of the
Zoning Code as will not be contrary to the public interest where, owing to the
special conditions, a literal enforcement of the provisions of the Zoning Code
would result in unnecessary hardship. A variance from the terms of the Zoning
Code shall not be granted by the Board of Adjustment unless and until:
   (1)   A written application for a variance is submitted demonstrating the
following:
      a.   Special conditions and circumstances exist which are peculiar to the
land, structure, or building involved and which are not applicable to other
lands, structures, or buildings in the same district.
      b.   Literal interpretation of the provisions of the Zoning Code would
deprive the applicant of rights commonly enjoyed by other properties in the
same district under the terms of the Zoning Code.
      c.   The special conditions and circumstances do not result from the
actions of the applicant.
      d.   Granting the variance requested will not confer on the applicant any
special privilege that is denied by the Zoning Code to other lands, structures,
or buildings in the same district. No nonconforming use of neighboring lands,
structures, or buildings in the same district, and no permitted use of lands,
structures, or buildings in other districts shall be considered grounds for the
issuance of a variance.
   (2)   Notice of public hearing shall be given as in Subsection 3 of this
section.
   (3)   The public hearing shall be held. Any party may appear in person, by
agent, or by engineer.
   (4)   The Board of Adjustment shall make findings that the requirements of
Subparagraph (1) above have been met by the applicant for a variance.
   (5)   The Board of Adjustment shall further make a finding that the reasons
set forth in the application justify the granting of the variance, and that the
variance is the minimum variance that will make possible the reasonable use of
the land, building, or structures.
   (6)   The Board of Adjustment shall further make a finding that the granting
of the variance will be in harmony with the general purpose and intent of the
Zoning Code, and will not be injurious to the neighborhood, or otherwise
detrimental to the public welfare.
   (7)   In granting any variance, the Board of Adjustment may prescribe
appropriate conditions and safeguards in conformity with the Zoning Code.
Violation of such conditions and safeguards, when made a part of the terms
under which the variance is granted, shall be deemed a violation of the Zoning
Code. Under no circumstances shall the Board of Adjustment grant a variance to
allow a use not permissible under the terms of the Zoning Code in the district
involved, or any use expressly or by implication prohibited by the terms of the
Zoning Code in such district.
   (8)   No decision of the Board of Adjustment granting a variance shall be
effective until the decision is reviewed by the Council. The Council shall
review decision of the Board of Adjustment granting variances at the Council’s
next regularly scheduled meeting following the meeting of the Board of
Adjustment granting the variance. In reviewing a decision of the Board of
Adjustment granting a variance, the Council may approve the decision of the
Board of Adjustment, take no action on the decision of the Board of Adjustment,
or remand a decision to grant a variance to the Board of Adjustment for further
study. If the Council either approves the decision of the Board of Adjustment
or takes no action, the decision of the Board of Adjustment shall be effective
immediately. If a decision granting a variance is remanded to the Board of
Adjustment, the effective date of the variance is delayed for 30 days from the
date of the remand by the Council. Following remand, the Board of Adjustment
shall meet as soon as possible, but no later than 30 days from the date of
remand by the Council. The Board of Adjustment shall hold such hearings and
consider such evidence as it deems necessary to review their prior decision
granting a variance. The Board of Adjustment shall then either affirm or
reverse its prior decision.
A.   Decisions. In exercising the powers set forth herein, the Board of
Adjustment may, so long as such action is in conformity with the terms of the
Zoning Code, reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order,
requirement, decision, or determination as ought to be made, and to that end
shall have powers of the Administrative Official from whom the appeal is taken.
The concurring vote of four members of the Board of Adjustment shall be
necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision, or determination of the
Administrative Official, or to decide in favor of the applicant on any matter
upon which it is required to pass under the Zoning Code, or to effect any
variation in the application of the Zoning Code.
B.   Appeals from Board of Adjustment. Any person or any board, taxpayer,
department, board, or bureau of the City aggrieved by any decision of the Board
of Adjustment may seek review by a court of record of such decision, in the
manner provided by the laws of the State and particularly by Chapter 414 of the
Code of Iowa, as amended.
166.04   AMENDMENTS TO CODE AND REZONING.
1.   Amendments to the Zoning Code. The regulations imposed and the districts
created by the Zoning Code may be amended from time to time by the Council but
no such amendments shall be made without public hearing before the Council and
after a report has been made upon the amendment by the Planning and Zoning
Commission. If the Planning and Zoning Commission makes no report within 30
days from the date of passage of Council’s motion or resolution referring the
same to the Planning and Zoning Commission, it shall be considered to have
recommended favorably on the proposed amendment and the Council may proceed
with a public hearing. The notice requirements of Section 414.4 of the Code of
Iowa shall apply to all amendments of this Zoning Code. In case the Planning
and Zoning Commission disapproves the change, or, in the case of a protest
filed with the Council against such change signed by the owners of 20 percent
or more either of the area of the lots included in such proposed change, or of
those immediately adjacent in the rear thereof extending the depth of one lot
or not to exceed 200 feet therefrom, or of those directly opposite thereto,
extending the depth of one lot or not to exceed 200 feet from the street
frontage of such opposite lots, such amendment shall not be passed except by
the favorable vote of three-fourths of all the members of the Council.
2.   Rezoning Applications.
A.   Application Contents. An application for rezoning shall contain the
following items:
   (1)   The legal description and local address of the property;
   (2)   The present zoning classification and the zoning classification
requested for the property;
   (3)   The existing use and proposed use of the property;
   (4)   A statement of the reasons why the applicant feels the present zoning
classification is no longer valid;
   (5)   A plat showing the locations, dimensions, and use of the applicant’s
property.
B.   Fees and Expenses. All requests for changes in the Zoning Code or Map,
except those initiated by the Council, shall be at the expense of the person
requesting said change. Said expense shall include costs of publication, fees
paid for special Council meetings, and engineering and legal fees in connection
with said zoning change.
C.   Notice Requirements. It shall be the obligation of the party requesting a
change in the Zoning Code or Map to send notice of the date, time, and place of
public hearing before the Council, by certified mail at said party’s own cost,
to the owners of the property to be affected by said proposed change and to the
owners of property located within 200 feet of the exterior boundaries of the
property to be affected by said change. Proof of the sending of notice must be
on file at the Clerk’s office at least one day before the date of the public
hearing before the Council.
166.05   VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES.
Any person who violates or fails to comply with the provisions of the Zoning
Code is guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be fined not more
than $500.00, and may be required to pay all costs and expenses involved in the
prosecution of the violation. Each day such violation continues shall
constitute a separate offense. The owners, or tenant of any building,
structure, land, or part thereof, and any architect, builder, contractor,
agent, or other persons who commits, participates in, assists in, or maintains
a violation may each be charged with a separate offense and, upon conviction,
suffer the penalties as provided herein. If any building or structure is
erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, repaired, converted, or
maintained; or any building, structure, or land is used in violation of the
Zoning Code, the City may, in addition to other remedies, institute injunction,
mandamus, or other appropriate lawful action necessary to prevent, correct, or
abate such violation.
CHAPTER 167
ZONING REGULATIONS - ZONING DISTRICT USE AND DIMENSIONS
167.01 Compliance Requirements         167.12 Applicability
167.02 Separate Yards, Open Space, and 167.13 A-1 Agricultural District
Off-Street
Parking                                167.14 R-1 Residential District
167.03 Minimum Yard and Area           167.15 R-2 Residential District
Requirements
167.04 Clearing and Grading            167.16 R-3 Residential District
Requirements
167.05 Fencing and Retaining Wall      167.17 R-4 Residential District
Requirements
167.06 Intersection Visibility         167.18 C-R Retail Commercial District
Requirements
167.07 Accessory Building Location     167.19 C-G General Commercial District
Restriction
167.08 Multiple Structures On Lot      167.20 C-H Highway Commercial District
167.09 Height Limitation Exemptions    167.21 I-L Light Industrial District
167.10 Use of Public Right-Of-Way      167.22 Nonconforming Structures and Uses
Prohibited
167.11 Uses Permitted in General       167.23 Special Uses
 
167.01   COMPLIANCE REQUIREMENTS.
No building or other structure shall be erected or altered to exceed the height
of, to accommodate or house a greater number of families, or to have narrower
or smaller rear yards, front yards, or other open spaces, than the provisions
of the Zoning Code. Unless required yard setbacks can be met, no construction
of a building or portion thereof, including decks or porches, shall be allowed
within any established side yard, front yard, or rear yard in any zoning
district in the City.
167.02   SEPARATE YARDS, OPEN SPACE, AND OFF-STREET PARKING.
No part of a yard or other open space, or off-street parking, or loading space
required about or in connection with any building for the purpose of complying
with the Zoning Code shall be included as part of a yard, open space, or off-
street parking or loading space similarly required for any other building.
167.03   MINIMUM YARD AND AREA REQUIREMENTS.
No yard or lot existing at the time of passage of the Zoning Code shall be
reduced in dimension or area below the minimum requirements set forth in the
Zoning Code. Yards or lots created after the effective date of the Zoning Code
shall meet at least the minimum requirements established by the Zoning Code. An
owner of contiguous lots may petition the Council for the privilege of filing a
restricted plat as set forth in Section
180.15(3) of this Code of Ordinances for the purpose of merging said contiguous
lots into one larger lot. The application shall comply with all applicable
zoning rules and regulations regarding use restrictions, setbacks, and other
provisions of this Code of Ordinances filed from the district wherein the
contiguous lots are located. In addition, contiguous lots may only be merged
under this provision and pursuant to the requirements of Section
180.15(3) if the zoning classification for each lot is the same.
167.04   CLEARING AND GRADING REQUIREMENTS.
This section is intended to provide the community with fair and equitable
grading practices and is not meant to supersede the requirements of any other
ordinance or code.
1.   Protection of Utilities. The person doing or causing grading or excavation
shall be responsible for the prevention of damage to any public utilities or
service.
2.   Protection of Adjacent Property. The person doing or causing grading or
excavation is responsible for the prevention of damage to abutting property. No
person shall grade or excavate on land to endanger any adjoining public street,
sidewalk, alley, or other public or private property from any damage that might
result from the grading or excavation.
3.   Inspection Notice. The person doing or causing grading or excavation shall
notify the Building Inspector at least 24 hours prior to start of work.
4.   Temporary Erosion Control. The person doing or causing grading or
excavation shall put into affect and maintain all precautionary measures
necessary to protect adjacent watercourses and public or private property from
damage by water erosion, flooding, or deposition of mud or debris originating
from the site. Precautionary measures must include provisions of properly
designed sediment control facilities so that downstream properties are not
affected by upstream erosion, or upstream properties are not flooded by
blockage of downstream drainage.
5.   Traffic Control and Protection of Streets. The person doing or causing
grading or excavation shall provide flag men, signs, barricades, and other
safety devices to ensure adequate safety when working in or near public
streets.
6.   Hazard from Existing Grading. Whenever any existing excavation,
embankment, or fill has become a hazard to life or limb or endangers
structures, or adversely affects the safety, use, or stability of a public way
or drainage channel, the owner of the property upon which the excavation,
embankment, or fill is located or the person or agent in control of said
property, upon receipt of notice in writing from the jurisdiction, shall within
the period specified therein repair, reconstruct, or remove such excavation,
embankment, or fill to eliminate hazard.
167.05   FENCING AND RETAINING WALL REQUIREMENTS.
The following regulations will apply to fences and retaining walls within City
limits.
1.   It is unlawful to install or construct, or cause to be installed or
constructed,2 any electric or barbed wire fence or any fence over six feet in
height without obtaining a permit. All applications for fence permits shall be
submitted to the Building Official and shall be accompanied by a sketch or
design of the proposed fence and a plot plan showing the location of the
proposed fence.
2.   Fences and hedges, when located within a front, side, or rear yard or
within five feet of a lot line, shall be subject to the following location and
height requirements:
A.   No portion of a fence more than 10 percent solid shall exceed eight feet
in height.
B.   Fences and hedges shall be located so no part thereof is within two feet
of any alley or a street right-of-way line.
C.   Retaining walls shall be located so no part thereof is within five of any
utility easement. This setback requirement applies to retaining walls that are
over four feet (1219 mm) in height and retaining walls regardless of height
that are deemed to be critical to the stabilization of a building foundation or
is an element of support to any structure that will have a lice load equal to
or greater than 40 psf or is equal to or greater than eight feet in height
measured from bottom of the footing to the top of the wall which is required to
be designed by a Professional Structural Engineer.
D.   Fences shall be located so that no part thereof is within one foot of any
property line not mentioned elsewhere.
E.   On all streets, no fence or hedge more than two feet in height above the
curb level shall be located within a triangular area, with the legs of the
triangle measured 30 feet along the curb from the point the curbs of the two
streets intersect.
F.   In R Zones or within 50 feet of an R Zone along the same frontage, fences
within the front yard shall not exceed four feet in height. Fences may be
constructed within a front yard abutting an expressway or arterial street, as
listed or defined in the Comprehensive Plan, as amended, to a height not
exceeding six feet when:
   (1)   The front yard is within a double frontage lot; or
   (2)   The front yard is within a corner lot and abuts the front yard of a
double frontage lot.
G.   It is prohibited to construct agricultural type metal fencing in all
Residential Zoning Districts.
1.   Except as otherwise provided, fenced enclosures shall be provided for
permanent swimming pools with a depth of 24 inches or more and for dog runs and
shall be subject to the following requirements:
A.   An outdoor swimming pool, the edge of which is less than four feet above
grade, shall be completely enclosed by a fence not less than four feet in
height. The fence shall be so constructed as not to allow a five-inch diameter
sphere to pass through the fence. A principal or an accessory building may be
used as a part of such enclosure.
B.   All gates or doors opening through an enclosure shall be equipped with a
self-closing and self-latching device for keeping the gate or door securely
closed at all times when not in actual use, except the door of any building
which forms a part of the enclosure need not be so equipped. The Building
Official may permit other protective devices or structures to be used so long
as the degree of protection afforded by the substitute device or structure is
not less than the protection afforded herein.
C.   Dog runs shall be enclosed by a fence of sufficient height and
construction to contain the dog at all times.
1.   Barbed wire and electric fences shall be subject to the following
requirements:
A.   Barbed wire shall consist of twisted wires with barbs on each wire a
minimum distance of four inches apart. Concertina wire shall be prohibited.
B.   Except for the enclosure of livestock operations, barbed wire fences shall
be permitted only in a C or I Zone, provided the bottom strand of barbed wire
shall not be less than six feet above grade.
C.   Except for the enclosure of livestock operations, electric fences shall
not be permitted in any zone.
D.   No electric fence shall carry a charge greater than 25 milliamperes or a
pulsating current lower than one-tenth second in a one-second cycle. All
electric fence charges shall carry the seal of an approved testing laboratory.
E.   Barbed wire and electric fences are prohibited within five feet of a
public sidewalk or within four feet of street right-of-way line where a public
sidewalk does not exist. In the latter case, however, either fence may be
installed or constructed along the right-of-way line if the property owner
agrees to move the fence back the required distance within two months after the
installation of a public sidewalk. Said agreement shall be processed with the
application for a permit.
1.   Retaining Walls. All retaining walls to be constructed in Residential
Zoning Districts shall be made of residential style blocks which shall be
approved by both the Zoning Officer and Building Inspector.
167.06   INTERSECTION VISIBILITY REQUIREMENTS.
On a corner lot in any Agricultural or Residential District, no fence, wall,
hedge, or other planting or structure that will obstruct vision between a
height of two and one-half feet and 10 feet above the centerline grades of the
intersecting streets shall be erected, placed, or maintained within the
triangular area formed by the right-of-way lines at such corner lots and a
straight line joining such right- of-way lines at points which are 25 feet
distant from the intersection of the right-of-way lines, and measured along the
right-of-way lines.
167.07   ACCESSORY BUILDING LOCATION RESTRICTION.
Accessory uses or structures are clearly incidental to the permitted uses or
structures of the district, not involving the conduct of business on the
premises, except home occupations, and located on the same lot or a contiguous
lot under the same ownership. The following restrictions shall apply to
accessory building location:
1.   In all R Zones, detached accessory uses and buildings (which include, but
are not limited to, detached garages) are subject to the following
requirements, except as otherwise provided:
A.   Time of Construction. Accessory buildings shall not be constructed prior
to the start of construction of the principal building.
B.   Setback from Property Lines. Except as otherwise provided, an accessory
building shall be separated from the lot lines in compliance with the following
requirements:
   (1)   Accessory buildings shall not be located in a front yard.
   (2)   An accessory building shall not be located closer than five feet to a
side lot line or six feet from a rear lot line.
   (3)   An accessory building for a zero-lot line shall comply with the
requirements set forth above and shall not be located in the required 10-foot
side yard.
   (4)   No portion of an accessory building shall be located closer than six
feet to the principal building or to any other building or structure on the lot
or location.
   (5)   Accessory buildings shall not occupy more that 30 percent of the rear
yard.
   (6)   Accessory buildings and structures shall not exceed a height of 15
feet in any R Zone. In other zones accessory buildings and structures shall not
exceed the maximum height permitted for a principal building.
1.   Attached accessory buildings shall be located pursuant to the requirements
for a principal building. Attached garages and carports shall be located on a
lot so as to provide a minimum 20-foot length driveway between the building and
the street right-of-way line.
2.   Accessory buildings must utilize in the construction and appearance
similar material and same color as the primary structure.
3.   No side yard shall be considered or included as rear yard for purposes of
calculation of the 30 percent of usable space for an accessory building.
167.08   MULTIPLE STRUCTURES ON LOT.
In any district, more than one principal structure housing a permitted
principal use may be erected on a single lot provided that the area, yard, and
other requirements of the Zoning Code are met for each structure as though it
were on an individual lot.
167.09   HEIGHT LIMITATION EXEMPTIONS.
The height limitations contained in this chapter do not apply to spires,
belfries, cupolas, chimneys, water tanks, ventilators, elevator housing, or
other structures placed above the roof level and not intended for direct human
use or occupancy. Antennas are not subject to other height limits in this
chapter, but shall not exceed 150 feet in any zone.
167.10   USE OF PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY PROHIBITED.
No portion of the public street or alley right-of-way shall be used or occupied
by an abutting use of land or structure for storage or display purposes, or to
provide any parking or loading space required by the Zoning Code, or for any
other purpose that would obstruct the use or maintenance of the public right-
of-way.
167.11   USES PERMITTED IN GENERAL.
Only those uses expressly set forth shall be allowed in each zoning district. A
higher or more intensive classification district shall not include the uses of
less intensive or lower districts.
167.12   APPLICABILITY.
The following district regulations shall be in effect for all lots, parcels, or
property for which building permits have been issued after July 1, 2004, or
which have been zoned or rezoned after July 1, 2004.
167.13   A-1 AGRICULTURAL DISTRICT.
The following regulations apply to the A-1 Agricultural District.
1.   Permitted Principal Uses and Structures. The permitted principal uses and
structures in the A-1 Agricultural District are as follows:
A.   Agriculture, horticulture, dairy farming, livestock farming, poultry
farming, general farming, truck gardening, and other agricultural activities;
B.   Single-family dwellings;
C.   Cemetery or mausoleum;
D.   Churches and temples;
E.   Public schools, elementary, junior high, and high schools;
F.   Parochial or private schools having similar curricula as public schools
and having no rooms used regularly for housing or sleeping purposes;
G.   Public, semi-public parks, playgrounds, or community buildings;
H.   Golf courses and country clubs, except miniature courses or driving ranges
operated for a profit;
I.   Boarding and riding stables;
J.   Group homes;
K.   Special uses as permitted in Section
167.23.
1.   Permitted Accessory Uses and Structures. The permitted accessory uses and
structures in the A-1 Agricultural District are as follows:
A.   Private garages;
B.   Farm buildings incidental to agricultural uses;
C.   Private greenhouses or plant nurseries not operated for commercial
purposes;
D.   Private swimming pools;
E.   Accessory uses or structures clearly incidental to the permitted uses or
structures of this district, not involving the conduct of business on the
premises, except home occupations, and located on the same lot or a contiguous
lot under the same ownership;
F.   Temporary buildings used in conjunction with construction work, provided
such buildings are removed promptly upon completion of the construction work.
1.   Minimum Yard Requirements. The minimum yard requirements for the A-
1 Agricultural District are as follows:
A.   Single-family dwelling:
   (1)   Front, 37 feet;
   (2)   Rear, 37 feet;
   (3)   Side, 17 feet;
   (4)   Street side, corner lot, 27 feet. Overhangs allowed to encroach two
feet into the setbacks. Unenclosed porches, steps, and balconies are allowed to
encroach a maximum of 10 feet into the rear yard or setback.
B.   Schools, churches, or other public or institutional buildings:
   (1)   Front, 40 feet;
   (2)   Rear, 40 feet;
   (3)   Side, 20 feet;
   (4)   Street side, corner lot, 25 feet.
1.   Maximum Height. The maximum height permitted in the A-1 Agricultural
District shall be 35 feet. ††
2.   Minimum Lot Area and Width. The minimum lot area and width requirements in
the A-1 District are as follows:
A.   Area: one acre
B.   Width: 150 feet
1.   Minimum Off-Street Parking and Loading Space. The minimum off-street
parking and loading space requirements in the A-1 Agricultural District are as
regulated under
Chapter 169.
2.   Permitted Signs. Signs permitted in the A-1 Agricultural District are as
regulated under
Chapter 168.
 
Notes
†† EDITOR’S NOTE: See height limitations exemptions in Section 167.09.
167.14   R-1 RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT.
The following regulations apply to the R-1 Residential District.
1.   Permitted Principal Uses and Structures. The permitted principal uses and
structures in the R-1 Residential District are as follows:
A.   Single-family detached dwellings;
B.   Churches and temples;
C.   Public schools, elementary, junior high, and high schools;
D.   Parochial or private schools having similar curricula as public schools
and having no rooms used regularly for housing or sleeping purposes;
E.   Public and semipublic parks, playgrounds, or community buildings;
F.   Cemeteries or mausoleums;
G.   Public utilities;
H.   Funeral homes;
I.   Special uses as permitted in Section
167.23.
1.   Permitted Accessory Uses and Structures. Accessory uses or structures are
permitted as follows:
A.   Private garages;
B.   Private swimming pools;
C.   Private greenhouses not operated for commercial purposes;
D.   Accessory uses or structures clearly incidental to the permitted uses or
structures of this district, not involving the conduct of business on the
premises except home occupations, and located on the same lot or a contiguous
lot under the same ownership;
E.   Temporary buildings used in conjunction with construction work, provided
that such buildings are removed promptly upon completion of the construction
work;
F.   Home occupations as defined and regulated by Section
167.23;
G.   Signs as regulated by
Chapter 168.
1.   Minimum Yard Requirements. The minimum yard requirements for the R-
l Residential District are as follows:
A.   Dwellings:
   (1)   Front, 27 feet;
   (2)   Rear, 32 feet;
   (3)   Side, one story, 10 feet; two or more stories, 12 feet;
   (4)   Street side, corner lot, 27 feet. Overhangs allowed to encroach two
feet into the setbacks. Unenclosed porches, steps, and balconies are allowed to
encroach a maximum of 10 feet into the rear yard or setback.
B.   Schools, churches, or other public or institutional buildings:
   (1)   Front, 40 feet;
   (2)   Rear, 40 feet;
   (3)   Side, 20 feet;
   (4)   Street side, corner lot, 25 feet.
1.   Maximum Height Regulations. The maximum height permitted in the R-
1 Residential District is as follows: two and one-half stories or 35 feet. ††
2.   Minimum Lot Area and Width.
A.   Area: 8,000 square feet;
B.   Width: 70 feet;
C.   Corner Lot Width: 75 feet;
Except subdivisions platted prior to the adoption of this Zoning Code shall
provide a minimum area of 7,200 square feet and a minimum width of 60 feet.
1.   Minimum Off-street Parking and Loading Space. The minimum off-street
parking and loading space requirements in the R-1 Residential District are as
regulated under Chapter 169.
2.   Permitted Signs. Signs permitted in the R-1 Residential District are as
regulated under Chapter 168.
3.   Minimum House Areas. Every residential house constructed in an R-
1 Residential District shall have the minimum area of 600 square feet on the
main floor of said residential house.
 
Notes
†† EDITOR’S NOTE: See height limitations exemptions in Section 167.09.
167.15   R-2 RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT.
The following regulations apply to the R-2 Residential District.
1.   Permitted Principal Uses and Structures. The permitted principal uses and
structures in the R-2 Residential District are as follows:
A.   Single-family detached dwellings;
B.   Two-family dwellings;
C.   Renting of rooms to not more than four persons not members of the
immediate family, so long as there is one additional off-street parking space
provided per person renting;
D.   Churches and temples;
E.   Public schools, elementary, junior high, and high schools;
F.   Parochial or private schools having similar curricula as public schools
and having no rooms used regularly for housing or sleeping purposes;
G.   Public and semipublic parks, playgrounds, or community buildings;
H.   Hospitals, sanitariums, rest, nursing, and convalescent homes, homes for
orphan and aged on sites of one acre or more;
I.   Cemeteries or mausoleums;
J.   Public utilities;
K.   Funeral homes;
L.   For those lots in the district platted before 1965 and having frontage on
State Highways 1 or 382, the following uses shall be allowed on the terms and
conditions set forth below: florists, antique shops, insurance or professional
offices, real estate offices, or medical offices and clinics.
   (1)   In order to qualify for the permitted uses in Paragraphs H through K
set forth above, there must be provided an off-street hard surface parking area
accommodating at least five parking spaces, and landscape or fence-type
barriers screening the parking area from adjoining structures.
   (2)   No more than two full-time employees and one part-time employee may be
working at the business at the same time. The hours of operation shall be
limited to no earlier than 8:00 a.m. and no later than 8:00 p.m., Monday
through Saturday, with no business activity allowed on Sunday until after 12:00
p.m.
   (3)   No outside commercial lighting shall be permitted outside of business
hours as set forth herein.
M.   Special uses as permitted in Section
167.23.
1.   Permitted Accessory Uses. Accessory uses or structures are permitted as
follows:
A.   Private garages;
B.   Private swimming pools;
C.   Private greenhouses not operated for commercial purposes;
D.   Accessory uses or structures clearly incidental to the permitted uses or
structures of this district, not involving the conduct of business on the
premises except home occupations, and located on the same lot or a contiguous
lot under the same ownership;
E.   Temporary buildings used in conjunction with construction work, provided
that such buildings are removed promptly upon completion of the construction
work;
F.   Home occupations as defined and regulated by Section
167.23;
G.   Signs as regulated by
Chapter 168.
1.   Minimum Yard Requirements. The minimum yard requirements for the R-
2 Residential District are as follows:
A.   Dwellings:
   (1)   Front, 27 feet;
   (2)   Rear, 32 feet;
   (3)   Side, one story, 10 feet; two or more stories, 12 feet;
   (4)   Street side, corner lot, 27 feet. Overhangs allowed to encroach two
feet into the setbacks. Unenclosed porches, steps, and balconies are allowed to
encroach a maximum of 10 feet into the rear yard or setback.
B.   Schools, churches, or other public or institutional buildings:
   (1)   Front, 40 feet;
   (2)   Rear, 40 feet;
   (3)   Side, 20 feet;
   (4)   Street side, corner lot, 25 feet.
1.   Maximum Height Regulations. The maximum height permitted in the R-
2 Residential District is as follows: two and one-half stories or 35 feet. ††
2.   Minimum Lot Area and Width.
A.   Area: 8,000 square feet;
B.   Width: 70 feet;
C.   Corner Lot Width: 75 feet;
Except subdivisions platted prior to the adoption of this Zoning Code shall
provide a minimum area of 7,200 square feet and a minimum width of 60 feet.
1.   Minimum Off-Street Parking and Loading Space. The minimum off-street
parking and loading space requirements in the R-2 District are as regulated
under
Chapter 169.
2.   Permitted Signs. Signs permitted in the R-2 District are as regulated
under
Chapter 168.
 
Notes
†† EDITOR’S NOTE: See height limitations exemptions in Section 167.09.
167.16   R-3 RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT.
The following regulations apply to the R-3 Residential District.
1.   Permitted Principal Uses and Structures. The permitted principal uses and
structures in the R-3 Residential District are as follows:
A.   Single-family detached dwellings;
B.   Two-family dwellings;
C.   Multi-family dwellings;
D.   Churches and temples;
E.   Public schools, elementary, junior high, and high schools;
F.   Parochial or private schools having similar curricula as public schools
and having no rooms used regularly for housing or sleeping purposes;
G.   Public and semipublic parks, playgrounds, or community buildings;
H.   Hospitals, sanitariums, rest, nursing, and convalescent homes, homes for
orphan and aged on sites of one acre or more;
I.   Cemeteries or mausoleums;
J.   Public utilities;
K.   Funeral homes;
L.   Special uses as permitted in Section
167.23.
1.   Permitted Accessory Uses. Accessory uses or structures are permitted as
follows:
A.   Private garages;
B.   Private swimming pools;
C.   Private greenhouses not operated for commercial purposes;
D.   Accessory uses or structures clearly incidental to the permitted uses or
structures of this district, not involving the conduct of business on the
premises except home occupations, and located on the same lot or a contiguous
lot under the same ownership;
E.   Temporary buildings used in conjunction with construction work, provided
that such buildings are removed promptly upon completion of the construction
work;
F.   Home occupations as defined and regulated by Section
167.23.
1.   Minimum Yard Requirements. The minimum yard requirements for the R-
3 Residential District are as follows:
A.   Dwellings:
   (1)   Front, 27 feet;
   (2)   Rear, 32 feet;
   (3)   Side, one story, 10 feet; two or more stories, 12 feet;
   (4)   Street side, corner lot, 27 feet. Overhangs allowed to encroach two
feet into the setbacks. Unenclosed porches, steps, and balconies are allowed to
encroach a maximum of 10 feet into the rear yard or setback.
B.   Schools, churches, or other public or institutional buildings:
   (1)   Front, 40 feet;
   (2)   Rear, 40 feet;
   (3)   Side, 20 feet;
   (4)   Street side, corner lot, 25 feet.
1.   Maximum Height Regulations. The maximum height permitted in the R-
3 Residential District is as follows: three stories or 42 feet. ††
2.   Minimum Lot Area and Width.
A.   Single Family Dwellings:
   (1)   Area: 6,000 square feet
   (2)   Width: 60 feet
   (3)   Corner Lot Width: 65 feet
B.   Two-Family Dwellings:
   (1)   Area: 8,000 square feet
   (2)   Width: 70 feet
   (3)   Corner Lot Width: 75 feet
C.   Multi-Family Dwellings:
   (1)   Area: 6,000 square feet plus 1,500 square feet per family
   (2)   Width: 80 feet
   (3)   Corner Lot Width: 85 feet
1.   Minimum Off-street Parking and Loading Space. The minimum off-street
parking and loading space requirements in the R-3 Residential District are as
regulated under
Chapter 169.
2.   Permitted Signs. Signs permitted in the R-3 Residential District are as
regulated under
Chapter 168.
 
Notes
†† EDITOR’S NOTE: See height limitations exemptions in Section 167.09.
167.17   R-4 RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT.
The purpose of this section is to provide for a zoning district intended to
provide a low-density residential area for single-family dwelling units jointed
together on either side of a common wall between units. The single-family
dwellings will be laterally joined together on a common boundary line. The
following regulations apply to the R-4 Residential District.
1.   Use Regulations. Premises in the R-4 Residential District may be used for
two-unit family dwellings only; provided, however, no more than two persons not
members of the family may room in each living unit which is a part of a two-
family dwelling, and the same will be specifically subject to and conditioned
upon compliance with the following requirements:
A.   A division of the lot or parcel of land into two separate parcels shall be
done in such a manner as to result in a single-family unit being located on
either side of the common boundary line with a common wall between the two
laterally joined single-family dwellings.
B.   The lot lines for each two-unit family dwelling must have a standard fire
wall between them that is built in such a manner as to allow no connections
other than the wall itself between the units.
C.   Prior to a division into two parcels, there shall be prepared restrictive
and protective covenants, reviewed and approved by the City, providing that any
owners of a unit of the two- unit family dwelling shall be jointly and
severally liable and responsible for the maintenance and repair of the common
wall as well as all other aspects including, but not limited to, utilities,
water, sanitary sewer, storm sewer, easements, and driveways. Up to the
dividing line, separate water and sewer lines will be furnished to each unit.
The covenants, after approval of the City, shall be recorded in the office of
the County Recorder and shall be a covenant running with the land.
1.   Permitted Principal Uses and Structures. The permitted principal uses and
structures in the R-4 Residential District are as follows:
A.   Single-family attached dwellings;
B.   Churches and temples;
C.   Public schools, elementary, junior high, and high schools;
D.   Parochial or private schools having similar curricula as public schools
and having no rooms used regularly for housing or sleeping purposes;
E.   Public and semi-public parks, playgrounds, or community buildings;
F.   Cemeteries or mausoleums;
G.   Public utilities;
H.   Funeral homes;
I.   Special uses as permitted in Section
167.23.
1.   Permitted Accessory Uses. Accessory uses or structures are permitted as
follows:
A.   Private garages;
B.   Private swimming pools;
C.   Private greenhouses not operated for commercial purposes;
D.   Accessory uses or structures clearly incidental to the permitted uses or
structures of this district, not involving the conduct of business on the
premises except home occupations, and located on the same lot or a contiguous
lot under the same ownership;
E.   Temporary buildings used in conjunction with construction work, provided
that such buildings are removed promptly upon completion of the construction
work;
F.   Home occupations as defined and regulated by Section
167.23.
1.   Minimum Yard Requirements. The minimum yard requirements for the R-
4 Residential District are as follows:
A.   Dwellings:
   (1)   Front, 27 feet;
   (2)   Rear, 32 feet;
   (3)   Side, one story, 10 feet; two or more stories, 12 feet;
   (4)   Street side, corner lot, 27 feet. Overhangs allowed to encroach two
feet into the setbacks. Unenclosed porches, steps and balconies are allowed to
encroach a maximum of 10 feet into the rear yard or setback.
B.   Schools, churches, or other public or institutional buildings:
   (1)   Front, 40 feet;
   (2)   Rear, 40 feet;
   (3)   Side, 20 feet;
   (4)   Street side, corner lot, 25 feet.
1.   Maximum Height Regulations. The maximum height permitted in the R-
4 Residential District is as follows: two and one-half stories or 35 feet. ††
2.   Minimum Lot Area and Width.
A.   Area: 9,600 square feet;
B.   Width: 80 feet;
C.   Corner Lot Width: 85 feet.
1.   Minimum Off-Street Parking and Loading Space. The minimum off-street
parking and loading space requirements in the R-4 Residential District are as
regulated under
Chapter 169.
2.   Permitted Signs. Signs permitted in the R-4 Residential District are as
regulated by
Chapter 168.
 
Notes
†† EDITOR’S NOTE: See height limitations exemptions in Section 167.09.
167.18   C-R RETAIL COMMERCIAL DISTRICT.
The following regulations apply to the C-R Retail Commercial District.
1.   Permitted Principal Uses and Structures. The permitted principal uses and
structures in the C-R Retail Commercial District are as follows:
A.   Retail businesses including the following:
   (1)   Appliance store;
   (2)   Auto accessory store;
   (3)   Bakery with baking limited to goods for retail sales on the premises;
   (4)   Book or stationery store;
   (5)   Café or restaurant;
   (6)   Camera or photographic supply shop;
   (7)   Candy or ice cream store;
   (8)   Delicatessen;
   (9)   Drug store;
   (10)   Fabric shop;
   (11)   Floor covering store;
   (12)   Florist shop;
   (13)   Furniture store, including incidental upholstering;
   (14)   Gift shop;
   (15)   Grocery store;
   (16)   Haberdashery or women’s ready-to-wear shop;
   (17)   Hardware or paint store;
   (18)   Hobby shop;
   (19)   Jewelry store;
   (20)   Meat market;
   (21)   Microbrewery.
   (22)   Shoe store;
   (23)   Variety shop.
B.   Service establishments including the following:
   (1)   Bank or other financial enterprise;
   (2)   Barber or beauty shop;
   (3)   Business or professional office, studios;
   (4)   Personal services;
   (5)   Clothes cleaning or laundry pick-up station;
   (6)   Self-service laundry;
   (7)   Meeting hall, club, or fraternal organization;
   (8)   Apartments above a store or shop;
   (9)   Music and dancing studios;
   (10)   Churches and temples.
   (11)   Hotel.
C.   Public uses including:
   (1)   Public utility;
   (2)   Public parking lot;
   (3)   Parks, playgrounds, community buildings.
D.   The following uses when occupying completely enclosed building located at
least 100 feet from any residential zone:
   (1)   Dance hall, bar, or cocktail lounge, nightclub, and similar
enterprise;
   (2)   Furniture upholstering shop only when operated in conjunction with a
retail business on the premises;
   (3)   Printing, publishing, engraving, or lithographing shop;
   (4)   Laundry and dry-cleaning shop.
E.   Special uses as permitted in Section
167.23.
F.   Carnivals, circuses, fairs, and road shows when a permit granted by
Council.
1.   Permitted Accessory Uses and Structures.
A.   Private greenhouses not operated for commercial purposes;
B.   Accessory uses or structures of this district clearly incidental to the
permitted uses or structures of this district and located on the same lot or a
contiguous lot under the same ownership;
C.   Temporary buildings used in conjunction with construction work, provided
that such buildings are removed promptly upon completion of the construction
work;
1.   Minimum Yard Requirements. The minimum yard requirements for the C-
R Retail Commercial District are as follows:
A.   Setbacks for Dwellings:
   (1)   Front, 27 feet;
   (2)   Rear, 32 feet;
   (3)   Side, one story, 10 feet; two or more stories, 12 feet;
   (4)   Street side, corner lot, 27 feet. Overhangs allowed to encroach two
feet into the setbacks. Unenclosed porches, steps, and balconies are allowed to
encroach a maximum of 10 feet into the rear yard or setback.
B.   Setbacks for Institutional Uses:
   (1)   Front, 25 feet;
   (2)   Rear, 30 feet;
   (3)   Side, 25 feet;
   (4)   Street side, corner lot, 25 feet.
C.   Setbacks for Commercial Uses: No yard setback shall be required except:
   (1)   Where apartments are above a store or shop, in which case a rear yard
of 20 feet shall be provided; and
   (2)   Where any commercial or industrial district is adjacent to an
agricultural or residential district, the setback shall be 25 feet, depending
on which yard abuts the agricultural or residential district, except where a
public street or alley separates the two districts, in which case no setback is
required.
1.   Maximum Height Regulations. The maximum height permitted in the C- R
Retail Commercial District is as follows: two and one-half stories or 35 feet.
††
2.   Minimum Lot Area and Width.
A.   For multi-family dwellings:
   (1)   Area: 6,000 square feet plus 1,500 square feet for each family above
one
   (2)   Width: 80 feet
B.   For commercial uses: no minimums.
1.   Minimum Off-street Parking and Loading Space. The minimum off- street
parking and loading space requirements in the C-R Retail Commercial District
are as regulated under
Chapter 169.
2.   Permitted Signs. Signs permitted in the C-R Retail Commercial District are
as regulated under
Chapter 168.
3.   Sidewalk Cafés. Sidewalk cafés are permitted in the public right- of-way
only in the C-R Retail Commercial District (the downtown commercial areas
directly north and south of Main Street).
A.   No person shall operate a sidewalk café without executing an easement
agreement.
B.   Each sidewalk café applicant shall file an application for an easement
agreement with the City, on forms provided by the City.
C.   The City Administrator, or designee, shall either grant or deny the
application within 30 days of the application being filed. If the application
is granted, the City Administrator, or designee, is authorized to enter into a
public right-of-way easement agreement. If the application is denied, the
applicant may appeal to the Board of Adjustment by filing a written appeal with
the City Hall. The City retains the right to limit the number of sidewalk
cafés.
D.   After execution of an easement agreement, the City Administrator, or
designee, shall retain the right to terminate the easement agreement within
five days written notice of violation has been given with or without notice, in
case the permitted use becomes dangerous or unsafe. Grounds for termination of
the easement agreement shall include, but not be limited to, repeated
violations of the State and liquor control laws, violations of the easement
agreement, and creating a safety hazard, health hazard, or public nuisance
under State or local law. Additionally, the City Administrator, or designee,
retains the right to terminate the easement agreement and direct removal of
sidewalk café operations if there is a substantial and reasonable need for use
of the public right-of-way for a valid public purpose. The café owner has the
right to appeal a decision to terminate the agreement to the Council.
E.   The easement agreement, at a minimum, shall require the café operator to
provide a certificate of insurance satisfactory to the City, and shall agree to
hold the City harmless against any and all liability arising from or relating
to the operation of the sidewalk café or the location of the café on the public
right-of-way including, but not limited to, all claims arising from occurrences
or accidents within the sidewalk café area, including the walkway through a
café.
F.   Sidewalks cafés shall operate only between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 10:
00 p.m.
G.   Food and beverages must be available for service to patrons in a sidewalk
café during all hours of operation. Sidewalk cafés shall not operate when the
restaurant kitchen is closed.
H.   A sidewalk café serving alcoholic beverages shall have an employee
monitoring the area at all times during the hours alcohol is consumed and shall
dispense any alcoholic beverage under State and local law.
I.   Amplified sound equipment shall not be permitted.
J.   The operation of any sidewalk café shall be in conformity with all
applicable federal, State, and local laws and regulations.
K.   All fees for the operation of a sidewalk café shall be set by resolution.
L.   The City Administrator is authorized to establish administrative rules not
inconsistent with any ordinances or policy adopted by the Council. A copy of
the policy and rules shall be on file with the Clerk and available on the City
website.
 
Notes
†† EDITOR’S NOTE: See height limitations exemptions in Section 167.09.
167.19   C-G GENERAL COMMERCIAL DISTRICT.
The following regulations apply to the C-G General Commercial District.
1.   Permitted Principal Uses and Structures. The permitted principal uses and
structures in the C-G General Commercial District are as follows:
A.   Retail and wholesale businesses including the following:
   (1)   Appliance store;
   (2)   Auto accessory store;
   (3)   Bakery with baking limited to goods for retail sales on the premises;
   (4)   Book or stationery store;
   (5)   Café or restaurant;
   (6)   Camera or photographic supply shop;
   (7)   Candy or ice cream store;
   (8)   Delicatessen;
   (9)   Drug store;
   (10)   Fabric shop;
   (11)   Floor covering store;
   (12)   Florist shop;
   (13)   Furniture store, including incidental upholstering;
   (14)   Gift shop;
   (15)   Grocery store;
   (16)   Haberdashery or women’s ready-to-wear shop;
   (17)   Hardware or paint store;
   (18)   Hobby shop;
   (19)   Jewelry store;
   (20)   Meat market;
   (21)   Shoe store;
   (22)   Variety shop;
   (23)   Department store;
   (24)   Automotive sales, service, and repair;
   (25)   Wholesale display rooms and offices;
   (26)   Car washes.
   (27)   Microbrewery.
B.   Service establishments including the following:
   (1)   Bank or other financial enterprise;
   (2)   Barber or beauty shop;
   (3)   Business or professional office, studios;
   (4)   Personal services;
   (5)   Clothes cleaning or laundry pick-up station;
   (6)   Self-service laundry;
   (7)   Meeting hall, club, or fraternal organization;
   (8)   Apartments above a store or shop;
   (9)   Music and dancing studios;
   (10)   Funeral home;
   (11)   Theater;
   (12)   Business or trade school;
   (13)   Daycare facility;
   (14)   Churches and temples;
   (15)   Repair shops;
   (16)   Motor fuel stations and convenience stores with no more than one bay
car wash permitted.
   (17)   Hotel.
C.   Public uses including:
   (1)   Public utility;
   (2)   Public parking lot;
   (3)   Parks, playgrounds, community buildings.
D.   The following uses when occupying completely enclosed building located at
least 100 feet from any residential zone:
   (1)   Bowling alley, pool hall or billiard parlor, dance hall, bar, or
cocktail lounge, nightclub, and similar enterprise;
   (2)   Furniture upholstering shop;
   (3)   Printing, publishing, engraving, or lithographing shop;
   (4)   Laundry and dry cleaning shop;
   (5)   Small-animal hospitals and veterinary clinics;
   (6)   Automobile, truck, trailer, and garden and farm implement
establishments for display, hire, sales, including sales lots;
   (7)   Bottling of soft drinks or milk, or distribution stations;
   (8)   Carpenter shop, electrical, heating, ventilating, or plumbing shop;
   (9)   Sign painting shop;
   (10)   Automobile repair garage doing major repair, including tire re-
treading or recapping, battery service and repair.
E.   Special uses as permitted in Section
167.23.
F.   Carnivals, circuses, fairs, and road shows when a permit granted by
Council.
1.   Permitted Accessory Uses and Structures.
A.   Private greenhouses not operated for commercial purposes;
B.   Accessory uses or structures of this district clearly incidental to the
permitted uses or structures of this district and located on the same lot or a
contiguous lot under the same ownership;
C.   Temporary buildings used in conjunction with construction work, provided
that such buildings are removed promptly upon completion of the construction
work;
1.   Minimum Yard Requirement. The minimum yard requirements for the C-
G General Commercial District are as follows:
A.   Setbacks for Dwellings:
   (1)   Front, 27 feet;
   (2)   Rear, 32 feet;
   (3)   Side, one story, 10 feet; two or more stories, 12 feet;
   (4)   Street side, corner lot, 27 feet. Overhangs allowed to encroach two
feet into the setbacks. Unenclosed porches, steps, and balconies are allowed to
encroach a maximum of 10 feet into the rear yard or setback.
B.   Setbacks for Institutional Uses:
   (1)   Front, 25 feet;
   (2)   Rear, 30 feet;
   (3)   Side, 25 feet;
   (4)   Street side, corner lot, 25 feet.
C.   Setbacks for Commercial Uses. No yard setback shall be required except:
   (1)   Where apartments are above a store or shop, in which case a rear yard
of 20 feet shall be provided; and
   (2)   Where any commercial or industrial district is adjacent to an
agricultural or residential district, the setback shall be 25 feet, depending
on which yard abuts the agricultural or residential district except where a
public street or alley separates the two districts, in which case no setback is
required.
1.   Maximum Height Regulations. The maximum height permitted in the C- G
General Commercial District is as follows: two and one-half stories or 35 feet.
††
2.   Minimum Lot Area and Width.
A.   For multi-family dwellings:
   (1)   Area: 6,000 square feet plus 1,500 square feet for each family above
one
   (2)   Width: 80 feet
B.   For commercial uses: no minimums.
1.   Minimum Off-street Parking and Loading Space. The minimum off- street
parking and loading space requirements in the C-G General Commercial District
are as regulated under
Chapter 169.
2.   Permitted Signs. Signs permitted in the C-G General Commercial District
are as regulated under
Chapter 168.
 
Notes
†† EDITOR’S NOTE: See height limitations exemptions in Section 167.09.
167.20   C-H HIGHWAY COMMERCIAL DISTRICT.
The following regulations apply to the C-H Highway Commercial District.
1.   Permitted Principal Uses and Structures. The permitted principal uses and
structures in the C-H Highway Commercial District are as follows:
A.   Retail and wholesale businesses including the following:
   (1)   Appliance store;
   (2)   Auto accessory store;
   (3)   Bakery with baking limited to goods for retail sales on the premises;
   (4)   Book or stationery store;
   (5)   Café, restaurant, or drive-through eating establishments;
   (6)   Camera or photographic supply shop;
   (7)   Candy or ice cream store;
   (8)   Delicatessen;
   (9)   Drug store;
   (10)   Fabric shop;
   (11)   Floor covering store;
   (12)   Florist shop;
   (13)   Furniture store, including incidental upholstering;
   (14)   Gift shop;
   (15)   Grocery store;
   (16)   Haberdashery or women’s ready-to-wear shop;
   (17)   Hardware or paint store;
   (18)   Hobby shop;
   (19)   Jewelry store;
   (20)   Meat market;
   (21)   Shoe store;
   (22)   Variety shop;
   (23)   Department store;
   (24)   Automotive sales, service, and repair;
   (25)   Wholesale display rooms and offices;
   (26)   Wholesale businesses and warehouses;
   (27)   Lumberyards, if enclosed on all sides by an eight-foot high solid
fence;
   (28)   Implement stores;
   (29)   Farm implement sales, service, and repair;
   (30)   Creamery, hatchery, feed, and grain mixing.
   (31)   Microbrewery.
B.   Service establishments including the following:
   (1)   Bank or other financial enterprise;
   (2)   Barber or beauty shop;
   (3)   Business or professional office, studios;
   (4)   Personal services;
   (5)   Clothes cleaning or laundry pick-up station;
   (6)   Self-service laundry;
   (7)   Meeting hall, club, or fraternal organization;
   (8)   Apartments above a store or shop;
   (9)   Music and dancing studios;
   (10)   Funeral home;
   (11)   Theater;
   (12)   Business or trade school;
   (13)   Daycare facility;
   (14)   Churches and temples;
   (15)   Repair shops;
   (16)   Hotels;
   (17)   Storage garages;
   (18)   Bus station;
   (19)   Commercial parking lot;
   (20)   Motor fuel stations and convenience stores;
   (21)   Animal hospitals and veterinary clinics;
   (22)   Commercial baseball field, bath house, or boat house, golf driving
range, skating rink, swimming pool, or similar open air recreational uses and
facilities;
   (23)   Car wash;
   (24)   Bowling alley, pool hall or billiard parlor, dance hall, bar, or
cocktail lounge, nightclub, and similar enterprise;
   (25)   Furniture upholstering shop;
   (26)   Printing, publishing, engraving, or lithographing shop;
   (27)   Laundry and dry cleaning shop;
   (28)   Automobile, truck, trailer, and garden and farm implement
establishments for display, hire, sales, including sales lots;
   (29)   Bottling of soft drinks or milk, or distribution stations;
   (30)   Carpenter shop, electrical, heating, ventilating, or plumbing shop;
   (31)   Sign painting shop;
   (32)   Automobile repair garage doing major repair, including tire re-
treading or recapping, battery service and repair.
C.   Public uses including:
   (1)   Public utility;
   (2)   Public parking lot;
   (3)   Parks, playgrounds, community buildings.
D.   Special uses as permitted in Section
167.23.
1.   Permitted Accessory Uses and Structures.
A.   Private greenhouses not operated for commercial purposes;
B.   Accessory uses or structures of this district clearly incidental to the
permitted uses or structures of this district and located on the same lot or a
contiguous lot under the same ownership;
C.   Temporary buildings used in conjunction with construction work, provided
that such buildings are removed promptly upon completion of the construction
work;
1.   Minimum Yard Requirement. The minimum yard requirements for the C-
H Highway Commercial District are as follows:
A.   Setbacks for Dwellings:
(1)   Front, 27 feet;
(2)   Rear, 32 feet;
(3)   Side, one story, 10 feet; two or more stories, 12 feet;
(4)   Street side, corner lot, 27 feet. Overhangs allowed to encroach two feet
into the setbacks. Unenclosed porches, steps, and balconies are allowed to
encroach a maximum of 10 feet into the rear yard or setback.
B.   Setbacks for Institutional Uses:
   (1)   Front, 25 feet;
   (2)   Rear, 30 feet;
   (3)   Side, 25 feet;
   (4)   Street side, corner lot, 25 feet.
C.   Setbacks for Commercial Uses. No yard setback shall be required except:
   (1)   Where apartments are above a store or shop, in which case a rear yard
of 20 feet shall be provided; and
   (2)   Where any commercial or industrial district is adjacent to an
agricultural or residential district, the setback shall be 25 feet, depending
on which yard abuts the agricultural or residential district except where a
public street or alley separates the two districts, in which case no setback is
required.
1.   Maximum Height Regulations. The maximum height permitted in the C-
H Highway Commercial District is as follows: two and one-half stories or 35
feet. ††
2.   Minimum Lot Area and Width.
   (1)   Area: one acre
   (2)   Width: 150 feet
3.   Minimum Off-street Parking and Loading Space. The minimum off-street
parking and loading space requirements in the C-H Highway Commercial Highway
Commercial District are as regulated under
Chapter 169.
4.   Permitted Signs. Signs permitted in the C-H Highway Commercial Highway
Commercial District are as regulated under
Chapter 168.
 
Notes
†† EDITOR’S NOTE: See height limitations exemptions in Section 167.09.
167.21   I-L LIGHT INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT.
The following regulations apply to the I- L Industrial District.
1.   Permitted Principal Uses and Structures. The permitted principal uses and
structures in the I-L Industrial District are as follows:
A.   Public garages and storage garages;
B.   Public utilities;
C.   Railroads;
D.   Freight and passenger terminals;
E.   Bulk storage of inflammable liquid;
F.   Manufacturing and processing;
G.   Bulk storage of liquid fertilizers;
H.   Grain storage or processing;
I.   Concrete batching or ready-mix plants;
J.   Contractor offices;
K.   Salvage yards;
L.   Storage of equipment;
M.   Public uses including:
   (1)   Public utility;
   (2)   Public parking lot;
   (3)   Parks, playgrounds, community buildings;
N.   Special uses as permitted in Section
167.23.
1.   Permitted Accessory Uses and Structures. The permitted accessory uses and
structures in the I-L Industrial District are as follows:
A.   Dwelling units for watchmen or caretakers employed on the premises;
B.   Any use or structure clearly incidental to the permitted uses of this
district;
C.   Temporary buildings used in conjunction with construction work provided
such buildings are removed promptly upon completion of the construction work.
1.   Minimum Yard Requirements. The minimum yard requirements for the I-
L Industrial District are as follows:
A.   Setbacks:
   (1)   Front, 25 feet;
   (2)   Rear, none, except where abutting an A District or R District, in
which case a 20-foot rear yard shall be provided;
   (3)   Side, none, except where abutting an A District or R District, in
which case a 10-foot side yard shall be provided.
1.   Maximum Height Regulations. The maximum height permitted in the I-
L Industrial District is as follows: three and one-half stories or 50 feet. ††
2.   Minimum Lot Area and Width. Minimum lot area and width requirements in the
I- L Industrial District are as follows: None.
3.   Minimum Off-street Parking and Loading Space. The minimum off-street
parking and loading space requirements in the I-L Industrial District are as
regulated under
Chapter 169.
4.   Permitted Signs. Signs permitted in the I-L Industrial District are as
regulated under
Chapter 168.
 
Notes
†† EDITOR’S NOTE: See height limitations exemptions in Section 167.09.
167.22   NONCONFORMING STRUCTURES AND USES.
1.   Purpose. Within the districts established by the Zoning Code or amendments
that may later be adopted there exist lots, structures and uses of land and
structures which were lawful before the Zoning Code was passed or amended, but
which would be prohibited, regulated, or restricted under the terms of the
Zoning Code or future amendment. It is the intent of the Zoning Code to permit
these nonconformities to continue until they are removed, but not to encourage
their survival. Such uses are declared by the Zoning Code to be incompatible
with permitted uses in the districts involved. It is further the intent of the
Zoning Code that nonconformities shall not be enlarged upon, expanded or
extended, or be used as grounds for adding other structures or uses prohibited
elsewhere in the same district. A nonconforming use of a structure, a
nonconforming use of land, or a nonconforming use of a structure and land shall
not be extended or enlarged after passage of the Zoning Code by attachment on a
building or premises of additional signs intended to be seen from off the
premises, or by the addition of other uses of a nature which would be
prohibited generally in the district involved. To avoid undue hardship, nothing
in the Zoning Code shall be deemed to require a change in the plans,
construction, or designated use of any building on which actual construction
was lawfully begun prior to the effective date of adoption or amendment of the
Zoning Code and upon which actual building construction has been diligently
carried on. Actual construction is defined to include the placing of
construction materials in permanent position and fastened in a permanent
manner; except that where demolition or removal of an existing building has
been substantially begun preparatory to rebuilding, such demolition or removal
shall be deemed to be actual construction, provided that work shall be
diligently carried on until completion of the building involved.
2.   Nonconforming Lots of Record. In any district in which single-family
dwellings are permitted, notwithstanding limitations imposed by other
provisions of the Zoning Code, a single-family dwelling and customary accessory
buildings may be erected on any single lot of record at the effective date of
adoption or amendment of the Zoning Code. Such lot must be in separate
ownership and not of continuous frontage with other lots in the same ownership.
This provision shall apply even though such lot fails to meet the requirements
for area or width or both that are generally applicable in the district;
provided, yard dimensions and other requirements not involving area or width,
or both, of the lot shall conform to the regulations for the district in which
such lot is located. Variance of area, width, and yard requirements shall be
obtained only through action of the Board of Adjustment. If two or more lots or
combinations of lots and portions of lots with continuous frontage in single
ownership are of record at the time of passage or amendment of the Zoning Code,
and if all or part of the lots do not meet the requirements for lot width and
area as established by the Zoning Code, the land involved shall be considered
to be an undivided parcel for the purposes of the Zoning Code, and no portion
of such parcel shall be used or sold which does not meet lot width and area
requirements established by the Zoning Code; nor shall any division of the
parcel be made which leaves remaining any lot with width or area below the
requirements stated in the Zoning Code.
3.   Nonconforming Uses of Land. Where, at the effective date of adoption or
amendment of the Zoning Code, lawful use of land exists that is made no longer
permissible under the terms of the Zoning Code as enacted and amended, such use
may be continued, so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the
following provisions:
A.   No such nonconforming use shall be enlarged or increased or extended to
occupy a greater area of land than was occupied at the effective date of
adoption or amendment of the Zoning Code.
B.   No such nonconforming use shall be moved, in whole or in part, to any
other portion of the lot or parcel occupied by such use at the effective date
of adoption or amendment of the Zoning Code.
C.   If any such nonconforming use of land ceases for any reason for a period
of more than one year, any subsequent use of such land shall conform to the
regulations specified by the Zoning Code for the district in which such land is
located.
1.   Nonconforming Structures. Where a lawful structure exists at the effective
date of adoption or amendment of the Zoning Code that could not be built under
the terms of the Zoning Code by reason of restrictions on area, lot coverage,
height, yards, or other characteristics of the structure or its location on the
lot, such structure may be continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful,
subject to the following provisions:
A.   No such structure may be enlarged or altered in a way which increases its
nonconformity.
B.   Should such structure be destroyed by any means to an extent of more than
50 percent of its replacement cost at time of destruction, it shall not be
reconstructed except in conformity with the provisions of the Zoning Code.
1.   Nonconforming Uses of Structures. If a lawful use of a structure, or of
structure and premises in combination, exists at the effective date of adoption
or amendment of the Zoning Code, that would not be allowed in the district
under the terms of the Zoning Code, the lawful use may be continued so long as
it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following provisions:
A.   No existing structure devoted to a use not permitted by the Zoning Code in
the district in which it is located shall be enlarged, extended, constructed,
reconstructed, moved, or structurally altered except in changing the use of the
structure to a use permitted in the district in which it is located.
B.   Any nonconforming use may be extended throughout any parts of a building
which were manifestly arranged or designed for such use at the time of adoption
or amendment of the Zoning Code, but no such use shall be extended to occupy
any land outside such building.
C.   If no structural alterations are made, any nonconforming use of a
structure, or structure and premises, may be changed to another nonconforming
use provided that the Board of Adjustment, either by general rule or by making
findings in the specific case, shall find that the proposed use is equally
appropriate or more appropriate to the district than the existing nonconforming
use. In permitting such change, the Board of Adjustment may require appropriate
conditions and safeguards in accord with the provisions of the Zoning Code.
D.   Any structure, or structure and land in combination, in or on which a
nonconforming use is superseded by a permitted use, shall thereafter conform to
the regulations for the district in which such structure is located, and the
nonconforming use may not thereafter be resumed.
E.   When a nonconforming use of a structure, or structure and premises in
combination, is discontinued or abandoned for six consecutive months or for 18
months during any three-year period, the structure thereafter shall not be used
except in conformance with the regulations of the district in which it is
located.
F.   Where nonconforming use status applies to a structure and premises in
combination, removal or destruction of the structure shall eliminate the
nonconforming status of the land.
1.   Repairs and Maintenance. On any building devoted, in whole or in part, to
any nonconforming use, work may be done in any period of 12 consecutive months
on ordinary repairs, or on repair or replacement of nonbearing walls, fixtures,
wiring, or plumbing, to an extent not exceeding 10 percent of the current
replacement value of the building provided that the cubic content of the
building as it existed at the time of passage or amendment of the Zoning Code
shall not be increased. Nothing in the Zoning Code shall be deemed to prevent
the strengthening of or restoring to a safe condition of any building or part
thereof declared to be unsafe by any official charged with protecting the
public safety, upon order of such official.
2.   Special Uses Deemed Conforming Uses. Any use for which a special exception
is permitted as provided in the Zoning Code shall not be deemed a nonconforming
use, but shall without further action be deemed a conforming use in such
district.
3.   Cessation of Nonconforming Uses. Notwithstanding any other provisions of
this chapter, it is a prohibited and unlawful use of any land not zoned as A-
1 Agricultural or allowed by special exception in land zoned as M-1 Industrial
for any owner, tenant, or person to keep, tend, or maintain any livestock
within the corporate limits of the City. All nonconforming uses under this
section shall be amortized no later than December 31, 2003.
167.23   SPECIAL USES.
The following Special Uses have been defined as follows.
1.   Home Occupations.
A.   General. Home occupations shall be permitted in all residential zones,
provided the home occupation is clearly and obviously subordinate to the
dwelling unit for residential purposes. The home occupation shall be conducted
wholly within the primary structure or existing accessory building on the
premises.
B.   Conditions.
   (1)   The home occupation shall not exceed 25 percent of the floor area of
the primary structure and 50 percent of an accessory building on premises.
   (2)   Other than those related by blood, marriage, or adoption, no more than
two persons may be employed in the home occupation.
   (3)   Inventory and supplies shall not occupy more than 50 percent of the
area permitted to be used as home occupation.
   (4)   There shall be no exterior display or storage of goods on said
premises.
   (5)   There shall be no more than one advertising wall sign displayed on the
premises and said wall sign shall not exceed two square feet, the location of
which shall be provided by the Zoning Official. The wall sign shall not be
illuminated.
   (6)   Sales and service patrons shall be arranged by appointment and
schedule so that not more than two patron vehicles are on the premises at the
same time.
   (7)   No activity shall be permitted which is noxious, offensive, or
hazardous by reason of pedestrian or vehicular traffic, or by creation of
noise, odor, refuse, heat, vibration, smoke, radiation, or any other
objectionable emissions or by interference with televisions or radio reception.
   (8)   No commodities shall be sold on the premises.
C.   Home Occupations Permitted. Permitted home occupations include, but are
not limited to, the following list of activities; provided, however, each
permitted home occupation shall be subject to the limitations in Paragraph B
above, and to all other regulations applicable to the district in which it is
located.
   (1)   Facilities used by a physician, surgeon, dentist, lawyer, clergyman,
or other professional person, for emergency consultation or treatment, but not
for the general practice of their profession.
   (2)   Professional services such as accounting, computer, architectural,
real estate, and other services, provided client contact consists of no more
than an average of eight clients per day.
   (3)   Providing instruction to no more than two students at a time.
   (4)   Daycare or babysitting of not more than five non-resident children.
   (5)   Studio of an artist, photographer, artisan, writer, or composer.
   (6)   Renting of rooms by a resident owner to no more than three roomers.
   (7)   Millinery, dressmaking, tailoring, and similar domestic service
activities.
   (8)   Barbershops and beauty parlors.
D.   Home Occupations Not Permitted. Home occupations shall not be interpreted
to include the following:
   (1)   Restaurants or taverns.
   (2)   Automotive equipment, body and repair, and salvage shops.
   (3)   Commercial stables and kennels.
   (4)   Hotel or motel.
   (5)   Taxicab or limousine businesses.
   (6)   Carpenter or woodworking business.
1.   Adult Uses.
A.   General. A Conditional Use Permit shall be obtained from the governing
body for all adult use businesses.
B.   Conditions.
   (1)   An adult use business shall be permitted in the I-L Light Industrial
District only.
   (2)   No adult use business shall be located within 1,200 feet of a park,
daycare center, library, religious, or cultural activity.
   (3)   No adult use business shall be located within 500 feet of any other
zoning district boundary line where adult uses are not permitted.
   (4)   Such distances shall be measured in a straight line without regard to
intervening structures, topography, and zoning.
   (5)   The sign regulations contained in
Chapter 168 shall apply.
1.   Daycare.
A.   Nonresidential Daycare. Nonresidential daycare includes, but is not
limited to, child daycare services, adult daycare centers, and the following:
   (1)   Adult daycare, such as adult day health centers or social daycare as
defined by the Iowa State Department of Social and Health Services;
   (2)   Nursery schools for children under minimum age for education in public
schools;
   (3)   Privately conducted kindergartens or pre-kindergartens when not a part
of a public or parochial school; and
   (4)   Programs covering after-school care for school children.
Daycare establishments are sub-classified as follows: Daycare I establishments
provide for a maximum of 12 adults or children in any 24-hour period and are
permitted in all zones except I-L Light Industrial District; Daycare II
establishments provide for more than 12 adults or children in any 24-hour
period and are permitted in R-3 and all C Districts.
B.   Residential Group Daycare. A group daycare home (less than 12 persons) may
be allowed in any residential zone or any zone where a residential use is
legally established, provided the operator has obtained a permit from the City
for a residential daycare facilities as provided for in this section. Criteria
which must be met to obtain a Group Daycare Home permit from the Council are as
follows:
   (1)   State registration requirements shall have been met and the applicant
agrees to meet any requirements of the building, fire, and health codes and any
other applicable local codes and ordinances.
   (2)   Applicant shall agree to register annually with the City for as long
as the use is continued. A reasonable administrative fee shall be charged as
may be established, from time to time, by resolution of the Council.
   (3)   No structural or decorative alteration that will alter the residential
character of an existing structure or be otherwise incompatible with
surrounding residences shall be permitted.
   (4)   The resident occupant shall be the principal care provider, shall be
registered by the State, and shall be present during operating hours. When
there are six or fewer children being cared for, the resident occupant need not
be present. However, an employee of the resident occupant must be present when
there are six or fewer children being cared for and the resident occupant is
not present. Both the resident occupant and the employee must be present when
there are more than six children being cared for. Only one employee over the
age of 14 shall be permitted. Family members are not considered employees.
   (5)   Any required outside play area shall be effectively screened from
adjacent residential uses.
   (6)   If located on a major street, an off-street drop off or pickup area
must be provided.
   (7)   One off-street parking space must be provided for a non- resident or
non-family member employee when located in a single- family residence district.
A residential driveway is acceptable for this purpose.
   (8)   One unlighted sign, under two square feet in area, and stating only
the resident-occupants name and wording “Group Daycare Home” or “Residential
Daycare” or “Daycare” shall be allowed.
   (9)   Any group daycare home which has been established and has obtained a
State Certificate of Registration prior to the effective date of the ordinance
codified herein, and in addition, meets all of the foregoing criteria, shall be
considered as being a lawful use under the terms of these regulations and may
so continue without approval of the Council.
1.   Bed and Breakfast Home. A Bed and Breakfast Home is allowed as a
conditional use in an R-1 Single Family District. Before any Conditional Use
Permit is issued, the applicant for said conditional use must submit the
property to an inspection by the City. The fee for the inspection shall be set
by Council. No Conditional Use Permit may be issued unless the inspection shows
the following:
A.   The property has a working fire extinguisher in the kitchen and on each
floor that is visible and accessible to guests. Size and location per 2015
International Fire Code.
B.   The property has a working smoke detector in each bedroom in the residence
and one outside of each bedroom wired with battery backup and interconnected
per adopted building and fire code.
C.   That electrical service is not provided by extension cords.
D.   That all banisters and balconies located in the residence meet all
applicable building and safety codes.
E.   All light bulbs located in the residence are in working order.
F.   The water heater in the residence is functioning properly.
G.   GFCI outlets are provided in all locations required by applicable building
and safety codes.
H.   The property has working CO2 detector on each floor.
I.   Homeowners shall provide and post in each bedroom a plan for exit from the
bedrooms if the hallway is blocked.
J.   All other requirements by the City Building Inspector deemed essential for
personal safety.
K.   Owner must be in compliance of all City codes required.
A Conditional Use Permit issued under this section shall not be longer than two
years in length. After expiration of the Conditional Use Permit, no additional
Conditional Use Permit may be issued unless the residence passes an inspection
ensuring that all items listed in Subparagraphs (A) through (K) are present in
the residence. Any violations of the Conditional Use Permit may lead to
revocation of permit.
1.   Short-term Rentals. Short-term rentals (STR) shall not exceed four
dwelling units. The owner or applicant for said property must submit the
property to an inspection by the City. The fee for inspection shall be set by
Council. Prior to any property used as a short-term rental, the following
inspections are required:
A.   The property has a working fire extinguisher in the kitchen and on each
floor that is visible and accessible to guests. Size and location per 2015
Internation Fire Code.
B.   The property has a working smoke detector in each bedroom in the residence
and one outside of each bedroom wired with battery backup and interconnected
per adopted building and fire code.
C.   That electrical service is not provided by extension cords.
D.   That all banisters and balconies located in the residence meet all
applicable building and safety codes.
E.   All light bulbs located in the residence are in working order.
F.   The water heater in the residence is functioning properly.
G.   GFCI outlets are provided in all locations required by applicable building
and safety codes.
H.   The property has working CO2 detector on each floor.
I.   Homeowners shall provide and post in each bedroom a plan for exit from the
bedrooms if the hallway is blocked.
J.   All other requirements by the City Building Inspector deemed essential for
personal safety.
K.   Owner must be in compliance of all City codes required.
A STR inspection shall occur every two years ensuring that all items listed in
Subparagraphs (A) through (K) are present in the residence.
CHAPTER 168
ZONING REGULATIONS - SIGN REGULATIONS
 
168.01 Purpose                         168.05 Sign Regulations - C-R, C-G, C-H,
                                       and I-L Zoning
168.02 Permit Requirements             Districts
168.03 Sign Regulations - All Zoning    
Districts
168.04 Sign Regulations - A-1, R-1, R-  
2, R-3, and R-4
Zoning Districts                        
 
168.01   PURPOSE.
The purpose of this chapter is to enhance the visual environment of the City
by:
1.   Establishing standards that regulate signs within the City;
2.   Recognizing the private purposes of signs for the identification of
businesses and promotion of products and services;
3.   Recognizing the public purposes of signs, which includes considerations of
traffic safety, economic, and aesthetic welfare; and
4.   Encouraging attractive, effective signage throughout the community, and
providing clearly identifiable design objectives for public and private signage
in the downtown.
This chapter provides standards for communicating information in the
environment of the City and its jurisdiction. The value and quality of the City
is particularly important to the City’s future. Street graphics and signs have
a significant impact on the overall appearance and visual quality of the
community. Therefore, it is essential that the style, quality, and design of
signs support the City’s overall quality and reflect its character. In
addition, signs can have a significant impact on the value and economic
stability of adjacent properties. Therefore, sign design must reflect the basic
value that development on one site must preserve the integrity of neighboring
sites.
168.02   PERMIT REQUIREMENTS.
1.   Except as otherwise permitted by this chapter, no permanent sign shall be
erected, altered, or relocated without approval by the City. A sign permit is
required and approval by the City granted before a permanent sign is erected,
altered, or relocated.
2.   No permit shall be required for cleaning or other normal maintenance and
repair of a sign, including changes to tenant or business names on multi-tenant
signs, provided that an overall consistency of color and design is maintained,
or for copy changes on changeable copy signs that do not alter the size, amount
of space allocated to each tenant, color, or structure of the sign.
3.   No permit is required for temporary signs.
4.   All sign permit applications shall include the following information:
A.   Name, address, and telephone number of applicant.
B.   Location of the sign, structure, or lot on which the sign is to be
installed.
C.   Two blueprints or scaled drawings of the plans of the sign, with
dimensions, notation of materials, type of construction, and method of
attachment to the ground.
1.   A fee determined by Council resolution shall accompany all sign permit
applications.
2.   All signs shall comply with existing City and State electrical and
structural regulations.
3.   In the event that erection, construction, or reconstruction of any sign is
commenced without first obtaining a permit, there shall be charged, in addition
to the required permit fee, an on-site inspection fee of $100.00. This
provision does not preclude any enforcement or penalty contained in this Code.
168.03   SIGN REGULATIONS - ALL ZONING DISTRICTS.
The following regulations shall apply to all zoning districts:
1.   No sign may be lighted in a manner which impairs the vision of the driver
of any motor vehicle.
2.   No sign may obstruct the view of any highway or railroad so as to render
dangerous the use of the highway.
3.   No sign may imitate or resemble an official traffic control sign, signal,
or device.
4.   Signs shall not encroach or extend over public rights-of-way except for
signage in the C-R Zoning Districts which shall be subject to having a minimum
clearance for pedestrian traffic of eight feet, and further provided the signs
and their supporting structures do not extend into the right-of-way beyond
seven and one-half feet, but no closer than two feet from the curb line of the
street.
5.   No sign may obscure or physically interfere with an official traffic
control sign, signal, or device.
6.   No advertisement or advertising structure shall be posted, erected, or
maintained which simulates any official, directional, or warning sign erected
or maintained by the State, County, municipal, or other governmental
subdivision or which incorporates or makes use of lights simulating or
resembling traffic signals or control signs.
7.   No advertisement shall be posted or maintained on trailers, fences, trees,
or other perennial plants, or on poles maintained by public utilities.
8.   All signs must be kept in good repair. Repairs shall be made within 30
days of damage to said sign.
9.   None of the rules or regulations set forth herein shall apply to signs
erected by the City.
168.04   SIGN REGULATIONS - A-1, R-1, R-2, R-3, AND R-4 ZONING DISTRICTS.
The following regulations shall apply to all A-1, R-l, R-2, R-3, and R-4 Zoning
Districts:
1.   Signs are not permitted, except for political signs, real estate signs
(both for sale and rental), and certain construction signs, as specified in
this section, and home occupation signs permitted under Section
167.23(1)(B)(5).
2.   This prohibition shall not apply to off-premises signage affixed to the
interior perimeter fencing or scoreboards facing inward of athletic fields.
3.   Political signs shall conform to State law.
4.   Real estate signs shall be removed upon the closing of the sale, or
rental, of the property.
5.   Construction signs relating to the vendor and services provided for the
construction or remodeling of a dwelling unit on the premises shall be
permitted during the time of construction in the front yard area, as defined in
Section
165.14(25)(B).
6.   The total square feet of surface area of all construction signs on any one
property shall not exceed 32 square feet.
7.   Real estate signs shall not exceed 10 square feet in surface area.
8.   Signs identifying the name of an apartment building shall be permitted on
the premises containing the apartment building, provided that the total square
feet of surface area of all such signs shall not exceed 32 square feet and
shall be subject to a setback of not less than 15 feet from the front boundary
line and a setback of not less than eight feet from the side boundary line.
168.05   SIGN REGULATIONS - C-R, C-G, C-H, AND I-L ZONING DISTRICTS.
The following regulations shall apply to all C-R, C-G, C-H, and I-L zoning
districts:
1.   Off-premises and on-premises signs are permitted.
2.   The gross area in square feet of all signs on a zoning lot shall not
exceed three times the lineal feet of frontage of such zoning lot.
3.   On-premises and off-premises signs shall comply with the setbacks of the
districts they are located in with the exception of signs located in I-L Zoning
Districts. There shall be no setback requirements for signs in I-L Zoning
Districts unless the lot upon which the sign is to be placed is adjacent to an
R-1, R-2, R-3, or R-4 Zoning District, in which case the sign must meet the
setback requirements for the I-L Zoning District. Other bulk regulations do not
apply. Off-premises signs are governed by State and federal regulations along
highways, where zoning exists.
4.   Within 90 days of closure of a business, all signs must be taken down
which protrude onto the City’s right-of-way and are illegible or pose a threat
to vehicular or pedestrian traffic.
5.   None of the rules or regulations set forth herein shall apply to signs
erected by the City.
CHAPTER 169
ZONING REGULATIONS - PARKING REGULATIONS
 
169.01 Purpose                    169.06 Design for Parking Facilities
169.02 Authority and Application  169.07 Stacking Spaces for Drive-Through
                                  Facilities
169.03 Off-Street Loading Space   169.08 Handicapped Parking Requirements
Required
169.04 Parking Space Requirements 169.09 Pedestrian Circulation and Access
169.05 Parking Stall Dimensions    
 
169.01   PURPOSE.
The purpose of this chapter is to provide adequate parking for all uses in the
Zoning Code, to reduce demand for parking by encouraging alternative means of
transportation including rideshare and bicycles, and to increase pedestrian
mobility in urban areas by:
1.   Setting minimum off-street parking standards for different land uses that
assure safe, convenient, and adequately sized parking facilities within
activity centers.
2.   Providing incentives to rideshare through preferred parking arrangements.
3.   Providing parking for parking and storage of bicycles.
4.   Providing safe direct pedestrian access from public rights-of- ways to
structures and between developments.
169.02   AUTHORITY AND APPLICATION.
1.   Before a Certificate of Occupancy may be granted for any new or enlarged
building, for any new parking area, or for a change of use in any existing
building, the use shall be required to meet the provisions of this chapter.
2.   If this chapter does not specify a parking requirement for a land use, the
Zoning Official shall establish the minimum requirement based on a study of
anticipated parking demand. In the study, the applicant shall provide
sufficient information to demonstrate that the parking demand for a specific
land use will be satisfied. Parking studies shall be prepared by a professional
engineer with expertise in traffic and parking analysis, unless an equally
qualified individual is authorized by the Zoning Official.
169.03   OFF-STREET LOADING SPACE REQUIRED.
1.   Number of Off-Street Loading Spaces Required. In any district every
building or part thereof erected, having a gross floor area of 10,000 square
feet or more, which is to be occupied by manufacturing, storage, warehouse,
goods display, retail store, wholesale store, market, hotel, hospital,
mortuary, office buildings, dry cleaning, or similar uses which require the
receipt or distribution by vehicles of material or merchandise, there shall be
provided and maintained on the same lot with such building at least one off-
street loading space, and for multiple tenant commercial or retail shopping
centers, one additional such loading space for each 20,000 square feet or
fraction thereof gross floor area used in excess of 10,000 square feet,
provided that the total number of loading spaces is not required to be more
than total number of occupying tenants.
2.   Off-Street Loading Space Design Requirements:
A.   Each loading space shall be not less than 10 feet in width and 20 feet in
length for loading spaces not requiring loading dock access, and 50 feet in
length for loading dock access for trucks, designed in a manner acceptable to
the Zoning Official providing adequate space for loading access.
B.   Such loading area may occupy part of a required yard or court space,
except yard or court space required by bulk regulations specified in each
zoning district, and provided the loading area and access roadways meet all
setbacks required of off-street parking areas as set forth in Section 169.06.
C.   Loading yards and loading docks shall be buffered, as approved by the
Zoning Official, from the general public view, public street, public buildings,
recreation facilities, parks, schools, places of assembly, residential zones
and uses, and from all other adjoining properties where is determined said
loading areas are considered offensive to more restrictive adjoining uses.
D.   All loading yards and access to loading yards and loading docks shall be
paved with asphalt or Portland cement concrete pavement in accordance with
surfacing requirements set forth in the Municipal Design Standards.
169.04   PARKING SPACE REQUIREMENTS.
1.   Required Number. The off-street parking spaces required for each use
permitted by the Zoning Code shall not be less than that found in Table 169- A,
provided that any fractional parking space is computed as a whole space.
Notwithstanding the amount of off-street parking required by the Zoning Code,
the Zoning Official may approve less off-street parking when the proponent of a
use demonstrates that, because of special circumstances involved with a
particular use, it is obvious that the off-street parking required by this Code
exceeds any reasonable likely need.
Table 169-A
Use Number of Parking Spaces Required
Table 169-A
Use                                 Number of Parking Spaces Required
One- and two-family dwellings       2.5 per dwelling unit
Multi-family dwellings              3.0 per dwelling unit
Elder multi-family units            1.2 per dwelling unit
Vehicle fueling and service station 1 per 300 gross square feet plus 1 per
                                    employee
Vehicle repair garage               1 per 300 gross square feet plus 1 per
                                    employee
Professional office                 1 per 200 gross square feet
Retail businesses                   1 per 200 gross square feet
Commercial equipment room           1 per 2,000 gross square feet
Restaurant                          1 per 100 gross square feet
Restaurant delivery - no seating    1 per 500 gross square feet plus 1 per
                                    employee
Dance hall                          1 per 100 gross square feet
Funeral homes, mortuaries           1 per 200 gross square feet
Warehouse                           1 per 2,000 square feet plus 1 per employee
Assembly                            1 per every 4 seats provided
Place of worship                    1 per every 10 seats provided
Medical office                      1 per 200 gross square feet
Schools                             1 per 3.5 seats in assembly rooms plus 1
                                    per faculty member
Radio or television station         1 per 400 gross square feet
Hospital                            1 per bed plus 1 per employee
Hotel or motel                      1 per guest room plus 1 per 500 gross
                                    square feet
Industry                            1 per 500 gross square feet
Parks and recreation areas          8 per acre of developed park
Note: Gross square feet are measured for the portion of the site utilized for
the use, including storage yards and outbuildings if applicable.
 
2.   Combination of Uses. Where there is a combination of uses on a lot, the
required number of parking spaces shall be the sum of that found for each use.
3.   Location of Parking Spaces. The parking spaces required by this Code shall
be provided on the same lot as the use or where the exclusive use of such is
provided on another lot not more than 500 feet radially from the subject lot
within the same or less restrictive zoning district. If the required amount of
off-street parking has been proposed to be provided off-site, the applicant
shall provide written contracts with affected landowners showing that required
off-street parking shall be provided in a manner consistent with the provisions
of this chapter. The contracts shall be reviewed by the Zoning Official for
compliance with this chapter, and if approved, the contracts shall be recorded
with the County Recorder’s Office as a deed restriction on the title to all
applicable properties. These deed restrictions may not be revoked or modified
without authorization by the Zoning Official.
4.   All dwellings in residential zones shall have at least a two-car garage on
the property.
169.05   PARKING STALL DIMENSIONS.
1.   Width.
A.   A minimum width of nine feet shall be provided for each parking stall.
B.   A minimum width of eight feet shall be provided for each compact parking
stall.
C.   A minimum width of eight feet shall be provided for each parallel parking
stall.
1.   Length.
A.   A minimum length of 19 feet shall be provided for each parking stall.
B.   A minimum length of 15 feet shall be provided for each compact parking
stall.
C.   A minimum length of 22 feet shall be provided for each parallel parking
stall.
169.06   DESIGN FOR PARKING FACILITIES.
1.   Driveway Design. All parking facility access drives located within the
public right-of-way shall be installed in accordance with the Municipal Design
Standards.
2.   Driveway Width. Every parking facility shall be provided with one or more
access driveways, the width of which shall be the following:
A.   Residential driveways at least 10 feet.
B.   All other driveways:
   (1)   Twelve feet for one-way enter or exit.
   (2)   Twenty-two feet for two-way enter or exit.
1.   Driveway and Ramp Slopes. The maximum slope of any driveway or ramp shall
not exceed 20 percent. Transition slopes in driveways and ramps shall be
provided in accordance with the Municipal Design Standards.
2.   Stall Accessibility. Each required parking stall shall be individually and
easily accessible based on good engineering practice. No automobile shall be
required to back onto any public street or sidewalk to leave any parking stall
when such stall serves more than one- and two- family dwelling uses. All
portions of a public lot or garage shall be accessible to other portions
thereof without requiring the use of any public street.
3.   Compact-to-Standard Stall Ratio. The maximum ratio of compact stalls to
standard stalls in any parking area shall not exceed one to three.
4.   Screening. General Commercial, Highway Commercial, and Industrial parking
lots shall be screened from public streets utilizing plantings and berming to
help maintain a visually attractive corridor. Larger parking lots exert a
greater visual impact and therefore should have a higher percentage of their
spaces devoted to landscaping islands. Landscaping islands are required per
Chapter173.
5.   Parking Facility and Loading Area Setback Requirements. Every public or
private off-street parking area and loading area shall be developed and
maintained in accordance with the following requirements:
6.   Surface Materials.
A.   All off-street parking, loading areas, and access drives shall have a
durable and dust free surface paved with asphaltic or Portland cement concrete
pavement in accordance with the specifications as herein set forth. Off-street
parking of automobiles, vans, campers, trucks, trailers, tractors, recreational
mobile vehicles equipped for street and highway travel shall be on asphaltic or
Portland cement concrete paved off-street parking area as required herein and
not parked or stored within the landscaped or open spaced area. Exception is in
residential zones a boat, RV, or camper less than 15,000 pounds may be stored
in the side and rear yard landscaped or open spaced area.
B.   All off-street parking areas and associated driveways, access roadways,
and frontage roads, except driveways for single-family residences, shall be
constructed with permanent, integrally attached, six-inch high Portland cement
concrete curbing, or curbing of alternate height acceptable to the City
(prefabricated portable curb stops shall not be considered an acceptable
alternate), and shall be so graded and drained as to dispose of all surface
water accumulation within the area; and shall be so arranged and marked as to
provide for orderly and safe loading or unloading and parking and storage of
self-propelled vehicles.
C.   The minimum thickness of pavement of the parking facilities shall be as
follows:
   (1)   Portland cement concrete shall have a minimum thickness of four inches
for residential uses and five inches for all other uses. The subgrade shall
have a minimum subgrade modulus (K) of 150. Additional thickness of Portland
cement concrete may be utilized to create an equivalent subgrade modulus if the
existing subgrade modulus is less than 150.
   (2)   Asphaltic concrete shall have a minimum thickness of four and one-half
inches for residential uses and five and one-half inches for all other uses.
The subgrade shall have a minimum CBR of five. Additional thickness of
asphaltic concrete may be utilized to create CBR if the existing CBR is less
than five. Pavement shall be designed in accordance with the Asphalt Institute
“Thickness Design Manual”.
1.   Striping. All parking stalls shall be striped substantially. Exception is
given for a private garage or parking area for the exclusive use by a single-
family dwelling.
2.   Lighting Illumination Requirements. Exterior lighting shall relate to the
scale and location of the development in order to maintain adequate security
while preventing nuisance or hardship to adjacent properties or streets. Except
for lighting of loading areas, service areas, and for architectural emphasis,
floodlighting is prohibited. Lighting shall comply with the following
requirements.
A.   Light fixtures 300 feet or less from a residential zone shall be mounted
no higher than 25 feet from grade.
B.   Light fixtures greater than 300 feet from a residential zone shall be
mounted no higher than 35 feet from grade.
C.   All lights greater than 2,000 lumens, both pole-mounted, and wall -
mounted, shall be equipped with cutoff shields so that no light shines above
the horizontal, and no direct light falls beyond the property line. Light
reflectors and refractors may be substituted for shields on ornamental and
pedestrian light fixtures.
D.   Light fixtures used to illuminate flags, statues, and objects mounted on a
pole or pedestal shall use a narrow cone of light that does not extend beyond
the illuminated object.
E.   Outdoor recreational facilities permitted by conditional use may be exempt
from the specific exterior lighting standards provided the Council approves a
lighting plan as part of the conditional use approval process.
F.   Illumination shall not exceed one foot-candle at property boundaries of
multi-family, commercial, and industrial uses abutting to or across the street
from a residential zone, or a commercial zone in which residential uses are
permitted.
1.   Parking Area Lighting Fixture. The City, before installation, shall
approve all exterior lighting fixtures. Wood utility pole shall not be used to
support a parking light fixture.
169.07   STACKING SPACES FOR DRIVE-THROUGH FACILITIES.
1.   A stacking space shall be an area measuring eight feet by 20 feet with
direct forward access to a service window of a drive-through facility. A
stacking space shall be located to prevent any vehicles from extending onto the
public right-of-way, or interfering with any pedestrian circulation, traffic
maneuvering, or other parking space areas. Stacking spaces for drive-through or
drive-in uses may not be counted as required parking spaces.
2.   Uses providing drive-up or drive-through services shall provide vehicle
stacking spaces as follows:
A.   For each drive-up window of a bank or financial institution, business
service, or other drive-through not listed, a minimum of five stacking spaces
shall be provided; and
B.   For each service window of a drive-through restaurant, a minimum of seven
stacking spaces shall be provided.
169.08   HANDICAPPED PARKING REQUIREMENTS.
Provision of handicapped parking stalls within off-street parking and loading
facilities shall be in accordance with Chapter 104A of the Code of Iowa and
this Code. These requirements shall apply to all public and private parking
facilities, temporary or permanent, used by the general public.
1.   Parking spaces designated for physically disabled persons and accessible
passenger loading zones that serve a particular building shall be located on
the shortest possible accessible circulation route to an accessible entrance of
the building. In separate parking structures or lots that do not serve a
particular building, parking spaces for physically disabled persons shall be
located on the shortest possible circulation route to an accessible pedestrian
entrance of the parking facility. When handicapped parking spaces are required
for buildings with more than one accessible entrance, the spaces shall be
distributed so that each accessible entrance shall have at least one parking
space located on the shortest accessible route to that entrance. Exception is
given if the required number of spaces is less than the number of accessible
entrances, the spaces shall be distributed so that as many entrances as
possible are served by at least one handicapped parking space located on the
shortest accessible route to those entrances.
2.   Single parking spaces designated for physically disabled people shall be
at least 96 inches wide and shall have an abutting access aisle 60 inches wide
(see Figure 169-1). Parking vehicle overhangs shall not reduce the clear width
of an accessible circulation route. Parking spaces and access aisles shall be
level with surface slopes not exceeding 1:50 in all directions.
Figure 169-1
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/1f6f570c323dcddbbcc7f233d6e26e86e24675d7/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2045.jpg]
 
3.   Two accessible parking spaces may share a common access aisle (see Figure
169-2).
Figure 169-2
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/1f6f570c323dcddbbcc7f233d6e26e86e24675d7/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2047.jpg]
 
4.   The first parking space provided in a parking lot or parking structure,
and every eighth handicapped parking space provided thereafter, shall be a van-
accessible space. A van-accessible space shall be 96 inches wide with an
abutting access aisle at least 96 inches wide (see Figure 169-3). Two abutting
van-accessible spaces may share a common access aisle. Exception will be
granted to entities providing handicapped parking spaces who are not required
to provide van-accessible spaces if all of the handicapped parking spaces
provided in a parking lot or structure are universally accessible. A
universally accessible space is at least 132 inches wide with an abutting 60
inches wide access aisle. Two abutting universally accessible spaces may share
a common access aisle (see Figure 169-4).
Figure 169-3
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/1f6f570c323dcddbbcc7f233d6e26e86e24675d7/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2049.jpg]
 
Figure 169-4
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/1f6f570c323dcddbbcc7f233d6e26e86e24675d7/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2051.jpg]
 
5.   Passenger loading zones shall provide an access aisle at least 48 inches
wide and 20 feet long abutting and parallel to the vehicle pull-up space (see
Figure 169-5). Vehicle standing spaces and access aisles shall be level with
surface slopes not exceeding 1:50 in all directions. ††
Figure 169-5
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/1f6f570c323dcddbbcc7f233d6e26e86e24675d7/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2053.jpg]
 
6.   A minimum vertical clearance of 108 inches shall be provided at accessible
passenger loading zones and along vehicle access routes to such areas from site
entrances. ††
7.   If there are curbs between the access aisle and vehicle pull-up space,
then a curb ramp complying with Section 216C.9 of the Code of Iowa shall be
provided.
8.   Accessible parking spaces shall be designated as reserved for physically
handicapped people by a sign having a blue background and bearing the
international symbol of accessibility in white. The handicapped parking sign
shall be affixed vertically on another object so that it is readily visible to
a driver of a motor vehicle approaching the handicapped parking space. Each
handicapped parking sign shall include language stating the amount of fine for
improperly using the handicapped parking space.
9.   At least two percent of the total parking spaces in any off-street
nonresidential parking facility available to the public shall be designated as
handicapped spaces, rounded to the nearest whole number of handicapped parking
spaces, in compliance with the provisions of this chapter. All off-street
parking facilities which provide 10 or more parking spaces shall designate
handicapped parking spaces in accordance with Table 169-B.
10.   All public and private buildings and facilities, temporary and permanent,
which are residences and which provide 10 or more tenant parking spaces,
excluding extended health care facilities, shall designate at least one
handicapped parking space as needed for each individual dwelling unit in which
a handicapped person resides. Residential buildings and facilities that provide
visitors’ parking of 10 or more spaces shall designate handicapped parking
spaces in the visitors’ parking area in accordance with Table 169-B.
Table 169-B
Total Parking Spaces in Lot Required Minimum Number of Handicapped Parking
                            Spaces
Table 169-B
Total Parking Spaces in Lot Required Minimum Number of Handicapped Parking
                            Spaces
10 to 25                    1
26 to 50                    2
51 to 75                    3
76 to 100                   4
101 to 150                  5
151 to 200                  6
201 to 300                  7
301 to 400                  8
401 to 500                  9
501 to 1,000                *
1,001 and over              **
*Two percent of total**Twenty spaces plus one for each 100 over 1,000Note:
Projects which are required to comply with the Uniform Federal Accessibility
Standards shall provide a minimum of one handicapped parking space.
 
 
Notes
   † EDITOR’S NOTE: Note: Projects which are required to comply with the Uniform
†Federal Accessibility Standards shall provide a width of 60 inches for the access
   aisle.
†† EDITOR’S NOTE: Note: Uniform Federal Accessibility Standard requires 114 inches
   of vertical clearance.
169.09   PEDESTRIAN CIRCULATION AND ACCESS.
1.   All uses, except single-family detached homes, shall provide pedestrian
access onto the site. Pedestrian access points shall be provided at all
pedestrian arrival points to the development including the property edges,
adjoining lots, abutting street intersections, crosswalks, and at transit
stops. Pedestrian access shall be located as follows:
A.   Access points at property edges and to adjoining lots shall be coordinated
with existing development to provide circulation patterns between developments;
and
B.   Residential developments shall provide links between cul-de-sacs or groups
of buildings to allow pedestrian access from within the development and from
adjacent developments to activity centers, parks, common tracts, open spaces,
schools or other public facilities, transit stops, and public streets.
1.   Pedestrian walkways shall form an on-site circulation system that
minimizes the conflict between pedestrians and traffic at all points of
pedestrian access to on-site parking and building entrances. Pedestrian
walkways shall be provided when the pedestrian access point or any parking
space is more than 75 feet from the building entrance or principal on-site
destination and as follows:
A.   All developments which contain more than one building shall provide
walkways between the principal entrances of the buildings.
B.   All nonresidential buildings set back more than 100 feet from the public
right-of-way shall provide for direct pedestrian access from the building to
buildings on adjoining lots.
C.   Pedestrian walkways across parking areas shall be located as follows:
   (1)   Walkways running parallel to the parking rows shall be provided for
every four rows. Rows without walkways shall be landscaped or contain barriers
or other means to encourage pedestrians to use the walkways.
   (2)   Walkways running perpendicular to the parking rows shall be no further
than 20 parking spaces. Landscaping, barriers, or other means shall be provided
between the parking rows to encourage pedestrians to use the walkways.
1.   Pedestrian access and walkways shall meet the following minimum design
standards:
A.   Access and walkways shall be well lit and physically separated from
driveways and parking spaces by landscaping, berms, barriers, grade separation,
or other means to protect pedestrians from vehicular traffic.
B.   Access and walkways shall be a minimum of 60 inches of unobstructed width
and meet the surfacing standards of the City’s Municipal Design Standards for
walkways or sidewalks.
C.   Access shall be usable by mobility impaired persons and shall be designed
and constructed to be easily located by the sight impaired pedestrian by either
grade change, texture, or other equivalent means.
D.   A crosswalk shall be required when a walkway crosses a driveway or a paved
area accessible to vehicles.
E.   Wherever walkways are provided, raised crosswalks or speed bumps shall be
located at all points where a walkway crosses the lane of vehicle travel.
1.   Blocks in excess of 900 feet shall be provided with a crosswalk at the
approximate midpoint of the block.
CHAPTER 171
ZONING REGULATIONS - PLANNED AREA DEVELOPMENT
 
171.01 Purpose        171.03 Standards and Criteria
171.02 Permitted Uses 171.04 Procedure for Review and Approval of a PAD
 
171.01   PURPOSE.
The Planned Area District is intended to provide for innovative housing
developments, including condominiums. The major objectives of a Planned Area
Development (PAD) are:
1.   To promote flexibility in the design and location of structures;
2.   To promote the efficient use of land and to facilitate a more economic
arrangement of buildings, circulation systems, land uses, and utilities;
3.   To preserve existing landscape features and amenities and to use such
features in a harmonious fashion;
4.   To provide for more usable and suitably-located common facilities than
would otherwise be provided under conventional land development procedures.
171.02   PERMITTED USES.
Uses permitted in a PAD will be the same as those allowed in the underlying
district, shall meet the design characteristics set forth in Section
171.03 and shall be compatible with surrounding residences.
171.03   STANDARDS AND CRITERIA.
The following standards and criteria apply to all PAD developments:
1.   Design Characteristics. The proposed PAD shall be designed to provide for
the unified development of the area in accordance with the purpose of the
district or districts in which the development is located. The design may
provide for modification of yard, setback, minimum dwelling unit size or height
requirements, or other variations consistent with the intent of this chapter.
The design may provide for one or more dwelling unit types, and may consist of
individual lots or it may have common building sites. Open spaces or common
land shall be an essential and major element of the plan unless demonstrated by
the developer that the particular use of the property proposed for the Planned
Area Development is such that these areas are impossible to accommodate. No
more than four attached units shall be allowed in R-1 Planned Area
Developments.
2.   Location. A PAD shall be permitted only in Districts R-l, R-2, R 3, R-4,
and combinations thereof, and in no other districts. A PAD may be approved,
provided that all the provisions of this section are complied with, but
approval is not mandatory, and PAD is not a use of right.
3.   Density of Development. The maximum development density allowed for any
PAD shall be the same density as would be allowed in the underlying zoning
district.
A.   The maximum density shall be calculated on the land area that remains
after deducting all perimeter street right-of-way requirements as determined by
City street standards, and the major thoroughfare plan.
B.   If the PAD is within two or more residential zoning districts, the maximum
permitted density shall be the sum of permitted dwelling units computed
separately for the area within each district.
C.   The actual density of the PAD shall be determined by conditions
specifically applicable to the site such as topography, the character of the
surrounding property, traffic movement, or adequacy of public services.
1.   Building Height. No specific maximum; however, building height shall be
compatible with the surrounding area.
2.   Lot Size. No minimum requirement.
3.   Yards. There shall be a 25-foot setback from all perimeter property lines
of the PAD. The setback is intended to be a landscaped buffer. In addition, the
Council may approve accessory uses within such 25-foot setback area if the
Council finds said uses to be compatible with the area.
4.   Vision Clearance. On any corner lot on which a front or side yard is
required, no wall, fence, sign, or other structure, or no plant growth of a
type which would interfere with traffic visibility across the corner, shall be
permitted or maintained higher than three feet above the curb level, within 15
feet of the intersection of the street right-of-way lines.
5.   Access. The streets within the proposed development must be public and
within a public right-of-way. Other driveways and pedestrian ways must be
adequate to serve the residents and visitors of the PAD.
6.   Parking. Adequate off-street parking must be provided and shall include at
a minimum two spaces per unit or dwelling.
7.   Homeowners Association. Homeowners associations may be required, and
homeowners association documents shall be recorded, prior to certificate of
Occupancy Permits being granted, for purposes of improving, operating, and
maintaining private common facilities, including drives, service areas, parking
areas, recreation areas, and any other function reasonably required by the
Council.
8.   Drainage. A drainage system shall be designed to minimize the possibility
of soil erosion and flood damage and said drainage system shall protect the
surrounding properties from runoff and erosion during construction.
171.04   PROCEDURE FOR REVIEW AND APPROVAL OF A PAD.
1.   Preliminary PAD Plan. The application shall be considered in the same
manner as a rezoning request and the same procedures shall be followed for
application, review. and public hearing. Upon final approval by the Council,
the PAD shall be designated on the Zoning District Map. Unless the PAD is to be
constructed in one phase, the plan shall provide for staged development of the
project. Prior to the Planning and Zoning Commission conducting a review of the
proposed preliminary development plan, the City staff shall review the plan for
conformance with all standards and ordinances.
2.   The preliminary PAD plan submittal shall show the following:
A.   Name of the PAD.
B.   A north arrow, scale, and the size of the site to the nearest acre.
C.   The name of the record owners of the land and their agents.
D.   Existing zoning of the tract and the zoning of all adjacent property.
E.   The existing topography of the site with contour intervals no greater than
five feet.
F.   The approximate size, location, and arrangement of proposed buildings on
the site.
G.   The proposed location of parking areas, an estimated parking ratio, and
the general arrangement of spaces, drives, and walkways on the site.
H.   The approximate locations of any existing or proposed rights-of-way.
I.   The location and size of existing and proposed sanitary sewers, water
mains, storm sewers, and natural gas mains within or adjacent to the site and
any proposed easements.
J.   Natural and modified drainage ways, proposed culverts, and detention
areas, if applicable, on the site.
K.   Existing waterways or wooded areas, and the approximate location of the
100-year flood plain, if applicable.
L.   The types of dwelling units, other uses, and proposed density of
development.
M.   The existing and proposed pedestrian circulation system.
N.   The general location of all areas to be conveyed, dedicated, or reserved
as common open space, public parks, recreational areas, school sites, and
similar public or semi-public areas.
O.   A general description of proposed landscaped areas and common areas on the
site.
P.   The stages of development, if applicable.
Q.   Signature blocks for Planning and Zoning Commission and Council approvals.
R.   The following items shall be submitted along with the plan:
   (1)   A deposit to cover advertising costs.
   (2)   A legal description of the property.
   (3)   The names and addresses of all property owners within 185 feet of the
property.
   (4)   Any proposed variances to subdivision regulations.
1.   After review, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall forward the
preliminary PAD plan to the Council with its recommendation including impact
fees, if appropriate.
2.   The Council, after a public hearing, may approve, approve conditionally,
or deny the preliminary PAD plan together with impact fees, if required.
Approval of the preliminary PAD plan shall be binding upon the owners, their
heirs, and assigns until such time as the Council may release such limitations
on the use of the subject property under the procedures provided herein.
3.   After Council approval of the preliminary PAD plan, the applicant shall
submit a final PAD plan which is substantially in conformance with the approved
preliminary plan for a public hearing by the Planning and Zoning Commission.
The procedures for application and review of a final plan shall be the same as
for a final subdivision plat.
4.   The Council may establish such schedule for approval and document studies
and services as shall appear necessary. The Council, upon application, may
waive such of these rules as necessary. Any required studies, engineering fees,
legal expenses of the City, and inspection fees shall be paid by the developer
prior to final approval and shall be the actual expenses incurred by the City
in relation thereto. In addition, the developer shall also pay for updating the
City Zoning Map to reflect the development.
5.   The final PAD plan submittal shall include the following:
A.   Name of the PAD.
B.   A north arrow, scale, small location map, and the size of the site to the
nearest one-tenth of an acre.
C.   The names and addresses of the record owners of the land and their agents.
D.   Names of adjacent property owners of unsubdivided land and the names of
adjacent subdivisions.
E.   The location of the boundary lines of the site in relation to any section
line, quarter-section line, and any corporate boundaries immediately adjoining.
F.   The existing topography of the site with contour intervals no greater than
five feet, and the specific location of the 100-year flood plain, if
applicable.
G.   The location of all buildings. In the case of one- or two-family units on
individual lots, this requirement can be met by use of building “envelopes”
which show the portion of the lot within which structures may be located.
H.   The location and number of parking spaces, drives, walkways, and the
parking ratio.
I.   The location and width of existing street rights-of-way, alleys, roads,
railroad rights-of-way, and recorded easements; and the proposed location,
width, name, and grade for any new street.
J.   The location and size of existing and proposed sanitary sewers, water
mains, storm sewers, and natural gas mains within or adjacent to the site and
any proposed easements.
K.   The types of dwelling units, other uses, and proposed density of
development.
L.   The location and size, in acres or square feet, of all areas to be
conveyed, dedicated, or reserved as common open space, public parks, pedestrian
ways, recreational areas, school sites, and similar public or semi-public uses.
M.   Signature blocks for Planning and Zoning Commission and Council approvals
on all exhibits considered part of the final PAD plan.
N.   The Planning and Zoning Commission or Council may require other plans or
data as it deems necessary to review a specific site.
O.   A stormwater management plan, which shall include provisions for erosion
control during construction.
P.   Any proposed variances to subdivision regulations.
Q.   For R-3 PAD plan submittals, a landscaping plan which complies with the
requirements of Section
173.05 of this Code of Ordinances.
1.   Approval of the final PAD plan shall be deemed as satisfying the
requirements of the subdivision regulations for a preliminary plat, provided
all those requirements have been met. Any variances to the subdivision
regulations proposed as part of the PAD shall be clearly stated on both the
preliminary and final PAD development plans. Such variances shall be considered
along with Planning and Zoning Commission and Council review of the preliminary
and final development plans.
2.   No building permit shall be issued for any construction in the PAD until a
final subdivision plat for the property on which permits are requested has been
approved.
3.   From and after two years following the date of approval of the final PAD
plan by the Council, the Council may, by ordinance, withdraw approval of such
final plan, provided construction has not commenced.
4.   Minor changes which do not constitute a substantial deviation to an
approved final PAD plan may be authorized by the Council. In determining
whether or not a substantial division has been proposed by the developer, the
Council shall consider, among other things, the following criteria:
A.   Changes in density;
B.   Changes in dwelling unit;
C.   Changes in infrastructure, public or private;
D.   Changes in landscaping, open spaces, common areas, or recreational
facilities;
E.   Changes in rearrangement of buildings;
F.   Changes in land use intensity, such as building height, size, or change in
parking area;
G.   Change of the use of any structure;
H.   Changes in traffic patterns or intensity.
CHAPTER 173
SITE PLAN REQUIREMENTS
173.01 Title                             173.08 Fees
173.02 Purpose and Application           173.09 Validity of Approval
173.03 Design Standards                  173.10 Site Plan Amendment
173.04 Required Information              173.11 Applicability to Existing
                                         Development
173.05 Open Space, Landscaping, Parking, 173.12 Enforcement
and Architectural Requirements
173.06 Zoning Permits                    173.13 Changes and Amendments
173.07 Procedure                         173.14 Maintenance Bonds
                                         
 
173.01   TITLE.
This chapter shall be known, cited, and referred to as “Site Plan Regulations
of the City of Solon, Iowa.”
173.02   PURPOSE AND APPLICATION.
It is the intent and purpose of this chapter to establish a procedure which
will enable the City to review certain proposed improvements to property within
specified zoning districts of the City to ensure compliance with all applicable
zoning, subdivision, and building regulations. Site plans shall only be
required whenever any person proposes to place any structure for which a
building permit is required under any other section of this Code, on any tract
or parcel of, and within any district of the Zoning Code, and for any use,
except one- and two-family dwellings.
173.03   DESIGN STANDARDS.
The standards of design provided herein are necessary to insure the orderly and
harmonious development of property in such manner as will safeguard the
public's health, safety, and general welfare.
1.   The design of the proposed improvements shall make adequate provisions for
surface and subsurface drainage, for connections to water and sanitary sewer
lines, each so designed as to neither overload existing public utility lines
nor increase the danger of erosion, flooding, landslide, or other endangerment
of adjoining or surrounding property.
2.   The proposed improvements shall be designed and located within the
property in such manner as not to unduly diminish or impair the use and
enjoyment of adjoining property, and to this end shall minimize the adverse
effects on such adjoining property from automobile headlights, illumination of
required perimeter yards, refuse containers, and impairment of light and air.
For the purpose of this section, the term “use and enjoyment of adjoining
property” shall mean the use and enjoyment presently being made of such
adjoining property, unless such property is vacant. If vacant, the term “use
and enjoyment of adjoining property” shall mean those uses permitted under the
zoning districts in which such adjoining property is located.
3.   The proposed development shall have such entrances and exits upon adjacent
streets and such internal traffic circulation pattern as will not unduly
increase congestion on adjacent or surrounding public streets.
4.   To such end as may be necessary and proper to accomplish the standards in
Subsections 1, 2, and 3 above, the proposed development shall provide fences,
walls, screening, landscaping, erosion control, or other improvements.
5.   The proposed development shall conform to all applicable provisions of the
Code of Iowa, as amended, and all applicable provisions of the Code of
Ordinances of the City, as amended.
173.04   REQUIRED INFORMATION.
All site plans required under Section
173.02, unless waived by the Council, shall include as a minimum the following
information:
1.   Date of preparation, north point, and scale.
2.   Legal description and address of the property to be developed
3.   Name and address of the record property owner, the applicant, and the
person or firm preparing the site plan.
4.   The existing and proposed zoning.
5.   The existing topography with a maximum of two-foot contour intervals.
Where existing ground is on a slope of less than two percent, either one foot
contours or spot elevations where necessary but not more than 50 feet apart in
both directions, shall be indicated on site plan.
6.   Existing and proposed utility lines and easements in accordance with City
Standard Specifications and Subdivision Regulations.
7.   Total number and type of dwelling units proposed; proposed uses for all
buildings; total floor area of each building; estimated number of employees for
each proposed use where applicable; and any other information which may be
necessary to determine the number of off-street parking spaces and loading
spaces required by the Zoning Code.
8.   Location, shape, and all exterior elevation views of all proposed
buildings, for the purpose of understanding the structures and building
materials to be used, the location of windows, doors, overhangs, projection
height, etc., and the grade relationship to floor elevation, and the number of
stories of each existing building to be retained and of each proposed building.
9.   All required yard setbacks.
10.   Location, grade, and dimensions of all existing and proposed paved
surfaces and all abutting streets.
11.   Complete traffic circulation and parking plan, showing the location and
dimensions of all existing and proposed parking stalls, loading areas, entrance
and exit drives, sidewalks, dividers, planters, and other similar permanent
improvements.
12.   Location and type of existing or proposed signs and of any existing or
proposed lighting on the property which illuminates any part of any required
yard.
13.   Location of existing trees six inches or larger in diameter, landslide
areas, springs and streams and other bodies of water, and any area subject to
flooding by a 100-year storm on-site and downstream off-site.
14.   Location, amount, and type of any proposed landscaping. Location of
proposed plantings, fences, walls, or other screening as required by the zoning
regulations and the design standards set forth in Section
173.03.
15.   A vicinity map at a scale of one inch = 500 feet or larger, showing the
general location of the property, and the adjoining land uses and zoning.
16.   Soil tests and similar information, if deemed necessary by the City
Engineer, to determine the feasibility of the proposed development in relation
to the design standards set forth in Section
173.03.
17.   Where possible ownership or boundary problems exist, as determined by the
Zoning Administrator, a property survey by a licensed land surveyor may be
required.
173.05   OPEN SPACE, LANDSCAPING, PARKING, AND ARCHITECTURAL REQUIREMENTS.
The requirements set forth in this section for open spaces, landscaping,
parking, and architectural standards shall apply to any development or
redevelopment except one- and two-family dwellings.
1.   Open Space Required. On each lot, except for one- and two-family
dwellings, there shall be provided open space in accordance with the following
schedule:
Zoning District Percent of Open Space
Zoning District Percent of Open Space
A-1*            30
R-1**           30
R-2**           30
R-3**           25
R-4**           30
C-R             25
C-G             25
C-H             25
I-L             25
*Non-agricultural uses.**Uses other than single-family dwellings and duplexes.
 
A.   Said open space shall be unencumbered with any structure, or off-street
parking or roadways and drives, and shall be landscaped and maintained with
grass, trees, and shrubbery. When the entire lot is not developed, the open
space requirement shall be based in proportion to the area of the improved
portion of the lot.
B.   Each principal structure of an apartment or office complex on same site
shall be separated from any other principal structure in the complex by an open
space of not less than 16 feet.
1.   Landscaping Required. Any development, except one- and two- family
dwellings, shall provide the following minimum number and size of landscape
plantings based on the minimum required open space for the development. The
following is the minimum requirement of trees and shrubs, by number and size,
and type of ground cover. Street trees planted in public street right-of-way
subject to approval by the City shall not be counted toward fulfillment of the
minimum site requirements set forth below. Plant species to be used for
landscaping shall be acceptable to the City that are not considered a nuisance
or undesirable species, such as trees with thorns, cottonwood or cotton-bearing
poplars, elm trees prone to Dutch Elm Disease, box elder, and silver maple.
Existing trees and shrubs to be retained on-site may be counted toward
fulfillment of the landscaping requirements.
A.   Minimum requirements at the time of planting - Two trees minimum or one
tree of the following size per 1,500 square feet of open space, whichever is
greater:
   (1)   Forty percent - one and one-half inches to two inches caliper
diameter.
   (2)   Balance - one inch to one and one-half inches caliper diameter.
(Evergreen trees shall not be less than six feet in height.)
B.   Minimum requirements at the time of planting - six shrubs, or one shrub
per 1,000 square feet of open space, whichever is greater.
C.   To reduce erosion all disturbed open space areas shall have ground cover
of grass or native vegetation, which is installed as sod, or seeded,
fertilized, and mulched.
1.   Buffer Required. The following conditions shall require a buffer which
shall be a landscaped area, wall, or other structure intended to separate and
obstruct the view between two adjacent zoning districts, land uses, or
properties:
A.   Any Commercial C and Industrial M District that abuts any Residential R
District shall require a buffer as described in this section. The buffer shall
be provided by the commercial or industrial uses when adjoining an R District.
B.   All Industrial Districts that abut any R and C District shall provide a
buffer as required by this section.
C.   Any storage area, garbage storage, junk storage or loading docks, and
loading areas, in any district shall be screened from public street view by a
buffer.
1.   Buffers. Buffers required under the provisions of this section or
elsewhere in the Zoning Code shall be accomplished by any one or approved
combination of the following methods:
A.   Buffer Wall. A buffer wall shall not be less than six feet in height;
constructed of a permanent low maintenance material such as concrete block,
cinder block, brick, concrete, precast concrete or tile block; the permanent
low- maintenance wall shall be designed by an architect or engineer for both
structural adequacy and aesthetic quality; weather resistant wood may be used
as a substitute material if designed with adequate structural integrity and
permanency and approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission and Council.
B.   Landscape Buffer. A landscape buffer shall not be less than 25 feet in
width, designed, and landscaped with earth berm and predominant plantings of
evergreen type trees, shrubs, and plants so as to assure year around
effectiveness; height of berm, and density and height of plantings shall be
adequate to serve as a solid and impenetrable screen. A chain link fence may
exist for security purposes, but is not considered a part of the landscape
screening to satisfy the intent of this requirement.
1.   Burden of Provision of Buffer. The burden of provision and selection of
the buffer shall be as follows:
A.   Where two different zoning districts, requiring a buffer between them, are
developed, the above requirement is not retroactive and a buffer is not
required. If a buffer is desired, it shall be provided by mutual agreement
between adjacent property owners. However, in the event any or all of the
improved property is abandoned, destroyed, or demolished, for the purpose of
renewal or redevelopment, that portion of such property being renewed or
redeveloped, shall be considered vacant and subject to the requirements herein.
B.   Where one of two different zoning districts requiring a buffer between
them is partly developed, the developer of the vacant land shall assume the
burden, unless otherwise specified herein.
C.   Where both zoning districts, requiring a buffer between them, are vacant
or undeveloped, the burden shall be assumed by the developer of the land that
is improved or developed, except for agricultural uses and unless otherwise
specified herein.
1.   Waiver of Buffer Requirements. Where the line between two districts,
requiring a buffer, follows a street, right-of-way, railroad, stream, or other
similar barrier, the requirement for a buffer may be waived by the Council
provided such waiver does not permit the exposure of undesirable
characteristics of land use to public view.
2.   Surfacing Requirements. All off-street parking and loading areas and
access roadways shall have a durable and dustless surface paved with asphaltic
or Portland cement concrete pavement in accordance with the requirements as
herein set forth. Off-street parking of automobiles, vans, campers, trucks,
trailers, tractors, recreational vehicles, boats, construction equipment, and
any other mobile vehicles equipped for street and highway travel shall be on an
asphaltic or Portland cement concrete paved off-street parking area as required
herein and not parked or stored within the landscaped open space area of the
front yard between the building and public street right-of- way, except,
however, the storage of a recreational vehicle, a camper, and boat within the
side or rear yard upon an unpaved area shall be permitted. All off- street
parking areas and associated driveways, access roadways, and frontage roads,
except driveways for single-family residences, shall be constructed with
permanent, integrally attached six inches high curbing or curbing of alternate
height acceptable to the City (prefabricated portable curb stops shall not be
considered an acceptable alternate), and shall be so graded and drained as to
dispose of all surface water accumulation within the area; and shall be so
arranged and marked as to provide for orderly and safe loading or unloading and
parking and storage of self-propelled vehicles. The curbing requirements may be
waived if it is determined that surface drainage can be adequately handled by
other means. The minimum thickness of pavement of the parking area shall be as
follows:
A.   Portland cement concrete shall have a minimum thickness of five inches.
B.   Asphaltic cement concrete shall have a minimum thickness of six inches.
C.   Material utilized in the subgrade shall be well-drained and not
susceptible to frost boils. The part of the parking utilized for driveways and
access roadways shall be specifically designed to accommodate the type and load
bearing capacity of traffic anticipated.
Driveways for attached townhouse style residences on private property shall be
Portland cement concrete or asphaltic concrete with minimum thickness of five
inches and six inches, respectively, with a sufficiently compacted and well-
drained subgrade base and not greater than 18 feet in width.
1.   Landscaping, Screening, and Open Space Requirements. It is desired that
all parking areas be aesthetically improved to reduce obtrusive characteristics
that are inherent to their use. Therefore, wherever practical and except for
single- and two-family detached and townhouse style residential parking in
driveways, parking areas shall be effectively screened from general public view
and contain shade trees within parking islands where multiple aisles of parking
exist. Not less than five percent of the interior parking area shall be
landscaped within parking islands.
2.   Off-Street Parking Access to Public Streets and Internal Traffic
Circulation. Off-street parking or loading facilities shall be designed so as
to permit entrance and exit by forward movement of the vehicle for all uses,
except single-family detached or row dwellings which shall permit backward
movement from a driveway. The backing or backward movement of vehicles from a
driveway, off-street parking, or loading area onto an arterial street or
highway shall be prohibited for all uses. Driveway approach returns shall not
extend beyond the side lot line as extended, unless such driveway is of joint
usage by the adjoining lots, and driveway approaches at roadway not greater
than established in the Municipal Design Standards. The number of ingress or
egress access points to public streets from off-street parking areas approved
by the City and located to limit vehicular conflicts, provide acceptable
location of driveway accesses to public streets, preserve proper traffic safety
and, as possible, not impair movement of vehicular traffic on public streets.
The permitted number of ingress or egress driveway approaches to public streets
for an off-street parking lot shall be dependent upon the projected future
average daily traffic (ADT) for the public street and, as possible, public
street accesses shall be located in alignment with driveway approaches gaining
access to the same public street from property on approaches gaining access to
the same public street from property on the opposite side of the street. The
design of off-street parking and loading facilities shall provide traffic
circulation for the internal forward movement of traffic within the parking
lot, so designed, as not to impair vehicular movement on public streets, or
backing of vehicles from an off-street parking or loading area to a public
street.
3.   Handicap Accessible Parking Requirements. Provision of handicapped parking
spaces within off-street parking areas shall be in accordance with applicable
federal, State, and local regulations, properly identified with signage and
provided with accessible ramps and walks in accordance with federal and State
regulations, and comply with the following parking space minimum requirements:
Total Parking in Lot Required Minimum Number of Handicapped Spaces
Total Parking in Lot Required Minimum Number of Handicapped Spaces
1 to 25              1
26 to 50             2
51 to 75             3
76 to 100            4
101 to 150           5
151 to 200           6
201 to 300           7
301 to 400           8
401 to 500           9
501 to 1,000         *
1,001 and over       **
*Two percent of total**Twenty (20) spaces plus one for each 100 over 1,000
 
Access space or aisle adjacent to handicap accessible parking space shall be a
minimum five feet wide. One in every eight handicap accessible spaces, but not
less than one, shall be served by an access space or aisle eight feet wide
minimum and shall be designated “van accessible.”
4.   Traffic Analysis Requirements. Any project which contains 100 dwelling
units or 1,000 average day trips as listed for uses in the Trip Generation
Handbook; Institute of Transportation Engineers, current edition, shall submit
a traffic analysis which provides necessary information to determine the affect
that the project will have upon the surrounding traffic. At a minimum the
traffic analysis shall contain project trip generation directional distribution
of project trips, traffic assignment, and capacity analysis, including
identification of congestion and turning-movement conflicts.
5.   Waiver of Requirements. The Council reserves the right to waive or modify
to a lesser requirement any provision or requirement of off-street parking and
loading areas contained in this chapter, provided a report on such change is
received from the Planning and Zoning Commission and City Administrator,
provided adequate area exists for texture expansion, and further provided said
waiver or modification does not adversely affect the intent of these
regulations to adequately safeguard the general public and surrounding
property. Exceptions will only be considered for those uses where special
circumstances warrant a change and whereby the modification or waiver is
determined to be in the best interest of the general public.
6.   Architectural Standards. As part of the submittal of a site plan for
development within any of the zoning districts and for any of the uses except
one- and two-family dwellings, architectural plans for buildings shall be
submitted for review and approval by the Council after recommendation from the
Planning and Zoning Commission. Documentation to be submitted shall include
building elevations showing the building’s design and a description of
structural and exterior materials to be used. The following standards shall be
considered by the City to review architectural plans:
A.   Multiple-Family Dwellings in All Districts. The architecture of multiple-
family buildings shall be designed in a manner compatible with adjoining
residential uses in the neighborhood. Architectural design for multiple-family
buildings shall include exterior building materials, exterior details and
texture, treatment of windows and doors, and a variety in the wall and roof
design to lessen the plainness of appearance that can be characteristic of
large residential buildings. Multiple-family buildings with single plane walls
and boxy in appearance shall not be considered acceptable unless the use of
exterior materials such as brick provides the elements necessary to enhance the
building’s physical appearance and eliminate its plainness of appearance.
Adequate treatment or screening of negative aspects of buildings (loading
docks, loading areas, outside storage areas, garbage dumpsters, and HVAC
mechanical units) from any public street and adjoining properties shall be
required. Buildings shall be designed or oriented not to expose loading docks,
or loading areas to the public.
B.   Non-Residential Uses in the R Districts. Any building used for a permitted
non-residential use in R Districts shall be designed and constructed with
architecture and use of materials compatible with the residential uses within
the neighborhood. Buildings located on a residential street in an R District
shall be residential in character, and exterior materials shall be wood, brick,
or brick veneer. The architectural design shall be approved by the City.
C.   All Uses Within the Commercial Districts. Architectural design and use of
materials for the construction of any building shall be approved by the City.
Buildings within the Commercial Districts shall have as a primary element of
the building exterior fascia glass, brick, concrete panels, textured concrete
block, architectural steel or stone panels, or cement fiber composite siding,
with all sides of any building built consistent in design and use of materials.
No wood, masonite, visible asphaltic exterior wall or roof material, aluminum
or steel siding, non-architectural sheet metal, non-textured concrete block,
stucco, E.I.F.S. (Exterior Insulation and Finish System) or other similar
materials shall constitute a portion of any building except as a trim material,
unless the Council, after receiving a recommendation from the Planning and
Zoning Commission, shall determine said material when used as a primary
element, does not distract from the physical appearance of the building.
Adequate treatment or screening of negative aspects of buildings (loading
docks, loading areas, outside storage areas, garbage dumpsters, and HVAC
mechanical units) from any public street and adjoining properties shall be
required. Building shall not be designed or oriented to expose loading docks,
non- residential use overhead doors, or loading areas to the public.
D.   All Uses Within Industrial Districts. Architectural design and use of
materials for construction of any building in the Industrial Districts shall be
reviewed as part of the site plan proposal and shall be approved by the City.
While it is not the purpose of this section to dictate, specify, or restrict
the use of building materials and structural elements, the use of appropriate
exterior materials to enhance the appearance of a building is encouraged by the
City. The exclusive use of sheet metal as an exterior building material shall
not be considered acceptable for buildings facing public streets. The exterior
material of the building’s front elevation shall be comprised of brick,
concrete panels, textured concrete block, architectural steel or stone panels,
or cement fiber composite siding, or other similar material. Loading areas,
loading docks, storage areas, and garbage dumpsters shall be located, screened,
or oriented to minimize their exposure to view from public streets.
173.06   ZONING PERMITS.
No Zoning Compliance Permit or building permit shall be issued for the
construction of any structure that is subject to the provisions of this
chapter, until a site plan has been submitted for review covering the land upon
which said structure is to be erected, and further, approved by Council for
such development in accordance with this chapter.
173.07   PROCEDURE.
1.   Pre-Application Conference. Whenever any person proposes to place any
structure for which a building permit is required under any other section of
this Code, on any tract or parcel of land within any district of the Zoning
Code, and any use, except one- and two-family dwellings, the person shall
submit to the City Administrator a request for a Pre-Application Conference.
The Conference shall include the applicant or their representative and the
Zoning Administrator. The purpose of the Conference shall be to acquaint the
City staff with the proposed construction and to acquaint the applicant or
their representative with the procedures and with any special problems that
might relate to such construction. The applicant shall furnish a legal
description of the subject real estate at the time of requesting a Pre-
Application Conference, and the Conference shall be held within seven days of
such request.
2.   Continuous Site Plan Review. After completion of the Pre- Application
Conference as required by Subsection 1, and in the event the applicant wishes
to proceed with the construction as discussed at said Conference, they shall
cause to be prepared a site plan of such proposed construction, and shall
submit five copies of the same to the Zoning Administrator and one copy to the
City Engineer. The site plan shall be accompanied by a cover letter requesting
review and approval of said plan. The site plan shall contain all the
information required by Sections
173.05 and
173.06 unless otherwise waived by the Zoning Administrator. The Zoning
Administrator shall retain one copy for their review and comment. The remaining
copies shall be retained by the Clerk for review and distribution. The Zoning
Administrator and City Engineer shall review the plan for conformance of the
design to the standards and required data set forth in Sections
173.04 and
173.05.
3.   Action.
A.   The Zoning Administrator shall promptly notify the applicant in writing of
any revisions or additional information needed as required by Sections
173.04 and
173.05. If necessary, the applicant shall make revisions and resubmit the
revised plan(s) to the Zoning Administrator for compliance. If the site plan
complies with requirements set forth in this chapter, the applicant shall
submit 10 copies of the plan to the Planning and Zoning Commission for
approval, disapproval, or approval subject to conditions.
B.   The Planning and Zoning Commission shall, in its regularly scheduled
meeting, act upon the site plan and accompanying material. The City Engineer,
City staff, and other departments shall submit to the Planning and Zoning
Commission their recommendation. Applicant or a representative shall be present
at the meeting. Action of the Planning and Zoning Commission shall be approval
subject to conditions, or denial.
C.   Approval by Planning and Zoning Commission. In the case of approval by the
Planning and Zoning Commission, the approval shall be documented on seven
copies of the site plan. One copy shall be returned to the applicant, one copy
retained by the Planning and Zoning Commission and five copies shall be
forwarded to the Council.
D.   Conditional Approval by Planning and Zoning Commission. In the case of
approval subject to conditions by the Planning and Zoning Commission, the
approval shall be documented on seven copies of the site plan and the
conditions determined attached thereto. One copy shall be returned to the
builder, one copy shall be retained by the Planning and Zoning Commission, and
five copies shall be forwarded to the Council. The applicant shall provide
revised copies of the site plan in accordance with the Planning and Zoning
Commission action and submit 10 copies to the Clerk prior to Council action.
The Clerk shall forward one copy to the City Engineer, five copies to the
Council and one copy for the Planning and Zoning Commission files.
E.   Disapproval by Planning and Zoning Commission. In the case of disapproval
by the Planning and Zoning Commission, the disapproval shall be documented on
three copies of the site plan. One copy shall be returned to the applicant, one
copy shall be retained by the Planning and Zoning Commission, and one copy
shall be retained by the Clerk.
F.   Council Action. At the next regularly scheduled Council meeting following
Planning and Zoning Commission action, the Council shall act on the site plan
and accompanying material. Applicant or a representative shall be present at
the meeting. Action of the Council shall be approval or denial.
G.   Approval by Council. In the case of approval by the Council, the approval
shall be documented on three copies of the site plan. One copy shall be
returned to the applicant, one copy shall be forwarded to the Planning and
Zoning Commission, and one copy shall be retained by the Clerk. Applicant may
then proceed with approval of building permit and accompanying material
H.   Denial by Council. In the case of denial by the Council, the denial shall
be documented on three copies of the site plan. One copy shall be returned to
the applicant, one to the Planning and Zoning Commission, and one copy shall be
retained by the Clerk.
I.   Resubmittal of Site Plan Denied by Council. A site plan that has been
approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission and denied by the Council may be
revised by the applicant in accordance with the Council action and 10 copies
resubmitted to the Planning and Zoning Commission for approval as before.
J.   Resubmittal of Site Plan Denied by Council and Planning and Zoning
Commission. A site plan that has been denied by both the Planning and Zoning
Commission and the Council may be resubmitted to the City by the applicant for
Planning and Zoning Commission and Council approval with respect to the
original terms of these procedures, which includes 10 copies of the preliminary
plat and filing fees. Resubmittal under these terms shall be considered a new
site plan subject to fees and procedures outlined in Section
173.07.
173.08   FEES.
The Council shall establish a schedule of fees, charges, and expenses and a
collection procedure for site plan approval and other matters pertaining to
this chapter. The schedule of fees shall be posted in the office of the Clerk,
and may be altered or amended only by the Council. Until all applicable fees,
charges, and expenses have been paid in full, no action shall be taken on any
application or appeal.
1.   Applicant shall be responsible for just and reasonable costs incurred by
the City for review of preliminary and final site plans deemed necessary by the
City to insure proper conformance with City ordinances and site plan
regulations.
173.09   VALIDITY OF APPROVAL.
1.   A site plan shall become effective upon certification of approval by the
Council.
2.   The Council approval of any site plan required by this chapter shall
remain valid for one year allowing one year extension with approval of Council
upon recommendation of the Planning and Zoning Commission after the date of
approval, after which time the site plan shall be deemed null and void if the
development has not been established or actual construction commenced. For the
purpose of this chapter “actual construction” shall mean that the permanent
placement of construction materials has started and is proceeding without undue
delay. Preparation of plans, securing financial arrangements, issuance of
building permits, letting of contracts, grading of property, or stockpiling of
materials on the site shall not constitute actual construction.
173.10   SITE PLAN AMENDMENT.
Any site plan may be amended in accordance with the standards and procedures
established herein, including payment of fees, provided that the Zoning
Administrator may waive such procedures for those minor changes hereinafter
listed. Such minor changes shall not be made unless the prior written approval
for such changes is obtained from the Zoning Administrator. No fees shall be
required for such minor changes.
1.   Moving building walls within the confines of the smallest rectangle that
would have enclosed each original approved building(s). Relocation of building
entrances or exits, shortening of building canopies.
2.   Changing to a more restrictive commercial or industrial use, provided the
number of off-street parking spaces meets the requirement of the Zoning Code.
This does not apply to residential uses.
3.   Changing angle of parking or aisle provided there is no reduction in the
amount of off-street parking as originally approved.
4.   Substituting plant species provided a landscape architect, engineer, or
architect certifies the substituted species is similar in nature and screening
effect.
5.   Changing type and design of lighting fixtures provided an engineer or
architect certifies there will be no change in the intensity of light at
property boundary.
6.   Increasing peripheral yards.
173.11   APPLICABILITY TO EXISTING DEVELOPMENT.
The requirements of this chapter shall not apply to the placement of any
structure for which building permits have been issued as of the date of the
adoption of this ordinance codified by this chapter (June 7, 2001), provided
that if such building permit shall expire, then a new building permit shall not
be issued until the requirements of this chapter have been met. Provided
further, that if an existing structure is to be reconstructed, enlarged,
expanded, or otherwise increased:
1.   In the case of building uses, in an amount 50 percent or greater of its
existing ground coverage or total floor space; or
2.   In the case of non-building uses or non-building portion of uses, in the
amount 50 percent or greater of the existing developed non-building site area,
then the provisions of this chapter shall apply.
173.12   ENFORCEMENT.
No zoning ordinance certification, Occupancy Permit, or building permit shall
be issued by the City or have any validity until the site plan has been
approved in the manner prescribed herein.
173.13   CHANGES AND AMENDMENTS.
Any provision of this chapter may be changed and amended from time to time by
the Council; provided, however, such changes and amendments shall not become
effective until after study and report by the Planning and Zoning Commission
and until after a public hearing has been held, public notice of which shall be
given in a newspaper of general circulation at least 15 days prior to the
hearing.
173.14   MAINTENANCE BONDS.
Maintenance bonds shall be posted with the City by the developer at the
developer’s cost for improvements required under this chapter for the following
time periods and improvements:
Improvement Time Period
Improvement                          Time Period
Streets and alleys                   Five years
Storm sewer, drainage, and detention Five years
Concrete payment                     Five years
Asphalt overlays                     Two years
Sidewalks                            Two years
Curb and gutter                      Two years
Water facilities                     Two years
Sanitary sewer facilities            Two years
All other underground utilities      Two years
 
CHAPTER 174
RECOUPMENT FEES FOR USE OF CITY RESOURCES
 
174.01 Purpose                      174.05 Use of Funds
174.02 Definitions                  174.06 Refund of Fees Paid
174.03 Imposition of Recoupment Fee 174.07 Exemptions
174.04 Payment of Fee               174.08 Credits
 
174.01   PURPOSE.
The purpose of this chapter is to regulate the use and development of land so
as to assure that new development bears a proportionate share of the cost of
capital expenditures necessary to provide public capital facilities in the
City. This must be done in order to promote and protect the public health,
safety, and welfare of the citizens and to expand the City’s capital facilities
to maintain current standards. This chapter is also intended to assist in the
implementation of the land use plan and capital improvements plan.
174.02   DEFINITIONS.
For purpose of this chapter, the following terms are defined:
1.   “Developer” means any person applying for a building permit for a
structure, the construction of which will impact upon public capital
facilities.
2.   “Public capital facility” means all City facilities as set forth in the
capital improvements plan for the City, any City enterprise, or public
improvement as set forth in Chapter 384.24(2) or 384.37(1) of the Code of Iowa,
or as designated by resolution from time to time.
174.03   IMPOSITION OF RECOUPMENT FEE.
Any person who seeks to develop land in the City by applying for a building
permit is required to pay a fee in addition to the set building permit rate
schedule. The amount of the fee shall be determined by the Council. The
developer shall have the right to a hearing before the Council if they are
aggrieved by the fee levied. At the hearing the developer may present such
evidence or information as may be available in an attempt to show the fee set
is inappropriate. The Council may take such action as it deems equitable with
regard to the amount of the fee at the conclusion of the hearing. In addition
to other relevant factors, the Council may consider the following in
determining an equitable recoupment fee:
1.   The cost of existing public capital facilities;
2.   The method of financing existing public capital facilities;
3.   The extent to which the new development has already contributed to
existing public capital facilities;
4.   The extent of future contributions of the new development, i.e., user
charges;
5.   Whether the developer may be entitled to a credit against all or a portion
of the fee imposed hereunder on account of the nature of a particular public
facility and its use in common with others not a part of the new development;
6.   Unusual costs associated with providing services to the new development;
7.   The time value of money for fees collected far in advance of actual
expenditure for the project.
174.04   PAYMENT OF FEE.
The fee payer shall pay the recoupment fee imposed hereunder prior to the
issuance of a building permit.
174.05   USE OF FUNDS.
Funds collected hereunder shall be used solely for the purpose of acquiring,
equipping, or making improvements to public capital facilities under the
jurisdiction and control of the City. Funds collected hereunder shall not be
used for maintenance or operations. In the event that bonds or similar debt
service instruments are issued for advance provision of capital facilities for
which recoupment fees could have been expended, fees collected hereunder may be
used to pay debt service on such bonds or debt instruments.
174.06   REFUND OF FEES PAID.
If a building permit expires without the commencement of construction, then the
developer shall be entitled to a refund, without interest, of the fee paid
hereunder. The fee payer must submit a written refund request within 30 days of
the expiration of the building permit to receive a refund.
174.07   EXEMPTIONS.
The following types of construction shall be exempt from the imposition of a
development fee:
1.   Alterations or expansions of an existing building where no additional
units are created and the use is not changed;
2.   The construction of accessory buildings or structures;
3.   The replacement of a building or structure with a new building or
structure of the same size or use;
4.   Any other construction for which a building permit is not otherwise
required.
174.08   CREDITS.
In lieu of the payment of all or a portion of a fee hereunder and with the
consent of the Council, a developer may dedicate land to the City. The amount
and location of the land will be determined through negotiation. Merchantable
title to such land must pass to the City prior to the issuance of a building
permit.
CHAPTER 180
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
180.01 Purpose                          180.27 Final Plat Attachments
180.02 Application                      180.28 Further Action by the Council
180.03 Definitions                      180.29 Erosion Control Plan
180.04 Improvements Required            180.30 Design Standards
180.05 Inspection                       180.31 Inspection of Improvements
180.06 Completion of Improvements       180.32 Street Widths
180.07 Performance Bond                 180.33 Sidewalks
180.08 Amendment Procedure              180.34 Street Grades
180.09 Compliance with Chapter and      180.35 Intersections
Council Approval
180.10 Acreage Subdivision              180.36 Extension of Streets
180.11 Procedure and Submission         180.37 Lot Positions
Requirements for Plats
180.12 Preapplication Conference        180.38 General Specifications
180.13 Sketch Plan Required             180.39 Water Supply System
180.14 Presentation to Planning and     180.40 Sanitary Sewer System
Zoning Commission
180.15 Subdivision Classified           180.41 Drainage System
180.16 Plats Required                   180.42 Disposal of Drainage Water
180.17 Requirements of Preliminary Plat 180.43 Installation of Utility Lines
                                        and Facilities
180.18 Filing Fees for Preliminary Plat 180.44 Streetlights
180.19 Referral of Preliminary Plat     180.45 Provision of Easements for
                                        Utilities
180.20 Action by the City Engineer      180.46 Review of Easements by Utilities
                                        Required
180.21 Action by the Planning and       180.47 Utility Line Location Approval
Zoning Commission                       Required
180.22 Action by the Council            180.48 Minimum First-Floor Elevation
180.23 Final Plat                       180.49 Final Approval Prerequisite for
                                        Building Permit
180.24 Filing Fee for Final Plat        180.50 Variances
180.25 Referral of Final Plat           180.51 Maintenance Bonds
180.26 Requirements of Final Plat       180.52 Maximum Units within Single
                                        Access Development
                                        
 
180.01   PURPOSE.
The purpose of this chapter is to provide minimum standards for the design,
development, and improvement of all new subdivisions and resubdivisions of
land, so that existing developments will be protected, and so that adequate
provisions are made for public facilities and services, and so that growth
occurs in an orderly manner, consistent with the Comprehensive Plan, and to
promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens of the
City. The further purpose of this chapter is to ensure that all new
subdivisions and developments pay their own way to the greatest extent possible
so that existing services and facilities of the City are not lessened or
reduced to the detriment of the current citizens.
180.02   APPLICATION.
Every owner of any original parcel of land, 40 acres or part thereof, entered
of record in the office of the County Recorder as a single lot, parcel, or
tract on or before the effective date of these regulations (date of original
subdivision ordinance) who divides said parcel into three or more lots,
parcels, or tracts for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of laying out
an addition, subdivision, building lot or lots, acreage or suburban lots,
transfer of ownership, or building development within the City or within two
miles of the corporate limits of the City, shall cause plats of such area to be
made in the form, and containing the information, as hereinafter set forth
before selling any lots therein contained or placing the plat on record.
180.03   DEFINITIONS.
For purposes of this chapter, the following terms are defined:
1.   Words beginning with “A.”
A.   “Acquisition plat” means the graphical representation of the division of
land or rights in land, created as the result of a conveyance or condemnation
for right-of-way purposes by an agency of the government or other persons
having the power of eminent domain.
B.   “Aliquot part” means a fractional part of a section within the United
States public land survey system. Only the fractional parts one-half, one-
quarter, one-half of one quarter, or one-quarter of one-quarter shall be
considered an aliquot part of a section.
C.   “Alley” means public property dedicated to public use primarily for
vehicular access to the back or side of properties otherwise abutting on a
street.
D.   “Auditor’s plat” means a subdivision plat required by either the auditor
or the assessor, prepared by a surveyor under the direction of the auditor.
1.   Words beginning with “B.”
A.   “Block” means an area of land within a subdivision that is entirely
bounded by streets, railroad rights-of-way, rivers, tracts of public land, or
the boundary of the subdivision.
B.   “Building line” means a line on a plat between which line and public
right-of-way no building or structures may be erected.
1.   Words beginning with “C.”
A.   “City Engineer” means the professional engineer registered in the State
designated as City Engineer by the Council or other hiring authority.
B.   “Comprehensive Plan” means the general plan for the development of the
community, that may be titled master plan, Comprehensive Plan, or some other
title, which plan has been adopted by the Council. Such Comprehensive Plan
shall include any part of such plat separately adopted, and any amendment to
such plan or parts thereof.
C.   “Conveyance” means an instrument filed with a recorder as evidence of the
transfer of title to land, including any form of deed or contract.
D.   “Cul-de-sac” means a street having one end connecting to another street,
and the other end terminated by a vehicular turnaround.
1.   Words beginning with “D.”
A.   “Division” means dividing a tract or parcel of land into two parcels of
land by conveyance or for tax purposes. The conveyance of an easement, other
than public highway easement, shall not be considered a division for the
purpose of this chapter.
1.   Words beginning with “E.”
A.   “Easement” means an authorization by a property owner for another to use a
designated part of said owner’s property for a specified purpose.
1.   Words beginning with “F.”
A.   “Flood hazard area” means any area subject to flooding by a one percent
probability flood, otherwise referred to as a 100-year flood; as designated by
the Iowa Department of Natural Resources or the Federal Emergency Management
Agency.
B.   “Floodway” means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the
adjacent lands that must be reserved in order to discharge the waters of a 100-
year flood without cumulatively raising the waterway surface elevation more
than one foot.
C.   “Forty-acre aliquot part” means one-quarter of one-quarter of a section.
1.   Words beginning with “G.”
A.   “Government lot” means a tract, within a section, that is normally
described by a lot number as represented and identified on the township plat of
the United States public land survey system.
1.   Words beginning with “H.”
2.   Words beginning with “I.”
A.   “Improvements” means changes to land necessary to prepare it for building
sites including, but not limited to, grading, filling, street paving, curb
paving, sidewalks, walkways, water mains, sewers, drainageways, and other
public works and appurtenances.
1.   Words beginning with “J.”
2.   Words beginning with “K.”
3.   Words beginning with “L.”
A.   “Lot” means a tract of land represented and identified by number or letter
designation on an official plat.
B.   “Lot, corner” means a lot situated at the intersection of two streets.
C.   “Lot, double frontage” means any lot that is not a corner lot that abuts
two streets.
1.   Words beginning with “M.”
A.   “Metes and bounds description” means a description of land that uses
distances and angles, uses distances and bearings, or describes the boundaries
of the parcel by reference to physical features of the land.
1.   Words beginning with “N.”
2.   Words beginning with “O.”
A.   “Official plat” means either an auditor’s plat or a subdivision plat that
meets the requirements of this chapter and has been filed for record in the
offices of the Recorder, Auditor, and Assessor.
B.   “Original parcel” means 40 acres or part thereof entered of record in the
office of the County Recorder as a single lot or parcel on or before date of
original subdivision ordinance.
C.   “Owner” means the legal entity holding title to the property being
subdivided, or such representative or agent as is fully empowered to act on its
behalf.
1.   Words beginning with “P.”
A.   “Parcel” means a part of a tract of land.
B.   “Performance bond” means a surety bond or cash deposit made out to the
City in an amount equal to the full cost of improvements which are required by
this chapter, said cost estimated by the City and said surety bond or cash bond
being legally sufficient to secure to the City that the said improvements will
be constructed in accordance with this chapter.
C.   “Permanent real estate index number” means a unique number or combination
of numbers assigned to a parcel of land pursuant to Section 441.29 of the Code
of Iowa.
D.   “Planning Commission” or “Commission” means the appointed Commission
designed by the Council for the purpose of this chapter, and may also be known
as the Planning and Zoning Commission.
E.   “Plat” means a map, drawing, or chart on which a subdivider’s plan for the
subdivision of land is presented, that said subdivider submits for approval and
intends, in final form, to record.
F.   “Plats Officer” means the individual assigned the duty to administer this
chapter by the Council or other appointing authority.
G.   “Plat of survey” means the graphical representation of a survey of one or
more parcels of land, including a complete and accurate description of each
parcel within the plat, prepared by a registered land surveyor.
H.   “Proprietor” means a person who has a recorded interest in land, including
a person selling or buying land pursuant to a contract, but excluding persons
holding mortgage, easement, or lien interest.
1.   Words beginning with “Q.”
2.   Words beginning with “R.”
A.   “Resubdivision” means any subdivision of land that has previously been
included in a recorded plat. In appropriate context it may be a verb referring
to the act of preparing a plat of previously subdivided land.
1.   Words beginning with “S.”
A.   “Street” means public property, not an alley, intended for vehicular
circulation. In appropriate context the term “street” may refer to the right-
of- way bounded by the property lines of such public property, or may refer to
the paving installed within such right-of-way.
B.   “Street, arterial” means a street primarily intended to carry traffic from
one part of the City to another, and not intended to provide access to abutting
property.
C.   “Street, collector” means a street primarily designed to connect smaller
areas of the community, and to carry traffic from local streets to arterial
streets.
D.   “Street, local” means a street primarily designed to provide access to
abutting property.
E.   “Subdivider” means the owner of the property being subdivided, or such
other person or entity empowered to act on the owner’s behalf.
F.   “Subdivision” means the cumulative effect of dividing an original lot,
tract, or parcel of land, as of date of original subdivision ordinance into
three or more lots for the purpose of immediate or future sale or transfer for
development purposes excluding public roadways, public utility extensions, and
land taken by condemnation. The term includes a resubdivision or replatting.
When appropriate to the context, the word may relate to the process of
subdividing, or the land subdivided.
G.   “Subdivision plat” means the graphical representation of the subdivision
of land, prepared by a registered land surveyor, having a number or letter
designation for each lot within the plan and succinct name or title that is
unique for the county where the land is located.
H.   “Surveyor” means a registered land surveyor who engages in the practice of
land surveying pursuant to Chapter 542B of the Code of Iowa.
1.   Words beginning with “T.”
A.   “Tract” means an aliquot part of a section, a lot within an official plat,
or a government lot.
1.   Words beginning with “U.”
A.   “Utilities” means systems for the distribution or collection of water,
gas, electricity, wastewater, and stormwater.
1.   Words beginning with “V.”
2.   Words beginning with “W.”
3.   Words beginning with “X.”
4.   Words beginning with “Y.”
5.   Words beginning with “Z.”
180.04   IMPROVEMENTS REQUIRED.
The subdivider shall, at said subdivider’s expense, install and construct all
improvements required by this chapter. All required improvements shall be
installed and constructed in accordance with the design standards established
for such improvements by the City, and as shown on the approved preliminary
plat.
180.05   INSPECTION.
All improvements shall be inspected to insure compliance with the requirements
of this chapter. The cost of such inspection shall be borne by the subdivider
and shall be the actual cost of the inspection to the City and must be paid in
full before any building permits are issued for any lots in the subdivision.
180.06   COMPLETION OF IMPROVEMENTS.
Before the Council shall approve the final flat, all of the required
improvements shall be constructed and accepted by formal resolution of the
Council. Before passage of said resolution of acceptance, the City Engineer
shall report that said improvements meet all City specifications and ordinances
or other City requirements, and the agreements between subdivider and the City.
180.07   PERFORMANCE BOND.
The completion requirement may be waived, in whole or in part, if the
subdivider will post a performance bond with the Council guaranteeing that
improvements not completed will be constructed within a period of one year from
final acceptance of the plat, but final acceptance of the plat will not
constitute final acceptance by the City of any improvements to be constructed.
Improvements will be accepted only after their construction has been completed,
and no public funds will be expended in the subdivision until such improvements
have been completed and accepted by the City.
180.08   AMENDMENT PROCEDURE.
This chapter may be amended from time to time by the Council. Such amendments
as may be proposed shall first be submitted to the Planning and Zoning
Commission for study and recommendation. The Planning and Zoning Commission
shall report within 30 days, and failure to do so will be deemed approval of
the proposed amendment. The amendment shall become effective from and after its
adoption and publication as required by law.
180.09   COMPLIANCE WITH CHAPTER AND COUNCIL APPROVAL.
No plat or subdivision in the City subject to control of the City under Chapter
354 of the Code of Iowa shall be recorded or filed with the County Auditor or
County Recorder nor shall any plat or subdivision have any validity until it
complies with the provisions of this chapter and has been approved by the
Council as prescribed in this chapter.
180.10   ACREAGE SUBDIVISION.
Where the plat submitted covers only a part of the subdivider’s plat, a sketch
of the prospective future subdivision of the unsubmitted part shall be
furnished and the street system of the part submitted shall be considered in
the light of adjustments in connection with the street system of the part not
submitted. Where the parcel is subdivided into larger tracts than for building
lots, such parcels shall be divided so as to allow for the opening of major
streets and the ultimate extension of minor streets. Subdivisions showing
unplatted strips or private streets controlling access to public ways will not
receive approval.
180.11   PROCEDURE AND SUBMISSION REQUIREMENTS FOR PLATS.
In obtaining final approval of a proposed subdivision by the Council, the
subdivider and owner shall submit a plat in accordance with the requirements
hereinafter set forth and install improvements or provide a performance bond.
180.12   PREAPPLICATION CONFERENCE.
Whenever a subdivision located within the platting jurisdiction of the City is
proposed, the owner and subdivider shall schedule a preapplication conference
with the Clerk. The conference should be attended by the Clerk and such other
City or utility representative as is deemed desirable. The purpose of such
conference shall be to acquaint the City with the proposed subdivision, and to
acquaint the subdivider with the requirements, procedures, and any special
problems relating to the proposed subdivision.
180.13   SKETCH PLAN REQUIRED.
For the preapplication conference, the subdivider shall provide a map or sketch
showing the location of the subdivision, the general location of any proposed
streets and other improvements, and the general layout and arrangement of
intended land uses, in relation to the surrounding area.
180.14   PRESENTATION TO PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION.
The subdivider may present the sketch plan to the Planning and Zoning
Commission for review prior to incurring significant costs preparing the
preliminary or final plat.
180.15   SUBDIVISION CLASSIFIED.
Any proposed subdivision or resubdivision shall be classified as follows.
1.   Minor Subdivision. Any subdivision that contains not more than four lots
fronting on an existing street, and that does not require construction of any
public improvements, and that does not adversely affect the remainder of the
parcel shall be classified as a minor plat.
2.   Major Subdivision. Any subdivision that, in the opinion of the Council,
does not for any reason meet the definition of a minor subdivision, shall be
classified as a major subdivision.
3.   Restricted Subdivision. Any subdivision necessitated by the transfer or
proposed transfer between adjoining landowners of small not buildable parcels.
When application for subdivision is made under this subsection and approved by
the Council, any or all of the requirements of a preliminary plat, final plat,
or other subdivision procedure, except fees and costs, may be waived by the
Council. At a minimum the subdivider shall cause to be prepared and recorded a
plat of survey complying with the requirements of Section 355.7 of the Code of
Iowa, together with an agreement sufficient to constitute a covenant running
with the land containing those restrictions on building and use required by the
Council.
180.16   PLATS REQUIRED.
In order to secure approval of a proposed subdivision, the owner and subdivider
of any major subdivision shall comply with the requirements for a preliminary
plat and the requirements for a final plat. The owner and subdivider of a minor
subdivision or an auditor’s plat may elect to omit the submission of a
preliminary plat.
180.17   REQUIREMENTS OF PRELIMINARY PLAT.
The subdivider shall prepare and file with the Clerk 11 copies of a preliminary
plat of adequate scale and size showing the following:
1.   Title, scale, north point, and date;
2.   Subdivision boundary lines, showing dimensions, bearing angles, and
references to section, townships, and range lines or corners;
3.   Present and proposed streets, alleys, and sidewalks, with their right-of-
way, in or adjoining the subdivision, including dedicated widths, approximate
gradients, types and widths of surfaces, curbs and planting strips, and
location of streetlights;
4.   Proposed layout of lots, showing numbers, dimensions, radii, chords, and
the square foot areas of lots that are not rectangular;
5.   Building setback or front yard lines;
6.   Parcels of land proposed to be dedicated or reserved for schools, parks,
playgrounds, or other public, semi-public, or community purposes;
7.   Present and proposed easements, showing locations, widths, purposes, and
limitation;
8.   Present and proposed utility systems, including sanitary and storm sewers,
other drainage facilities, water lines, gas mains, electric utilities, and
other facilities, with the size, capacity, invert elevation, and location of
each;
9.   Proposed name of the subdivision which shall not duplicate or resemble
existing subdivision names in the County;
10.   Names and addresses of the owner, subdivider, builder, engineer,
surveyor, or architect who prepared the preliminary plat, and the engineer,
surveyor, or architect who will prepare the final plat;
11.   Existing and proposed zoning of the proposed subdivision and adjoining
property;
12.   A general summary description of any protective covenants or private
restrictions to be incorporated in the final plat;
13.   Contours at vertical intervals of not more than two feet, if the general
slope of the site is less than 10 percent, and at vertical intervals of not
more than five feet, if the general slope is 10 percent or greater, unless the
Council waives this requirement;
14.   Any other item requested by the Council or City Engineer to enable the
City to review the preliminary plat in accordance with the purpose stated in
this chapter.
180.18   FILING FEES FOR PRELIMINARY PLAT.
It is the intended purpose of this chapter that the subdivider pay all
associated expenses incurred by the Council in reviewing the plat filed
pursuant hereto. Accordingly, the subdivider shall pay a fee of $150.00 plus an
additional $1.00 for each lot in the proposed subdivision. In addition, prior
to the approval of the preliminary plat the subdivider shall reimburse the
Council for its actual expenses incurred by its professional staff in the
review of the plat submitted. In addition, by filing a plat hereunder, the
subdivider specifically grants permission to the Council to hire those experts
and conduct those studies necessary to further the purposes of this chapter and
any costs and fees associated therewith shall also be reimbursed by the
subdivider to the Council prior to the preliminary plat being approved
hereunder. All costs paid by the subdivider to the Council shall be those costs
actually incurred by the Council.
180.19   REFERRAL OF PRELIMINARY PLAT.
The Clerk shall forthwith refer two copies of the preliminary plat to the City
Engineer, four copies to the Council, four copies to the Planning and Zoning
Commission, and one copy to City Attorney.
180.20   ACTION BY THE CITY ENGINEER.
The City Engineer shall, within 15 days of filing of the preliminary plat,
carefully examine said plat as to its compliance with Chapter 354 of the Code
of Iowa and the laws and regulations of the City, the existing street system,
and good engineering practices, and shall submit the City Engineer’s findings
in duplicate to the Council and a copy to the City Attorney and Planning and
Zoning Commission.
180.21   ACTION BY THE PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION.
The Planning and Zoning Commission shall, upon receiving the report of the City
Engineer, schedule a meeting as soon as possible but not more than 15 days
thereafter to consider and report, negotiate with the subdivider on changes
deemed advisable and the kind and extent of the improvements being made by the
subdivider together with a recommendation as to whether any recoupment fees
should be assessed under Chapter 174. In addition, the Planning and Zoning
Commission shall pass upon the preliminary plat as originally submitted or
modified together with any changes, recommendations, or proposals the Planning
and Zoning Commission shall consider relevant. Said report shall be made by the
Planning and Zoning Commission not later than 15 days following the date of its
meeting. Failure to make a report shall be deemed an approval of the
preliminary plat without recommendation.
180.22   ACTION BY THE COUNCIL.
The Council shall, upon receiving the report of the City Engineer, as soon as
possible, but not more than 45 days thereafter, consider said report, negotiate
with the subdivider on changes deemed advisable, the nature and extent of
recoupment fees, and the kind and extent of improvements to be made by the
subdivider, review the recommendation of the Planning and Zoning Commission, if
any, and pass upon the preliminary plat as originally submitted or modified. If
the Council does not act within 45 days, the preliminary plat shall be deemed
to be approved; provided, however, that the subdivider may agree to an
extension of the time for a period not to exceed an additional 60 days. It
shall then set forth its recommendations in writing, whether of approval,
modification, or disapproval. In the event that substantial changes or
modifications are made by the Council or disapproval of the plat, it shall give
its reasons therefore and it may request and cause a revised preliminary plat
to be resubmitted in the same manner as the original plat. If approved, the
Council shall express its approval as “conditional approval” and state the
conditions of such approval, if any. The action of the Council shall be noted
on two copies of the preliminary plat, referenced and attached to any
conditions determined. One copy shall be returned to the subdivider and the
other copy retained by the Council. The “conditional approval” by the Council
shall not constitute final acceptance of the addition or subdivision by the
City but an authorization to proceed with preparation of the final plat.
180.23   FINAL PLAT.
The final plat shall conform substantially to the preliminary plat as approved,
and, if desired by the subdivider, it may constitute only that portion of the
approved preliminary plat which the subdivider proposes to record and develop
at the time; provided, however, that such portion conforms to all requirements
of these regulations.
180.24   FILING FEE FOR FINAL PLAT.
The subdivider or developer shall reimburse the Council, as a filing fee for
the final plat, the cost actually incurred by the Council by its professional
staff or others for the actual cost of review and monitoring of the actions
taken by the subdivider subsequent to the approval of the preliminary plat.
These costs shall include, but not be limited to, inspection fees, actual costs
of professional staff together with the actual cost of any studies or findings
made by others commissioned by the Council to perform services in connection
with the review of the plat filed hereunder to further the purposes of this
chapter.
180.25   REFERRAL OF FINAL PLAT.
The subdivider shall, within 12 months of the “conditional approval” of the
preliminary plat by the Council, prepare and file four copies of the final plat
and other required documents with the Clerk as hereinafter set forth, and upon
the subdivider’s failure to do so within the time specified, the “conditional
approval” of the preliminary plat shall be null and void unless an extension of
time is applied for and granted by the Council. Upon receipt of the final plat
and other required documents, the Clerk shall transmit two copies of the final
plat to the Council for its recommendations and approval. Except for a final
plat for a minor subdivision or an auditor’s plat as set forth herein, no final
plat shall be considered by the Council until and unless a preliminary plat for
the area included in the proposed final plat has been approved and has not
expired and become void as set forth above. At its discretion the Council may
refer the final plat to the City Engineer pursuant to the procedure established
in Section
180.20.
180.26   REQUIREMENTS OF FINAL PLAT.
The final plat shall conform to the requirements of Chapter 354 of the Code of
Iowa, and shall be clearly and legibly drawn to a scale of not more than 100
feet to one inch with India ink on a reproducible tracing linen. It shall show:
1.   The title under which the subdivision is to be recorded;
2.   The linear dimensions in feet and decimals of a foot of the subdivision
boundary, lot lines, streets, and alleys. These should be exact and complete to
include all distances, radii, arc, chords, points of tangency, and central
angles;
3.   Street names and clear designations of public alleys. Streets that are
continuations of present streets should bear the same name. If new names are
needed, they should be distinctive. Street names may be required to conform to
the City plan;
4.   Location, type, materials, and size of all monuments and markers including
all U.S., County, or other official benchmarks;
5.   The signature and acknowledgment of the subdivision landowner and the
subdivision landowner’s spouse;
6.   A sealed certification of the accuracy of the plat and that the plat
conforms to Chapter 354 of the Code of Iowa, by the professional engineer or
land surveyor who drew the final plat.
180.27   FINAL PLAT ATTACHMENTS.
The final plat shall have the following attached to it:
1.   A statement by the proprietors and their spouses, if any, that the plat is
prepared with their free consent and in accordance with their desire, signed,
and acknowledged before an officer authorized to take the acknowledgments of
deeds. The statement by the proprietors may also include a dedication to the
public of all lands within the plat that are designated for streets, alleys,
parks, open areas, school property, or other public use, if the dedication is
approved by the Council.
2.   A statement from the mortgage holders or lienholders, if any, that the
plat is prepared with their free consent and in accordance with their desire,
signed, and acknowledged before an officer authorized to take the
acknowledgment of deeds. An affidavit and bond as provided for in Section
354.12 of the Code of Iowa, may be recorded in lieu of the consent of the
mortgage or lienholder. When a mortgage or lienholder consents to the
subdivision, a release of mortgage or lien shall be recorded for any areas
conveyed to the City or dedicated to the public.
3.   An opinion by an attorney-at-law who has examined the abstract of title of
the land being platted. The opinion shall state the names of the proprietors
and holders of mortgages, liens, or other encumbrances on the land being
platted and shall note the encumbrances, along with any bonds securing the
encumbrances. Utility easements shall not be construed to be encumbrances for
the purpose of this section.
4.   A certificate of the County Treasurer that the land is free from certified
taxes and certified special assessments or that the land is free from certified
taxes and that the certified special assessments are secured by bond in
compliance with Section 354.12 of the Code of Iowa.
5.   A resolution and certificate for approval by the Council and for
signatures of the Mayor and Clerk.
180.28   FURTHER ACTION BY THE COUNCIL.
Upon receipt of the plat, but not more than 60 days following submission of the
final plat to the Clerk as stated in Section
180.22, the Council shall either approve or disapprove the final plat. In the
event that said plat is disapproved by the Council, such disapproval shall be
expressed in writing and shall point out wherein said proposed plat is
objectionable. In the event that said plat is found to be acceptable and in
accordance with this chapter, the Council shall accept the same. The passage of
a resolution by the Council accepting the plat shall constitute final approval
of the platting of the area shown on the final plat, but the subdivider or
owner shall cause such plat to be recorded in the office of the County
Recorder, and shall file satisfactory evidence of such recording before the
City shall recognize the plat as being in full force and effect.
180.29   EROSION CONTROL PLAN.
No preliminary plat shall be approved without a final erosion control plan
being submitted to and approved by the Johnson County Soil and Water
Conservation District wherein any of the following disturbing activities takes
place:
1.   Subdivision of land in three parcels or more;
2.   All site preparation involving land disturbing activities for
subdivisions;
3.   Individual nonresidential projects where the actual areas disturbed will
be greater than 10,000 square feet.
180.30   DESIGN STANDARDS.
Design standards are to be used in the construction of subdivision improvements
to achieve uniformity and provide for the general health, safety, and welfare
of the residents of the City. Plans and specifications for the construction of
subdivision improvements shall be submitted to the Council for approval prior
to construction, and construction shall not be started until the plans and
specifications have been approved.
180.31   INSPECTION OF IMPROVEMENTS.
The City Engineer shall cause the installation of all improvements to be
inspected to ensure compliance with the requirements with the applicable City
ordinances. The cost of inspection shall be borne by the subdivider and shall
be the actual cost of the inspection to the City.
180.32   STREET WIDTHS.
1.   All street widths shall be measured from back-to-back of the curbs. Right-
of-way widths shall be provided as follows:
A.   Arterial streets, 80 feet;
B.   Collector streets, 66 feet;
C.   Local streets, 60 feet;
D.   Cul-de-sacs, 100 feet;
E.   Cul-de-sac entry streets, 50 feet;
F.   Alleys, 20 feet.
1.   Pavement widths shall be measured from the back of the curb to the back of
the curb and shall be provided as follows:
A.   Arterial streets, 45 feet;
B.   Collector streets, 36 feet;
C.   Local streets, 29 feet;
D.   Cul-de-sacs shall be paved with a 29-foot paving for the straight section
and for the bulb, the outer edge of which shall be 15 feet inside the
circumference of the right-of-way. Cul-de-sacs shall not exceed 500 feet in
length. A cul-de-sac shall be measured from the centerline of the street from
which it commences to the center of the turnaround.
E.   Alleys measured edge to edge shall be 16 feet.
180.33   SIDEWALKS.
Specifications for sidewalks shall be as follows:
1.   All sidewalks shall be four feet in width and made of Portland concrete
cement.
2.   The distance between the back of the curb and the outside edge of the
sidewalk shall be six feet, six inches.
3.   The thickness of the Portland cement sidewalk shall be four inches, except
through driveway areas where it shall be six inches.
4.   The elevation of the edge of the sidewalk closest to the street shall be
two inches above the top of the curve. The elevation of the other edge of the
sidewalk should be three inches above the curb.
5.   The sidewalk shall extend across the total width of the lot in question.
180.34   STREET GRADES.
No street grade shall be less than one-half of one percent and shall not exceed
the following limits:
1.   Arterial streets, eight percent;
2.   Collector streets, 10 percent;
3.   Local streets, 12 percent.
180.35   INTERSECTIONS.
Intersections of more than two streets at a point shall not be permitted.
Intersections of street centerlines shall be between 80 degrees and 100
degrees.
180.36   EXTENSION OF STREETS.
New subdivisions shall make provisions for the continuation and extension of
arterial and collector streets. Arterial and collector streets in a subdivision
shall extend through the boundaries thereof.
180.37   LOT POSITIONS.
Corner lots which abut on arterial and collector streets shall have a minimum
radius of 15 feet at the intersection. Lots with double frontage on front and
rear shall be avoided, except in specific locations where good platting
indicates their use. Sidelines of lots shall approximate right angles to
straight street lines and radial angles to curved street lines except where a
variation will provide a better street and lot layout.
180.38   GENERAL SPECIFICATIONS.
1.   Jobs of less than 125 feet shall be avoided.
2.   No dead-end streets and alleys will be permitted except at subdivision
boundaries on undeveloped areas.
3.   The length of blocks shall not be less than 400 feet and not more than
2,000 feet. The width of the block shall be sufficient to permit two tiers of
lots, but in no case shall the width be less than 220 feet.
4.   Crosswalks may be required in blocks over 800 feet long or in areas where
curved streets require excessive out of distance travel. If required, they
shall be constructed by the developer and dedicated to the City.
5.   Alleys shall be discouraged in residential districts, but shall be
provided in commercial and industrial districts unless an alternate plan for
service area is provided.
6.   A Portland concrete sidewalk shall be provided and must meet all City
specifications as set out above.
7.   An iron rod not less than five-eighths inch in diameter and 30 inches in
length shall be placed as follows: on all corners and angle points on property
lines.
8.   The developer shall, as part of their duty to dispose of the stormwater,
reconnect any and all field drainage tile that the subdivider encounters in
placing improvements in the subdivision. In no event shall the subdivider
create undue hardships on the adjoining property owners by blocking the tile,
but instead shall have a duty to continue the proper drainage of the
underground water.
180.39   WATER SUPPLY SYSTEM.
The subdivider shall provide the subdivision with a complete water main supply
system including hydrants, valves, and all other appurtenances which shall be
extended into and through the subdivision to the boundary lines, and which
shall provide for a water connection for each lot, and shall be connected to
the municipal water system when installed and when it meets all City
specifications.
180.40   SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM.
The subdivider shall provide the subdivision with a complete sanitary sewer
system including stubs for each lot which shall connect with the sanitary sewer
outlet approved by the City Engineer. The sewers shall extend to the
subdivision boundaries as necessary to provide for the extension of the sewers
by adjacent property. In the event the City requires a sewer system which is
greater than is needed to service the subdivision itself, the City shall pay on
a pro rata basis for the excess cost over that which is necessary to service
the subdivision itself. Other subdivisions which connect with the systems shall
on a pro rata basis reimburse the City for the costs of the additional system,
which shall service that subdivision and meet all City specifications. It shall
be in the City’s sole discretion to decide when a sewer system which is
required to be installed is greater than is necessary to service the
subdivision itself.
180.41   DRAINAGE SYSTEM.
The developer shall provide the subdivision with adequate drains, ditches,
culverts, complete bridges, storm sewers, intakes, and manholes to provide for
the collection and removal of all surface waters, and these improvements shall
extend to the boundaries of the subdivision so as to provide for extension by
adjoining properties and meet City specifications.
180.42   DISPOSAL OF DRAINAGE WATER.
It is not intended that the City pay for the excess cost when the subdivider is
required under Iowa Civil Law Rule to dispose of the natural drainage as
between adjoining lands, as this will still be a requirement of the subdivider
to make sure that the subdivision properly disposes all drainage water, at no
cost to the City.
180.43   INSTALLATION OF UTILITY LINES AND FACILITIES.
The subdivider shall provide for the installation of electric distribution
lines, streetlights, gas mains, telephone lines, and other facilities in any
new subdivision as are needed, before final approval shall be given to the
final plat. The subdivider shall be responsible for making the necessary
monetary arrangements to provide for such utilities as are needed and, in
addition, shall provide for underground facilities in residential subdivisions
and commercial subdivisions with each utility company. In providing for the
utility transmission lines, the subdivider shall make sure that adequate
connections are provided to each subdivision lot of utilities as needed.
180.44   STREETLIGHTS.
The subdivider shall submit proposed streetlight placements for the Council’s
approval. The subdivider in providing for streetlights shall be required to
have the utility furnish a standard wooden pole, only, and in the event the
subdivider desires anything else, then they shall have the privilege of paying
for the additional costs incurred.
180.45   PROVISION OF EASEMENTS FOR UTILITIES.
The subdivider shall provide all necessary easements in the subdivision for
placement of all utilities including streetlights, and will submit to the City,
at the time the final subdivider’s agreement is presented, all proposed
easements for use in the subdivision.
180.46   REVIEW OF EASEMENTS BY UTILITIES REQUIRED.
As a condition of the approval of the final plat by the City, the preliminary
and final subdivision plat shall be presented to the designated representatives
of the utility companies serving this subdivision area for the purpose of
review and concurrence that sufficient easements have been obtained and shown
on the final plat to accommodate placement of their particular utility service
lines.
180.47   UTILITY LINE LOCATION APPROVAL REQUIRED.
All proposed utility line locations in public rights-of-way or municipal
easements shall be reviewed by the City for the purpose of avoiding location,
topographic, or other conflicts. In no case shall the permanent utility lines
or appurtenances be constructed prior to authorization and approval of the
final plat by the City.
180.48   MINIMUM FIRST-FLOOR ELEVATION.
The minimum first-floor elevation shall be established by providing a slope of
two percent from top of curb of the frontage street pavement to the required
building setback point. If frontage street pavement does not have a curb, the
minimum first-floor elevation shall be established by providing a slope of two
percent from a point six inches above the edge of existing frontage pavement to
the required building setback point.
180.49   FINAL APPROVAL PREREQUISITE FOR BUILDING PERMIT.
No building permit shall be issued for any lot in a subdivision which has
received final approval under this chapter, wherein the improvements ,with the
exception of sidewalks, have not been installed, and there is on record an
agreement between the developer and the City that no permit shall be issued
without compliance with the improvement requirements of this chapter. No more
than two building permits for each separate tract existing at the time of the
effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter shall be issued unless
the tract has been platted in accordance with the regulations of this chapter,
except that this provision shall not limit the number of building permits that
may be issued for accessory buildings or additions already existing on the
tract.
180.50   VARIANCES.
Where in the case of a particularly proposed subdivision or plat thereof, it
can be shown that strict compliance with the requirements of this chapter would
result in extraordinary hardship to the subdivider because of unusual
topography, excessive costs, or other such non-self-inflicted conditions, or
that these conditions would result in prohibiting the achievement of the
objectives of these regulations, the Planning and Zoning Commission may vary,
modify, or waive general requirements so that substantial justice may be done
and the public interest secured; provided, however, such variance,
modification, or waiver will not have the effect of nullifying the intent and
purpose of this chapter. The Planning and Zoning Commission may waive the
requirements of the filing of a preliminary plat to allow the submission by the
Council, provided that the final plat shall contain all the requirements of
both the preliminary application and a final plat. However, in no case shall
any such variance or modification be in conflict with the Zoning Code or zoning
map of the City. In all cases of a variance, modification, or waiver of a
general requirement, it will be necessary to have the Council approve the same
and note this in the resolution approving the plat and subdivision. The Council
may also modify, vary, or waive the general requirements on its motion for good
reason shown, even if the Planning and Zoning Commission refused to do so.
180.51   MAINTENANCE BONDS.
Maintenance bonds shall be posted with the City by the subdivider at the
subdivider’s cost for improvements required under this chapter for the
following time periods and improvements:
Improvement Time Period
Improvement                          Time Period
Streets and alleys                   Five years
Storm sewer, drainage, and detention Five years
Concrete payment                     Five years
Asphalt overlays                     Two years
Sidewalks                            Two years
Curb and gutter                      Two years
Water facilities                     Two years
Sanitary sewer facilities            Two years
All other underground utilities      Two years
 
180.52   MAXIMUM UNITS WITHIN SINGLE ACCESS DEVELOPMENT.
A single access development shall be limited to a maximum of 65 residential
units of housing for single-family developments. Duplexes and zero lot line
units are equal to two units. A development with more than 225 residential
units shall be required to have three access points in and out of the
subdivision.
APPENDIX TO CODE OF ORDINANCES
USE AND MAINTENANCE OF THE CODE OF ORDINANCES
The following information is provided to assist in the use and proper
maintenance of this Code of Ordinances.
DISTRIBUTION OF COPIES
   1.   OFFICIAL COPY. The “OFFICIAL COPY” of the Code of Ordinances must be
kept by the City Clerk and should be identified as the “OFFICIAL COPY.”
   2.   DISTRIBUTION. Other copies of the Code of Ordinances should be made
available to all persons having a relatively frequent and continuing need to
have access to ordinances which are in effect in the City as well as reference
centers such as the City Library, County Law Library, and perhaps the schools.
   3.   SALE. The sale or distribution of copies in a general fashion is not
recommended as experience indicates that indiscriminate distribution tends to
result in outdated codes being used or misused.
   4.   RECORD OF DISTRIBUTION. The City Clerk should be responsible for
maintaining an accurate and current record of persons having a copy of the Code
of Ordinances. Each official, elected or appointed, should return to the City,
upon leaving office, all documents, records and other materials pertaining to
the office, including this Code of Ordinances.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
NUMBERING OF ORDINANCES AMENDING THE CODE OF ORDINANCES
It is recommended that a simple numerical sequence be used in assigning
ordinance numbers to ordinances as they are passed. For example, if the
ordinance adopting the Code of Ordinances is No. 163, we would suggest that the
first ordinance passed changing, adding to, or deleting from the Code be
assigned the number 164, the next ordinance be assigned the number 165, and so
on. We advise against using the Code of Ordinances numbering system for the
numbering of ordinances.
RETENTION OF AMENDING ORDINANCES
Please note that two books should be maintained: (1) the Code of Ordinances;
and (2) an ordinance book. We will assist in the maintenance of the Code of
Ordinances book, per the Supplement Agreement, by revising and returning
appropriate pages for the Code of Ordinances book as required to accommodate
ordinances amending the Code. The City Clerk is responsible for maintaining the
ordinance book and must be sure that an original copy of each ordinance
adopted, bearing the signatures of the Mayor and Clerk, is inserted in the
ordinance book and preserved in a safe place.
SUPPLEMENT RECORD
A record of all supplements prepared for the Code of Ordinances is provided in
the front of the Code. This record will indicate the number and date of the
ordinances adopting the original Code and of each subsequently adopted
ordinance which has been incorporated in the Code. For each supplemented
ordinance, the Supplement Record will list the ordinance number, date, topic,
and chapter or section number of the Code affected by the amending ordinance. A
periodic review of the Supplement Record and ordinances passed will assure that
all ordinances amending the Code have been incorporated therein.
DISTRIBUTION OF SUPPLEMENTS
Supplements containing revised pages for insertion in each Code will be sent to
the Clerk. It is the responsibility of the Clerk to see that each person having
a Code of Ordinances receives each supplement so that each Code may be properly
updated to reflect action of the Council in amending the Code.
AMENDING THE CODE OF ORDINANCES
The Code of Ordinances contains most of the laws of the City as of the date of
its adoption and is continually subject to amendment to reflect changing
policies of the Council, mandates of the State, or decisions of the Courts.
Amendments to the Code of Ordinances can only be accomplished by the adoption
of an ordinance.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.2)
The following forms of ordinances are recommended for making amendments to the
Code of Ordinances:
ADDITION OF NEW PROVISIONS
New material may require the addition of a new SUBSECTION, SECTION or CHAPTER,
as shown in the following sample ordinance:
ORDINANCE NO. ___
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING THE CODE OF ORDINANCES OF THE CITY OF __________, IOWA,
BY ADDING A NEW SECTION LIMITING PARKING TO 30 MINUTES ON A PORTION OF
_______________________ STREET
BE IT ENACTED by the City Council of the City of __________, Iowa:
SECTION 1. NEW SECTION. The Code of Ordinances of the City of __________, Iowa,
is amended by adding a new Section 69.16, entitled PARKING LIMITED TO 30
MINUTES, which is hereby adopted to read as follows:
69.16 PARKING LIMITED TO 30 MINUTES. It is unlawful to park any vehicle for a
continuous period of more than 30 minutes between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 8:
00 p.m. on each day upon the following designated streets:
1.   __________ Street, on the _____ side, from ___________ Street to
____________ Street.
SECTION 2. REPEALER. All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with the
provisions of this ordinance are hereby repealed.
SECTION 3. SEVERABILITY CLAUSE. If any section, provision, or part of this
ordinance shall be adjudged invalid or unconstitutional, such adjudication
shall not affect the validity of the ordinance as a whole or any section,
provision, or part thereof not adjudged invalid or unconstitutional.
SECTION 4. WHEN EFFECTIVE. This ordinance shall be in effect from and after its
final passage, approval, and publication as provided by law.
Passed by the Council the ___ day of ______________, 20___, and approved this
___ day of _______________, 20___.
 
______________________________
Mayor
ATTEST:
 
_____________________________
City Clerk
First Reading: ___________________
Second Reading: _________________
Third Reading: __________________
I certify that the foregoing was published as Ordinance No. _____ on the ___
day of ________________, 20___.
 
______________________________
City Clerk
DELETION OF EXISTING PROVISIONS
Provisions may be removed from the Code of Ordinances by deleting SUBSECTIONS,
SECTIONS or CHAPTERS, as shown in the following sample ordinance:
ORDINANCE NO. ___
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING THE CODE OF ORDINANCES OF THE CITY OF __________, IOWA,
BY REPEALING SECTION 65.02, SUBSECTION 5, PERTAINING TO THE SPECIAL STOP
REQUIRED ON ______________________ STREET.
BE IT ENACTED by the City Council of the City of __________, Iowa:
SECTION 1. SUBSECTION REPEALED. The Code of Ordinances of the City of
__________, Iowa, is hereby amended by repealing Section 65.02, Subsection 5,
which required vehicles traveling south on _____________ Street to stop at
______________ Street.
SECTION 2. SEVERABILITY CLAUSE. If any section, provision, or part of this
ordinance shall be adjudged invalid or unconstitutional, such adjudication
shall not affect the validity of the ordinance as a whole or any section,
provision, or part thereof not adjudged invalid or unconstitutional.
SECTION 3. WHEN EFFECTIVE. This ordinance shall be in effect from and after its
final passage, approval, and publication as provided by law.
Passed by the Council the ___ day of _______________, 20___, and approved this
___ day of _______________, 20___.
 
______________________________
Mayor
ATTEST:
_____________________________
City Clerk
First Reading: ___________________
Second Reading: _________________
Third Reading: __________________
I certify that the foregoing was published as Ordinance No.___ on the ___ day
of _________________, 20___.
 
______________________________
City Clerk
MODIFICATION OR CHANGE OF EXISTING PROVISION
Existing provisions may be added to, partially deleted, or changed, as shown in
the following sample:
ORDINANCE NO. ___
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING THE CODE OF ORDINANCES OF THE CITY OF __________, IOWA,
BY AMENDING PROVISIONS PERTAINING TO SEWER SERVICE CHARGES
BE IT ENACTED by the City Council of the City of __________, Iowa:
SECTION 1. SECTION MODIFIED. Section 99.01 of the Code of Ordinances of the
City of __________, Iowa, is repealed and the following adopted in lieu
thereof:
99.01   SEWER SERVICE CHARGES REQUIRED. Every customer shall pay to the City
sewer service charges in the amount of ______________ percent of the bill for
water and water service attributable to the customer for the property served,
but in no event less than $_______________ dollars per __________.
SECTION 2. SEVERABILITY CLAUSE. If any section, provision, or part of this
ordinance shall be adjudged invalid or unconstitutional, such adjudication
shall not affect the validity of the ordinance as a whole or any section,
provision, or part thereof not adjudged invalid or unconstitutional.
SECTION 3. WHEN EFFECTIVE. This ordinance shall be in effect from and after its
final passage, approval, and publication as provided by law.
Passed by the Council the ___ day of ______________, 20___, and approved this
___ day of _________________, 20___.
 
______________________________
Mayor
ATTEST:
_____________________________
City Clerk
First Reading: ___________________
Second Reading: _________________
Third Reading: __________________
I certify that the foregoing was published as Ordinance No. _____ on the ___
day of ________________, 20___.
 
______________________________
City Clerk
ORDINANCES NOT CONTAINED IN THE CODE OF ORDINANCES
There are certain types of ordinances which the City will be adopting which do
not have to be incorporated in the Code of Ordinances. These include
ordinances: (1) establishing grades of streets or sidewalks; (2) vacating
streets or alleys; (3) authorizing the issuance of bonds; and (4) amending the
zoning map.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.8)
ORDINANCE NO. ___
AN ORDINANCE VACATING (INSERT LOCATION OR LEGAL DESCRIPTION OF STREET OR ALLEY
BEING VACATED) TO __________, IOWA
Be It Enacted by the City Council of the City of __________, Iowa:
SECTION 1. The (location or legal description of street or alley) to
__________, Iowa, is hereby vacated and closed from public use.
SECTION 2. The Council may by resolution convey the alley described above to
abutting property owners in a manner directed by the City Council.
SECTION 3. All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with the
provisions of this ordinance are hereby repealed.
SECTION 4. If any section, provision, or part of this ordinance shall be
adjudged invalid or unconstitutional, such adjudication shall not affect the
validity of the ordinance as a whole or any section, provision, or part thereof
not adjudged invalid or unconstitutional.
SECTION 5. This ordinance shall be in effect from and after its final passage,
approval, and publication as provided by law.
Passed by the Council the ___ day of _________________, 20___, and approved
this ___ day of ________________, 20___.
 
______________________________
Mayor
ATTEST:
 
_____________________________
City Clerk
First Reading: ___________________
Second Reading: _________________
Third Reading: __________________
I certify that the foregoing was published as Ordinance No. _____ on the ___
day of ________________, 20___.
 
______________________________
City Clerk
These ordinances should be numbered in the same numerical sequence as any other
amending ordinance and placed in their proper sequence in the ordinance book.
SUGGESTED FORMS
 
FIRST NOTICE – DANGEROUS BUILDING
TO:   (Name and address of owner, agent, or occupant of the property on which
nuisance is located or the person causing or maintaining the nuisance).
You are hereby notified to abate the nuisance existing at (name location of
nuisance) within ____ days from service of this notice or file written request
for a Council hearing with the undersigned officer within said time limit.
The nuisance consists of (describe the nuisance and cite the law or ordinance)
and shall be abated by (state action necessary to abate the particular
nuisance).
In the event you fail to abate or cause to be abated the above nuisance, as
directed, or file written request for hearing within the time prescribed
herein, the City will take such steps as are necessary to abate or cause to be
abated the nuisance and the cost will be assessed against you as provided by
law.
 
Date of Notice: ______________________________
 
 
City of __________, Iowa
 
By: ________________________________________
   (enforcement officer)
NOTICE OF HEARING ON DANGEROUS BUILDING
 
TO:   (Name and address of the owner, agent, or occupant of the property on
which nuisance is located or the person causing or maintaining the nuisance).
You are hereby notified that the City Council of __________, Iowa, will meet on
the ___ day of __________________, 20___, at _____ p.m., in the Council
Chambers of the City Hall, at (address of City Hall) for the purpose of
considering whether or not the alleged nuisance consisting of (describe the
nuisance) on your property, locally known as ______________________,
constitutes a nuisance pursuant to Chapter of the Code of Ordinances of
__________, Iowa, and should be abated by (state action necessary to abate the
particular nuisance).
You are further notified that at such time and place you may appear and show
cause why the said alleged nuisance should not be abated.
You are further notified to govern yourselves accordingly.
 
 
Date of Notice: ______________________
 
City of __________, Iowa
 
By: _______________________________
   (enforcement officer)
RESOLUTION AND ORDER REGARDING DANGEROUS BUILDING
 
BE IT RESOLVED, by the City Council of the City of __________, Iowa:
WHEREAS, notice has heretofore been served on the ___ day of
____________________, 20___, on (property owner’s name), through (agent’s name
or “none”), agent, to abate the nuisance existing at (legal description and
address) within ___ days from service of said notice upon the said (name of
owner or agent). and
 
(EITHER)
WHEREAS, a hearing was requested by the said (name of property owner or agent)
and the same was held at this meeting and evidence produced and considered by
the City Council.
(OR, ALTERNATE TO PRECEDING PARAGRAPH)
WHEREAS, the said owner (agent) named above has failed to abate or cause to be
abated the above nuisance as directed within the time set, and after evidence
was duly produced and considered at this meeting, and said owner has failed to
file a written request for hearing, as provided, after being properly served by
a notice to abate.
NOW THEREFORE, BE IT RESOLVED that the owner of said property, or said owner’s
agent (name of owner or agent) is hereby directed and ordered to abate the
nuisance consisting of (describe the nuisance) by (state action necessary to
abate) within ___ days after the service of this Order upon said owner or
agent. and
BE IT FURTHER RESOLVED that the enforcement officer be and is hereby directed
to serve a copy of this Order upon the said property owner or agent named
above. and
BE IT FURTHER RESOLVED that in the event the owner, or agent (name the owner or
agent) fails to abate the said nuisance within the time prescribed above, then
and in that event the City will abate the said nuisance and the cost will be
assessed against the property and/or owner (owner’s name) at (address), as the
law shall provide.
Moved by ____________________ to adopt.
Adopted this ____ day of __________________, 20___.
 
______________________________
Mayor
ATTEST:
 
_____________________________
City Clerk
Note: It is suggested by the blank space in the resolution that additional time
be allowed the owner to abate the nuisance after the passage of the resolution
before any action is taken on the part of the City to abate the same. In some
instances, for the sake of public safety, the time element could be stricken
from the resolution and immediate action be taken to abate the nuisance after
the order is given.
 
NOTICE TO ABATE NUISANCE
TO:   (Name and address of owner, agent, or occupant of the property on which
the nuisance is located or the person causing or maintaining the nuisance).
You are hereby notified to abate the nuisance existing at (name location of
nuisance) or file written request for a hearing with the undersigned officer
within (hours or days) from service of this notice.
The nuisance consists of: (describe the nuisance) and shall be abated by:
(state action necessary to abate the particular nuisance).
In the event you fail to abate or cause to be abated the above nuisance as
directed, the City will take such steps as are necessary to abate or cause to
be abated the nuisance and the costs will be assessed against you as provided
by law.
 
Date of Notice: _______________________
 
City of __________, Iowa
 
By: ________________________________
   (designate officer initiating notice)
NOTICE
REQUIRED SEWER CONNECTION
TO:   __________________________________
      (Name)
   __________________________________
      (Street Address)
   ______________________________, Iowa
You are hereby notified that connection to the public sanitary sewer system is
required at the following described property within ______ (____) days from
service of this notice or that you must file written request for a hearing
before the Council with the undersigned office within said time limit.
Description of Property
_____________________________________
_____________________________________
_____________________________________
The nearest public sewer line within ________________ (____) feet of the above
described property is located
_____________________________________
_____________________________________
_____________________________________
In the event you fail to make connection as directed, or file written request
for hearing within the time prescribed herein, the connection shall be made by
the City and the costs thereof assessed against you as by law provided.
 
Date of Notice: ______________________
 
City of __________, Iowa
 
By: ________________________________, _____________________________
   (Name)   (Title)
NOTICE OF HEARING
REQUIRED SEWER CONNECTION
TO:   ______________________________
      (Name)
   ______________________________
      (Street Address)
   __________________________, Iowa
You are hereby notified that the City Council of __________, Iowa, will meet on
the ___ day of ________________, 20___, at ______ __m. in the Council Chambers
of the City Hall for the purpose of considering whether or not connection to
the public sanitary sewer system shall be required at the following described
property:
Description of Property
_____________________________________
_____________________________________
_____________________________________
You are further notified that at such time and place you may appear and show
cause why said connection should not be required.
You are further notified to govern yourselves accordingly.
 
Date of Notice: _______________________
 
City of __________, Iowa
 
By: ______________________________,   _____________________________
   (Name)      (Title)
RESOLUTION AND ORDER
REQUIRED SEWER CONNECTION
BE IT RESOLVED, by the City Council of the City of __________, Iowa:
WHEREAS, notice has heretofore been served on the ____ day of __________,
20___, on _____________________________________,             (Name of Property
Owner)
through _________________________, Agent,
      (Agent’s Name or “None”)
to make connection of the property described as
_____________________________________
_____________________________________
_____________________________________
_____________________________________
to the public sanitary sewer located_______________________
within ______ (_____) days from service of notice upon said owner or agent. and
(EITHER)
WHEREAS, a hearing was requested by the said owner or agent and the same was
held at this meeting and evidence produced and considered by the City Council.
(OR AS ALTERNATE TO THE PRECEDING PARAGRAPH)
WHEREAS, the said owner or agent named above has failed to make such required
connection within the time set, and after evidence was duly produced and
considered at this meeting, and said owner or agent has failed to file a
written request for hearing after being properly served by a notice to make
such connection or request a hearing thereon.
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT RESOLVED that the owner of said property, or said owner’s
agent, _______________________
         (Name of Owner or Agent)
is hereby directed and ordered to make such required connection within ______
days after the service of this ORDER upon said owner or agent. and
BE IT FURTHER RESOLVED that the City Clerk be and the same is hereby directed
to serve a copy of this ORDER upon said property owner or agent named above.
and
BE IT FURTHER RESOLVED, that in the event the owner, or agent,
_____________________________________,
   (Name of Owner or Agent)
fails to make such connection within the time prescribed above, then and in
that event the City will make such connection and the cost thereof will be
assessed against the property and/or owner
_____________________________________
   (Owner’s Name)
_______________________, as provided by law.
   (Address)
Moved by ____________________ to adopt.
 
Seconded by __________________________.
 
AYES: ________________, _______________, ______________,
    ________________, _______________, ______________.
NAYS: ________________, _______________, ______________,
    ________________, _______________, ______________.
Resolution approved this ___ day of ___________________, 20___.
 
______________________________
Mayor
ATTEST:
 
_____________________________
City Clerk
 
1.
 
