CITY CODE
of
WEST DES MOINES, IOWA
1993
 
Code current through:
Ord. 2667, passed 8-18-2025
 
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street, Suite 310
Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
1-800-445-5588 * www.amlegal.com
PREFACE
         This code of the City of West Des Moines, as supplemented, contains
ordinances up to and including ordinance 2667, passed August 18, 2025.
Ordinances of the City adopted after said ordinance supersede the provisions of
this code to the extent that they are in conflict or inconsistent therewith.
Consult the City office in order to ascertain whether any particular provision
of the code has been amended, superseded or repealed.
                     American Legal Publishing
                     Cincinnati, Ohio
ORDINANCES PENDING REVIEW FOR CODIFICATION
Listed ordinances have been passed, but they are pending review by the
publisher, and they may not amend the code of ordinances. Additionally,
ordinances listed in this section may not show the original ordinances in their
entirety. Please contact the office of the clerk if there are any questions
concerning any listed ordinances.
ADOPTING ORDINANCE
ORDINANCE NO. 2352
AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING THE CITY CODE OF THE CITY OF WEST DES MOINES, IOWA, 2019
BE IT ENACTED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF WEST DES MOINES, IOWA:
SECTION 1. The West Des Moines City Council, as required by Iowa Code Section
380.8, published notice of a proposed City Code prepared by Sterling Codifiers,
and placed on file in the office of the City Clerk for review by the public,
and for which the City Council, following public hearing on the 4th day of
March, 2019 approved the proposed Code for the City of West Des Moines, Iowa.
SECTION 2. From and after the date of publication of this Ordinance, the City
Code of the City of West Des Moines, Iowa, prepared by Sterling Codifiers,
containing compilation of all ordinances of a general nature together with the
changes made to said ordinances, under the direction of the governing body of
the City, shall be accepted in all courts without question as the Official Code
and law of the City of West Des Moines.
SECTION 3. The official City Code, pursuant to Iowa Code Section 380.8,
contains all the City Ordinances in effect except for grade ordinances, bond
ordinances, zoning map ordinances, ordinances vacating streets and alleys, and
ordinances containing legal descriptions of urban renewal areas and urban
revitalization areas.
SECTION 4. If any section, provision, or part of this ordinance shall be
adjudged invalid or unconstitutional such adjudication shall not affect the
validity of the ordinance as a whole or any section, provision, or part thereof
not adjudged invalid or unconstitutional.
SECTION 5. This ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after its
final passage, adoption and publication as required by law.
PASSED AND APPROVED this 18th day of March, 2019.
         
      Steven K. Gaer, Mayor
ATTEST:
   
Ryan T. Jacobson
City Clerk
 
 
 
   City of West Des Mointes   ORDINANCE NO. 2600
AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING THE CITY CODE OF THE CITY OF WEST DES MOINES, IOWA, 2024
BE IT ENACTED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF WEST DES MOINES, IOWA:
SECTION 1. The West Des Moines City Council, as required by Iowa Code Section
380.8, published notice of a proposed City Code prepared by American Legal
Publishing and placed on file in the office of the City Clerk for review by the
public, and for which the City Council, following public hearing on the 5th day
of February, 2024 approved the proposed Code for the City of West Des Moines,
Iowa.
SECTION 2. From and after the date of publication of this Ordinance, the City
Code of the City of West Des Moines, Iowa, prepared by American Legal
Publishing containing compilation of all ordinances of a general nature
together with the changes made to said ordinances, under the direction of the
governing body of the City, shall be accepted in all courts without question as
the Official Code and law of the City of West Des Moines.
SECTION 3. The official City Code, pursuant to Iowa Code Section 380.8,
contains all the City Ordinances in effect except for grade ordinances, bond
ordinances, zoning map ordinances, ordinances vacating streets and alleys, and
ordinances containing legal descriptions of urban renewal areas and urban
revitalization areas.
SECTION 4. If any section, provision, or part of this ordinance shall be
adjudged invalid or unconstitutional such adjudication shall not affect the
validity of the ordinance as a whole or any section, provision, or part there
of not adjudged invalid or unconstitutional.
SECTION 5. This ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after its
final passage, adoption and publication as required by law.
PASSED AND APPROVED this 19th day of February, 2024.
_________________________________
Russ Trimble, Mayor
ATTEST:
                                                                
Ryan T. Jacobson
City Clerk
 
 
 
ORDINANCE NO. 2600
AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING THE CITY CODE OF THE CITY OF WEST DES MOINES, IOWA, 2024
BE IT ENACTED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF WEST DES MOINES, IOWA:
SECTION 1. The West Des Moines City Council, as required by Iowa Code Section
380.8, published notice of a proposed City Code prepared by American Legal
Publishing and placed on file in the office of the City Clerk for review by the
public, and for which the City Council, following public hearing on the 5th day
of February, 2024 approved the proposed Code for the City of West Des Moines,
Iowa.
SECTION 2. From and after the date of publication of this Ordinance, the City
Code of the City of West Des Moines, Iowa, prepared by American Legal
Publishing containing compilation of all ordinances of a general nature
together with the changes made to said ordinances, under the direction of the
governing body of the City, shall be accepted in all courts without question as
the Official Code and law of the City of West Des Moines.
SECTION 3. The official City Code, pursuant to Iowa Code Section 380.8,
contains all the City Ordinances in effect except for grade ordinances, bond
ordinances, zoning map ordinances, ordinances vacating streets and alleys, and
ordinances containing legal descriptions of urban renewal areas and urban
revitalization areas.
SECTION 4. If any section, provision, or part of this ordinance shall be
adjudged invalid or unconstitutional such adjudication shall not affect the
validity of the ordinance as a whole or any section, provision, or part there
of not adjudged invalid or unconstitutional.
SECTION 5. This ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after its
final passage, adoption and publication as required by law.
PASSED AND APPROVED this 19th day of February, 2024.
_________________________________
Russ Trimble, Mayor
ATTEST:
                                                                
Ryan T. Jacobson
City Clerk
TITLE 1
ADMINISTRATIVE
Official City Code   1
Saving Clause   2
Definitions   3
Municipal Infractions   4
Charter   5
Mayor And Council   6
Mayor   6A
Council   6B
Officers And Employees   7
City Clerk   7A
City Manager   7B
Finance Director   7C
City Attorney   7D
Miscellaneous Provisions   8
Municipal Elections   9
Finances   10
Industrial Tax Abatement   10A
Tax Increment Financing   10B
CHAPTER 1
OFFICIAL CITY CODE
SECTION:
1-1-1: Title
1-1-2: Acceptance
1-1-3: Amendments
1-1-4: Code Alterations
1-1-1: TITLE:
Upon the adoption by the City Council, this City Code is hereby declared to be
and shall hereafter constitute the official City Code of West Des Moines. This
City Code of ordinances shall be known and cited as the WEST DES MOINES CITY
CODE OR CITY CODE and is hereby published by authority of the Council and shall
be kept up to date as provided in Section
1-1-3 of this Chapter. Any reference to the number of any section contained
herein shall be understood to refer to the position of the same number, its
appropriate chapter and title heading, and to the general penalty clause
relating thereto, as well as to the section itself, when reference is made to
this City Code by title in any legal documents. (1993 Code)
1-1-2: ACCEPTANCE:
The City Code, as hereby presented in printed form, shall hereafter be received
without further proof in all courts and in administrative tribunals of this
State as the ordinances of the City of general and permanent effect, except the
excluded ordinances enumerated in Section
 1-2-1 of this Title. (1993 Code)
1-1-3: AMENDMENTS:
Any ordinance amending the City Code shall set forth the Title, chapter and
section number of the section or sections to be amended, and this shall
constitute sufficient compliance with any statutory requirement pertaining to
the amendment or revision by ordinance of any part of this City Code. All such
amendments or revisions by ordinance shall be immediately forwarded to the
codifiers, and the said ordinance material shall be prepared for insertion in
its proper place in each copy of this City Code. Each such replacement page
shall be properly identified and shall be inserted in each individual copy of
the City Code. (1993 Code)
1-1-4: CODE ALTERATIONS:
It shall be deemed unlawful for any person to alter, change, replace or deface
in any way any section or any page of this City Code in such a manner that the
meaning of any phrase or order may be changed or omitted. Replacement pages may
be inserted according to the official instructions when so authorized by the
City Council. The City Clerk shall see that the replacement pages are properly
inserted in the official copies maintained in the office of the Clerk. Any
person having in his custody a copy of the City Code shall make every effort to
maintain said Code in an up-to-date and efficient manner. He shall see to the
immediate insertion of new or replacement pages when such are delivered to him
or made available to him through the office of the City Clerk. Said Code books,
while in actual possession of officials and other interested persons, shall be
and remain the property of the City and shall be returned to the office of the
City Clerk when directed so to do by order of the City Council. (1993 Code)
CHAPTER 2
SAVING CLAUSE
SECTION:
1-2-1: Repeal of General Ordinances
1-2-2: Public Utility Ordinances
1-2-3: Court Proceedings
1-2-4: Severability Clause
1-2-1: REPEAL OF GENERAL ORDINANCES:
All general ordinances of the City passed prior to the adoption of this City
Code are hereby repealed, except such as are included in this City Code or are
by necessary implication herein reserved from repeal (subject to the saving
clauses contained in the following sections), and excluding the following
ordinances which are not hereby repealed: tax levy ordinances; appropriation
ordinances; ordinances relating to boundaries and annexations; ordinances
relating to ward and precinct boundaries; franchise ordinances and other
ordinances granting special rights to persons or corporations; contract
ordinances and ordinances authorizing the execution of a contract or the
issuance of warrants; salary ordinances or resolutions; ordinances
establishing, naming or relocating and vacating streets, alleys or other public
places; improvement ordinances; bond ordinances; ordinances relating to
elections; ordinances relating to the transfer or acceptance of real estate by
or from the City; grade ordinances; ordinances relating to community
development and environment; ordinances pertaining to PUD District regulations
as it relates to specific parcels of land; ordinances relating to covenants and
easements; any administrative ordinances or resolutions of the City Council not
in conflict or inconsistent with the provisions of the City Code; any ordinance
affecting building lines or dedicating property for public use; and all special
ordinances. (1993 Code)
1-2-2: PUBLIC UTILITY ORDINANCES:
No ordinance relating to railroad crossings with streets and other public ways,
or relating to the conduct, duties, service or rates of public utilities shall
be repealed by virtue of the adoption of this City Code or by virtue of the
preceding Section, excepting as the City Code may contain provisions for such
matters, in which case, this City Code shall be considered as amending such
ordinance or ordinances in respect to such provisions only. (1993 Code)
1-2-3: COURT PROCEEDINGS:
No new ordinance shall be construed or held to repeal a former ordinance
whether such former ordinance is expressly repealed or not, as to any offense
committed against such former ordinance or as to any act done, any penalty,
forfeiture or punishment so incurred, or any right accrued or claim arising
under the former ordinance, or in any way whatever to affect any such offense
or act so committed or so done, or any penalty, forfeiture or punishment so
incurred or any right accrued or claim arising before the new ordinance takes
effect, save only that the proceedings thereafter shall conform to the
ordinance in force at the time of such proceeding, so far as practicable, if
any penalty, forfeiture or punishment may be mitigated by any provision of a
new ordinance, such provision may be, by consent of the party affected, applied
to any judgment announced after the new ordinance takes effect.
This Section shall extend to all repeals, either by express words or
implication, whether the repeal is in the ordinance making any new provisions
upon the same subject or in any other ordinance.
Nothing contained in this Chapter shall be construed as abating any action now
pending under or by virtue of any general ordinance of the City herein
repealed, and the provisions of all general ordinances contained in this Code
shall be deemed to be continuing provisions and not a new enactment of the same
provisions; nor shall this Chapter be deemed as discontinuing, abating,
modifying or altering any penalty accrued or to accrue, or as affecting the
liability of any person, firm or corporation, or as waiving any right of the
City under any ordinance or provision thereof in force at the time of the
adoption of this City Code. (1993 Code)
1-2-4: SEVERABILITY CLAUSE:
If any section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase
of this City Code or any part thereof is for any reason held to be
unconstitutional or invalid or ineffective by any court of competent
jurisdiction, such decision shall not effect the validity or effectiveness of
the remaining portions of this Code, or any part thereof. The City Council
hereby declares that it would have passed each section, subsection,
subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase thereof irrespective of the
fact that any one or more sections, subsections, subdivisions, paragraphs,
sentences, clauses or phrases be declared unconstitutional, invalid or
ineffective. (1993 Code)
CHAPTER 3
DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
1-3-1: Construction of Words
1-3-2: Definitions, General
1-3-3: Catchlines
1-3-1: CONSTRUCTION OF WORDS:
All general provisions, terms, phrases and expressions contained in this City
Code shall be liberally construed in order that the true intent and meaning of
the City Council may be fully carried out.
In the construction of this City Code, the following rules shall be observed,
unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the
Council or repugnant to the context of the provisions:
A.   May: Confers a power.
B.   Must: States a requirement.
C.   Shall: Imposes a mandatory duty. (1985 Code §1-1.0103)
D.   Plural/Singular and Gender: Whenever any word in any section of this City
Code importing the plural number is used in describing or referring to any
matters, parties or persons, any single matter, party or person shall be deemed
to be included, although distributive words may not have been used. When any
subject matter, party or person is referred to in this City Code by words
importing the singular number only, or the masculine gender, several matters,
parties or persons and females as well as males and bodies corporate shall be
deemed to be included; provided, that these rules of construction shall not be
applied to any section of this City Code which contains any express provision
excluding such construction or where the subject matter or context may be
repugnant thereto.
E.   Ordinance: The word "ordinance" contained in the ordinances of the City
has been changed in the content of this City Code to "Title", "Chapter",
"Section" and/or "subsection" or words of like import for organizational and
clarification purposes only. Such change to the City's ordinances is not meant
to amend passage and effective dates of such original ordinances. (1993 Code).
1-3-2: DEFINITIONS, GENERAL:
Where words and phrases used in this City Code are defined by State law, such
definitions shall apply to their use in this City Code and are adopted by
reference. Those definitions so adopted that need further definition or are
reiterated, and other words and phrases used herein, shall have the following
meanings, unless specifically defined otherwise in another portion of this City
Code:
AGENT: A person acting on behalf of another with authority conferred either
expressly or impliedly, to do so. (1993 Code)
ALLEY: A public right of way, other than a street, affording secondary means of
access to abutting property, and unless otherwise indicated in the text, shall
include the entire width between property lines.
CITY: The City of West Des Moines, Iowa.
CITY CODE: The Code of Ordinances of the City of West Des Moines, Iowa.
CLERK: The City Clerk of West Des Moines, Iowa.
CODE: The specific chapter in which a specific subject is covered and bears a
descriptive title word (such as the Building Code and/or a standard code
adopted by reference.)
COUNCIL: The City Council of West Des Moines, Iowa.
COUNTY: Polk or Dallas County, Iowa. (1985 Code §1-1.0102; 1993 Code)
EMPLOYEES: Whenever reference is made in this Code to a City employee by title
only, this shall be construed as though followed by the words "of the City of
West Des Moines".
FEE: A sum of money charged by the City for the carrying on of a business,
profession or occupation.
LICENSE or PERMIT: The permission granted for the carrying on of a business,
profession or occupation.
MAYOR: The chief executive officer of the City of West Des Moines, Iowa. (1993
Code)
MEASURE: An ordinance, amendment, resolution or motion.
MONTH: A calendar month. (1985 Code §1-1.0102)
NUISANCE: Anything offensive to the sensibilities of reasonable persons, or any
act or activity creating a hazard which threatens the health and welfare of
inhabitants of the City, or any activity which by its perpetuation can
reasonably be said to have a detrimental effect on the property of a person or
persons within the community. (1993 Code)
OATH: Shall be construed to include an affirmation in all cases in which by law
an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases, the words
"affirm" and "affirmed" shall be equivalent to the words "swear" and "sworn".
OCCUPANT, TENANT: Applied to a building or land, shall include any person who
occupies the whole or a part of such building or land, whether alone or with
others. (1985 Code §1-1.0102)
OFFENSE: Any act forbidden by any provision of this Code or the omission of any
act required by the provisions of this Code.
OFFICERS: Whenever reference is made in this Code to a City officer by title
only, this shall be construed as though followed by the words "of the City of
West Des Moines". Officers shall include the designee of the officer.
OPERATOR: The person who is in charge of any operation, business or profession.
(1993 Code)
ORDINANCES: The ordinances of the City of West Des Moines, Iowa, as embodied in
the Code of Ordinances, ordinances not repealed by the ordinance adopting the
Code of Ordinances and those enacted hereafter.
PERSON: An individual, firm, partnership, domestic or foreign corporation,
company, association or joint stock association, trust or other legal entity,
and includes a trustee, receiver, assignee or similar representative thereof,
but does not include a governmental body. (1985 Code §1-1.0102)
PERSONAL PROPERTY: Shall include every description of money, goods, chattels,
effects, evidences of rights in action and all written instruments by which any
pecuniary obligation, right or title to property is created, acknowledged,
transferred, increased, defeated, discharged or diminished and every right of
interest therein. (1993 Code)
PRECEDING, FOLLOWING: Next before and next after, respectively.
PROPERTY: Real property and tangible and intangible personal property unless
clearly indicated otherwise.
PROPERTY OWNER: A person owning private property in the City as shown by the
County Auditor's plats of the City. (1985 Code §1-1.0102)
As applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint owner,
tenant in common, joint tenant or lessee of the whole or of a part of such
building or land. (1993 Code)
PUBLIC PLACE: Includes in its meaning, but is not restricted to, any City-owned
open place, such as parks and squares.
PUBLIC PROPERTY: Any and all property owned by the City or held in the name of
the City by any of the departments, commissions or agencies within the City
government.
PUBLIC WAY: Includes any street, alley, boulevard, parkway, highway, sidewalk
or other public thoroughfare.
REPEATED OFFENSE: A recurring violation of the same section of the City Code.
(1985 Code §1-1.0102)
RETAILER: Unless otherwise specifically defined, shall be understood to relate
to the sale of goods, merchandise, articles or things in small quantities
direct to the consumer.
RIGHT OF WAY: The privilege of the immediate use of the roadway or other
property. (1993 Code)
SIDEWALK: That improved concrete walk-way portion of the street between the
edge of the travelled way, surfacing or curb line and the adjacent property
line.
STATE: The State of Iowa.
STATUTES, LAWS: The latest edition of the Code of Iowa, as amended.
STREET: Means and includes any public way, highway, street, avenue, boulevard,
parkway, or other public thoroughfare, and each of such words shall include
every other of them and, unless otherwise indicated in the text, shall include
the entire width between property lines. (1985 Code §1-1.0102)
WHOLESALER: The terms "wholesaler" and "wholesale dealer" as used in this Code,
unless otherwise specifically defined, shall be understood to relate to the
sale of goods, merchandise, articles or things in quantity to persons who
purchase for the purpose of resale.
WRITTEN, IN WRITING: May include printing and any other mode of representing
words and letters, but when the written signature of any person is required by
law to any official or public writing or bond it shall be in the proper
handwriting of such person, or in case he is unable to write, by his proper
mark. (1993 Code)
YEAR: A calendar year. (1985 Code §1-1.0102)
1-3-3: CATCHLINES:
The catchlines of the several sections of the City Code are intended as mere
catchwords to indicate the content of the section and shall not be deemed or
taken to be titles of such sections, nor be deemed to govern, limit, modify or
in any manner affect the scope, meaning or intent of the provisions of any
division or section hereof, nor unless expressly so provided, shall they be so
deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or re-
enacted. (1993 Code)
CHAPTER 4
MUNICIPAL INFRACTIONS
SECTION:
1-4-1: Municipal Infractions
1-4-2: General Penalty
1-4-1: MUNICIPAL INFRACTIONS:
A.   A municipal infraction is a civil offense punishable by a civil penalty of
not more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each violation or, if
the infraction is a repeat offense, a civil penalty not to exceed one thousand
dollars ($1,000.00) for each repeat offense. However, notwithstanding Iowa Code
section 364.3, a municipal infraction arising from noncompliance with a
pretreatment standard or requirement, referred to in 40 CFR section 403.8, by
an industrial user may be punishable by a civil penalty of not more than one
thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each day a violation exists or continues. The
city may classify a municipal infraction, other than a violation arising from
noncompliance with a pretreatment standard or requirement, as an environmental
violation if the infraction is a violation of Iowa Code chapter 455B or 459,
subchapters II and III, or a violation of a standard established by the city in
consultation with the department of natural resources, or both. The discharge
of airborne residue from grain, created by the handling, drying or storing of
grain by a person, shall not be subject to an ordinance, the violation of which
is classified as an environmental violation, unless the person is engaged in
industrial production or manufacturing of grain products. The discharge of
airborne residue from grain, created by the handling, drying or storing of
grain by a person engaged in industrial production or manufacturing of grain
products, shall not be subject to an ordinance, the violation of which is
classified as an environmental violation, if the discharge occurs from
September 15 to January 15. A municipal infraction which is classified as an
environmental violation is punishable by a civil penalty of not more than one
thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each occurrence. A person committing an
environmental violation is not subject to a civil penalty, if all of the
following conditions are satisfied:
1.   The violation results solely from the person conducting an initial
startup, cleaning, repairing, performing scheduled maintenance, testing or
conducting a shutdown, of either equipment causing the violation or the
equipment designed to reduce or eliminate the violation.
2.   The person notifies the city of the violation within twenty four (24)
hours from the time that the violation begins.
3.   The violation does not continue in existence for more than eight (8)
hours.
The city shall not enforce this section against a person committing an
environmental violation, until the city offers to participate in informal
negotiations with the person. If the person accepts the offer, the city and the
person shall participate in good faith negotiations to resolve issues alleged
to be the basis for the violation.
B.   The violation of any section of this code or of any law, rule, or
regulation adopted by reference in this code shall constitute a municipal
infraction and is subject to civil penalties and/or subject to abatement for
halting the violation.
C.   Any violation of this code which would be a felony, an aggravated
misdemeanor or a serious misdemeanor under state law or a violation of a simple
misdemeanor under chapters 687-747 of the code of Iowa shall not constitute a
municipal infraction.
D.   An officer authorized to enforce this code or regulations may issue a
civil citation to a person who commits a municipal infraction. The citation may
be served by personal service as provided in Iowa rule of civil procedure
1.305, by certified mail addressed to the defendant at the defendant's last
known mailing address, return receipt requested, or by publication in the
manner as provided in Iowa rule of civil procedure 1.310 and subject to the
conditions of Iowa rule of civil procedure 1.311. A copy of the citation shall
be retained by the issuing officer, and one copy shall be sent to the clerk of
the district court. The citation shall serve as notification that a civil
offense has been committed and shall contain the following information:
1.   The name and address of the defendant.
2.   The name or description of the infraction attested to by the officer
issuing the citation.
3.   The location and time of the infraction.
4.   The amount of civil penalty to be assessed or the alternate relief sought,
or both.
5.   The manner, location, and time in which the penalty may be paid.
6.   The time and place of court appearance.
7.   The penalty for failure to appear in court.
E.   In municipal infraction proceedings:
1.   The matter shall be tried before a magistrate, a district associate judge
or a district judge in the same manner as a small claim. The matter shall only
be tried before a judge in district court if the total amount of civil
penalties assessed exceeds the jurisdictional amount for small claims set forth
in Iowa Code section 631.1.
2.   The city has the burden of proof that the municipal infraction occurred
and that the defendant committed the infraction. The proof shall be by clear,
satisfactory and convincing evidence.
3.   The court shall ensure that the defendant has received a copy of the
charges and that the defendant understands the charges. The defendant may
question all witnesses who appear for the city and produce evidence or
witnesses on the defendant's behalf.
4.   The defendant may be represented by counsel of the defendant's own
selection and at the defendant's own expense.
5.   The defendant may answer by admitting or denying the infraction.
6.   If a municipal infraction is proven, the court shall enter a judgment
against the defendant. If the infraction is not proven, the court shall dismiss
it.
F.   All penalties or forfeitures collected by the court for municipal
infractions shall be remitted to the city in the same manner as fines and
forfeitures are remitted for criminal violations under Iowa Code section
602.8106. If the person named in the citation is served as provided in this
section and fails, without good cause, to appear in response to the civil
citation, judgment shall be entered against the person cited.
G.   A person against whom judgment is entered shall pay court costs and fees
as in small claims under Iowa Code chapter 631. If the action is dismissed, the
city is liable for the court costs and court fees. Where the action is disposed
of without payment, or provisions for assessment, of court costs, the clerk
shall at once enter judgment for costs against the city.
H.   Seeking a civil penalty as authorized in this section does not preclude
the city from seeking alternative relief from the court in the same action.
I.   When judgment has been entered against a defendant, the court may do any
of the following:
1.   Impose a civil penalty by entry of a personal judgment against the
defendant.
2.   Direct that payment of the civil penalty be suspended or deferred under
conditions imposed by the court.
3.   Grant appropriate alternative relief ordering the defendant to abate or
cease the violation.
4.   Authorize the city to abate or correct the violation.
5.   Order that the city's costs for abatement or correction of the violation
be entered as a personal judgment against the defendant or assessed against the
property where the violation occurred, or both.
If a defendant wilfully violates the terms of an order imposed by the court,
the failure is contempt.
A magistrate or district associate judge shall have jurisdiction to assess or
enter judgment for costs of abatement or correction in an amount not to exceed
the jurisdictional amount for a money judgment in a civil action pursuant to
Iowa Code section 631.1, subsection 1, for magistrates and section 602.6306,
subsection 2, for district associate judges. If the city seeks abatement or
correction costs in excess of those amounts, and the matter is not before a
judge in district court, the case shall be referred to the district court for
hearing and entry of an appropriate order. The procedure for hearing in the
district court shall be the same procedure as that for a small claims appeal
pursuant to Iowa Code section 631.13.
J.   The defendant or the city may file a motion for a new trial or may appeal
the decision of a magistrate, district associate judge, or a district judge to
the district court. The procedure on appeal shall be the same as for a small
claim pursuant to Iowa Code section 631.13. A factual determination made by the
trial court, supported by substantial evidence as shown in the record, is
binding for purposes of appeal relating to the violation at issue, but shall
not be admissible or binding as to any future violation for the same or similar
ordinance provision by the same defendant.
K.   This section does not preclude a peace officer of the city from issuing a
criminal citation for a violation of this code or regulations if criminal
penalties are also provided for the violation. Each day that a violation occurs
or is permitted to exist by the defendant constitutes a separate offense.
L.   The issuance of a civil citation for a municipal infraction or the ensuing
court proceedings does not provide an action for false arrest, false
imprisonment, or malicious prosecution.
M.   An action brought pursuant to this section for a municipal infraction
which is an environmental violation does not preclude, and is in addition to,
any other enforcement action which may be brought pursuant to Iowa Code chapter
455B, 455D, 455E, or 459, subchapters II, III, and VI. (Ord. 1732, 3-12-2007)
1-4-2: GENERAL PENALTY:
Unless another penalty is expressly provided by this code for any particular
provision, section or chapter, any person failing to perform a duty, or obtain
a license required by, or violating any provision of this code, or any rule or
regulation adopted herein by reference, shall be subject to a civil penalty of
not more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each violation or, if
the infraction is a repeat offense, a civil penalty not to exceed one thousand
dollars ($1,000.00) for each repeat offense. (Ord. 1733, 3-12-2007)
CHAPTER 5
CHARTER
SECTION:
1-5-1: Title
1-5-2: Form of Government
1-5-3: Officers' Powers and Duties
1-5-4: Number and Term of Council
1-5-5: Term of Mayor
1-5-6: Copies on File
1-5-1: TITLE:
These provisions may be cited as the CHARTER OF THE CITY OF WEST DES MOINES,
IOWA. (1985 Code §1-2.0101)
1-5-2: FORM OF GOVERNMENT:
The form of government of the City of West Des Moines, Iowa, is the Mayor-
Council with appointed Manager form of government. (1985 Code §1-2.0102)
1-5-3: OFFICERS' POWERS AND DUTIES:
The City Council and Mayor and other City officers have such powers and shall
perform such duties as are authorized or required by State law and by the
ordinances, resolutions, rules and regulations of the City. (1985 Code §1-
2.0103)
1-5-4: NUMBER AND TERM OF COUNCIL:
The Council consists of two (2) Councilmembers elected at large and one
Councilmember from each of three (3) wards as established by the City Code, 1
elected for overlapping terms of four (4) years. (1985 Code §1-2.0104)
 
Notes
1 1. See Section 1-9-2 of this Title.
1-5-5: TERM OF MAYOR:
The Mayor is elected for a term of four (4) years. (1985 Code §1-2.0105)
1-5-6: COPIES ON FILE:
The City Clerk shall keep an official copy of the Charter on file with the
official records of the Clerk, the Secretary of State, and shall keep copies of
the Charter available at the Clerk's office for public inspection. (1985 Code
§1-2.0106)
CHAPTER 6
MAYOR AND COUNCIL
ARTICLE A. MAYOR
SECTION:
1-6A-1: Term Of Office; Compensation
1-6A-2: Powers And Duties
1-6A-3: Appointments
1-6A-4: Voting On Measures
1-6A-5: Mayor Pro Tempore
1-6A-1: TERM OF OFFICE; COMPENSATION:
The Mayor is elected to a term of four (4) years. The salary of the Mayor shall
be fourteen thousand dollars ($14,000.00) annually and effective January 1,
2028, the salary of the Mayor shall be fifteen thousand dollars ($15,000)
annually. The salary of the Mayor shall be adjusted in each subsequent year
after January 1, 2028, on January 1 at an amount equal to the percentage
increase in the Consumer Price Index (CPI?U, U.S. City Average, all items NSA)
from the preceding 12-month period from October 1 to September 30, rounded to
the closest $1.00, but in no event shall the increase be less than one percent.
(Ord. 1093, 6-6-1994; amd. Ord. 1552, 10-27-2003; Ord. 2645, 12-2-2024)
1-6A-2: POWERS AND DUTIES:
The powers and duties of the mayor shall be as follows:
A.   Chief Executive Officer: The mayor is the chief executive officer of the
city, and except for the supervisory duties which have been delegated by law to
the city manager or other authority. He shall have the power to examine all
functions of the municipal departments, their records and to call for special
reports from the city manager or department heads at any time.
B.   Council Duties:
1.   Presiding Officer: He shall act as presiding officer at all regular and
special council meetings. The mayor pro tem 1  shall serve in this capacity in
the mayor's absence.
2.   Reports To Council: He shall make such oral or written reports to the
council as requested. These reports shall concern municipal affairs generally,
the municipal departments and recommendations suitable for council action.
3.   Calling Special Meetings: He shall call special meetings of the council
when he deems such meetings necessary to the interests of the city.
4.   Veto Power 1 . He may sign, veto or take no action on an ordinance,
amendment or resolution passed by the city council; however, the mayor may not
veto a measure if he was entitled to vote on the measure at the time of
passage. If he exercises his veto power, he must explain the reason for such
veto to the council at the time of the veto. The council may override the
mayor's veto by a two-thirds (2/3) majority of the council members.
C.   Contracts: He shall, whenever authorized by the council, sign contracts on
behalf of the city.
D.   Professional Services: He shall, upon order of the council, secure for the
city such specialized and professional services not already available to the
city. In executing the order of the council, he shall conduct himself in
accordance with this code and the laws of the state.
E.   Emergencies: The mayor may take command of the police and govern the city
by proclamation when he determines a time of emergency or public danger exists.
Within the city limits, he has all the powers conferred upon the sheriff to
suppress disorders.
F.   Signature On Licenses And Permits: He shall sign all licenses and permits
which have been granted by the council, except those designated by law or
ordinance to be issued by the city clerk or city manager.
G.   Removal Orders For Nuisances: He shall order in writing, to be removed at
public expense, any nuisance for which no person can be found responsible and
liable or where an ordinance authorizes otherwise. (1985 Code §1-3.0102; amd.
1993 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. See also section
  1-6A-5 of this article.
1 1. See also section
  1-6B-5 of this chapter.
1-6A-3: APPOINTMENTS:
The mayor shall appoint the following officials:
A.   Mayor pro tem 1 .
B.   Civil service commission 2 , subject to council approval.
C.   Library board of trustees 3 , subject to council approval.
D.   Board of water works trustees 4 , subject to council approval.
E.   Planning and zoning commission 5 , subject to council approval.
F.   Zoning board of adjustment 6 , subject to council approval.
G.   Municipal code appeals board 7 .
H.   Other board or commission members as authorized, subject to the approval
of the council. (1985 Code §1-3.0103; amd. Ord. 912, 7-9-1990; Ord. 1012, 7-6-
1992; 1993 Code)
 
Notes
1 2. See section
  1-6A-5 of this article.
2 2. See subsection
  2-3-2A of this code.
3 4. See section
  2-6-2 of this code.
4 5. See section
  2-4-2 of this code.
5 1. See section
   2-1-1 of this code.
6 2. See title 2, chapter 2 of this code.
7 3. See title 8, chapter 2, article F of this code.
1-6A-4: VOTING ON MEASURES:
The mayor is not a member of the council and may not vote as a member of the
council. (1985 Code §1-3.0105)
1-6A-5: MAYOR PRO TEMPORE4. See also subsection
1-6A-3A of this article.4:
A.   Vice President Of Council: The mayor pro tempore shall be vice president
of the council. (1985 Code §1-3.0201)
B.   Compensation: If the mayor pro tem performs the duties of the mayor during
his absence or disability for a continuous period of fifteen (15) days or more,
the mayor pro tem may be paid for that period such compensation as determined
by the council, based upon his performance of the mayor's duties and upon the
compensation of the mayor. (1985 Code §1-3.0204)
C.   Powers And Duties: Except for the limitations otherwise provided herein,
the mayor pro tempore shall perform the duties of the mayor in cases of absence
or inability of the mayor to perform his duties. In the exercise of the duties
of his office, the mayor pro tempore shall not have power to employ or
discharge from employment officers or employees that the mayor has the power to
appoint, employ or discharge without the approval of the council. (1985 Code
§1-3.0202)
D.   Voting Rights: The mayor pro tempore shall have the right to vote as a
member of the council. (1985 Code §1-3.0203)
ARTICLE B. COUNCIL
SECTION:
1-6B-1: Number And Term Of Council; Compensation
1-6B-2: Meetings
1-6B-3: Powers And Duties
1-6B-4: Appointments
1-6B-5: Procedures For Passage Of Measures
1-6B-1: NUMBER AND TERM OF COUNCIL; COMPENSATION:
The Council shall consist of two (2) Council members elected at large and one
Council member from each of three wards as established by the City Code,
elected for overlapping terms of four (4) years. The salary of each Council
member shall be nine thousand dollars ($9,000) annually and effective January
1, 2028, the salary of each Council member shall be ten thousand dollars
($10,000) annually. The salary of each Council member shall be adjusted in each
subsequent year after January 1, 2028 on January 1 at an amount equal to the
percentage increase in the Consumer Price Index (CPI-U, U.S. City Average, all
items NSA) from the preceding 12-month period from October 1 to September 30,
rounded to the closest $1.00, but in no event shall the increase be less than
one percent. (Ord. 1553, 10-27-2003; amd. Ord. 2646, 12-2-2024)
1-6B-2: MEETINGS:
Meetings of the council shall be as follows:
A.   Regular Meetings: The regular meetings of the council shall be set by
adoption of a schedule of regular meetings for the next calendar year at the
first regular meeting held in September of each year. The regular meetings
shall begin at five thirty o'clock (5:30) P.M. in the city council chambers at
West Des Moines City Hall or at some other designated location. The schedule,
time and place of the meeting is subject to change by council resolution.
B.   Special Meetings: Special meetings shall be held upon call of the mayor or
upon the written request of a majority of the members of the council submitted
to the clerk. Notice of a special meeting shall specify the date, time, place
and subject of the meeting and such notice shall be given personally or left at
the usual place of residence of each member of the council. A record of the
service of notice shall be maintained by the clerk.
C.   Quorum: A majority of all council members is a quorum.
D.   Compelling Attendance: Any three (3) members of the council can compel the
attendance of the absent members at any regular, adjourned or duly called
meeting by serving a written notice upon the absent members to attend at once.
E.   Rules Of Procedure: The council shall determine the rules of its own
proceedings by resolution, and the clerk shall keep such rules on file for
public inspection.
F.   Open And Closed Meetings:
1.   Meetings Open: All meetings shall be held in open session unless closed
sessions are held as expressly permitted by state law.
2.   Closed Session: A closed session may be held only by affirmative vote of
either two-thirds (2/3) of the council or all of the members present at the
meeting and in accordance with chapter 28A of the Iowa Code.
G.   Use Of Electronic Devices:
1.   Cameras And Recorders: The public may use cameras or recording devices at
any open session.
2.   Electronic Meetings: A meeting may be conducted by electronic means only
in circumstances where such a meeting in person is impossible or impractical
and then only in compliance with the provisions of chapter 28A of the Iowa
Code.
H.   Minutes: Minutes shall be kept of all meetings showing the date, time and
place, the members present and the action taken at each meeting. The minutes
shall show the results of each vote taken, and the vote of each member present
shall be made public. (1985 Code §1-3.0304; amd. Ord. 1177, 4-8-1996, eff. 5-
10-1996; Ord. 2443, 10-5- 2020)
1-6B-3: POWERS AND DUTIES:
The powers and duties of the council shall include, but are not limited to, the
following:
A.   General: All powers of the city are vested in the council except as
otherwise provided by law or ordinance.
B.   Wards: By ordinance, the council may divide the city into wards based upon
population, change the boundaries of wards, eliminate wards or create new
wards.
C.   Fiscal Authority: The council shall appropriate and apportion all funds,
and audit and allow all bills, accounts, payrolls and claims, and order payment
thereof. It shall make all assessments for the cost of street improvements,
sidewalks, sewers and other work, improvement or repairs which may be specially
assessed.
D.   Public Improvements: The council shall make all orders for the doing of
work, or the making or construction of any improvements, bridges or buildings.
E.   Contracts: The council shall make or authorize the making of all
contracts, and no contract shall bind or be obligatory upon the city unless
either made by ordinance or resolution adopted by the council, or reduced to
writing and approved by the council, or expressly authorized by ordinance or
resolution adopted by the council.
F.   Employees: The council shall authorize, by resolution, the number, duties
and compensation of employees not otherwise provided for by state law or this
code.
G.   Records: The council shall maintain records of its proceedings.
H.   Setting Compensation For Elected Officers: By ordinance, the council shall
prescribe the compensation of the mayor, council members, and other elected
city officers, but a change in the compensation of the mayor shall not become
effective during the term in which the increase is adopted, and the council
shall not adopt such an ordinance changing the compensation of any elected
officer during the months of November and December immediately following a
regular city election. A change in the compensation of councilmembers shall
become effective for all councilmembers at the beginning of the term of the
Councilmembers elected at the election next following the adoption of the
increase in compensation. (1985 Code §1-3.0302)
1-6B-4: APPOINTMENTS:
The Council shall appoint the following officials and prescribe their powers,
duties, compensation and term of office:
City Clerk 1 .
City Attorney 2 .
City Manager 3 .
(1985 Code §1-3.0305; amd. Ord. 1187, 6-3-1996)
 
Notes
1 1. See also Section
  1-7A-1 of this Title.
2 2. See also Section
  1-7D-1 of this Title.
3 3. See also Section
  1-7B-2 of this Title.
1-6B-5: PROCEDURES FOR PASSAGE OF MEASURES:
The Council shall exercise a power only by the passage of a motion, a
resolution, an amendment, or an ordinance in the following manner: (1985 Code
§1-3.0303)
A.   Approved Action By Council: Passage of an ordinance, amendment or
resolution requires an affirmative vote of not less than a majority of the
Councilmembers. Each Councilmember's vote on an ordinance, amendment or
resolution must be recorded. (1985 Code §1-3.0303; 1993 Code)
B.   When Measures Become Effective: Measures passed by the Council, other than
motions, become effective in one of the following ways:
1.   If the Mayor signs the measure, a resolution becomes effective immediately
upon signing and an ordinance or amendment becomes a law when published, unless
a subsequent effective date is provided within the measure.
2.   If the Mayor vetoes a measure 1  and the Council repasses the measure
after the Mayor's veto, a resolution becomes effective immediately upon
repassage, and an ordinance or amendment becomes a law when published, unless a
subsequent effective date is provided within the measure.
3.   If the Mayor takes no action on the measure, a resolution becomes
effective fourteen (14) days after the date of passage, and an ordinance or
amendment becomes law when published, but not sooner than fourteen (14) days
after the day of passage unless a subsequent effective date is provided within
the measure.
C.   Overriding Mayor's Veto: Within thirty (30) days after the Mayor's veto,
the Council may repass the ordinance or resolution by a vote of not less than
two-thirds (2/3) of the Councilmembers, and the ordinance or resolution becomes
effective upon repassage and publication. (1985 Code §1-3.0303)
 
Notes
1 1. See also subsection
  1-6A-2B4 of this Chapter.
CHAPTER 7
OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES1. See Title 2, Chapter 3 of this Code for Civil Service
Commission.1
SECTION:
1-7-1: Oaths
1-7-2: Terms of Appointed Officers
1-7-3: Open Meetings
1-7-4: Duties; General
1-7-5: Conflicts of Interest
1-7-6: Books and Records
1-7-7: Resignations; Removals; Vacancies
1-7-1: OATHS:
The oath of office shall be required and administered in accordance with the
following: (1985 Code §1-1.0201)
A.   Qualify for Office: All elected officers and the following appointed
officers shall qualify for office by taking the oath set out in subsection B
herein:
1.   City Clerk.
2.   Deputy City Clerk.
3.   Police Chief and peace officers.
4.   Fire Chief and career fire fighters.
5.   Treasurer. (Ord. 911, 7-9-90)
B.   Prescribed Oath: The prescribed oath is: I, (name), do solemnly swear that
I will support the Constitution of the United States and the Constitution of
the State of Iowa, and that I will faithfully and impartially, to the best of
my ability, discharge all duties of the office of (name of office) in West Des
Moines as now or hereinafter required by law.
C.   Officers Empowered to Administer Oaths: The following officers are
empowered to administer oaths and to take affirmations in any matter pertaining
to the business of their respective office:
1.   The Mayor.
2.   The Clerk. (1985 Code §1-1.0201; 1993 Code)
1-7-2: TERMS OF APPOINTED OFFICERS:
The terms of all appointed officers that are not otherwise fixed by law or
ordinance shall be two (2) years, such terms expiring at the time of the
organizational meeting of the Council in January following the regular
Municipal election and the appointment of a successor. (1985 Code §1-1.0208)
1-7-3: OPEN MEETINGS: 1
All meetings of the Council, any board or commission or any multi-membered body
formally and directly created by any of the foregoing bodies shall be held in
open session unless closed sessions are expressly permitted by law. 2  (1985
Code §1-1.0206)
 
Notes
1 1. See also subsection
  1-6B-2 F of this Title.
2 2. I.C., ch. 28A.
1-7-4: DUTIES; GENERAL:
Each Municipal officer shall exercise the powers and perform the duties
prescribed by law and City Code, or as otherwise directed by the Council unless
contrary to State law or City Charter. 1  (1985 Code §1-1.0203)
 
Notes
1 3. See Chapter 5 of this Title.
1-7-5: CONFLICTS OF INTEREST:
A City officer or employee shall not have an interest, direct or indirect, in
any contract or job of work or material or the profits thereof or services to
be furnished or performed for this City, unless expressly permitted by law. A
contract entered into in violation of this Section is void. The provisions of
this Section do not apply to:
A.   Compensation of Officers: The payment of lawful compensation of a City
officer or employee holding more than one City office or position, the holding
of which is not incompatible with another public office or is not prohibited by
law.
B.   Investment of Funds: The designation of a bank or trust company as a
depository, paying agent or for investment of funds.
C.   Stock Interests: Contracts in which a City officer or employee has an
interest solely by reason of employment, or a stock interest of the kind
described in subsection F3 of this Section, or both, if the contracts are made
by competitive bid, publicly invited and opened, and if the remuneration of
employment will not be directly affected as a result of the contract, and the
duties of employment do not directly involve the procurement or preparation of
any part of the contract. The competitive bid requirement of this subsection
shall not be required for any contract for professional services not
customarily awarded by competitive bid.
D.   Newspaper: The designation of an official newspaper.
E.   Contracts:
1.   Existing Contracts: A contract in which a City officer or employee has an
interest if the contract was made before the time he was elected or appointed,
but the contract may not be renewed.
2.   Volunteers: Contracts with volunteer firemen, emergency medical volunteers
or civil defense volunteers.
3.   Corporations: A contract with a corporation in which a City officer or
employee has an interest by reason of stockholdings when less than five percent
(5%) of the outstanding stock of the corporation is owned or controlled
directly or indirectly by the officer or employee or the spouse or immediate
family of such officer or employee.
4.   Competitive Bids: A contract made by competitive bid, publicly invited and
opened, in which a member of a City board of trustees, commission or
administrative agency has an interest if he is not authorized by law to
participate in the awarding of the contract. The competitive bid requirement of
this subsection does not apply to any contract for professional services not
customarily awarded by competitive bid. (1985 Code §1-1.0207; 1993 Code)
1-7-6: BOOKS AND RECORDS:
A.   Open for Inspection: All books and records required to be kept by law or
ordinance shall be open to inspection by the public upon request. (1985 Code
§1-1.0204)
B.   Transfer to Successor: Each officer shall transfer to his successor in
office all books, paper, records, documents and property in his custody and
appertaining to his office. (1985 Code §1-1.0205)
1-7-7: RESIGNATIONS; REMOVALS; VACANCIES:
A.   An elected officer who wishes to resign may do so by submitting his
resignation in writing to the Clerk so that it shall be properly recorded and
considered. A person who resigns from an elective office is not eligible for
appointment to the same office during the time for which he was elected if,
during that time, the compensation of the office has been increased. (1985 Code
§1-1.0209)
B.   Removal of Appointed Officers: Except as otherwise provided by State or
City law, all persons appointed to City office may be removed by the officer or
body making the appointment, but every such removal shall be by written order.
The order shall give the reasons, be filed in the office of the Clerk, and a
copy shall be sent by certified mail to the person removed who, upon request
filed with the Clerk within thirty (30) days of the date of mailing the copy,
shall be granted a public hearing before the Council on all issues connected
with the removal. The hearing shall be held within thirty (30) days of the date
the request is filed, unless the person removed requests a later date. (1985
Code §1-1.0210)
C.   Vacancies: A vacancy in an elective City office during a term of office
shall be filled by the Council, within thirty (30) days after the vacancy
occurs for the balance of the unexpired term unless a special election is
sooner held to fill the office for the remaining balance of the unexpired term.
Such an election shall be called if the Council is presented with a petition so
requesting in accordance with State law or the Council may call an election.
When a vacancy occurs in an appointed office, it must be filled by the
appointing authority. (1985 Code §1-1.0211; 1993 Code)
ARTICLE A. CITY CLERK
SECTION:
1-7A-1: Appointment
1-7A-2: City Seal
1-7A-3: Powers And Duties Generally
1-7A-4: Council Meetings
1-7A-5: Attendance At Meetings
1-7A-6: Council Measures
1-7A-7: Records
1-7A-8: Civil Service Commission Secretary
1-7A-9: Licenses And Permits; Issuance
1-7A-10: Notify Appointees
1-7A-11: Elections Duties
1-7A-1: APPOINTMENT: 1
At its first meeting in January following the regular city election, the
council shall appoint by majority vote a city clerk to serve for a term of two
(2) years. (Ord. 1878, 8-23-2010, eff. 9-17-2010)
 
Notes
1 1. See also section
  1-6B-4 of this title.
1-7A-2: CITY SEAL:
The city seal shall be in the custody of the clerk and shall be attached by him
to all transcripts, orders, and certificates which it may be necessary or
proper to authenticate. The city seal shall be circular in form, in the center
of which shall be the words "Corporate Seal" and around the margin the words
"City of West Des Moines, Iowa". (Ord. 1878, 8-23-2010, eff. 9-17-2010)
1-7A-3: POWERS AND DUTIES GENERALLY:
The clerk, or in his absence or inability to act, the deputy clerk, shall have
the powers and duties as provided in this article, this code and the law. (Ord.
1878, 8-23-2010, eff. 9-17-2010)
1-7A-4: COUNCIL MEETINGS:
A.   Recording And Publication Of Meeting Minutes: The clerk shall attend all
regular and special council meetings and within thirty (30) days following a
regular or special meeting shall cause the minutes of the proceedings thereof
to be published. Such publication shall include a list of all claims allowed, a
summary of all receipts and the gross amount of the claims approved.
B.   Council Agenda: The clerk shall prepare and maintain a city council
agenda, subject to modification by the mayor, city council, or the city
manager, and forward copies to such officials or persons as directed. (Ord.
1878, 8-23-2010, eff. 9-17-2010)
1-7A-5: ATTENDANCE AT MEETINGS:
At the direction of the council, the clerk shall attend meetings of committees,
boards and commissions. The clerk shall record and preserve a correct record of
the proceedings of such meetings. (Ord. 1878, 8-23-2010, eff. 9-17-2010)
1-7A-6: COUNCIL MEASURES:
A.   Recording Council Measures Being Considered: The clerk shall promptly
record each measure considered by the council with a statement, where
applicable, indicating whether the mayor signed, vetoed or took no action on
the measure, and whether the measure was repassed after the mayor's veto.
B.   Publication Of Measures: The clerk shall cause to be published all
ordinances, enactments, proceedings, and official notices requiring publication
as follows:
1.   Time: If notice of an election, hearing, or other official action is
required by this code or law, the notice must be published at least once, not
less than four (4) nor more than twenty (20) days before the date of the
election, hearing or other action, unless otherwise provided by law.
2.   Manner Of Publication: A publication required by this code or law must be
in a newspaper published at least once weekly and having general circulation in
the city.
C.   Authentication And Certification:
1.   Authentication: The clerk shall authenticate all such measures except
motions with his signature, certifying the time and manner of publication when
required.
2.   Certify Measures: The clerk shall certify all measures establishing any
zoning district, building lines, or fire limits and a plat showing the
district, lines, or limits to the recorder of the county containing the
affected parts of the city. (Ord. 1878, 8-23-2010, eff. 9-17-2010)
1-7A-7: RECORDS:
The clerk shall maintain the specified city records in the following manner:
A.   Ordinances And Codes: The clerk shall maintain copies of all effective
city ordinances and codes for public use.
B.   Custody: The clerk shall have custody and be responsible for the
safekeeping of all writings or documents in which the city is a party in
interest unless otherwise specifically directed by law or ordinance.
C.   Maintenance: The clerk shall maintain all city records for at least ten
(10) years, except that ordinances, resolutions, council proceedings and
records and documents relating to real property transactions or bond issues
must be maintained permanently. Bonds and coupons may be destroyed after two
(2) years from the retirement of debt and a record of destruction shall be
placed with the original bond record.
D.   Provide Copy: The clerk shall furnish, upon request, to any municipal
officer a copy of any record, paper, or public document under his control when
it may be necessary to such officer in the discharge of his duty. The clerk
shall furnish a copy to any citizen when requested upon payment of the fee set
by council resolution. The clerk shall, under the direction of the mayor or
other authorized officer, affix the seal of the corporation to those public
documents or instruments which, by ordinance and this code, are required to be
attested by the affixing of the seal.
E.   Filing Of Communications: The clerk shall keep and file all communications
and petitions directed to the council or to the city generally. The clerk shall
endorse thereon the action of the council taken upon matters considered in such
communications and petitions. (Ord. 1878, 8-23-2010, eff. 9-17-2010)
1-7A-8: CIVIL SERVICE COMMISSION SECRETARY:
The clerk shall serve as secretary to the civil service commission and perform
such functions as required by law. (Ord. 1878, 8-23-2010, eff. 9-17-2010)
1-7A-9: LICENSES AND PERMITS; ISSUANCE:
The clerk shall issue or revoke licenses and permits when authorized by this
code, and keep a record of licenses and permits issued which shall show date of
issuance, license or permit number, official receipt number, name of person to
whom issued, term of license or permit and purpose for which issued. (Ord.
1878, 8-23-2010, eff. 9-17-2010)
1-7A-10: NOTIFY APPOINTEES:
The clerk shall inform all persons appointed by the mayor or council to offices
in the city government of their position and the time at which they shall
assume the duties of their office. (Ord. 1878, 8-23-2010, eff. 9-17-2010)
1-7A-11: ELECTIONS DUTIES:
The clerk shall accept the nomination petition of a candidate for a city office
for filing if on its face it appears to have the requisite number of signatures
and it is timely filed. The clerk shall deliver all nomination petitions to the
county commissioner of elections not later than five o'clock (5:00) P.M. on the
day following the last day on which nomination petitions can be filed. (Ord.
1878, 8-23-2010, eff. 9-17-2010)
ARTICLE B. CITY MANAGER
SECTION:
1-7B-1: Purpose
1-7B-2: Appointment, Term, And Compensation
1-7B-3: Duties
1-7B-1: PURPOSE:
By virtue of the authority conferred by section 372.4, code of Iowa, the office
of city manager for the city of West Des Moines, Iowa, is hereby created. (Ord.
1878, 8-23-2010, eff. 9-17-2010)
1-7B-2: APPOINTMENT, TERM, AND COMPENSATION:
The city manager shall be appointed by a majority of the city council at a
regular meeting of such body, and such manager shall hold office at the
pleasure of the said body and shall be subject to removal by a majority vote
thereof, subject to the terms and conditions of any existing agreement executed
between the city council and the manager. The manager shall receive such annual
salary as the council shall, from time to time, determine by agreement and/or
approve by resolution, and time of payment shall be fixed in accordance with
other city employees. (Ord. 1878, 8-23-2010, eff. 9-17-2010)
1-7B-3: DUTIES:
The duties of the manager shall be as follows:
A.   Resolutions, Policies, And Laws: The manager shall see that all
resolutions, ordinances, laws, council's and mayor's directives and approved
operational policies are either faithfully enforced and executed or referred to
the proper official for compliance thereof.
B.   Attend Council Meetings: The manager shall attend all meetings of the city
council unless otherwise excused by the mayor or council.
C.   Recommendations: The manager shall recommend to the mayor and council such
measures as the manager may deem necessary for good efficient government and
the general welfare of the city.
D.   Departmental Administration: The manager shall have general supervision
and direction of the administration of the following departments, offices,
classifications, and services and be directly responsible to the mayor and
council for the proper function of same:
1.   City clerk.
2.   Department of public works.
3.   Department of community and economic development.
4.   Department of finance.
5.   Department of development services.
6.   Fire department.
7.   Emergency medical services department.
8.   Police department.
9.   Purchasing.
10.   Human resources.
11.   Human services.
12.   Parks and recreation.
13.   Public buildings, land, and custodians thereof under the direct
jurisdiction of the council.
14.   Budget preparation and operation.
15.   Contracts and agreements as approved by council.
16.   Administrative policies and procedures.
17.   All others as directed by council.
E.   Supervise Contracts: The manager shall supervise the performance of all
contracts for work and services to be done for the city except as specified
otherwise in said construction or service program involved.
F.   Franchises: The manager shall maintain an accounting of all obligations,
agreements, commitments, and contractual franchises involving the city and
report to the mayor and council any deviations from the exact terms as
specified.
G.   Purchasing: The manager shall be authorized to direct the purchasing of
all commodities, materials, supplies, capital outlay, and services for all
departments of the city that have been budgeted and appropriated by a
resolution of the council and enforce a program to determine that such
purchases are received and are of the quality and character called for in the
order.
H.   Require Taking Of Bids: The manager shall require the taking of bids on
all matters deemed advisable as required by law, or as directed by the council.
I.   Hire, Suspend, And Discharge Employees: The manager shall have the power
to hire, suspend, or discharge any employee over which the manager has, by this
article, authority to appoint or employ, subject to civil service provisions
and chapter 70, code of Iowa.
J.   Emergency Employees: The manager shall have the authority to employ any
person for emergency purposes as deemed necessary for the welfare of the city,
but in no case shall said employment be extended after the first council
meeting following the date of employment, unless otherwise approved by vote of
the council.
K.   Supervision Of Facilities And Equipment: The manager shall supervise and
manage all buildings, structures, and land under the jurisdiction of the
council and shall also be charged with the care and preservation of all city
owned equipment, tools, machinery, appliances, supplies, and commodities under
the control of employees or departments over which the manager has, by this
article, specific authority.
L.   Personnel Functions: Unless such power is specifically assigned by law to
another appointing authority, the city manager shall have the power to appoint,
employ, transfer, promote, reclassify, determine rate of pay, discipline, or
discharge all persons to city service, subject to civil service provisions and
chapter 70, code of Iowa. The city manager shall review and comment on
personnel actions made by the police and fire chiefs to the city council. The
city manager shall develop, administer, and enforce personnel rules and
regulations for employees under the authority delegated to the office of city
manager.
M.   Fiscal Advice: The manager shall keep the mayor and council fully advised
of the financial and other conditions of the city.
N.   Annual Budget: The manager shall prepare and submit to the mayor and
council an annual budget in the manner as prescribed by law.
O.   Business Affairs: The manager shall see that all business affairs of the
city are conducted by modern, approved methods and in an efficient manner.
P.   Records And Reports: The manager shall, at all times, be responsible for
the maintenance of accurate and current records of all affairs of the
departments under the manager's jurisdiction, and in a form acceptable by the
council. Copies of such reports shall be available for public inspection.
Q.   Assist Council Committees: The manager shall assist the council committees
in the execution of their reviews, investigations, reports and assignments, and
perform in compliance with their directives; provided, same is not in conflict
with established procedure governed by this article or not in conflict with
existing city ordinances.
R.   Other: The manager shall perform duties and have direct authority on all
matters delegated by council action.
S.   Administrative Assistant To Mayor: The manager shall act as administrative
assistant to the mayor and perform duties in the coordination of all phases of
municipal activity as directed by the mayor and council. (Ord. 1878, 8-23-2010,
eff. 9-17-2010)
ARTICLE C. FINANCE DIRECTOR
SECTION:
1-7C-1: Appointment
1-7C-2: Duties Of Finance Director
1-7C-3: Finance Officer Of Library Board
1-7C-1: APPOINTMENT:
The finance director shall be appointed by the city manager. (Ord. 1878, 8-23-
2010, eff. 9-17-2010)
1-7C-2: DUTIES OF FINANCE DIRECTOR:
The duties of the finance director shall be as follows:
A.   Custody Of Funds: The finance director shall be responsible for the safe
custody of all funds of the city in the manner provided by law and council
direction.
B.   Record Of Fund: The finance director shall keep the record of each fund
separate.
C.   Record Receipts: The finance director shall keep an accurate record of all
money or securities received by the finance director on behalf of the city and
specify the date, from whom, and for what purpose received.
D.   Record Disbursements: The finance director shall keep an accurate account
of all disbursements, money, or property, specifying date, and to whom and from
what fund paid.
E.   Special Assessments: The finance director shall keep a separate account of
all money received by the finance director from special assessments.
F.   Deposit Funds In Bank: The finance director shall, upon receipt of monies
to be held in his custody and belonging to the city, deposit the same in banks
selected by the council in amounts not exceeding monetary limits authorized by
the council.
G.   Bank Reconciliation: The finance director shall reconcile bank statements
with his books and certify monthly to the council the balance of cash and
investments of each fund and amounts received and disbursed.
H.   Debt Service: The finance director shall keep a register of all bonds
outstanding and record all payments of interest and principal.
I.   Billings And Collections: The finance director shall bill and collect all
charges, rents, or fees due the city for services not specifically assigned to
other departments.
J.   Other Duties: The finance director shall perform such other duties as
specified by the council by resolution or ordinance. (Ord. 1878, 8-23-2010,
eff. 9-17-2010)
1-7C-3: FINANCE OFFICER OF LIBRARY BOARD:
The finance director shall be the finance officer of the library board and pay
out all money under control of the board on orders signed by the chair and
secretary of the board but shall receive no additional compensation for such
services. (Ord. 1878, 8-23-2010, eff. 9-17-2010)
ARTICLE D. CITY ATTORNEY
SECTION:
1-7D-1: Appointment and Compensation
1-7D-2: Attorney for City
1-7D-3: Power of Attorney
1-7D-4: Ordinance Preparation
1-7D-5: Review and Comment; Legal Opinion
1-7D-6: Opinion on Contracts
1-7D-7: Attendance at Council Meetings
1-7D-8: Prepare Documents
1-7D-9: Special Counsel
1-7D-1: APPOINTMENT AND COMPENSATION: 1
The City Attorney shall be appointed by majority vote of the Council and
receive such compensation as shall be established by resolution. (1985 Code §1-
4.0301)
 
Notes
1 1. See also Section
  1-6B-4 of this Title.
1-7D-2: ATTORNEY FOR CITY:
The City Attorney shall act as attorney for the City in all matters affecting
the City's interest and appear on behalf of the City before any court,
tribunal, commission or board. The City Attorney shall prosecute or defend all
actions and proceedings when so requested by the mayor or Council. (1985 Code
§1-4.0302)
1-7D-3: POWER OF ATTORNEY:
The City Attorney shall sign the name of the City to all appeal bonds and to
all other bonds or papers of any kind that may be essential to the prosecution
of any cause in court, and when so signed, the City shall be bound upon the
same. (1985 Code §1-4.0303)
1-7D-4: ORDINANCE PREPARATION:
The City Attorney shall prepare those ordinances which the Council may desire
and direct to be prepared and report to the Council upon all such ordinances
before their final passage by the Council and publication. (1985 Code §1-
4.0304)
1-7D-5: REVIEW AND COMMENT; LEGAL OPINION:
The City Attorney shall, upon request from the Mayor, Council or City Manager,
give his legal opinion in writing, upon all questions of law relating to City
matters. (1985 Code §§1-4.0305, 1-4.0307)
1-7D-6: OPINION ON CONTRACTS:
The City Attorney shall, at the request of the Council, offer a written opinion
on and recommend alterations pertaining to contracts involving the City before
they become binding upon the City. (1985 Code §1-4.0306)
1-7D-7: ATTENDANCE AT COUNCIL MEETINGS:
The City Attorney shall attend meetings of the Council at the request of the
Mayor, Council or City Manager. (1985 Code §1-4.0308; 1993 Code)
1-7D-8: PREPARE DOCUMENTS:
The City Attorney shall, upon request, formulate drafts for contracts, forms
and other writings which may be required for the use of the City. (1985 Code
§1-4.0309)
1-7D-9: SPECIAL COUNSEL:
Special counsel may be retained, following authorization by the Council, when
deemed necessary or appropriate. (1985 Code §1-4.0310)
CHAPTER 8
MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
SECTION:
1-8-1: Corporate Limits
1-8-1: CORPORATE LIMITS:
The corporate limits of the City as of January 1, 1992 are described as
follows:
Beginning at the northeast corner of the west one-half of Section 11, Township
78 North, Range 25 West of the Fifth Principal Meridian, Polk County, Iowa;
Thence south, along the east line of the west one-half of said Section 11, to
the northeast corner of the northwest quarter of Section 14, Township 78 North,
Range 25 East of the Fifth Principal Meridian, Polk County, Iowa;
Thence south, along the east line of the northwest quarter of said Section 14,
to the north bank of the Raccoon River;
Thence southwesterly, along the high water mark of the north bank of the
Raccoon River, through Sections 14, 15, 22, 21, 28, 29 and 30, Township 78
North, Range 25 East of the Fifth Principal Meridian, Polk County, Iowa to the
east line of Range 26 West of the Fifth Principal Meridian, Dallas County,
Iowa;
Thence north, along said east line of Range 26 West of the Fifth Principal
Meridian, to a point 165.00 feet north of the southeast corner of the northeast
quarter of the southeast quarter of Section 12, Township 78 North, Range 26
West of the Fifth Principal Meridian, Dallas County, Iowa;
Thence west, a distance of 200.00 feet;
Thence south, a distance of 165.00 feet to the south line of the northeast
quarter of the southeast quarter of said Section 12;
Thence west, along the south line of the north one-half of the south one-half
of said Section 12, to the southwest corner of the northeast quarter, of the
southwest quarter of said Section 12;
Thence north, along the west line of the northeast quarter of the southwest
quarter of said Section 12, to the southeast corner of the southwest quarter of
the northwest quarter of said Section 12;
Thence west, along the south line of the southwest quarter of the northwest
quarter of said Section 12, to the southwest corner of the northwest quarter of
said Section 12;
Thence north, along the west line of the northwest quarter of said Section 12,
to the southwest corner of Section 1, Township 78 North, Range 26 West of the
Fifth Principal Principal Meridian, Dallas County, Iowa;
Thence east, along the south line of said Section 1, to the west line of the
east 15.0 acres of the southwest quarter of the southwest quarter of said
Section 1;
Thence north, along the west line of the east 15.0 acres of the southwest
quarter of the southwest quarter of said Section 1, to the north line of the
southwest quarter of the southwest quarter of said Section 1;
Thence west, along the north line of the southwest quarter of the southwest
quarter of said Section 1, to a point on the east line of Section 2, Township
78 North, Range 26 West of the Fifth Principal Meridian, Dallas County, Iowa;
Thence south, along the east line of said Section 2, to the north right-of-way
line of Chicago and Northwestern Transportation Company Rail Line;
Thence northwesterly, along the north right-of-way line of the Chicago and
Northwestern Transportation Company Rail Line, to the southerly right-of-way
line of Interstate Route Number 80;
Thence northeasterly, along the southerly right-of-way line of Interstate Route
Number 80, to a point 609.63 feet west and 45.08 feet south of the northeast
corner of the southeast quarter of said Section 2;
Thence south 00o00'00" east (assumed bearing), a distance of 654.92 feet;
Thence north 82o51'00" east (assumed bearing), a distance of 609.63 feet, to a
point on the east line of the southeast quarter of said Section 2;
Thence north, along the east line of said Section 2, to a point 308.00 feet
south of the northeast corner of the southeast quarter of said Section 2;
Thence south 90o00'00" west (assumed bearing), a distance of 257.50 feet;
Thence north 00o00'00" east, a distance of 250.95 feet, to a point on the south
right-of-way line of Interstate Route Number 80;
Thence easterly, along the southerly right-of-way line of Interstate Route
Number 80, to a point of intersection with the east line of Section 2, Township
78 North, Range 26 West of the Fifth Principal Meridian;
Thence north, along the east line of said Section 2, to a point of intersection
with the north right-of-way line of Interstate Route Number 80;
Thence southwesterly, along the north right-of-way line of Interstate Number
80, to a point 2.3 feet east of the west line of said Section 2;
Thence north, parallel to the west line of said Section 2, to a point 1007.60
feet north of and 2.30 feet east of the southeast corner of Section 3, Township
78 North, Range 26 West of the Fifth Principal Meridian, Dallas County, Iowa;
Thence southwesterly, along a 716.20 foot radius curve, concave northwesterly,
a distance of 900.00 feet to a point of tangency;
Thence south, 72o14'00" west (assumed bearing), a distance of 789.80 feet to a
point of curvature;
Thence southwesterly, along a 716.20 foot radius curve, concave southeasterly,
to a point on the east line, of the southwest quarter of the southeast quarter
of said Section 3;
Thence north, along the east line of the southwest quarter of the southeast
quarter of said Section 3, to the north line of the southwest quarter of the
southeast quarter of said Section 3;
Thence west, along the north line of the southwest quarter of the southeast
quarter of said Section 3, to the east line of the southwest quarter of said
Section 3;
Thence south, along the east line of the southwest quarter of said Section 3,
to the southeast corner of the southwest corner of said Section 3;
Thence west, along the south line of the southwest quarter of said Section 3, a
distance of 541.10 feet;
Thence north, a distance of 460.00 feet;
Thence west, a distance of 158.00 feet;
Thence south, a distance of 460.00 feet to a point on the south line of the
southwest quarter of said Section 3;
Thence west, along the south line of the southwest quarter of said Section 3,
to the southwest corner of the east one-half of the southwest quarter of said
Section 3;
Thence north, along the west line of the east one-half of the west one-half of
said Section 3, to the southeast corner of Government Lot 4, of said Section 3;
Thence west, along the south line of said Government Lot 4, of said Section 3,
to a point of intersection with the east right-of-way line of the County Road
(Waco Place);
Thence north, along the east right-of-way line of said County Road (Waco Place)
and its extensions, to a point of intersection with the north line of said
Section 3;
Thence east, along the north line of said Section 3, to the northwest corner of
the east 2.5 acres of Government Lot 2, of said Section 3;
Thence south, along the west line of the east 2.5 acres of said Government Lot
2, of said Section 3, to the south line of said Government Lot 2, of said
Section 3;
Thence east, along the south line of Government Lots 2 and 1, of said Section
3, to a point 170.00 feet west of the east line of said Section 3;
Thence south, a distance of 107.00 feet;
Thence east, a distance of 170.00 feet, to a point on the west line of Section
2, Township 78 North, Range 26 West of the Fifth Principal Meridian, Dallas
County, Iowa;
Thence north, along the west line of said Section 2, to the northwest corner of
said Section 2;
Thence east, along the north line of Township 78 North, to a point of
intersection with the easterly right-of-way line of the Norfolk and Southern
Railroad Company right of way, said point lying on the north line of Section 3,
Township 78 North, Range 25 West of the Fifth Principal Meridian, Polk County,
Iowa;
Thence southeasterly, along the east right-of-way line of the Norfolk and
Southern Railroad Company right-of-way line, to a point of intersection with
the west right-of-way line of 73rd Street (Windsor Heights);
Thence southeasterly, along the west right-of-way line of 73rd Street (Windsor
Heights), to the northwest corner of Rancho Grande Subdivision, an official
subdivision in Polk County, Iowa;
Thence south, along the west line of said Rancho Grande Subdivision, to a point
on the southerly right-of-way line of Interstate Highway Route Number 235;
Thence easterly, along the southerly right-of-way line of Interstate Highway
Route Number 235 and its extensions, to a point on the west line of Section 2,
Township 78 North, Range 25 West of the Fifth Principal Meridian;
Thence north, along the west line of said Section 2, to the northwest corner of
the southwest quarter of said Section 2;
Thence east, along the north line of the southwest quarter of said Section 2,
to a point of intersection with the east line of Lot 44, Janet Woods
Subdivision, an official subdivision in Polk County, Iowa, and its extensions;
Thence southeasterly, along the northeasterly sides of Lots 44, 45 and 22, of
said Janet Woods Subdivision, to the southeast corner of said Lot 22, Janet
Woods Subdivision;
Thence east, along the south line of Janet Woods Subdivision, to a point on the
east line of the southwest quarter of said Section 2;
Thence south, along the east line of the southwest quarter of said Section 2,
to the point of beginning.
And also:
Beginning at the northeast corner of the west one-half of Section 23, Township
78 North, Range 25 West of the Fifth Principal Meridian, Polk County, Iowa;
Thence south, along the east line of the west one-half of said Section 23, to
the northeast corner of the west one-half of Section 26, Township 78 North,
Range 25 West of the Fifth Principal Meridian, Polk County, Iowa;
Thence south, along the east line of the west one-half of said Section 26, to
the northwest corner of the northeast quarter of Section 35, Township 78 North,
Range 25 West of the Fifth Principal Meridian, Polk County, Iowa;
Thence east, along the north line of the northeast quarter of said Section 35,
to the northeast corner of the west one-half of the east one-half of said
Section 35;
Thence south, along the east line of the west one-half of the east one-half of
said Section 35, to the southeast corner of the west one-half of the east one-
half of said Section 35;
Thence west, along the south line of said Section 35, to the southwest corner
of said Section 35;
Thence north, along the west line of said Section 35, to a point of
intersection with the south right-of-way line of the County Road (formerly
known as Southwest 72nd Avenue);
Thence west, along the south right-of-way line of the County Road (formerly
known as Southwest 72nd Street), to a point of intersection with the northerly
right-of-way line of the Iowa Natural Heritage Foundation's Martensdale Bike
Trail;
Thence southwesterly, along the northerly right-of-way line of the Natural
Heritage Foundation's Martensdale Bike Trail, to a point on the west line of
the east one-half of the east one-half of Section 34, Township 78 North, Range
25 West of the Fifth Principal Meridian, Polk County, Iowa;
Thence north, along the west line of the east one-half of the east one-half of
said Section 34, of the southwest corner of the east one-half of the east one-
half of Section 27, Township 78 North, Range 25 West of the Fifth Principal
Meridian, Polk County, Iowa;
Thence north, along the west line of the east one-half of the east one-half of
said Section 27, to the northwest corner of the southeast quarter of the
northeast quarter of said Section 27;
Thence west, along the south line of the north one-half of the north one-half
of said Section 27, to the point of intersection with the east property line of
Walnut Woods State Park;
Thence northwesterly, along the easterly property line of Walnut Woods State
Park, to a point on the west line of said Section 27;
Thence north, along the west line of said Section 27, to the southwest corner
of Section 22, Township 78 North, Range 25 West of the Fifth Principal
Meridian, Polk County, Iowa;
Thence east, along the south line of the southwest quarter of said Section 22,
to the southeast corner of the southwest quarter of the southwest quarter of
said Section 22;
Thence north, along the west line of Government Lot 10, of said Section 22, to
the high water mark on the southerly bank of the Raccoon River;
Thence northeasterly, along the high water mark of the south bank of the
Raccoon River, through Sections 22, 23 and 14, Township 78 North, Range 25 West
of the Fifth Principal Meridian, Polk County, Iowa, to a point of intersection
with the east line of the west one-half of said Section 14;
Thence south, along the east line of the west one-half of said Section 14, to
the point of beginning.
EXCEPT, Lot 8, Sylvan Rill, an official plat in Section 26, Township 78 North,
Range 25 West of the Fifth Principal Meridian, Polk County, Iowa;
EXCEPT, a 1.0 acre church site in the southeast quarter of the southwest
quarter of Section 3, Township 78 North, Range 26 West of the Fifth Principal
Meridian, Dallas County, Iowa;
EXCEPT, a tract of land commencing at the southwest corner of Government Lot
11, of Section 3, Township 78 North, Range 26 West of the Fifth Principal
Meridian, Polk County, Iowa;
Thence east, along the south line of said Government Lot 11, of said Section 3,
a distance of 2 rods;
Thence north, a distance of 2 rods;
Thence west, a distance of 2 rods to a point on the west line of said
Government Lot 11, of said Section 3;
Thence south, along the west line of said Government Lot 11, to the point of
beginning.
EXCEPT, a tract of land commencing at the northeast corner of the northwest
quarter of Section 12, Township 78 North, Range 26 West of the Fifth Principal
Meridian, Dallas County, Iowa;
Thence south, along the east line of Lot A Belleson Auditor's Plat, an official
plat, Dallas County, Iowa, to the point of beginning located at the southeast
corner of said Lot A;
Thence south, along the east line of the northwest quarter of said Section 12,
to the south line of the northeast quarter of the northwest quarter of said
Section 12;
Thence west, along the south line of the northeast quarter of the northwest
quarter of said Section 12, to the southeast corner of Lot 4, Belleson
Auditor's Plat, an official plat in said Section 12, Dallas County, Iowa;
Thence northwesterly, along the northeasterly line of said Lot 4, to the
northwest corner of said Lot 4;
Thence south, along the west line of said Lot 4, to a point on the south line
of the northeast quarter of the northwest quarter of said Section 12;
Thence west, along the south line of the northeast quarter of the northwest
quarter of said Section 12, to the southwest corner of the northeast quarter of
the northwest quarter of said Section 12;
Thence north, along the west line of the northeast quarter of the northwest
quarter of said Section 12, to the south line of Lot A Belleson Auditor's Plat,
an official plat, Dallas County, Iowa;
Thence easterly, along the southern line of Lot A of said Belleson Auditor's
Plat, to the west line of Lot 5 of said Belleson Auditor's Plat;
Thence south, along the west line of Lot 5 of said Belleson Auditor's Plat, to
the southwest corner of Lot 5 Belleson Auditor's Plat;
Thence southeasterly, along the southerly line of Lot 5 of said Belleson
Auditor's Plat, to the southeast corner of Lot 5 of said Belleson Auditor's
Plat;
Thence north, along the east line of Lot 5 of said Belleson Auditor's Plat, to
the south line of Lot A of said Belleson Auditor's Plat;
Thence east, along the south line of Lot A of said Belleson Auditor's Plat, to
the point of beginning.
EXCEPT, Lots 1, 2, 3, 4, 6, 7 and 8, Barnes Heights, Plat 1, an official plat
in the northeast quarter of Section 12, Township 78 North, Range 26 West of the
Fifth Principal Meridian, Dallas County, Iowa;
EXCEPT, Lots 1, 2, 3, 5, 8 and 9, Barnes Heights, Plat 2, an official plat in
the northeast quarter of Section 12, Township 78 North, Range 26 West of the
Fifth Principal Meridian, Dallas County, Iowa. (Ord. 993, 2-18-92)
CHAPTER 9
MUNICIPAL ELECTIONS
SECTION:
1-9-1: Runoff Elections
1-9-2: Wards And Precincts
1-9-2-1: Division Into Wards
1-9-2-2: Numerical Designations
1-9-2-3: Voting Precincts
1-9-1: RUNOFF ELECTIONS:
A.   Purpose: The purpose of this chapter is to adopt the alternative of using
a runoff election in lieu of a primary election for the choosing of persons for
elective municipal offices and prescribing the procedures to be followed
therein. (1985 Code §1-1.0301)
B.   When Held: A runoff election shall be held only for positions unfilled
because of failure of a sufficient number of candidates to receive a majority
vote in the regular city election. (1985 Code §1-1.0302)
C.   Qualification: Candidates who do not receive a majority of the votes cast
for an office, but who receive the highest number of votes cast for that office
in the regular city election to the extent of twice the number of unfilled
positions, are candidates in the runoff elections. (1985 Code §1-1.0303)
D.   Time Held: Runoff elections shall be held four (4) weeks after the date of
the regular city election and shall be conducted in the same manner as regular
city elections. (1985 Code §1-1.0304; amd. 1993 Code)
E.   Candidates Elected: Candidates in the runoff election who receive the
highest number of votes cast for each office on the ballot are elected to the
extent necessary to fill the positions open. (1985 Code §1-1.0305)
1-9-2: WARDS AND PRECINCTS:
1-9-2-1: DIVISION INTO WARDS:
The incorporated area of West Des Moines (City) is divided into three (3) wards
described as follows:
A.   First Ward: The first ward shall include all of that part of the City
contained within the precincts identified with the beginning number one (1) as
described in Section
1-9-2-3.
B.   Second Ward: The second ward shall include all that part of the City
contained within the precincts identified with the beginning number two (2) as
described in Section
1-9-2-3.
C.   Third Ward: The third ward shall include all that part of the City
contained within the precincts identified with the beginning number three (3)
as described in Section
1-9-2-3. (Ord. 1449, 8-6-2001, eff. 1-15-2002; amd. Ord. 1929, 8-8-2011, eff.
1-15-2012; Ord. 2501, 12-20-2021, eff. 1-15-2022)
1-9-2-2: NUMERICAL DESIGNATIONS:
The following defines the meaning of the three (3) numbers that identify the
Precincts in West Des Moines.
A.   The first number identifies which ward the precinct is in with one (1)
being the First Ward, two (2) being the Second Ward and three (3) being the
Third Ward
B.   The second number identifies which County the precinct is in with one (1)
being Polk County, two (2) being Dallas County, three (3) being Warren County
and four (4) being Madison County.
C.   The third number identifies the precinct number within the ward and
county. (Ord. 1643, 8-15-2005; amd. Ord. 1929, 8-8-2011, eff. 1-15-2012; Ord.
2501, 12-20-2021, eff. 1-15-2022)
1-9-2-3: VOTING PRECINCTS:
The incorporated area of West Des Moines is divided into twenty-eight (28)
voting precincts described as follows:
FIRST WARD
Precinct 111
Beginning at the centerline intersection of the centerline of Grand Avenue and
the east corporate limits;
Thence south, along the east corporate limits, to the centerline intersection
of Railroad Avenue;
Thence west, along the centerline of Railroad Avenue, to the centerline
intersection of 8th Street;
Thence north, along the centerline of 8th Street, to the north corporate
limits;
Thence easterly, along the north corporate limits, to the east corporate
limits;
Thence south, along the east corporate limits, to the point of beginning.
Precinct 112
Beginning at the centerline intersection of the centerline of Railroad Avenue
and the east corporate limits;
Thence south along the east corporate limits, to the Polk/Warren County line;
Thence west, along the Polk/Warren County line to a point on the West Des
Moines corporate limit line; west of Interstate 35, southeast corner census
block number 1044 within tract number 011028;
Thence north along the West Des Moines corporate limit line, to the high water
mark of the north bank of the Raccoon River;
Thence northerly and easterly, along the high water mark of the north bank of
the Raccoon River to the centerline intersection of the northeast line of
Census Block number 3040 within Tract number 011028;
Thence north and west, along the northeast line of Census Block Number 3040
within Tract Number 11028, to the centerline of the Iowa Interstate Railroad
tracks;
Thence northerly and easterly, along the centerline of the Iowa Interstate
Railroad tracks, to the intersection of Census Block number 3034 within Tract
number 011028 and the Raccoon Regional Park entrance;
Thence northwest to the centerline intersection of Grand Avenue;
Thence north to the centerline intersection of Fuller Road;
Thence northeasterly, along the centerline of Fuller Road, to the centerline
intersection of South 19th Street;
Thence northerly, along the centerline of South 19th Street, to the centerline
intersection of Grand Avenue;
Thence northeasterly, along the centerline of Grand Avenue, to the centerline
intersection of Railroad Avenue;
Thence east, along the centerline of Railroad Avenue, to the point of
beginning.
Precinct 113
Beginning at the centerline intersection of 8th Street and Railroad Avenue;
Thence west, along the centerline of Railroad Avenue, to the centerline
intersection of Grand Avenue;
Thence northerly and easterly, along the centerline of Grand Avenue, to the
centerline intersection of 8th Street;
Thence south, along the centerline of 8th Street, to the point of beginning.
Precinct 114
Beginning at the centerline intersection of Vine Street and Grand Avenue;
Thence southwesterly, along the centerline of Grand Avenue, to the north side
of E. P. True Parkway (Road);
Thence west, along the north side of E.P. True Parkway Street (Road) to the
intersection of E.P. True Parkway and center of Fairmeadows Creek;
Thence west, along the centerline of E. P. True Parkway to the centerline
intersection of E.P. True Parkway and Valley West Drive;
Thence north, along the centerline of Valley West Drive, to the centerline
intersection of Giles Street;
Thence east, along the centerline of Giles Street, to the centerline
intersection of 28th Street;
Thence north, along the centerline of 28th Street, to the centerline
intersection of Meadow Lane;
Thence east, along the centerline of Meadow Lane, to the centerline
intersection of 27th Street;
Thence north, along the centerline of 27th Street, to the centerline
intersection of Vine Street;
Thence southeasterly and easterly, along the centerline of Vine Street, to the
point of beginning.
Precinct 115
Beginning at the centerline intersection of Ashworth Road and 39th Street;
Thence east, along the centerline of Ashworth Road, to the centerline
intersection of 19th Street;
Thence south, along the centerline of 19th Street, to the centerline
intersection of Vine Street;
Thence westerly and northwesterly, along the centerline of Vine Street, to the
centerline intersection of 27th Street;
Thence south, along the centerline of 27th Street, to the centerline
intersection of Meadow Lane;
Thence north and west, along the centerline of Meadow Lane, to the centerline
intersection of 28th Street;
Thence south, along the centerline of 28th Street, to the centerline
intersection of Giles Street;
Thence west, along the centerline of Giles Street, to the centerline
intersection of Valley West Drive;
Thence south, along the centerline of Valley West Drive, to the centerline
intersection of E. P. True Parkway;
Thence west, along the centerline of E. P. True Parkway, to the centerline
intersection of 39th Street;
Thence north, along the centerline of 39th Street, to the point of beginning.
Precinct 116
Beginning at the centerline intersection of Valley West Drive and the south
side of Interstate Highway 235;
Thence south, along the centerline of Valley West Drive, to the centerline
intersection of Ashworth Road;
Thence west, along the centerline of Ashworth Road, to the centerline
intersection of 50th Street;
Thence north, along the centerline of 50th Street, to the south side of
Interstate Highway 235;
Thence east, along the south side of Interstate Highway 235, to the point of
beginning.
Precinct 117
Beginning at the centerline intersection of Ashworth Road and 18th Street;
Thence west, along the centerline of Ashworth Road, to the centerline
intersection of Valley West Drive;
Thence north, along centerline of Valley West Drive, to the north corporate
limits;
Thence easterly and southerly, along the north and easterly corporate limits,
to the east right of way line of the Iowa Interstate Railroad;
Thence southeast, along the West Des Moines corporate limit line, to the south
side of Interstate Highway 235;
Thence west along the south side of Interstate Highway 235; to the centerline
intersection of 17th Street;
Thence south, along the centerline of 17th Street, to the centerline
intersection of Pleasant Street;
Thence southwesterly, along the centerline of Pleasant Street, to the
centerline intersection of 18th Street;
Thence south, along the centerline of 18th Street, to the point of beginning.
Precinct 118
Beginning at the centerline intersection of Grand Avenue and Vine Street;
Thence west, along the centerline of Vine Street, to the centerline
intersection of 19th Street;
Thence north, along the centerline of 19th Street, to the centerline
intersection of Ashworth Road;
Thence easterly, along the centerline of Ashworth Road, to the centerline
intersection of 18th Street;
Thence north, along the centerline of 18th Street, to the centerline
intersection of Pleasant Street;
Thence northeast, along the centerline of Pleasant Street, to the centerline
intersection of 17th Street;
Thence north, along the centerline of 17th Street, to the south side of
Interstate Highway 235;
Thence east, along the south side of Interstate Highway 235, to the easterly
corporate limits;
Thence southeasterly, along the easterly corporate limits, to the centerline
intersection of 8th Street;
Thence south, along the centerline of 8th Street, to the centerline
intersection of Grand Avenue;
Thence southwesterly, along the centerline of Grand Avenue, to the point of
beginning.
Precinct 131
Beginning at the centerline intersection of South Orilla Road/Warren County
Highway R45 and the Polk/Warren County line (County Line Road);
Thence south, along the centerline of South Orilla Road/Warren County Highway
R45, to the centerline intersection of Warren County Highway G14;
Thence west, along the centerline of Warren County Highway G14, to the southern
corporate limit line; Thence south and west following along the West Des Moines
corporate limit line to the centerline of Adams Street;
Thence east and north, along the West Des Moines corporate limit line to the
centerline of County Line Road;
Thence east, along the Polk/Warren County line (County Line Road), to the point
of beginning.
and
Beginning at the centerline intersection of 105th Street/SW Adams Street and
10th Street/SW 60th Street (Madison/Warren County Line);
Thence south on 10th Street/SW 60th Street (Madison/Warren County Line) to a
point intersecting the easterly corporate limit line;
Thence easterly along the corporate limit line to the east right-of-way line of
Interstate Highway 35;
Thence north along the east right-of-way line of Interstate Highway 35 to the
centerline of County Line Road (Polk/Warren County line);
Thence west along County Line Road (Polk/Warren County line) to a point
intersecting the southerly corporate limit line;
Thence south along the corporate limit line to the westerly corporate limit
line;
Thence west along the corporate limit line to the point of beginning.
Precinct 141
Beginning at the centerline intersection of 10th Street (SW 60th Street) and
110th Street in Madison County;
Thence west to the centerline intersection of SW 60th Street and 110th Street;
Thence south to the centerline of 110th Street;
Thence easterly along corporate limit to 110th Street (SW 60th Street) and 10th
street intersection;
Thence north to the point of beginning.
SECOND WARD
Precinct 211
Beginning at the centerline intersection of University Avenue and Valley West
Drive;
Thence south, along the centerline of Valley West Drive, to the south side of
Interstate Highway 235;
Thence west, along the south side of Interstate Highway 235, to the centerline
intersection of 50th Street;
Thence south, along the centerline of 50th Street, to the centerline
intersection of Ashworth Road;
Thence west, along the centerline of Ashworth Road, to the Polk/Dallas County
Line (60th Street);
Thence north, along the Polk/Dallas County line (60th Street), to the
centerline intersection of University Avenue;
Thence east, along the centerline of University Avenue, to the point of
beginning.
Precinct 212
Beginning at the centerline intersection of Ashworth Road and the west side
Interstate Highway 35;
Thence south, along the west side of Interstate Highway 35, to the centerline
intersection of E. P. True Parkway;
Thence west, along the centerline intersection of E. P. True Parkway, to the
intersection of the north line of Census Block Number 1011 within tract number
011026;
Thence west along the north side of E.P. True Parkway (Road) pavement to a
point intersecting the centerline of 60th Street (Polk/Dallas County line);
Thence north, along the centerline of 60th Street (Polk/Dallas County line), to
the centerline intersection of Ashworth Road;
Thence east, along the centerline of Ashworth Road, to the point of beginning.
Precinct 221
Beginning at the centerline intersection of Ashworth Road and 60th Street
(Polk/Dallas County line);
Thence south, along the centerline of 60th Street (Polk/Dallas County line), to
the north line of Census Block Number 1011 within tract number 011026;
Thence west along the north side of E.P. True Parkway (Road) a point
intersecting the east line of census Block Number 2009 within tract number
050816; east side of Jordan Creek Parkway (Road);
Thence north along east side of Jordan Creek Parkway (Road) to the intersection
of Census Block Number 1026 within tract number 05084 and centerline of
Ashworth Road;
Thence east along the centerline of Ashworth Road, to the point of beginning.
Precinct 222
Beginning at the intersection of Census Block number 2010 within tract number
050816 and the centerline intersection of 60th Street (Polk/Dallas County
line);
Thence south, along the centerline of 60th Street (Polk/Dallas County line), to
the centerline intersection of Wistful Vista Drive;
Thence west, along the centerline of Wistful Vista Drive, to the centerline
intersection of 68th Street/South 68th Street;
Thence south, along the centerline of South 68th Street, to the centerline
intersection of Mills Civic Parkway;
Thence west, along the centerline of Mills Civic Parkway, to the centerline
intersection of South 81st Street;
Thence north, along the centerline of South 81st Street/81st Street, to the
centerline intersection of E. P. True Parkway;
Thence east, along the centerline of E. P. True Parkway to a point intersecting
Census Block Number 2015 within tract 050815;
Thence east along the north side of E.P. True Parkway (Road) to the point of
beginning.
Precinct 223
Beginning at the intersection of Block number 1026 within tract number 050814
and the east side of Jordan Creek Parkway (Road);
Thence south along the east side of Jordan Creek Parkway, to the intersecting
north line of Census Block number 2013 within tract number 050816;
Thence west, along the north line of E. P. True Parkway (Road) to a point
Census Block number 2015 within tract number 050815;
Thence west along the centerline of E.P. True Parkway to the centerline
intersection of 88th Street;
Thence north, along the centerline of 88th Street, to the centerline
intersection of Ashworth Road;
Thence east, along the centerline of Ashworth Road, to the point of beginning.
Precinct 224
Beginning at the centerline intersection of south 81st Street and Mills Civic
Parkway;
Thence west to a point intersecting the north corporate limit line;
Thence north to a point intersecting the west corporate limit line;
Thence west to a point intersecting the north corporate limit line and V Court;
Thence north to the northeast corporate limit line;
Thence northeast, to the north corporate limit line;
Thence north to a point intersecting the east corporate limit line and the
south side of Interstate Highway 80;
Thence northeasterly along the south side of Interstate Highway 80 to a point
intersecting the north corporate limit line Census Block number 2022 within
tract number 050818;
Thence north to the centerline intersection of Ashworth Road;
Thence east along the centerline of Ashworth Road to the centerline
intersection of 88th Street;
Thence south along 88th Street to the centerline intersection of E.P. True
Parkway;
Thence northeast along E.P. True Parkway to the centerline intersection of 81st
Street;
Thence south along 81st Street/South 81st Street to the point of beginning.
Precinct 225
Beginning at the centerline intersection of University Avenue and 92nd Street;
Thence south, along the centerline of 92nd Street, to the centerline
intersection of Chalk Street;
Thence southeasterly, along the centerline of Chalk Street, to the centerline
intersection of 88th Street;
Thence south and southwesterly, along the centerline of 88th Street, to the
centerline intersection of Ashworth Road;
Thence west, along the centerline of Ashworth Road, to the centerline of 98th
Street (west corporate limits);
Thence north, along the centerline of 98th Street (west corporate limits), to
the centerline of University Avenue;
Thence east, along the centerline of University Avenue, to the point of
beginning.
Precinct 226
Beginning at the centerline intersection of University Avenue and Jordan Creek
Parkway Census Block number 1005 within tract number 050813;
Thence south, along the west side of Jordan Creek Parkway (Road), to Census
Block number 1025 within tract number 050814 and the centerline intersection of
Ashworth Road;
Thence west, along the centerline of Ashworth Road, to the centerline
intersection of 88th Street (north);
Thence north and northeasterly, along the centerline of 88th Street, to the
centerline intersection of Chalk Street;
Thence northwesterly, along the centerline of Chalk Street, to the centerline
intersection of 92nd Street;
Thence north, along the centerline of 92nd Street, to the centerline of
University Avenue;
Thence east, along the centerline of University Avenue, to the point of
beginning.
Precinct 227
Beginning at the centerline intersection of University Avenue and 59th Place
(Polk/Dallas County line);
Thence south, along the Polk/Dallas County line, to the centerline intersection
of Ashworth Road;
Thence west, along the centerline of Ashworth Road, to the west side Census
Block number 1025 within tract number 050814 west side of Jordan Creek Parkway
(Road);
Thence north, along the west side of Jordan Creek Parkway (Road) to Census
Block number 1005 within tract number 050813 and the centerline intersection of
University Avenue;
Thence east, along the centerline of University Avenue, to the point of
beginning.
THIRD WARD
Precinct 311
Beginning at the intersection of the centerline of E. P. True Parkway and the
west side of Interstate Highway 35;
Thence south, along the west side of Interstate Highway 35, to the centerline
intersection of Mills Civic Parkway;
Thence west, along the centerline of Mills Civic Parkway, to the centerline
intersection of South 60th Street (Polk/Dallas County line);
Thence north, along South 60th Street (Polk/Dallas County line), to Census
Block number 1011 within tract number 011026 and the north side of E.P. True
Parkway (Road),
Thence east, to a point on Census Block number 1011 within tract 011026 along
the north side of E. P. True Parkway to the centerline of E.P. True Parkway;
Thence east along the centerline of E.P. True Parkway to the point of
beginning.
Precinct 312
Beginning at the centerline intersection of Ashworth Road and 50th Street;
Thence south, along the centerline of 50th Street, to the north side of Mills
Civic Parkway (Road) Census Block 1014 within Tract Number 011027;
Thence westerly along the north side of Mills Civic Parkway (Road) Census Block
1014 within Tract Number 011027 to the centerline of Mills Civic Parkway;
Thence westerly, along the centerline of Mills Civic Parkway, to the west side
of Interstate Highway 35;
Thence north, along the west side of Interstate Highway 35, to the centerline
intersection Ashworth Road;
Thence east, along the centerline of Ashworth Road, to the point of beginning.
Precinct 313
Beginning at the centerline intersection of 39th Street and Ashworth Road;
Thence south, along the centerline of 39th Street, to the centerline
intersection E. P. True Parkway;
Thence west, along the centerline of E. P. True Parkway, to the centerline
intersection of South 41st Street;
Thence south and southwest, along the centerline of South 41st Street, to the
centerline of Westwood Drive;
Thence west, along the centerline of Westwood Drive, to the centerline of South
50th Street;
Thence north, along the centerline of South 50th Street/50th Street, to the
centerline intersection of Ashworth Road;
Thence east, along the centerline of Ashworth Road, to the point of beginning.
Precinct 314
Beginning at the centerline intersection of South 50th Street and the south
side of Mills Civic Parkway;
Thence south, along the centerline of South 50th Street to the centerline
intersection of Grand Avenue;
Thence east, along the centerline of Grand Avenue to the intersection of Census
Block number 3034 within Tract Number 011028 and Scenic Valley Drive;
Thence southeast to a point intersecting on the centerline of the Iowa
Interstate Railroad tracks and Raccoon River Drive Park entrance;
Thence southwest, along the centerline of the Iowa Interstate Railroad Tracks,
to the high water mark on the north bank of the Raccoon River;
Thence west, along the high water mark on the north bank of the Raccoon River,
to the Polk/Dallas County Line;
Thence north, along the Polk/Dallas County Line (South 60th Street), to the
centerline intersection of Mills Civic Parkway;
Thence east along the centerline of Mills Civic Parkway to Census Block 1014
within Tract Number 011027;
Thence east, along the south side of Mills Civic Parkway (Road) to Census Block
1013 within Tract Number 011027 to the point of beginning.
Precinct 315
Beginning at the centerline intersection of E. P. True Parkway and Mills Civic
Parkway;
Thence south and southwesterly, along the west/southwest side of Mills Civic
Parkway, to the centerline intersection of South 35th Street;
Thence south, along the centerline of South 35th Street, to the centerline
intersection of Grand Avenue;
Thence west, along the centerline of Grand Avenue to the centerline
intersection of South 50th Street;
Thence north, along the centerline of South 50th Street, to the centerline of
Westwood Drive;
Thence east, along the centerline of Westwood Drive, to the centerline
intersection of South 41st Street;
Thence north and east, along the centerline of South 41st Street, to the
centerline of E. P. True Parkway;
Thence east, along the centerline of E. P. True Parkway. to the point of
beginning.
Precinct 316
Beginning at the centerline intersection of Fuller Road and Grand Avenue;
Thence southwesterly, along the centerline of Grand Avenue, to the centerline
intersection of South 35th Street;
Thence north, along the centerline of South 35th Street to the south side of
Mills Civic Parkway (Road) and Census Block Number 2012 within Tract Number
011028;
Thence east and northeasterly, along the south side of Mills Civic Parkway
(Road) to Census Block Number 2012 within Tract Number 011028 and the
centerline of E.P. True Parkway;
Thence east, along the centerline of E.P. True Parkway, to the intersection of
Fairmeadows Creek;
Thence southeast along the north side of E.P. True Parkway (Road) to the
centerline of Grand Avenue;
Thence southwest to the intersection of Grand Avenue and South 19th Street;
Thence south, along the centerline of South 19th Street to the centerline of
Fuller Road;
Thence west, along the centerline of Fuller Road, to the point of beginning.
Precinct 321
Beginning at the centerline intersection of Wistful Vista Drive and South 68th
Street;
Thence east, along the centerline of Wistful Vista Drive, to the centerline
intersection of South 60th Street Polk/Dallas County line;
Thence south, along the Polk/Dallas County line (South 60th Street), to the
centerline intersection of Grand Avenue;
Thence west, along the centerline of Grand Avenue, to the centerline
intersection of South Jordan Creek Parkway;
Thence north, along the centerline of South Jordan Creek Parkway, to the
centerline intersection of Mills Civic Parkway;
Thence east, along the centerline of Mills Civic Parkway, to the centerline
intersection of South 68th Street;
Thence north, along the centerline of South 68th Street, to the point of
beginning.
Precinct 322
This precinct shall be composed of all incorporated territory in the City of
West Des Moines in Dallas County lying south of Mills Civic Parkway/335th
Street and west of South Jordan Creek Parkway and west of South 60th Street/
10th Street, not contained in Precinct 321.
Precinct 341
Beginning at the centerline intersection of the Dallas/Madison County line and
Utica Trail/Timberbrook Drive;
Thence southwesterly, along the centerline of Utica Trail/Timberbrook Avenue,
to the centerline intersection of 105th Street (Adams Street);
Thence easterly, along the centerline of 105th Street (Adams Street), to the
centerline intersection of the Timber Ridge Drive;
Thence north, along the centerline of Timber Ridge Drive to the intersection of
Madison Avenue;
Thence southwesterly, along the Dallas/Madison County line, to the point of
beginning.
and
Beginning at the centerline intersection of 105th Street/(Adams Street) and
Valley View Lane Madison County;
Thence north on Valley View Lane to the east corporate limit line;
Thence east on the West Des Moines east corporate limit line to the north
corporate limit line;
Thence north to the centerline of Madison Avenue/360th Street;
Thence east on Madison Avenue to the south corporate limit line;
Thence south to the centerline of 105th Street/(Adams Street);
Thence westerly, to the centerline of Valley View Lane and the point of
beginning. (Ord. 1449, 8-6-2001, eff. 1-15-2002; amd. Ord. 1465, 12-26-2001,
eff. 1-15-2002; Ord. 1643, 8-15-2005; Ord. 1929, 8-8-2011, eff. 1-15-2012; Ord.
2501, 12-20-2021, eff.1-15-2022)
CHAPTER 10
FINANCES
SECTION:
1-10-1: Purpose
1-10-2: Cash Control
1-10-3: Funds Control
1-10-4: Investment Of Funds
1-10-5: Budgets
1-10-5-1: Operating Budget Preparation
1-10-5-2: Reserved
1-10-5-3: Budget Amendments
1-10-6: Records And Reports
1-10-7: Unauthorized Expenditure
1-10-8: Purchase Orders
1-10-9: Non-Discrimination
1-10-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to establish policies and provide for rules and
regulations governing the management of the financial affairs of the City.
(1985 Code §1-1.0401)
1-10-2: CASH CONTROL:
To assure the proper accounting and safe custody of monies, the following shall
apply: (1985 Code §1-1.0403; amd. 1993 Code)
A.   Deposit Of Funds: All monies or fees collected for any purpose by any City
officer shall be deposited through the Office of the Finance Director. If any
said fees are due to an officer, they shall be paid to him by check drawn by
the Finance Director and approved by the Council only upon such officer's
making adequate reports relating thereto as required by law, ordinance or
Council directive. (1985 Code §1-1.0403; amd. 1993 Code; Ord. 1878, 8-23-2010,
eff. 9-17-2010)
B.   Bank Deposits: All monies belonging to the City shall be promptly
deposited in banks selected by the Council in amounts not exceeding the
authorized depository limitation established by the Council. (1985 Code §1-
1.0403; amd. 1993 Code)
C.   Change Fund: The Finance Director is authorized, at his discretion, to
draw a check on the General Fund for establishing departmental petty cash
accounts to accommodate disbursements of small amounts for operating purposes
and making change, without commingling other funds to meet the requirements of
said office. The funds shall be operated on an imprest basis not to exceed a
total amount as authorized by resolution of the City Council. Disbursements
from departmental petty cash accounts shall be evidenced by supporting data,
properly approved as to propriety and authenticity. (1985 Code §1-1.0403; amd.
1993 Code; Ord. 1878, 8-23-2010, eff. 9-17-2010)
1-10-3: FUNDS CONTROL:
The Finance Director shall establish and maintain separate and distinct funds
in accordance with the following: (1985 Code §1-1.0404; amd. 1993 Code; Ord.
1878, 8-23-2010, eff. 9-17-2010)
A.   Revenues: All monies received by the City shall be credited to the proper
fund as required by law, ordinance or resolution.
B.   Expenditures: No disbursement shall be made from a fund unless such
disbursement is authorized by law, ordinance or resolution, was properly
budgeted, and supported by a claim approved by the Council.
C.   Emergency Fund: No transfer may be made from any fund to the Emergency
Fund.
D.   Debt Service Fund: Except where specifically prohibited by State law,
monies may be transferred from any other City fund to the Debt Service Fund to
meet payments of principal and interest. Such transfers must be authorized by
the original budget or a budget amendment.
E.   Capital Improvements Reserve Fund: Except where specifically prohibited by
State law, monies may be transferred from any City fund to the Capital
Improvements Reserve Fund. Such transfers must be authorized by the original
budget or a budget amendment. (1985 Code §1-1.0404; amd. 1993 Code)
F.   Balancing Of Funds: The Finance Director shall reconcile fund accounts at
the close of each month and submit a report thereof to the Council. (1985 Code
§1-1.0404; amd. 1993 Code; Ord. 1878, 8-23-2010, eff. 9-17-2010)
1-10-4: INVESTMENT OF FUNDS:
The Finance Director shall advise the Council on investments and shall invest
City monies not immediately needed at interest in accordance with Council
directives and the requirements of chapter 452, Code of Iowa. (1985 Code §1-
1.0408; amd. 1993 Code; Ord. 1878, 8-23-2010, eff. 9-17-2010)
1-10-5: BUDGETS:
1-10-5-1: OPERATING BUDGET PREPARATION:
The annual operating budget of the City shall be prepared in accordance with
the following:
A.   Proposal Prepared: The City Manager shall be responsible for preparation
of the annual budget detail, for review and adoption by the Mayor and Council
in accordance with directives of the Mayor and Council. (1985 Code §1-1.0405;
amd. 1993 Code)
B.   Boards And Commissions: All boards, commissions and other administrative
agencies of the City that are authorized to prepare and administer budgets must
submit their budget proposals to the Finance Director for inclusion in the
proposed City budget no later than a date determined by the City Manager.
C.   Submission To Council: The Finance Director shall submit the completed
budget proposal to the Council no later than February 15 of each year. (1985
Code §1-1.0405; amd. 1993 Code; Ord. 1878, 8-23-2010, eff. 9-17-2010)
D.   Council Review: The Council shall review the proposed budget and may make
any adjustments in the budget which it deems appropriate before accepting such
proposal for publication, hearing and final adoption.
E.   Notice Of Hearing: Upon adopting a proposed budget, the Council shall set
a date for public hearing thereon to be held before March 15 and cause notice
of such hearing and a summary of the proposed budget to be published not less
than four (4) nor more than twenty (20) days before the date established for
the hearing. Proof of such publication must be filed with the county auditor.
F.   Copies Of Budget On File: No later than ten (10) days before the public
hearing, the clerk shall make available a sufficient number of copies of the
detailed budget to meet the requests of taxpayers and organizations and have
them available for distribution at the offices of the mayor and clerk and at
the city library.
G.   Adoption And Certification: After the hearing, the council shall adopt, by
resolution, a budget for at least the next fiscal year, and the clerk shall
certify the necessary tax levy for the next fiscal year to the county auditor
and the county board of supervisors of Polk and Dallas Counties. The tax levy
certified may be less than, but not more than, the amount estimated in the
proposed budget. Two (2) copies each of the detailed budget as adopted and of
the tax certificate must be transmitted to the county auditor. (1985 Code §1-
1.0405; amd. 1993 Code)
1-10-5-2: RESERVED:
1-10-5-3: BUDGET AMENDMENTS:
A city budget finally adopted for the following fiscal year becomes effective
July 1 and constitutes the city appropriation for each program and purpose
specified therein until amended as provided by this section.
A.   Program Increase: Any increase in the amount appropriated to a program
must be prepared, adopted and subject to protest in the same manner as the
original budget.
B.   Program Transfer: Any transfer of appropriation from one program to
another must be prepared, adopted and subject to protest in the same manner as
the original budget.
C.   Subprogram Transfer: Any transfer of appropriation from one subprogram to
another must be approved by resolution of the council. (1985 Code §1-1.0407;
amd. 1993 Code)
D.   Activity Transfers: The finance director, with the advice and consent of
the city manager, shall have the authority to adjust, by transfer or otherwise,
the appropriation allocated to activities within a program or subprogram;
provided, however, that when such adjustments in any one activity aggregate one
thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or ten percent (10%) of the amount appropriated,
whichever is greater, no further adjustments shall be made without approval by
resolution of the council. All such transfers shall be reported in writing at
the next regular meeting of the council following the transfer and recorded in
the minutes for the information of the council and general public. (1985 Code
§1-1.0407; amd. 1993 Code; Ord. 1878, 8-23-2010, eff. 9-17-2010)
1-10-6: RECORDS AND REPORTS:
A.   Accounting Records: The accounting records of the city shall consist of
not less than the following:
1.   Books Of Original Entry: There shall be established and maintained books
of original entry to provide a chronological record of cash received and
disbursed.
2.   General Ledger: There shall be established and maintained a general ledger
controlling all cash transactions, budgetary accounts and for recording
unappropriated surpluses. (1985 Code §1-1.0409; amd. 1993 Code)
3.   Checks: Checks shall be prenumbered and signed by the finance director
following council approval, except as provided by subsection A5 of this
section. (1985 Code §1-1.0409; amd. 1993 Code; Ord. 1878, 8-23-2010, eff. 9-17-
2010)
4.   Budget Accounts: There shall be established such individual accounts to
record receipts by source and expenditures by program, subprogram and activity
as will provide adequate information and control for budgeting purposes as
planned and approved by the council. Each individual account shall be
maintained within its proper fund and so kept that receipts can be immediately
and directly compared with revenue estimates and expenditures can be related to
the authorizing appropriation. No expenditure shall be posted except to the
appropriation for the function and purpose for which the expense was incurred.
(1985 Code §1-1.0409; amd. 1993 Code)
5.   Immediate Payment Authorized: The council may, by resolution, authorize
the finance director to issue checks for immediate payment of amounts due
which, if not paid promptly, would result in loss of discount, penalty for late
payment or additional interest cost. Any such payments made shall be reported
to the council for review and approval with and in the same manner as other
claims at the next meeting following such payment. The resolution authorizing
immediate payment shall specify the type of payment so authorized and may
include, but is not limited to, payment of utility bills, contractual
obligations, payroll and bond principal and interest.
6.   Utilities: The finance director shall perform and be responsible for
accounting functions of the municipally owned utilities except those under the
control and management of the utility board of trustees. (1985 Code §1-1.0409;
amd. 1993 Code; Ord. 1878, 8-23-2010, eff. 9-17-2010)
B.   Financial Reports: The finance director shall prepare and file the
following financial reports: (1985 Code §1-1.0410; amd. 1993 Code; Ord. 1878,
8-23-2010, eff. 9-17-2010)
1.   Monthly Reports: There shall be submitted to the council, each month, a
report showing the activity and status of each fund, program, subprogram and
activity for the preceding month.
2.   Annual Report: Not later than October 1 of each year or a subsequent date
determined by the state auditor, there shall be published an annual report
containing a summary for the preceding fiscal year of all collections and
receipts, all accounts due the city, and all expenditures, the current public
debt of the city, and the legal debt limit of the City for the current fiscal
year. A copy of the annual report must be furnished to the auditor of State.
(1985 Code §1-1.0410; amd. 1993 Code)
1-10-7: UNAUTHORIZED EXPENDITURE:
No City official or employee, or any person acting under color of such office
or employment, shall knowingly make any contract or authorize any expenditure
known by him or her to be in excess of that authorized by law. (1985 Code
§1.0412)
1-10-8: PURCHASE ORDERS:
All purchases of supplies, material, services or equipment shall be made in
accordance with procedures established by the City Manager and approved by the
Council. (1985 Code §1-1.0414)
1-10-9: NON-DISCRIMINATION:
The City of West Des Moines does not discriminate on the basis of age, color,
creed, disability, gender identity, national origin, race, religion, sex,
sexual orientation, or veteran status. Contractors and vendors doing business
with the City of West Des Moines shall not discriminate against any employees
or applicants for employment on the basis of age, color, creed, disability,
gender identity, national origin, race, religion, sex, sexual orientation, or
veteran status and shall include a similar non- discrimination provision in all
agreements associated with their business agreements with the City of West Des
Moines. (Ord. 2279, 2-20-2018)
ARTICLE A. INDUSTRIAL TAX ABATEMENT
SECTION:
1-10A-1: Purpose
1-10A-2: Definitions
1-10A-3: Tax Exemption
1-10A-4: Exemption Prohibited
1-10A-5: Application for Exemption
1-10A-6: Exemption May be Repealed
1-10A-1: PURPOSE:
This Article shall provide for a partial exemption from property taxation of
the actual value added to industrial real estate by new construction of
industrial real estate, research-service facilities, warehouses, distribution
centers and acquisition of or improvement to machinery and equipment assessed
as real estate pursuant to section 427A.1, subsection 1, paragraph e, Code of
Iowa, as amended. (Ord. 894, 10-30-89)
1-10A-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this Article, the following terms are defined:
DISTRIBUTION CENTER:
A.   Means a building or structure used primarily for the storage of goods
which are intended for subsequent shipment to retail outlets.
B.   Does not mean a building or structure used primarily to store raw
agricultural products, used primarily by a manufacturer to store good to be
used in the manufacturing process, used primarily for the storage of petroleum
products or used for the retail sale of goods.
NEW CONSTRUCTION:
A.   Means a new building and structures and includes new buildings and
structures which are constructed as additions to existing buildings and
structures.
B.   Does not include reconstruction of an existing building or structure which
does not constitute complete replacement of an existing building or structure,
unless the reconstruction of an existing building or structure is required due
to economic obsolescence, and the reconstruction is necessary to implement
recognized industry standards for the manufacturing and processing of specific
products, and the reconstruction is required for the owner of the building or
structure to continue to competitively manufacture or process those products;
which determination shall receive prior approval form the City Council upon the
recommendation of the Iowa Department of Economic Development. The exemption
shall also apply to new machinery and equipment assessed as real estate
pursuant to section 427A.1, subsection 1, paragraph e, Code of Iowa, as
amended, unless the machinery or equipment is part of the normal replacement or
operating process to maintain or expand the existing operational status.
RESEARCH-SERVICE FACILITIES: A building or group of buildings devoted primarily
to research and development activities, including, but not limited to, the
design and production or manufacture of prototype products for experimental
use, and corporate-research services which do not have a primary purpose of
providing on-site services to the public.
WAREHOUSE: A building or structure used as a public warehouse for the storage
of goods pursuant to chapter 554, article 7, Iowa Code, except that it does not
mean a building or structure used primarily to store raw agricultural products
or from which goods are sold at retail. (Ord. 894, 10-30-89)
1-10A-3: TAX EXEMPTION:
The amount of actual value added which is eligible and to which this exemption
from taxation applies shall be as follows:
A.   For the first year, seventy five percent (75%).
B.   For the second year, sixty percent (60%).
C.   For the third year, forty five percent (45%).
D.   For the fourth year, thirty percent (30%).
E.   For the fifth year, fifteen percent (15%). (1985 Code §1-6.03)
1-10A-4: EXEMPTION PROHIBITED:
A.   Dual Exemptions: A property tax exemption under this Article shall not be
granted if the property for which an exemption is being claimed has received,
or is receiving any other property tax exemption authorized by law.
B.   Assessed Value Not Reduced Below Starting Value. The granting of an
exemption under this Chapter for new construction constituting complete
replacement of an existing building or structure shall not result in an
assessed value of the industrial real estate being reduced below the assessed
value of the industrial real estate before the start of the new construction
added. (1985 Code §1-6.04)
1-10A-5: APPLICATION FOR EXEMPTION:
Applications for exemption under this Chapter shall be made pursuant to the
provisions of section 427B.4 of the Code of Iowa, as amended. (1985 Code §1-
6.05)
1-10A-6: EXEMPTION MAY BE REPEALED:
When in the opinion of the City Council continuation of the exemption granted
by this Article, and pursuant to chapter 427B of the Code of Iowa, ceases to be
a benefit to the City, the Council may repeal this Article, but existing
exemptions shall continue until their expiration. (1985 Code §1-6.06)
ARTICLE B. TAX INCREMENT FINANCING
SECTION:
1-10B-1: Valley Junction Urban Renewal Project Area (Rep. by Ord. 2207, 3-20-
2017)
1-10B-2: Westown Parkway Urban Renewal Project Area
1-10B-3: Glenoaks Urban Renewal Project Area
1-10B-4: Valley Junction/Railroad Avenue Urban Renewal Plan Area
1-10B-5: Westown III Urban Renewal Project Area
1-10B-6: Westown IV Urban Renewal Project Area
1-10B-7: Mills Parkway Urban Renewal Project Area
1-10B-8: Westown V Urban Renewal Area
1-10B-9: Ashworth Corridor Urban Renewal Area
1-10B-10: Fuller Road Urban Renewal District
1-10B-11: 4125 Westown Parkway Urban Renewal Area (Rep. by Ord. 2495, 11-1-
2021)
1-10B-12: Alluvion Urban Renewal Area (Willow Creek Plat 1)
1-10B-13: Alluvion Urban Renewal Area (Tract 3 Of Amendment 2 Parcel)
1-10B-13-1: Alluvion Urban Renewal Area 2019 Addition
1-10B-14: Coachlight Drive Urban Renewal Area
1-10B-14-1: Coachlight Drive Urban Renewal Area 2018 Addition
1-10B-14-2: Coachlight Drive Urban Renewal Area Deleted Property
1-10B-15: Jordan Creek Urban Renewal Area (Amended Area) Rep. by Ord. 2388, 11-
18-2019)
1-10B-16: Historic West Des Moines Urban Renewal Area
1-10B-16-1:   Historic West Des Moines Urban Renewal Area 2019 Addition
1-10B-17: Osmium Urban Renewal Area (Microsoft Parcel)
1-10B-18: Midtown Urban Renewal Area
1-10B-19: E.P. True Parkway Urban Renewal Area
1-10B-20: Woodland Hills Urban Renewal Area
1-10B-20-1: Woodland Hills Urban Renewal Area 2018 Addition
1-10B-20-2:   Woodland Hills Urban Renewal Area Deleted Property
1-10B-21: Grand Ridge Urban Renewal Area
1-10B-22: 1525 Grand Urban Renewal Area
1-10B-23: 8300 Mills Civic Parkway Urban Renewal Area
1-10B-24: Iowa Clinic Urban Renewal Area
1-10B-25: University Avenue Corridor Urban Renewal Area (Claim Doc Parcel)
1-10B-26: Grand Prairie Parkway Urban Renewal Area (Microsoft Parcels)
1-10B-27: Alluvion Urban Renewal Area (2021 Parcels)
1-10B-28
: Ponderosa Urban Renewal Plan-Removing Property
1-10B-1: VALLEY JUNCTION URBAN RENEWAL PROJECT AREA:
(Rep. by Ord. 2207, 3-20-2017)
1-10B-2: WESTOWN PARKWAY URBAN RENEWAL PROJECT AREA:
A.   The taxes levied on the taxable property in each district of the urban
renewal project area known as the Westown Parkway Urban Renewal Project Area,
as legally described in the preamble of the ordinances codified herein, by and
for the benefit of the State of Iowa, City of West Des Moines, Counties of Polk
and Dallas, West Des Moines Community School District, the Waukee Community
School District, and all other taxing districts from and after the effective
date hereof, shall be divided as hereinafter in this section provided. (Ord.
982, 12-16-1992; amd. Ord. 990, 12-23-1991)
B.   That portion of the taxes which would be produced by the rate at which the
tax is levied each year by or for each of the taxing districts taxing property
in the respective tax increment financing districts within said Westown Parkway
Urban Renewal Project Area upon the total sum of the assessed value on the
assessment roll of January 1, 1993, being the first day of the calendar year
preceding the effective date hereof, shall be allocated to and, when collected,
be paid into the fund for the respective taxing district as taxes by or for
said taxing district into which all other Property Taxes are paid.
C.   That portion of the taxes each year in excess of the base period taxes
determined as provided in subsection B of this Section shall be allocated to
and, when collected, be paid into a special tax increment fund of the City
hereby established in each county, to pay the principal of and the interest on
loans, monies advanced to, indebtedness, whether funded, refunded, assumed or
otherwise, including bonds or obligations issued under the authority of
sections 403.9 and 403.12 of the Code of Iowa, as amended, incurred by the
City, to finance or refinance in whole or in part projects undertaken pursuant
to the amended Westown Parkway Urban Renewal Project Program, except that taxes
for the payment of bonds and interest of each taxing district levying taxes on
said project area shall be collected against all taxable property within the
project area without any limitation as hereinabove provided. (Ord. 1105, 10-24-
1994)
D.   All taxes levied and collected upon the taxable property in said Westown
Parkway Urban Renewal Project Area shall be paid into the funds of the taxing
districts as taxes by or for said taxing districts in the same manner as all
other property taxes, unless or until the total assessed valuation of the
taxable property in said Urban Renewal Project Area shall exceed the total
assessed value of the taxable property in each tax increment financing district
in said Urban Renewal Project Area on the effective date hereof.
E.   At such time as the loans, monies advanced, bonds and interest thereon and
indebtedness of the City hereinabove in subsection C referred to have been
paid, all monies thereafter received from taxes upon the taxable property in
the Westown Parkway Urban Renewal Project Area shall be paid into the funds for
the respective taxing districts in the same manner as taxes on all other
property.
F.   All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with the provisions of
this Section are hereby repealed. The provisions of this Section are intended
and shall be construed so as to fully implement the provisions of section
403.19 of the Code of Iowa, as amended, with respect to the division of taxes
from property within the Urban Renewal Project Area as described above. In the
event that any provision of this Section shall be determined to be contrary to
law, it shall not affect other provisions or application of this Section, which
shall at all times be construed to fully invoke the provisions of section
403.19 of the Code of Iowa with reference to said Urban Renewal Project and the
territory therein. (Ord. 982, 12-16-1991; amd. Ord. 990, 12-23-1991)
1-10B-3: GLENOAKS URBAN RENEWAL PROJECT AREA:
A.   The taxes levied on the taxable property in the Urban Renewal Project Area
known as the Glenoaks Urban Renewal Project Area, as legally described in the
preamble of Ordinance 987 on file in the office of the City Clerk, by and for
the benefit of the State of Iowa, City of West Des Moines, counties of Polk and
Dallas, West Des Moines Community School District, and all other taxing
districts from and after the effective date hereof, shall be divided as
hereinafter in this Section provided.
B.   That portion of the taxes which would be produced by the rate at which the
tax is levied each year by or for each of the taxing districts taxing property
in said Glenoaks Urban Renewal Project Area upon the total sum of the assessed
value on the assessment roll of January 1, 1990, being the first day of the
calendar year preceding the effective date hereof, shall be allocated to and,
when collected, be paid into the fund for the respective taxing district as
taxes by or for said taxing district into which all other property taxes are
paid.
C.   That portion of the taxes each year in excess of the base period taxes
determined as provided in subsection B of this Section, shall be allocated to
and, when collected, be paid into a special tax increment fund of the City
hereby established to pay the principal of and the interest on loans, monies
advanced to, indebtedness, whether funded, refunded, assumed or otherwise,
including bonds or obligations issued under the authority of sections 403.9 and
403.12 of the Code of Iowa, as amended, incurred by the City, to finance or
refinance in whole or in part projects undertaken pursuant to the Glenoaks
Urban Renewal Project Program, except that taxes for the payment of bonds and
interest of each taxing district levying taxes on said project area shall be
collected against all taxable property within the project area without any
limitation as hereinabove provided.
D.   All taxes levied and collected upon the taxable property in said Glenoaks
Urban Renewal Project Area shall be paid into the funds of the taxing districts
as taxes by or for said taxing districts in the same manner as all other
property taxes, unless or until the total assessed valuation of the taxable
property in said Urban Renewal Project Area shall exceed the total assessed
value of the taxable property in said Urban Renewal Project Area on the date of
the effective date hereof.
E.   At such time as the loans, monies advanced, bonds and interest thereon and
indebtedness of the City hereinabove in subsection C referred to have been
paid, all monies thereafter received from taxes upon the taxable property in
the Glenoaks Urban Renewal Project Area shall be paid into the funds for the
respective taxing districts in the same manner as taxes on all other property.
F.   All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with the provisions of
this Section are hereby repealed. The provisions of this Section are intended
and shall be construed so as to fully implement the provisions of section
403.19 of the Code of Iowa, as amended, with respect to the division of taxes
from property within the Urban Renewal Project Area as described above. In the
event that any provision of this Section shall be determined to be contrary to
law, it shall not affect other provisions or application of this Section which
shall at all times be construed to fully invoke the provisions of section
403.19 of the Code of Iowa with reference to said Urban Renewal Project and the
territory therein. (Ord. 987, 12-23-1991)
1-10B-4: VALLEY JUNCTION/RAILROAD AVENUE URBAN RENEWAL PLAN AREA:
A.   The taxes levied on the taxable property in the Polk County Tax Increment
Financing District of the Urban Renewal Project Area known as the Valley
Junction/Railroad Avenue Urban Renewal Plan Area, as legally described in the
preamble of Ordinance 1161, by and for the benefit of the State of Iowa, City
of West Des Moines, Polk County, West Des Moines Community School District, and
all other taxing districts from and after the effective date hereof, shall be
divided as hereinafter in this Section provided.
B.   That portion of the taxes which would be produced by the rate at which the
tax is levied each year by or for each of the taxing districts taxing property
in the Polk County Tax Increment Financing District within said Valley
Junction/Railroad Avenue Urban Renewal Plan Area upon the total sum of the
assessed value on the assessment roll of January 1, 1994, being the first day
of the calendar year preceding the effective date hereof, shall be allocated to
and, when collected, be paid into the fund for the respective taxing district
as taxed by or for said taxing district into which all other property taxes are
paid.
C.   That portion of the taxes each year in excess of the base period taxes
determined as provided in subsection B of this Section shall be allocated to
and, when collected, be paid into a special tax increment fund of the City
hereby established, to pay the principal of and the interest on loans, monies
advanced to, indebtedness, whether funded, refunded, assumed or otherwise,
including bonds or obligations issued under the authority of sections 403.9 and
403.12 of the Code of Iowa, as amended, incurred by the City, to finance or
refinance in whole or in part projects undertaken pursuant to the Valley
Junction/Railroad Avenue Urban Renewal Plan, except that taxes for the payments
of bonds and interest of each taxing district levying taxes on said project
area shall be collected against all taxable property within the project area
without any limitation as hereinabove provided.
D.   All taxes levied and collected upon the taxable property in said Valley
Junction/Railroad Avenue Urban Renewal Plan Area shall be paid into the funds
of the taxing districts as taxes by or for said taxing districts in the same
manner as all other property taxes unless or until the total assessed valuation
of the taxable property in said Urban Renewal Plan Area shall exceed the total
assessed value of the taxable property in the Polk County Tax Increment
Financing District in said Urban Renewal Plan Area on the date of adoption
hereof.
E.   At such time as the loans, monies advanced, bonds and interest thereon and
indebtedness of the City hereinabove in subsection C of this Section referred
to have been paid, all monies thereafter received from taxes upon the taxable
property in the Valley Junction/Railroad Avenue Urban Renewal Plan Area shall
be paid into the funds for the respective taxing districts in the same manner
as taxes on all other property.
F.   All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with the provisions of
this Section are hereby repealed. The provisions of this Section are intended
and shall be construed so as to fully implement the provisions of section
403.19 of the Code of Iowa, as amended, with respect to the division of taxes
from property within the Urban Renewal Project Area as described above. In the
event that any provision of this Section shall be determined to be contrary to
law, it shall not affect other provisions or application of this Section, which
shall at all times be construed to fully invoke the provisions of section
403.19 of the Code of Iowa with reference to said Urban Renewal Plan and the
territory therein. (Ord. 1161, 12-18-1995)
1-10B-5: WESTOWN III URBAN RENEWAL PROJECT AREA:
A.   That the taxes levied on the taxable property in the Urban Renewal Project
Area legally described in the preamble of Ordinance 1327, by and for the
benefit of the State of Iowa, City of West Des Moines, counties of Polk and
Dallas, West Des Moines Community School District, and all other taxing
districts from and after the effective date hereof shall be divided as
hereinafter in this Section provided.
B.   That portion of the taxes which would be produced by the rate at which the
tax is levied each year by or for each of the taxing districts upon the total
sum of the assessed value of the taxable property in the Urban Renewal Project
Area, as shown on the assessment roll as of January 1 of the calendar year
preceding the first calendar year in which the City certifies to the county
auditor the amount of loans, advances, indebtedness, or bonds payable from the
division of property tax revenue described herein (which certification is
directed to be made during the 1998 calendar year), shall be allocated to and
when collected be paid into the fund for the respective taxing district as
taxes by or for the taxing district into which all other property taxes are
paid.
C.   That portion of the taxes each year in excess of the base period taxes
determined as provided in subsection B of this Section shall be allocated to
and when collected be paid into a special tax increment fund of the City hereby
established, to pay the principal of and interest on loans, monies advanced to,
indebtedness, whether funded, refunded, assumed or otherwise, including bonds
or obligations issued under the authority of section 403.9 or 403.12 of the
Code of Iowa, as amended, incurred by the City, to finance or refinance, in
whole or in part, urban renewal projects undertaken within the Urban Renewal
Project Area pursuant to the Urban Renewal Plan, except that taxes for the
payment of bonds and interest of each taxing district shall be collected
against all taxable property within the Urban Renewal Project Area without any
limitation as hereinabove provided.
D.   Unless or until the total assessed valuation of the taxable property in
the Urban Renewal Project Area exceeds the total assessed value of the taxable
property in the Urban Renewal Project Area as shown by the assessment roll
referred to in subsection B of this section, all of the taxes levied and
collected upon the taxable property in the urban renewal project area shall be
paid into the funds for the respective taxing districts as taxes by or for said
taxing districts in the same manner as all other Property Taxes.
E.   At such time as the loans, advances, indebtedness, bonds and interest
thereon of the City referred to in subsection C of this section have been paid,
all monies thereafter received from taxes upon the taxable property in the
urban renewal project area shall be paid into the funds for the respective
taxing districts in the same manner as taxes on all other property.
F.   All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with the provisions of
this section are hereby repealed. The provisions of this section are intended
and shall be construed so as to fully implement the provisions of section
403.19 of the Code of Iowa, as amended, with respect to the division of taxes
from property within the urban renewal project area as described above. In the
event that any provision of this section shall be determined to be contrary to
law, it shall not affect other provisions or application of this section which
shall at all times be construed to fully invoke the provisions of section
403.19 of the Code of Iowa with reference to the urban renewal project area and
the territory contained therein. (Ord. 1327, 9-21-1998)
1-10B-6: WESTOWN IV URBAN RENEWAL PROJECT AREA:
A.   The taxes levied on the taxable property in the urban renewal project area
legally described in the preamble of the ordinance codified herein, by and for
the benefit of the State of Iowa, City of West Des Moines, County of Polk, West
Des Moines Community School District, and all other taxing districts from and
after the effective date hereof shall be divided as provided in this section.
B.   That portion of the taxes which would be produced by the rate at which the
tax is levied each year by or for each of the taxing districts upon the total
sum of the assessed value of the taxable property in the urban renewal project
area, as shown on the assessment roll as of January 1 of the calendar year
preceding the first calendar year in which the City certifies to the County
auditor the amount of loans, advances, indebtedness, or bonds payable from the
division of Property Tax revenue described herein (which certification is
directed to be made during the 1998 calendar year), shall be allocated to and
when collected be paid into the fund for the respective taxing district as
taxes by or for the taxing district into which all other Property Taxes are
paid.
C.   That portion of the taxes each year in excess of the base period taxes
determined as provided in subsection B of this section shall be allocated to
and when collected be paid into a special Tax Increment Fund of the City hereby
established, to pay the principal of and interest on loans, monies advanced to,
indebtedness, whether funded, refunded, assumed or otherwise, including bonds
or obligations issued under the authority of section 403.9 or 403.12 of the
Code of Iowa, as amended, incurred by the City, to finance or refinance, in
whole or in part, urban renewal projects undertaken within the urban renewal
project area pursuant to the urban renewal plan, except that taxes for the
payment of bonds and interest of each taxing district shall be collected
against all taxable property within the urban renewal project area without any
limitation as hereinabove provided.
D.   Unless or until the total assessed valuation of the taxable property in
the urban renewal project area exceeds the total assessed value of the taxable
property in the urban renewal project area as shown by the assessment roll
referred to in subsection B of this section, all of the taxes levied and
collected upon the taxable property in the urban renewal project area shall be
paid into the funds for the respective taxing districts as taxes by or for said
taxing districts in the same manner as all other Property Taxes.
E.   At such time as the loans, advances, indebtedness, bonds and interest
thereon of the City referred to in subsection C of this section have been paid,
all monies thereafter received from taxes upon the taxable property in the
urban renewal project area shall be paid into the funds for the respective
taxing districts in the same manner as taxes on all other property.
F.   All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with the provisions of
this section are hereby repealed. The provisions of this section are intended
and shall be construed so as to fully implement the provisions of section
403.19 of the Code of Iowa, as amended, with respect to the division of taxes
from property within the urban renewal project area as described above. In the
event that any provision of this section shall be determined to be contrary to
law, it shall not affect other provisions or application of this section which
shall at all times be construed to fully invoke the provisions of section
403.19 of the Code of Iowa with reference to the urban renewal project area and
the territory contained therein. (Ord. 1328, 9-21-1998)
1-10B-7: MILLS PARKWAY URBAN RENEWAL PROJECT AREA:
A.   For purposes of this section, the following terms shall have the following
meanings:
AMENDED AREA: That portion of the City of West Des Moines, State of Iowa,
included within the Original Tax Increment District (less the property removed
by the Amendment No. 4 Area), the Tax Increment Subdistrict Nos. 1, 3, 4, 5, 6,
and 7, and the Tax Increment Subdistrict No. 8 portion of the Amendment No. 5
Area, less the property removed by the Amendment No. 6 Area and the Amendment
No. 8 Area, which Amended Area includes the lots and parcels located within the
area legally described this subsection A.
AMENDMENT NO. 3 AREA: Did not add or remove land.
AMENDMENT NO. 4 AREA: That portion of the City of West Des Moines, Iowa
described in the Amendment to the Amended and Restated Urban Renewal Plan for
the Mills Parkway Urban Renewal Area approved by Resolution No. 13-11-11-07 on
November 11, 2013, which removed the lots and parcels located within the area
legally described in the ordinance codified herein.
AMENDMENT NO. 5 AREA: That portion of the City of West Des Moines, Iowa
described in the Amendment to the Amended and Restated Urban Renewal Plan for
the Mills Parkway Urban Renewal Area approved by Resolution No. 14-11-17-09 on
November 17, 2014, which added the lots and parcels located within the area
legally described in the ordinance codified herein.
AMENDMENT NO. 6 AREA: That portion of the City of West Des Moines, Iowa
described in amendment to the amended and restated urban renewal plan for the
Mills Parkway Urban Renewal Area approved by Resolution No. 18-06-25-12 on June
25, 2018, which removed the lots and parcels located within Subdistrict No. 7
Area legally described in the ordinance codified herein.
AMENDMENT NO. 7 AREA: Did not add or remove land.
AMENDMENT NO. 8 AREA: That portion of the City of West Des Moines, Iowa
described in the Amendment No. 8 to the Amended and Restated Urban Renewal Plan
for the Mills Parkway Urban Renewal Area approved by Resolution No. ________ on
July 20, 2020, which removes the lots and parcels located within the
Subdistrict No. 8 Area legally described in the ordinance codified herein.
ORIGINAL TAX INCREMENT DISTRICT: That portion of the City of West Des Moines,
Iowa described in the Urban Renewal Plan for the Mills Parkway Urban Renewal
Area approved by Resolution No. 99-06-14-05 on June 14, 1999, and amended by
Resolution No. 03-11-10-05 on November 10, 2003 and Resolution No. 08-12-01-05
on December 1, 2008, which includes the lots and parcels located within the
area legally described in the ordinance codified herein.
TAX INCREMENT SUBDISTRICT NO. 1: That portion of the City of West Des Moines,
Iowa described in the Urban Renewal Plan for the Mills Parkway Urban Renewal
Area, as amended by Resolution No. 03-11-10-05 approved on November 10, 2003,
which includes the lots and parcels located within the area described in the
ordinance codified herein.
TAX INCREMENT SUBDISTRICT NO. 3: That portion of the City of West Des Moines,
Iowa described in the Urban Renewal Plan for the Mills Parkway Urban Renewal
Area, as amended by Resolution No. 03-11-10-05 approved on November 10, 2003,
which includes the lots and parcels located within the area described in the
ordinance codified herein.
TAX INCREMENT SUBDISTRICT NO. 4: That portion of the City of West Des Moines,
Iowa described in the Urban Renewal Plan for the Mills Parkway Urban Renewal
Area, as amended by Resolution No. 03-11-10-05 approved on November 10, 2003,
which includes the lots and parcels located within the area described in the
ordinance codified herein.
TAX INCREMENT SUBDISTRICT NO. 5: That portion of the City of West Des Moines,
Iowa described in the Amended and Restated Urban Renewal Plan for the Mills
Parkway Urban Renewal Area approved by Resolution No. 07-03-12-06 on March 12,
2007, which includes the lots and parcels located within the area legally
described in the ordinance codified herein.
TAX INCREMENT SUBDISTRICT NO. 6: That portion of the City of West Des Moines,
Iowa described in the Amendment to the Amended and Restated Urban Renewal Plan
for the Mills Parkway Urban Renewal Area approved by Roll Call No. 08-068 on
March 10, 2008 and Resolution No. 08-12-01-05 on December 1, 2008, which
includes the lots and parcels located within the area legally described in the
ordinance codified herein.
TAX INCREMENT SUBDISTRICT NO. 7: That portion of the City of West Des Moines,
Iowa described in the Amendment to the Amended and Restated Urban Renewal Plan
for the Mills Parkway Urban Renewal Area approved by Resolution No. 08-12-01-08
on December 1, 2008, which includes the lots and parcels located within the
area legally described in the ordinance codified herein.
B.   The taxes levied on the taxable property in subsection A of this section,
by and for the benefit of the State of Iowa, Counties of Dallas and Polk, Iowa,
Van Meter Community School District, Waukee Community School District, West Des
Moines Community School District, and all other taxing districts from and after
the effective date of this section shall be divided as hereinafter in this
section provided.
C.   As to the Original Tax Increment District, the District was removed from
the Mills Parkway Urban Renewal Area by Amendment No. 4 and Ordinance No. 2014.
As to Tax Increment Subdistrict Nos. 1, 3 and 4, base period taxes shall be
computed using the total assessed value shown on the assessment roll as of
January 1, 2002, being the first day of the calendar year preceding the
effective date of Ordinance No. 1560.
As to Tax Increment Subdistrict No. 5, base period taxes shall be computed
using the total assessed value shown on the assessment roll as of January 1,
2006, being the first day of the calendar year preceding the effective date of
Ordinance No. 1740.
As to Tax Increment Subdistrict No. 6, which consists of properties formerly
included within Tax Increment Subdistrict Nos. 2, 3 and 5, base period taxes
shall be computed in the same manner using the total assessed value shown on
the assessment roll as of January 1, 2007, being the first day of the calendar
year preceding the effective date of Ordinance No. 1800.
As to Tax Increment Subdistrict No. 7, which consists of properties formerly
included within the Original Tax Increment District, base period taxes shall be
computed in the same manner using the total assessed value shown on the
assessment roll as of January 1, 2007, being the first day of the calendar year
preceding the effective date of Ordinance No. 1824. Note: First certification
of debt was 2011, making Fiscal Year 2031-2032 the last year to collect Tax
Increment.
As to the Amendment No. 4 Area, no base period taxes are applicable because the
Amendment No. 4 Area removed the Original Mills Parkway District (for the
avoidance of doubt, Tax Increment Subdistrict No. 7 created by Ordinance No.
1824 is comprised of property formerly included within the Original Tax
Increment District, and Amendment No. 4/Ordinance No. 2014 did not remove the
property within Tax Increment Subdistrict No. 7 from the division of revenue
nor alter the base value of Tax Increment Subdistrict No. 7 in any way). Any
property added by Amendment No. 4 was solely right- of-way that did not create
increment and therefore was not included in Ordinance No. 2014.
As to the Amendment No. 5 Area, only the Subdistrict No. 8 Area (Glennan
Square) has been included in the TIF Ordinance. Base period taxes on
Subdistrict No. 8 Area, less that portion removed from the Subdistrict No. 8
Area by Amendment No. 8 and the adoption of Ordinance 2427, shall be computed
using the total assessed value shown on the assessment roll as of January 1,
2013, being the first day of the calendar year preceding the effective date of
Ordinance No. 2072.
As to the Amendment No. 6 Area, no base period taxes are applicable because the
property removed by Amendment No. 6 was not previously included in a TIF
Ordinance.
As to Amendment No. 8 Area, base period taxes shall be reduced in the
Subdistrict No. 8 Area due to the removal of land by Amendment No. 8 as noted
above.
D.   That portion of the taxes each year in excess of the base period taxes for
the Amended Area, determined for each sub-area thereof as provided in
subsection C of this section, shall be allocated to and when collected be paid
into the special tax increment fund previously established by the City of West
Des Moines, State of Iowa, to pay the principal of and interest on loans,
monies advanced to, or indebtedness, whether funded, refunded, assumed or
otherwise, including bonds issued under authority of section 403.9 or section
403.12, Code of Iowa, incurred by the City of West Des Moines, State of Iowa,
to finance or refinance, in whole or in part, urban renewal projects undertaken
within the Urban Renewal Area pursuant to the Urban Renewal Plan, as amended,
except Ordinance shall be divided as hereinafter in this section provided.
E.   Unless or until the total assessed valuation of the taxable property in
the areas of the Amended Area exceeds the total assessed value of the taxable
property in the areas shown by the assessment rolls referred to in subsection C
of this section, all of the taxes levied and collected upon the taxable
property in the Amended Area shall be paid into the funds for the respective
taxing districts as taxes by or for the taxing districts in the same manner as
all other property taxes.
F.   At such time as the loans, monies advanced, bonds and interest thereon and
indebtedness of the City of West Des Moines, State of Iowa, referred to in
subsection D hereof have been paid, all monies thereafter received from taxes
upon the taxable property in the Amended Area shall be paid into the funds for
the respective taxing districts in the same manner as taxes on all other
property.
G.   All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with the provisions of
this section are hereby repealed. The provisions of this section are intended
and shall be construed so as to continue the division of taxes from property
within the Original Tax Increment District, Tax Increment Subdistrict Nos. 1,
3, 4, 5, 6 and 7, and the Tax Increment Subdistrict No. 8 portion of the
Amendment No. 5 Area (less the property removed by the Amendment No. 4 Area,
Amendment No. 6 Area, and Amendment No. 8 Area) under the provisions of section
403.19 of the Code of Iowa, as authorized in Ordinance Nos. 1384, 1560, 1740,
1800, 1824, 2014, 2072, and 2314. Notwithstanding any provisions in any prior
Ordinances or other documents, the provisions of this section and all prior
Ordinances relating to the Urban Renewal Area, as amended, shall be construed
to continue the division of taxes from property within the Amended Area to the
maximum period of time allowed by section 403.19 of the Code of Iowa. In the
event that any provision of this section shall be determined to be contrary to
law it shall not affect other provisions or application of this section which
shall at all times be construed to fully invoke the provisions of section
403.19 of the Code of Iowa with reference to the Amended Area and the territory
contained therein. (Ord. 2072, 12-1-2014; amd. Ord. 2314, 7-9-2018; Ord. 2427,
8-3-2020; Ord. 2466, 4-19-2021)
1-10B-8: WESTOWN V URBAN RENEWAL AREA:
A.   The taxes levied on the taxable property in the urban renewal area legally
described in the preamble of the ordinance codified herein, as amended from
time to time by and for the benefit of the State of Iowa, City of West Des
Moines, Counties of Polk and Dallas, West Des Moines Community School District,
and all other taxing districts from and after the effective date hereof shall
be divided as provided in this section. (Ord. 1848, 11-16-2009; amd. Ord. 2125,
11-2-2015)
1.   Deleted Property:
a.   Purpose: The purpose of this subsection is to delete certain property from
the tax increment financing district for the Westown V Urban Renewal Area.
b.   Definitions: For use within this subsection the following terms shall have
the following meanings:
DELETED PROPERTY: Shall mean the following real property situated in the City
of West Des Moines, Dallas County, State of Iowa:
Lot 5 in West Lakes Office Park plat 9, an official plat, now included in and
forming a part of the City of West Des Moines, Dallas County, Iowa.
And
Lot 1 in West Lakes Office Park plat 10, an official plat, now included in and
forming a part of the City of West Des Moines, Dallas County, Iowa.
c.   Property Removed: The deleted property is hereby removed from the tax
increment financing district for the Westown V Urban Renewal Area. No division
of Property Tax revenues as provided under section 403.19 of the Code of Iowa
shall be done with respect to the deleted property without further action by
the City Council. (Ord. 2365, 6-3-2019)
B.   That portion of the taxes which would be produced by the rate at which the
tax is levied each year by or for each of the taxing districts upon the total
sum of the assessed value of the taxable property in the urban renewal project
area, as shown on the assessment roll as of January 1 of the calendar year
preceding the first calendar year in which the City of West Des Moines, Iowa,
certifies to the County Auditor the amount of loans, advances, indebtedness, or
bonds payable from the division of Property Tax revenue described herein (which
certification is directed to be made during the 2009 calendar year), shall be
allocated to and when collected be paid into the fund for the respective taxing
district as taxes by or for the taxing district into which all other Property
Taxes are paid.
C.   That portion of the taxes each year in excess of the base period taxes
determined as provided in subsection B of this section shall be allocated to
and when collected be paid into a special Tax Increment Fund of the City of
West Des Moines, Iowa, hereby established, to pay the principal of and interest
on loans, monies advanced to, indebtedness, whether funded, refunded, assumed
or otherwise, including bonds or obligations issued under the authority of
section 403.9 or 403.12 of the Code of Iowa, as amended, incurred by the City
of West Des Moines, Iowa, to finance or refinance, in whole or in part, urban
renewal projects undertaken within the urban renewal area pursuant to the urban
renewal plan, except that taxes for the regular and voter approved physical
plant and equipment levy of a school district imposed pursuant to section
298.2, but only to the extent authorized in section 403.19(2), and taxes for
the payment of bonds and interest of each taxing district shall be collected
against all taxable property within the urban renewal area without any
limitation as hereinabove provided.
D.   Unless or until the total assessed valuation of the taxable property in
the urban renewal area exceeds the total assessed value of the taxable property
in the urban renewal area as shown by the assessment roll referred to in
subsection B of this section, all of the taxes levied and collected upon the
taxable property in the urban renewal area shall be paid into the funds for the
respective taxing districts as taxes by or for the taxing districts in the same
manner as all other property taxes.
E.   At such time as the loans, advances, indebtedness, bonds and interest
thereon of the city of West Des Moines, Iowa, referred to in subsection C of
this section have been paid, all monies thereafter received from taxes upon the
taxable property in the urban renewal area shall be paid into the funds for the
respective taxing districts in the same manner as taxes on all other property.
F.   All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with the provisions of
this section are hereby repealed. The provisions of this section are intended
and shall be construed so as to fully implement the provisions of section
403.19 of the code of Iowa, as amended, with respect to the division of taxes
from property within the urban renewal area as described above. In the event
that any provision of this section shall be determined to be contrary to law,
it shall not affect other provisions or application of this section which shall
at all times be construed to fully invoke the provisions of section 403.19 of
the code of Iowa with reference to the urban renewal area and the territory
contained therein. (Ord. 1848, 11-16-2009)
1-10B-9: ASHWORTH CORRIDOR URBAN RENEWAL AREA:
A.   For purposes of this section, the following terms shall have the following
meanings:
AMENDED AREA: That portion of the city of West Des Moines, state of Iowa,
included within the original subarea and the amendment no. 1 subarea, which
amended area includes the lots and parcels located within the area legally
described in the original subarea and the amendment no. 1 subarea.
AMENDMENT NO. 1 SUBAREA: That portion of the city of West Des Moines, state of
Iowa, described in amendment no. 1 to the urban renewal plan for the Ashworth
Corridor urban renewal area approved by resolution 16-07-25-07 on July 25,
2016, which amendment no. 1 subarea includes the lots and parcels located
within the area legally described in the ordinance codified herein.
ORIGINAL SUBAREA: That portion of the city of West Des Moines, state of Iowa,
described in the urban renewal plan for the Ashworth Corridor urban renewal
area approved by resolution 09-11-02-10 on November 2, 2009, which original
subarea includes the lots and parcels located within the area legally described
in the ordinance codified herein.
B.   The taxes levied on the taxable property in the amended area, legally
described in the ordinance codified herein, by and for the benefit of the state
of Iowa, county of Dallas, Iowa, Waukee community school district, and all
other taxing districts from and after the effective date hereof shall be
divided as hereinafter in this section provided.
C.   As to the original subarea, that portion of the taxes which would be
produced by the rate at which the tax is levied each year by or for each of the
taxing districts taxing property in the original subarea upon the total sum of
the assessed value of the taxable property in the original subarea as shown on
the assessment roll as of January 1 of the calendar year preceding the first
calendar year in which the municipality certifies to the county auditor the
amount of loans, advances, indebtedness, or bonds payable from the division of
property tax revenue described in ordinance 1850, shall be allocated to and
when collected be paid into the fund for the respective taxing district as
taxes by or for the taxing district into which all other property taxes are
paid. The taxes so determined shall be referred to herein as the "base period
taxes" for such area.
As to amendment no. 1 subarea, base period taxes shall be computed in the same
manner using the total assessed value shown on the assessment roll as of
January 1, 2015, being the assessment roll applicable to property in such
subarea as of January 1 of the calendar year preceding the effective date
hereof.
D.   That portion of the taxes each year in excess of the base period taxes for
the amended area, determined for each subarea thereof as provided in subsection
C of this section, shall be allocated to and when collected be paid into the
special tax increment fund previously established by the city of West Des
Moines, state of Iowa, to pay the principal of and interest on loans, monies
advanced to, or indebtedness, whether funded, refunded, assumed or otherwise,
including bonds issued under authority of section 403.9 or 403.12 of the code
of Iowa, incurred by the city of West Des Moines, state of Iowa, to finance or
refinance, in whole or in part, urban renewal projects undertaken within the
amended area pursuant to the urban renewal plan, as amended, except that: 1)
taxes for the regular and voter approved physical plant and equipment levy of a
school district imposed pursuant to Iowa Code section 298.2 and taxes for the
instructional support program of a school district imposed pursuant to Iowa
Code section 257.19, but in each case only to the extent required under Iowa
Code section 403.19(2); 2) taxes for the payment of bonds and interest of each
taxing district; 3) taxes imposed under Iowa Code section 346.27(22) related to
joint county-city buildings; and 4) any other exceptions under Iowa Code
section 403.19 shall be collected against all taxable property within the
amended area without any limitation as hereinabove provided.
E.   Unless or until the total assessed valuation of the taxable property in
the subareas of the amended area exceeds the total assessed value of the
taxable property in the subareas shown by the assessment rolls referred to in
subsection C of this section, all of the taxes levied and collected upon the
taxable property in the amended area shall be paid into the funds for the
respective taxing districts as taxes by or for the taxing districts in the same
manner as all other property taxes.
F.   At such time as the loans, monies advanced, bonds and interest thereon and
indebtedness of the city of West Des Moines, state of Iowa, referred to in
subsection D of this section have been paid, all monies thereafter received
from taxes upon the taxable property in the amended area shall be paid into the
funds for the respective taxing districts in the same manner as taxes on all
other property.
G.   All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with the provisions of
this section are hereby repealed. The provisions of this section are intended
and shall be construed so as to continue the division of taxes from property
within the original subarea under the provisions of section 403.19 of the code
of Iowa, as authorized in ordinance 1850, and to fully implement the provisions
of section 403.19 of the code of Iowa with respect to the division of taxes
from property within the amendment no. 1 subarea as described above.
Notwithstanding any provisions in any prior ordinances or other documents, the
provisions of this section and all prior ordinances relating to the urban
renewal area, as amended, shall be construed to continue the division of taxes
from property within the area to the maximum period of time allowed by section
403.19 of the code of Iowa. In the event that any provision of this section
shall be determined to be contrary to law it shall not affect other provisions
or application of this section which shall at all times be construed to fully
invoke the provisions of section 403.19 of the code of Iowa with reference to
the amended area and the territory contained therein. (Ord. 2163, 8-8-2016)
1-10B-10: FULLER ROAD URBAN RENEWAL DISTRICT:
A.   For purposes of this section, the following terms shall have the following
meanings:
URBAN RENEWAL DISTRICT: That portion of the city of West Des Moines within the
boundaries described in the ordinance codified herein.
URBAN RENEWAL PLAN: The urban renewal plan for the Fuller Road urban renewal
district, approved by resolution 10-03-08-13 on March 8, 2010, as the same may
be amended from time to time.
B.   The taxes levied on the taxable property in the urban renewal district
legally described in subsection A of this section, by and for the benefit of
the state of Iowa, city of West Des Moines, county of Polk, West Des Moines
community school district, and all other taxing districts from and after the
effective date hereof shall be divided as hereinafter in this section provided.
(Ord. 1862, 3-22-2010)
C.   That portion of the taxes which would be produced by the rate at which the
tax is levied each year by or for each of the taxing districts upon the total
sum of the assessed value of the taxable property in the urban renewal
district, as shown on the assessment roll as of January 1 of the calendar year
preceding the first calendar year in which the city of West Des Moines, Iowa,
certifies to the county auditor the amount of loans, advances, indebtedness, or
bonds payable from the division of property tax revenue described herein (which
certification is directed to be made during the 2011 calendar year), shall be
allocated to and when collected be paid into the fund for the respective taxing
district as taxes by or for the taxing district into which all other property
taxes are paid. (Ord. 1908, 2-7-2011)
D.   That portion of the taxes each year in excess of the base period taxes
determined as provided in subsection C of this section shall be allocated to
and when collected be paid into a special tax increment fund of the city of
West Des Moines, Iowa, hereby established, to pay the principal of and interest
on loans, monies advanced to, indebtedness, whether funded, refunded, assumed
or otherwise, including bonds or obligations issued under the authority of
section 403.9 or 403.12 of the code of Iowa, as amended, incurred by the city
of West Des Moines, Iowa, to finance or refinance, in whole or in part, urban
renewal projects undertaken within the urban renewal district pursuant to the
urban renewal plan, except that taxes for the regular and voter approved
physical plant and equipment levy of a school district imposed pursuant to
section 298.2, but only to the extent authorized in section 403.19(2), and
taxes for the payment of bonds and interest of each taxing district shall be
collected against all taxable property within the urban renewal district
without any limitation as hereinabove provided.
E.   Unless or until the total assessed valuation of the taxable property in
the urban renewal district exceeds the total assessed value of the taxable
property in the urban renewal district as shown by the assessment roll referred
to in subsection C of this section, all of the taxes levied and collected upon
the taxable property in the urban renewal district shall be paid into the funds
for the respective taxing districts as taxes by or for the taxing districts in
the same manner as all other property taxes.
F.   At such time as the loans, advances, indebtedness, bonds and interest
thereon of the city of West Des Moines, Iowa, referred to in subsection D of
this section have been paid, all monies thereafter received from taxes upon the
taxable property in the urban renewal district shall be paid into the funds for
the respective taxing districts in the same manner as taxes on all other
property.
G.   All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with the provisions of
this section are hereby repealed. The provisions of this section are intended
and shall be construed so as to continue the division of taxes from property
within the urban renewal district as described above, to the full extent
authorized by section 403.19 of the code of Iowa, as amended. In the event that
any provision of this section shall be determined to be contrary to law, it
shall not affect other provisions or application of this section which shall at
all times be construed to fully invoke the provisions of section 403.19 of the
code of Iowa with reference to the urban renewal district and the territory
contained therein. (Ord. 1862, 3-22-2010)
1-10B-11: 4125 WESTOWN PARKWAY URBAN RENEWAL AREA:
(Rep. by Ord. 2495, 11-1-2021)
1-10B-12: ALLUVION URBAN RENEWAL AREA (WILLOW CREEK PLAT 1):
A.   The taxes levied on the taxable property in the Willow Creek Plat 1, Lots
1, 2, 3 and 4 parcel of the urban renewal area legally described in the
preamble of the ordinance codified herein, by and for the benefit of the State
of Iowa, City of West Des Moines, County of Polk, West Des Moines Community
School District, and all other taxing districts from and after the effective
date hereof shall be divided as hereinafter in this section provided.
B.   That portion of the taxes which would be produced by the rate at which the
tax is levied each year by or for each of the taxing districts upon the total
sum of the assessed value of the taxable property in the Willow Creek Plat 1,
Lots 1, 2, 3 and 4 parcel of the urban renewal area, as shown on the assessment
roll as of January 1 of the calendar year preceding the first calendar year in
which the City of West Des Moines, State of Iowa, certifies to the Auditor of
Polk County, Iowa, the amount of loans, advances, indebtedness, or bonds
payable from the division of Property Tax revenue described herein, shall be
allocated to and when collected be paid into the fund for the respective taxing
district as taxes by or for the taxing district into which all other property
taxes are paid. (Ord. 2091, 5-4-2015; amd. Ord. 2170, 9-19-2016; Ord. 2185, 11-
28-2016)
1.   The City Clerk is directed to file a certification of debt under Iowa Code
section 403.19 on or before December 1, 2015; thus, the frozen base assessed
valuation for Willow Creek Plat 1, Lot 1 parcel shall be as of January 1, 2014.
(Ord. 2091, 5-4-2015)
2.   The City Clerk is directed to file a certification of debt under Iowa Code
section 403.19 on or before December 1, 2016; thus, the frozen base assessed
valuation for Willow Creek Plat 1, Lots 2 and 3 parcel shall be as of January
1, 2015. (Ord. 2170, 9-19-2016)
3.   The City Clerk is directed to file a certification of debt under Iowa Code
section 403.19 for Willow Creek Plat 1, Lot 4 parcel. (Ord. 2185, 11-28-2016)
C.   That portion of the taxes each year in excess of the base period taxes
determined as provided in subsection B of this section shall be allocated to
and when collected be paid into a Special Tax Increment Fund of the City of
West Des Moines, State of Iowa, hereby established, to pay the principal of and
interest on loans, monies advanced to, indebtedness, whether funded, refunded,
assumed or otherwise, including bonds or obligations issued under the authority
of section 403.9 or 403.12 of the Code of Iowa, as amended, incurred by the
City of West Des Moines, State of Iowa, to finance or refinance, in whole or in
part, urban renewal projects undertaken anywhere within the urban renewal area
pursuant to the urban renewal plan, except that: 1) taxes for the regular and
voter approved physical plant and equipment levy of a school district imposed
pursuant to Iowa Code section 298.2 and taxes for the Instructional Support
Program of a school district imposed pursuant to Iowa Code section 257.19, but
in each case only to the extent required under Iowa Code section 403.19(2); 2)
taxes for the payment of bonds and interest of each taxing district; 3) taxes
imposed under Iowa Code section 346.27(22) related to joint County-City
buildings; and 4) any other exceptions under Iowa Code section 403.19 shall be
collected against all taxable property within the Willow Creek Plat 1, Lots 1,
2, 3 and 4 parcel of the urban renewal area without any limitation as
hereinabove provided.
D.   Unless or until the total assessed valuation of the taxable property in
the Willow Creek Plat 1, Lots 1, 2, 3 and 4 parcel of the urban renewal area
exceeds the total assessed value of the taxable property in the Willow Creek
Plat 1, Lots 1, 2, 3 and 4 parcel of the urban renewal area as shown by the
assessment roll referred to in subsection B of this section, all of the taxes
levied and collected upon the taxable property in the Willow Creek Plat 1, Lots
1, 2, 3 and 4 parcel of the urban renewal area shall be paid into the funds for
the respective taxing districts as taxes by or for the taxing districts in the
same manner as all other property taxes.
E.   At such time as the loans, advances, indebtedness, bonds and interest
thereon of the City of West Des Moines, State of Iowa, referred to in
subsection C of this section have been paid, all monies thereafter received
from taxes upon the taxable property in the Willow Creek Plat 1, Lots 1, 2, 3
and 4 parcel of the urban renewal area shall be paid into the funds for the
respective taxing districts in the same manner as taxes on all other property.
F.   All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with the provisions of
this section are hereby repealed. The provisions of this section are intended
and shall be construed so as to fully implement the provisions of section
403.19 of the Code of Iowa, as amended, with respect to the division of taxes
from property within the Willow Creek Plat 1, Lots 1, 2, 3 and 4 parcel of the
urban renewal area as described above. In the event that any provision of this
section shall be determined to be contrary to law, it shall not affect other
provisions or application of this section which shall at all times be construed
to fully invoke the provisions of section 403.19 of the Code of Iowa with
reference to the Willow Creek Plat 1, Lots 1, 2, 3 and 4 parcel of the urban
renewal area and the territory contained therein. (Ord. 2091, 5-4-2015; amd.
Ord. 2170, 9-19-2016; Ord. 2185, 11-28-2016)
1-10B-13: ALLUVION URBAN RENEWAL AREA (TRACT 3 OF AMENDMENT 2 PARCEL):
A.   The taxes levied on the taxable property in the Tract 3 of Amendment 2
Parcel of the urban renewal area legally described in the preamble of the
ordinance codified herein, by and for the benefit of the State of Iowa, City of
West Des Moines, County of Polk, West Des Moines Community School District, and
all other taxing districts from and after the effective date of this section
shall be divided as hereinafter in this section provided.
B.   That portion of the taxes which would be produced by the rate at which the
tax is levied each year by or for each of the taxing districts upon the total
sum of the assessed value of the taxable property in the Tract 3 of Amendment 2
Parcel of the urban renewal area, as shown on the assessment roll as of January
1 of the calendar year preceding the first calendar year in which the City of
West Des Moines, State of Iowa, certifies to the Auditor of Polk County, Iowa
the amount of loans, advances, indebtedness, or bonds payable from the division
of Property Tax revenue described herein, shall be allocated to and when
collected be paid into the fund for the respective taxing district as taxes by
or for the taxing district into which all other property taxes are paid.
C.   That portion of the taxes each year in excess of the base period taxes
determined as provided in subsection B of this section shall be allocated to
and when collected be paid into a Special Tax Increment Fund of the City of
West Des Moines, State of Iowa, hereby established, to pay the principal of and
interest on loans, monies advanced to, indebtedness, whether funded, refunded,
assumed or otherwise, including bonds or obligations issued under the authority
of section 403.9 or 403.12 of the Code of Iowa, as amended, incurred by the
City of West Des Moines, State of Iowa, to finance or refinance, in whole or in
part, urban renewal projects undertaken anywhere within the Urban Renewal Area
pursuant to the Urban Renewal Plan, except that: 1) taxes for the regular and
voter-approved physical plant and equipment levy of a school district imposed
pursuant to Iowa Code section 298.2 and taxes for the Instructional Support
Program of a school district imposed pursuant to Iowa Code section 257.19 (but
in each case only to the extent required under Iowa Code section 403.19(2)); 2)
taxes for the payment of bonds and interest of each taxing district; 3) taxes
imposed under Iowa Code section 346.27(22) related to joint County-City
buildings; and 4) any other exceptions under Iowa Code section 403.19 shall be
collected against all taxable property within the Tract 3 of Amendment 2 Parcel
of the urban renewal area without any limitation as hereinabove provided.
D.   Unless or until the total assessed valuation of the taxable property in
the Tract 3 of Amendment 2 Parcel of the urban renewal area exceeds the total
assessed value of the taxable property in the Tract 3 of Amendment 2 Parcel of
the urban renewal area as shown by the assessment roll referred to in
subsection B of this section, all of the taxes levied and collected upon the
taxable property in the Tract 3 of Amendment 2 Parcel of the urban renewal area
shall be paid into the funds for the respective taxing districts as taxes by or
for the taxing districts in the same manner as all other property taxes.
E.   At such time as the loans, advances, indebtedness, bonds and interest
thereon of the City of West Des Moines, State of Iowa, referred to in
subsection C of this section have been paid, all monies thereafter received
from taxes upon the taxable property in the Tract 3 of Amendment 2 Parcel of
the urban renewal area shall be paid into the funds for the respective taxing
districts in the same manner as taxes on all other property.
F.   All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with the provisions of
this section are hereby repealed. The provisions of this section are intended
and shall be construed so as to fully implement the provisions of section
403.19 of the Code of Iowa, as amended, with respect to the division of taxes
from property within the Tract 3 of Amendment 2 Parcel of the urban renewal
area as described above. In the event that any provision of this section shall
be determined to be contrary to law, it shall not affect other provisions or
application of this section which shall at all times be construed to fully
invoke the provisions of section 403.19 of the Code of Iowa with reference to
the Tract 3 of Amendment 2 Parcel of the urban renewal area and the territory
contained therein. (Ord. 2186, 11-28-2016)
1-10B-13-1: ALLUVION URBAN RENEWAL AREA 2019 ADDITION:
A.   Purpose. The purpose of this ordinance is to provide for the division of
taxes levied on the taxable property in the December, 2019 Alluvion Urban
Renewal Area Addition of the City, each year by and for the benefit of the
state, city, county, school districts or other taxing districts after the
effective date of this ordinance in order to create a special fund to pay the
principal of and interest on loans, moneys advanced to or indebtedness,
including bonds proposed to be issued by the City to finance projects in such
area.
B.   Definitions. For use within the remainder of this ordinance the following
terms shall have the following meanings:
CITY: Shall mean the City of West Des Moines, Iowa.
COUNTY: Shall mean Polk County, Iowa.
2019 URBAN RENEWAL AREA ADDITION: Shall mean the December, 2019 Alluvion Urban
Renewal Area Addition of the City of West Des Moines, Iowa, the legal
description of which is set out below, approved by the City Council by
resolution adopted on December 16, 2019:
All that part of Lots "A", "B", 1, 2, 3, 4 and 5 of Pleasant Ridge Heights, an
Official Plat, AND the Southwest Quarter (SW1/4) of Section 26, Township 78
North, Range 25 West of the 5th P.M., all now included in and forming a part of
the City of West Des Moines, Polk County, Iowa, more particularly described as
follows:
Beginning at the intersection of the North Right of Way of SE Willow Creek
Drive, formerly SE Army Post Road and the East line of the SW1/4 of said
Section 26;
Thence West along said North Right of Way of SE Willow Creek Drive and the
South lines of Lots 4, 1 and 5 of said Pleasant Ridge Heights, to the Southwest
Corner of said Lot 5 and Southeast corner of Lot 6 Pleasant Ridge Heights;
Thence North along the East line of said Lot 6 and the West lines of Lots 5 and
1 of said Pleasant Ridge Heights, to the Northwest corner of said Lot 1 and the
Northeast corner of said Lot 6;
Thence West along the north line of Lots 6 and 7 of Pleasant Ridge Heights and
the projection west thereof, to the West Right of Way line of Veterans Parkway;
Thence Northeast along the West Right of Way line of Veterans Parkway to the
intersection of the North line of the SW1/4 of Section 26, Township 78 North,
Range 25 West of the 5th P.M., now included in the City of West Des Moines,
Polk County, Iowa;
Thence East, along the North line of said SW1/4 of Section 26, Township 78
North, Range 25 West of the 5th P.M., now included in and forming a part of the
City of West Des Moines, Polk County, Iowa, to the Intersection of the
Northerly projection of the West line of Quinn's Acres, an Official Plat, now
included in and forming a part of the City of West Des Moines, Polk County,
Iowa and the North line of the SW1/4 of said Section 26;
Thence South along the Northerly projection of the West line of said Quinn's
Acres, a distance of 409.75 feet;
Thence East, 409.75 feet South of and parallel to the North line of the SW1/
4 of said Section 26, to the West Right of Way line of SE 1st Street;
Thence South, along the West Right of Way line of SE 1st Street a distance of
60 feet;
Thence West 469.75 feet South of and parallel to the North line of the SW1/4 of
said Section 26, to the Northerly projection of the West line of Quinn's Acres;
Thence South, along the Northerly projection of the West line of Quinn's Acres,
to the Northwest corner of Lot 1 of said Quinn's Acres;
Thence continuing South, along the West line of Quinn's Acres to the Southwest
corner of Lot 3 of said Quinn's Acres;
Thence East, along the South line of said Lots 3 and A of said Quinn's Acres to
the Southeast corner of said Quinn's Acres, being a point on the East line of
the SW1/4 of Section 26, Township 78 North, Range 25 West of the 5th P.M., now
included in and forming a part of the City of West Des Moines, Polk County,
Iowa;
Thence South, along the East line of the SW1/4 of said Section 26, to the Point
of Beginning.
URBAN RENEWAL AREA: Shall mean the entirety of the Alluvion Urban Renewal Area
as amended from time to time.
C.   Provisions for Division of Taxes Levied on Taxable Property in the
December, 2019 Urban Renewal Area Addition. After the effective date of this
ordinance, the taxes levied on the taxable property in the 2019 Urban Renewal
Area Addition each year by and for the benefit of the State of Iowa, the City,
the County and any school district or other taxing district in which the 2019
Urban Renewal Area Addition is located, shall be divided as follows:
1   That portion of the taxes which would be produced by the rate at which the
tax is levied each year by or for each of the taxing districts upon the total
sum of the assessed value of the taxable property in the 2019 Urban Renewal
Area Addition, as shown on the assessment roll as of January 1 of the calendar
year preceding the first calendar year in which the City certifies to the
County Auditor the amount of loans, advances, indebtedness, or bonds payable
from the special fund referred to in subsection C.2. below, shall be allocated
to and when collected be paid into the fund for the respective taxing district
as taxes by or for said taxing district into which all other property taxes are
paid. For the purpose of allocating taxes levied by or for any taxing district
which did not include the territory in the 2019 Urban Renewal Area Addition on
the effective date of this ordinance, but to which the territory has been
annexed or otherwise included after the effective date, the assessment roll
applicable to property in the annexed territory as of January 1 of the calendar
year preceding the effective date of the ordinance which amends the plan for
the 2019 Urban Renewal Area Addition to include the annexed area, shall be used
in determining the assessed valuation of the taxable property in the annexed
area.
2   That portion of the taxes each year in excess of such amounts shall be
allocated to and when collected be paid into a special fund of the City to pay
the principal of and interest on loans, moneys advanced to or indebtedness,
whether funded, refunded, assumed or otherwise, including bonds issued under
the authority of Section 403.9(1), of the Code of Iowa, incurred by the City to
finance or refinance, in whole or in part, projects in the Urban Renewal Area,
and to provide assistance for low and moderate-income family housing as
provided in Section 403.22, except that taxes for the regular and voter-
approved physical plant and equipment levy of a school district imposed
pursuant to Section 298.2 of the Code of Iowa, taxes for the instructional
support program levy of a school district imposed pursuant to Section 257.19 of
the Code of Iowa and taxes for the payment of bonds and interest of each taxing
district shall be collected against all taxable property within the taxing
district without limitation by the provisions of this ordinance. Unless and
until the total assessed valuation of the taxable property in the 2019 Urban
Renewal Area Addition exceeds the total assessed value of the taxable property
in such area as shown by the assessment roll referred to in subsection C.1. of
this section, all of the taxes levied and collected upon the taxable property
in the 2019 Urban Renewal Area Addition shall be paid into the funds for the
respective taxing districts as taxes by or for said taxing districts in the
same manner as all other property taxes. When such loans, advances,
indebtedness, and bonds, if any, and interest thereon, have been paid, all
money thereafter received from taxes upon the taxable property in the 2019
Urban Renewal Area Addition shall be paid into the funds for the respective
taxing districts in the same manner as taxes on all other property.
3   The portion of taxes mentioned in subsection C.2. of this section and the
special fund into which that portion shall be paid may be irrevocably pledged
by the City for the payment of the principal and interest on loans, advances,
bonds issued under the authority of Section 403.9(1) of the Code of Iowa, or
indebtedness incurred by the City to finance or refinance in whole or in part
projects in the Urban Renewal Area.
4   As used in this section, the word "taxes" includes, but is not limited to,
all levies on an ad valorem basis upon land or real property. (Ord. 2401, 1-6-
2020)
1-10B-14: COACHLIGHT DRIVE URBAN RENEWAL AREA:
A.   The taxes levied on the taxable property in the urban renewal area legally
described in the preamble of the ordinance codified herein, by and for the
benefit of the State of Iowa, City of West Des Moines, County of Dallas, Waukee
Community School District, and all other taxing districts from and after the
effective date of this section shall be divided as hereinafter in this section
provided.
B.   That portion of the taxes which would be produced by the rate at which the
tax is levied each year by or for each of the taxing districts upon the total
sum of the assessed value of the taxable property in the urban renewal area, as
shown on the assessment roll on January 1 of the calendar year preceding the
first calendar year in which the Municipality certified to the County Auditor
the amount of loans, advances, indebtedness, or bonds payable from the division
of Property Tax revenue described in this section, shall be allocated to and
when collected be paid into the fund for the respective taxing district as
taxes by or for the taxing district into which all other property taxes are
paid.
C.   That portion of the taxes each year in excess of the base period taxes
determined as provided in subsection B of this section shall be allocated to
and when collected be paid into a Special Tax Increment Fund of the City of
West Des Moines, State of Iowa, hereby established, to pay the principal of and
interest on loans, monies advanced to, indebtedness, whether funded, refunded,
assumed or otherwise, including bonds or obligations issued under the authority
of section 403.9 or 403.12 of the Code of Iowa, as amended, incurred by the
City of West Des Moines, State of Iowa, to finance or refinance, in whole or in
part, urban renewal projects undertaken within the urban renewal area pursuant
to the Urban Renewal Plan, except that: 1) taxes for the regular and voter-
approved physical plant and equipment levy of a school district imposed
pursuant to Iowa Code section 298.2 and taxes for the Instructional Support
Program of a school district imposed pursuant to Iowa Code section 257.19 (but
in each case only to the extent required under Iowa Code section 403.19(2)); 2)
taxes for the payment of bonds and interest of each taxing district; 3) taxes
imposed under Iowa Code section 346.27(22) related to joint County-City
buildings; and 4) any other exceptions under Iowa Code section 403.19 shall be
collected against all taxable property within the urban renewal area without
any limitation as hereinabove provided.
D.   Unless or until the total assessed valuation of the taxable property in
the urban renewal area exceeds the total assessed value of the taxable property
in the urban renewal area as shown by the assessment roll referred to in
subsection B of this section, all of the taxes levied and collected upon the
taxable property in the urban renewal area shall be paid into the funds for the
respective taxing districts as taxes by or for the taxing districts in the same
manner as all other property taxes.
E.   At such time as the loans, advances, indebtedness, bonds and interest
thereon of the City of West Des Moines, State of Iowa, referred to in
subsection C of this section have been paid, all monies thereafter received
from taxes upon the taxable property in the urban renewal area shall be paid
into the funds for the respective taxing districts in the same manner as taxes
on all other property.
F.   All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with the provisions of
this section are hereby repealed. The provisions of this section are intended
and shall be construed so as to fully implement the provisions of section
403.19 of the Code of Iowa, as amended, with respect to the division of taxes
from property within the urban renewal area as described above. In the event
that any provision of this section shall be determined to be contrary to law,
it shall not affect other provisions or application of this section which shall
at all times be construed to fully invoke the provisions of section 403.19 of
the Code of Iowa with reference to the urban renewal area and the territory
contained therein. (Ord. 2202, 3-6-2017)
1-10B-14-1: COACHLIGHT DRIVE URBAN RENEWAL AREA 2018 ADDITION:
A.   Purpose: The purpose of this section is to provide for the division of
taxes levied on the taxable property in the June, 2018 Coachlight Drive Urban
Renewal Area Addition of the City, each year by and for the benefit of the
State, City, County, school districts or other taxing districts after the
effective date of this section in order to create a special fund to pay the
principal of and interest on loans, moneys advanced to or indebtedness,
including bonds proposed to be issued by the City to finance projects in such
area.
B.   Definitions: For use within the remainder of this section the following
terms shall have the following meanings:
CITY: Shall mean the City of West Des Moines, Iowa.
COUNTY: Shall mean Dallas County, Iowa.
2018 URBAN RENEWAL AREA ADDITION: Shall mean the June, 2018 Coachlight Drive
Urban Renewal Area Addition of the City of West Des Moines, Iowa, the legal
description of which is set out below, approved by the City Council by
resolution adopted on the 25th day of June, 2018:
A tract of land in sections 10, 11, 13, 14, 15 and 16, township 78 north, range
26 west of the 5th P.M., City of West Des Moines, Dallas County, Iowa, is
included in the Coachlight Drive TIF District and is more particularly
described as follows:
Beginning at the southeast corner of Lot 'A', Villas at Bridgewood plat 1, an
official plat, now included in and forming a part of the City of West Des
Moines, Dallas County, Iowa, with said point of beginning being located on the
east line of section 14, township 78 north, range 26 west of the 5th P.M., City
of West Des Moines, Dallas County, Iowa and located on the centerline of 74th
Street/South Jordan Creek Parkway;
Thence westerly, along the southerly line (Lot 'A', Lot 'B', and partial Lot
'C') of said Villas at Bridgewood plat 1, to the northeast corner of Lot 'A',
Gardens at Bridgewood plat 2, an official plat, now included in and forming a
part of the City of West Des Moines, Dallas County, Iowa;
Thence southerly and westerly, along the south line (Lot 'A', Lot 4, Lot 5, and
partial Lot 7) of said Gardens at Bridgewood plat 2, to the southeast corner of
Bridgewood South, an official plat, now included in and forming a part of the
City of West Des Moines, Dallas County, Iowa;
Thence westerly, along the south line of said Bridgewood South, and the
projection to the west of the south line of Bridgewood South, to the west right
of way line of South 81st Street;
Thence southerly, along the west right of way line of South 81st Street, to the
north right of way line of Mills Civic Parkway;
Thence west, along the north right of way line of Mills Civic Parkway, to the
northwest corner of street Lot P, Heritage Bend plat 1, an official subdivision
now included in and forming a part of the City of West Des Moines, Dallas
County, Iowa;
Thence south, along the west line of street Lot P, Heritage Bend plat 1, to the
southwest corner of street Lot P, Heritage Bend plat 1;
Thence continuing southerly, along the projection of the west line of street
Lot P, Heritage Bend plat 1, to the south right of way of Mills Civic Parkway;
Thence easterly, along the south right of way of Mills Civic Parkway, to the
west right of way of South 81st Street;
Thence south, along the west right of way line of South 81st Street, a distance
of 250 feet;
Thence easterly, along a line 250 feet south of and parallel to the south right
of way line of Mills Civic Parkway, to a point on the east line of the
southwest quarter of section 14, township 78 north, range 26 west of the 5th
P.M., City of West Des Moines, Dallas County, Iowa, also being the centerline
of S 81st Street;
Thence south, along the east line of the southwest quarter of said section 14,
to the southerly point of the north line of street Lot 'B', the Cascades At
Jordan Creek plat 1, an official plat, now included in and forming a part of
the City of West Des Moines, Dallas County, Iowa;
Thence west, to the west right of way line of South 81st Street, said point
being the northwest corner of said street Lot 'B';
Thence south, along the west right of way line of South 81st Street, to the
southwest corner of street Lot 'B', also being the southeast corner of lot 1,
both in the Cascades At Jordan Creek plat 1;
Thence southwesterly, along the south line and the south line extended of Lot
1, the Cascades At Jordan Creek plat 1, to the southwest corner of the
southeast quarter of the southwest quarter of section 14, also being a point on
the east line of Sunset Ridge, an official plat, now included in and forming a
part of the City of West Des Moines, Dallas County, Iowa;
Thence north, along the east line of Sunset Ridge, to the southeast corner of
Lot 6, Sunset Ridge;
Thence west, along the south line of Lot 6, to the southwest corner of said Lot
6, being at the east right of way line of S 88th Street;
Thence south, along the east right of way line of S 88th Street, to the south
line of section 14, township 78 north, range 26 west of the 5th P.M., now
included in and forming a part of the City of West Des Moines, Dallas County,
Iowa;
Thence west, along the south line of said section 14, to the southeast corner
of section 15, township 78 north, range 26 west of the 5th P.M., now included
in and forming a part of the City of West Des Moines, Dallas County, Iowa, also
being the southeast corner of street Lot "Z" in corrected Michael's Landing
plat 1;
Thence west, along the south line of said street Lot "Z", to the southwest
corner of said street Lot "Z", being also the west right of way line of S 88th
Street;
Thence north, along the west right of way line of said South 88th Street, to
the northeast corner of street Lot 'D' in corrected Michael's Landing plat 1,
an official subdivision now included in and forming a part of the City of West
Des Moines, Dallas County, Iowa;
Thence south and westerly, along the north line of said street Lot 'D', to the
southeast corner of street Lot 'H', corrected Michael's Landing plat 1;
Thence northerly, along the east line of said street Lot 'H', to the
intersection point of street Lot 'AA', of said corrected Michael's Landing plat
1;
Thence westerly, along the south line of said street Lot 'AA', to the southwest
corner of said street Lot 'AA', said point also being on the east line of the
southwest quarter of section 15, township 78 north, range 26 west of the 5th
P.M., City of West Des Moines, Dallas County, Iowa; also being the south line
of street Lot 'AA', and the south right of way line of Mills Civic Parkway;
Thence north, along the west line of said street Lot 'AA' to the northwest
corner of said street Lot 'AA', being also the center of section, section 15,
township 78 north, range 26 west of the 5th P.M., City of West Des Moines,
Dallas County, Iowa;
Thence northeasterly, along the north line of the southeast quarter of said
section 15, to the southwest corner of Lot "A" road, Cedar Ridge, an official
plat, now included in and forming a part of the City of West Des Moines, Dallas
County, Iowa;
Thence northeasterly, along the south line of Lot "A" road, Cedar Ridge, to the
projection south of the west line of Lot 7, Cedar Ridge;
Thence north along the projection of the west line of Lot 7 Cedar Ridge, to the
southwest corner of Lot 7, Cedar Ridge;
Thence north, along the west line of Lot 7, to the southwest corner of Lot 21,
Cedar Ridge;
Thence north, along the west line of said Lot 21, to the southeast corner of
Lot 25 of said Cedar Ridge;
Thence west, along the south line of Lots 25 and 26 to the southwest corner of
Lot 26 of said Cedar Ridge;
Thence north then southwesterly then north again, along the west line of said
Lot 26, Cedar Ridge, to the northwest corner of Lot 28, of said Cedar Ridge;
Thence west, to the southwest corner of Lot 29 of said Cedar Ridge;
Thence north, along the west line of Lot 29 of said Cedar Ridge, to the
northwest corner of said Lot 29;
Thence northeasterly, along the north line of Lots 29, 30, and 31 of said Cedar
Ridge, to the southwest corner of the NE1/4 NE1/4 of section 15, township 78
north, range 26 west of the 5th P.M., West Des Moines, Dallas County, Iowa;
Thence northeasterly along the south line of the NE1/4 NE1/4 of section 15,
429.06 feet to the southwest corner of an acquisition plat for Coachlight
Drive, recorded in book 2015 page 20234, recorded in Dallas County Iowa;
Thence north, to the south line of street Lot 'E', Whisper Ridge plat 3, an
official plat, now included in and forming a part of the City of West Des
Moines, Dallas County, Iowa;
Thence west along the south line of street Lot E to the southwest corner of
street Lot E Whisper Ridge plat 3 now included in and forming a part of the
City of West Des Moines, Dallas County, Iowa;
Thence north, along the west line of street Lot E and Lots 18 - 20, 26, 27, 31
- 35, street Lot A and outlot "X", Whisper Ridge plat 3, to the northwest
corner of outlot 'X', Whisper Ridge plat 3, also being the southwest corner of
outlot V, Whisper Ridge plat 2, an official plat, now included in and forming a
part of the City of West Des Moines, Dallas County, Iowa;
Thence north, along the west line of outlot V, to the southwest corner of
outlot W, Whisper Ridge plat 2;
Thence north, along the west line of outlot W, to the west corner, also being a
bend, on the southernmost line of Lot 11, Whisper Ridge plat 2;
Thence northwesterly, along the southwest line of Lot 11, Whisper Ridge plat 2,
to the southeast corner of Lot 12, Whisper Ridge plat 2;
Thence northwesterly, along the south line of Lot 12, to the southwest corner
of Lot 12, Whisper Ridge plat 2;
Thence north, along the west line of Lot 12, Whisper Ridge plat 2, to the
southwest corner of Lot 13, Whisper Ridge plat 2;
Thence north, along the west line of Lot 13, Whisper Ridge plat 2, to the
southwest corner of Lot 14, Whisper Ridge plat 2;
Thence north, along the west line of Lot 14, Whisper Ridge plat 2, to the
southwest corner of Lot 15, Whisper Ridge plat 2;
Thence north, along the west line of Lot 15, Whisper Ridge plat 2, to the
southwest corner of Lot 16, Whisper Ridge plat 2;
Thence north, along the west line of Lot 16, Whisper Ridge plat 2, to the
northwest corner of Lots 16 and 17, Whisper Ridge plat 2;
Thence northeasterly, along the north line of Lot 17, Whisper Ridge plat 2, to
the northwest corner of Lot 18, Whisper Ridge plat 2;
Thence northeasterly, along the north line of Lot 18, Whisper Ridge plat 2, to
the northwest corner of Lot 19, Whisper Ridge plat 2;
Thence northeasterly, along the north line of Lot 19, Whisper Ridge plat 2, to
the northwest corner of Lot 20, Whisper Ridge plat 2;
Thence northeasterly, along the north line of Lot 20, Whisper Ridge plat 2, to
the northwest corner of Lot 21, Whisper Ridge plat 2;
Thence northeasterly, along the north line of Lot 21, Whisper Ridge plat 2, to
the northwest corner of Lot 22, Whisper Ridge plat 2;
Thence northeasterly, along the north line of Lot 22, Whisper Ridge plat 2, to
the northwest corner of street Lot A, Whisper Ridge plat 2;
Thence northeasterly, along the north line of street Lot A, Whisper Ridge plat
2, to the northwest corner of Lot 33, Whisper Ridge plat 2;
Thence northeasterly, along the north line of Lot 33, Whisper Ridge plat 2, to
the northeast corner of Lot 33, Whisper Ridge plat 2, being also the northwest
corner of Lot 1, Whisper Ridge plat 1, an official plat, now included in and
forming a part of the City of West Des Moines, Dallas County, Iowa;
Thence northeasterly, along the north line of Lot 1, Whisper Ridge plat 1, to
the northwest corner of street Lot 'C', Whisper Ridge plat 1, also being a
point on the west right of way line of 88th Street;
Thence continuing northeasterly, along the north line of street Lot 'C',
Whisper Ridge plat 1, to the west right of way line of 88th Street, running
north of street Lot 'C' Whisper Ridge plat 1;
Thence north, along the west right of way line of 88th Street, to the westerly
projection of the north right of way line of E.P. True Parkway;
Thence northeast, along the westerly projection of the north right of way line
of E.P. True Parkway, to the southwest corner of street Lot 'B', Park 88, an
official plat, now included in and forming a part of the City of West Des
Moines, Dallas County, Iowa;
Thence northeasterly, along the south line of street Lot 'B', Park 88, to the
southwest corner of Lot 1, Park 88;
Thence northeasterly, along the south line of Lot 1, Park 88, and being the
north right of way line of E.P. True Parkway, to the southeast corner of said
Lot 1, also being the southwest corner of Lot 3, Stone Creek Villas, an
official plat, now included in and forming a part of the City of West Des
Moines, Dallas County, Iowa;
Thence northeasterly, along the south line of Lot 3, Stone Creek Villas, and
being the north right of way line of E.P. True Parkway, to the southwest corner
of Lot 4, Stone Creek Villas;
Thence northeasterly, along the south line of Lot 4, Stone Creek Villas, and
being the north right of way line of E.P. True Parkway, to the southwest corner
of Lot 9, Stone Creek Villas;
Thence northeasterly, along the south line of Lot 9, Stone Creek Villas, and
being the north right of way line of E.P. True Parkway, to the southwest corner
of Lot 10, Stone Creek Villas;
Thence northeasterly, along the south line of Lot 10, Stone Creek Villas, and
being the north right of way line of E.P. True Parkway, to the southwest corner
of Lot 11, Stone Creek Villas;
Thence northeasterly, along the south line of Lot 11, Stone Creek Villas, and
being the north right of way line of E.P. True Parkway, to the southwest corner
of Lot 'B', Heritage Hills plat 1, an official plat, now included in and
forming a part of the City of West Des Moines, Dallas County, Iowa;
Thence northeasterly, along the south line of Lot 'B', Heritage Hills plat 1,
and being the north right of way line of E.P. True Parkway, to the southwest
corner of outlot 'Z', Heritage Hills plat 1;
Thence northeasterly, along the south line of outlot 'Z', Heritage Hills plat
1, and being the north right of way line of E.P. True Parkway, to the southwest
corner of Lot 24, Heritage Hills plat 1;
Thence northeasterly, along the south line of Lot 24, Heritage Hills plat 1,
and being the north right of way line of E.P. True Parkway, to the southwest
corner of Lot 23, Heritage Hills plat 1;
Thence northeasterly, along the south line of Lot 23, Heritage Hills plat 1,
and being the north right of way line of E.P. True Parkway, to the southwest
corner of Lot 22, Heritage Hills plat 1;
Thence northeasterly, along the south line of Lot 22, Heritage Hills plat 1,
and being the north right of way line of E.P. True Parkway, to the southwest
corner of Lot 21, Heritage Hills plat 1;
Thence northeasterly, along the south line of Lot 21, Heritage Hills plat 1,
and being the north right of way line of E.P. True Parkway, to the southwest
corner of Lot 20, Heritage Hills plat 1;
Thence northeasterly, along the south line of Lot 20, Heritage Hills plat 1,
and being the north right of way line of E.P. True Parkway, to the southwest
corner of Lot 19, Heritage Hills plat 1;
Thence northeasterly, along the south line of Lot 19, Heritage Hills plat 1,
and being the north right of way line of E.P. True Parkway, to the southwest
corner of Lot 18, Heritage Hills plat 1;
Thence northeasterly, along the south line of Lot 18, Heritage Hills plat 1,
and being the north right of way line of E.P. True Parkway, to the southwest
corner of Lot 17, Heritage Hills plat 1;
Thence northeasterly, along the south line of Lot 17, Heritage Hills plat 1,
and being the north right of way line of E.P. True Parkway, to the southwest
corner of Lot 16, Heritage Hills plat 1;
Thence northeasterly, along the south line of Lot 16, Heritage Hills plat 1,
and being the north right of way line of E.P. True Parkway, to the southwest
corner of Lot 15, Heritage Hills plat 1;
Thence northeasterly, along the south line of Lot 15, Heritage Hills plat 1,
and being the north right of way line of E.P. True Parkway, to the southwest
corner of Lot 14, Heritage Hills plat 1;
Thence northeasterly, along the south line of Lot 14, Heritage Hills plat 1,
and being the north right of way line of E.P. True Parkway, to the southwest
corner of Lot 13, Heritage Hills plat 1;
Thence northeasterly, along the south line of Lot 13, Heritage Hills plat 1,
and being the north right of way line of E.P. True Parkway, to the southwest
corner of Lot 12, Heritage Hills plat 1;
Thence northeasterly, along the south line of Lot 12, Heritage Hills plat 1,
and being the north right of way line of E.P. True Parkway, to the southwest
corner of Lot 11, Heritage Hills plat 1;
Thence northeasterly, along the south line of Lot 11, Heritage Hills plat 1,
and being the north right of way line of E.P. True Parkway, to the southwest
corner of Lot 10, Heritage Hills plat 1;
Thence northeasterly, along the south line of Lot 10, Heritage Hills plat 1,
and being the north right of way line of E.P. True Parkway, to a point at the
intersection of the north right of way line of E.P. True Parkway and the west
right of way line of 81st Street;
Thence easterly, along the projection of the north right of way line of E.P.
True Parkway, to the intersection of the north right of way line of E.P. True
Parkway and the east right of way line of 81st Street, being the southwest
corner of Lot 6, Bartlett Farm plat 8, an official plat, now included in and
forming a part of the City of West Des Moines, Dallas County, Iowa;
Thence northeasterly, along the south line of Lot 6, Bartlett Farm plat 8, and
being the north line of E.P. True Parkway, to the southeast corner of said Lot
6, Bartlett Farm plat 8, and also being the southwest corner of Lot 8, Arbor
Springs plat 1, an official plat, now included in and forming a part of the
City of West Des Moines, Dallas County, Iowa;
Thence easterly, along the south line of Lot 8, Arbor Springs plat 1, and being
the north line of Lot 'A', Bridgewood School, an official plat, now included in
and forming a part of the City of West Des Moines, Dallas County, Iowa, to the
northeast corner of Lot 'A', Bridgewood School;
Thence southerly and easterly, along the north right of way line of E.P. True
Parkway, to the northeast corner of said E.P. True Parkway, as shown on the
acquisition plat in book 2002 page 1211, page 6 of 8 of the records of the
Dallas County Recorder, being on the west right of way line of 74th Street/
South Jordan Creek Parkway;
Thence east, to a point on the east line of the southeast quarter of section
11, township 78 north, range 26 west of the 5th P.M., City of West Des Moines,
Dallas County, Iowa; and also, being at the center of 74th Street/South Jordan
Creek Parkway;
Thence south, along the east line of the southeast quarter of said section 11,
to the southeast corner of said section 11, being the northeast corner of
section 14 and the northwest corner of section 13, all in township 78 north,
range 26 west of the 5th P.M., City of West Des Moines, Dallas County, Iowa;
and also being at the center of 74th Street/South Jordan Creek Parkway;
Thence south, along the west line of the northwest quarter of said section 13;
and also, being at the center of 74th Street/South Jordan Creek Parkway; to the
southwest corner of Lot E, Jordan Creek Town Center plat 1 - replat 1, an
official plat, now included in and forming a part of the City of West Des
Moines, Dallas County, Iowa;
Thence easterly, along the south line of Lot E, Jordan Creek Town Center plat 1
- replat 1, to the northwest corner of Lot 3, Hurd Jordan plat 2, an official
subdivision, now included in and forming a part of the City of West Des Moines,
Dallas County, Iowa, being also on the east right of way line of 74th Street/
South Jordan Creek Parkway;
Thence easterly, along the north line of Lot 3, Hurd Jordan plat 2, to the
northeast corner of said Lot 3;
Thence south, along the east line of Lot 3, Hurd Jordan plat 2, to the
southeast corner of said Lot 3;
Thence southwest and westerly, along the south line of Lot 3, Hurd Jordan plat
2, to the southeast corner of Lot 4, Hurd Jordan plat 2;
Thence westerly, along the south line of Lot 4, Hurd Jordan plat 2, to the
southwest corner of said Lot 4;
Thence west, on a projection of the south line of said Lot 4, to a point on the
east line of said section 14; also being at the centerline of 74th Street/South
Jordan Creek Parkway and on the east line of Lot 'B', Bridgewood plat 1, an
official plat, now included in and forming a part of the City of West Des
Moines, Dallas County, Iowa;
Thence south, along the east line of said section 14, the east line of Lot 'B',
Bridgewood plat 1, and the east line of Lot 'A', Villas At Bridgewood plat 1,
to the point of beginning.
URBAN RENEWAL AREA: Shall mean the entirety of the Coachlight Drive Urban
Renewal Area as amended from time to time.
C.   Provisions For Division Of Taxes Levied On Taxable Property In The June,
2018 Urban Renewal Area Addition: After the effective date of this section, the
taxes levied on the taxable property in the 2018 urban renewal area addition
each year by and for the benefit of the State of Iowa, the City, the County and
any school district or other taxing district in which the 2018 urban renewal
area addition is located, shall be divided as follows:
1.   That portion of the taxes which would be produced by the rate at which the
tax is levied each year by or for each of the taxing districts upon the total
sum of the assessed value of the taxable property in the 2018 urban renewal
area addition, as shown on the assessment roll as of January 1 of the calendar
year preceding the first calendar year in which the City certifies to the
County auditor the amount of loans, advances, indebtedness, or bonds payable
from the special fund referred to in subsection C2 of this section, shall be
allocated to and when collected be paid into the fund for the respective taxing
district as taxes by or for said taxing district into which all other Property
Taxes are paid. For the purpose of allocating taxes levied by or for any taxing
district which did not include the territory in the 2018 urban renewal area
addition on the effective date of this section, but to which the territory has
been annexed or otherwise included after the effective date, the assessment
roll applicable to property in the annexed territory as of January 1 of the
calendar year preceding the effective date of the ordinance which amends the
plan for the 2018 urban renewal area addition to include the annexed area,
shall be used in determining the assessed valuation of the taxable property in
the annexed area.
2.   That portion of the taxes each year in excess of such amounts shall be
allocated to and when collected be paid into a special fund of the City to pay
the principal of and interest on loans, moneys advanced to or indebtedness,
whether funded, refunded, assumed or otherwise, including bonds issued under
the authority of section 403.9(1), of the Code of Iowa, incurred by the City to
finance or refinance, in whole or in part, projects in the urban renewal area,
and to provide assistance for low and moderate-income family housing as
provided in Iowa Code section 403.22, except that taxes for the regular and
voter-approved physical plant and equipment levy of a school district imposed
pursuant to section 298.2 of the Code of Iowa, taxes for the instructional
support program levy of a school district imposed pursuant to section 257.19 of
the Code of Iowa and taxes for the payment of bonds and interest of each taxing
district shall be collected against all taxable property within the taxing
district without limitation by the provisions of this section. Unless and until
the total assessed valuation of the taxable property in the 2018 urban renewal
area addition exceeds the total assessed value of the taxable property in such
area as shown by the assessment roll referred to in subsection C1 of this
section, all of the taxes levied and collected upon the taxable property in the
2018 urban renewal area addition shall be paid into the funds for the
respective taxing districts as taxes by or for said taxing districts in the
same manner as all other Property Taxes. When such loans, advances,
indebtedness, and bonds, if any, and interest thereon, have been paid, all
money thereafter received from taxes upon the taxable property in the 2018
urban renewal area addition shall be paid into the funds for the respective
taxing districts in the same manner as taxes on all other property.
3.   The portion of taxes mentioned in subsection C2 of this section and the
special fund into which that portion shall be paid may be irrevocably pledged
by the City for the payment of the principal and interest on loans, advances,
bonds issued under the authority of section 403.9(1) of the Code of Iowa, or
indebtedness incurred by the City to finance or refinance in whole or in part
projects in the urban renewal area.
4.   As used in this subsection C, the word "taxes" includes, but is not
limited to, all levies on an ad valorem basis upon land or real property. (Ord.
2316, 7-9-2018)
1-10B-14-2: COACHLIGHT DRIVE URBAN RENEWAL AREA DELETED PROPERTY:
A.   Purpose: The purpose of this section is to delete certain property from
the tax increment financing district for the Coachlight Drive Urban Renewal
Area.
B.   Definitions: For use within this section the following terms shall have
the following meanings:
DELETED PROPERTY: Shall mean the following real property situated in the City
of West Des Moines, Dallas County, State of Iowa:
Beginning at the northwest corner of Parcel "AA" as filed in book 2014 page
4167 of the Dallas County Recorder's Office, being a point on the east line of
Lot 5 Sunset Ridge as filed in book 6 page 244 of the Dallas County Recorder's
Office;
Thence north along the east line of Lots 5, 4, 3, 2 and 1 of said Sunset Ridge,
to the south right of way line of Mills Civic Parkway, as described in
acquisition plat filed in book 2009 page 15835 of the Dallas County Recorder's
Office;
Thence east, along said south right of way line of Mills Civic Parkway, to a
point on the east line of the southwest quarter of section 14, Township 78
north, range 26 west of the 5th P.M., in the City of West Des Moines, Dallas
County, Iowa;
Thence south, along the east line of the southwest quarter of said section 14,
to the southerly point of the north line of street Lot 'B', the Cascades at
Jordan Creek plat 1, an official plat, now included in and forming a part of
the City of West Des Moines, Dallas County, Iowa;
Thence west, to the west right of way line of South 81st Street, said point
being the northwest corner of said street Lot 'B';
Thence west and thence northwest along the southwesterly right of way of South
81st Street, to the southeast corner of street Lot 'A' of the Cascades at
Jordan Creek plat 1, as filed in book 2015 page 13814 of the Dallas County
Recorder's Office;
Thence southwesterly, along the south line of said street Lot 'A' of the
Cascades at Jordan Creek plat 1, to the southwest corner of said street Lot
'A';
Thence northwesterly, along the west line of street Lot 'A', to a point on the
north line of Parcel "AA" in book 2014 page 4167;
Thence southwesterly, along the north line of said Parcel "AA", to the point of
beginning.
C.   Property Removed: The deleted property is hereby removed from the tax
increment financing district for the Coachlight Drive Urban Renewal Area. No
division of Property Tax revenues as provided under section 403.19 of the Code
of Iowa shall be done with respect to the deleted property without further
action by the City Council. (Ord. 2348, 2-19-2019)
1-10B-15: JORDAN CREEK URBAN RENEWAL AREA (AMENDED AREA):
   (Rep. by Ord. 2388, 11-18-2019)
1-10B-16: HISTORIC WEST DES MOINES URBAN RENEWAL AREA:
A.   The taxes levied on the taxable property in the TIF area legally described
in the ordinance codified herein, by and for the benefit of the State of Iowa,
City of West Des Moines, County of Polk, West Des Moines Community School
District, and all other taxing districts from and after the effective date of
this section shall be divided as hereinafter in this section provided.
B.   That portion of the taxes which would be produced by the rate at which the
tax is levied each year by or for each of the taxing districts upon the total
sum of the assessed value of the taxable property in the TIF area, as shown on
the assessment roll as of January 1 of the calendar year preceding the first
calendar year in which the City of West Des Moines, State of Iowa, certifies to
the auditor of Polk County, Iowa the amount of loans, advances, indebtedness,
or bonds payable from the division of Property Tax revenue described herein,
shall be allocated to and when collected be paid into the fund for the
respective taxing district as taxes by or for the taxing district into which
all other Property Taxes are paid.
C.   That portion of the taxes each year in excess of the base period taxes
determined as provided in subsection B of this section shall be allocated to
and when collected be paid into a special Tax Increment Fund of the City of
West Des Moines, State of Iowa, hereby established, to pay the principal of and
interest on loans, monies advanced to, indebtedness, whether funded, refunded,
assumed or otherwise, including bonds or obligations issued under the authority
of section 403.9 or 403.12 of the Code of Iowa, as amended, incurred by the
City of West Des Moines, State of Iowa, to finance or refinance, in whole or in
part, urban renewal projects undertaken within the urban renewal area pursuant
to the urban renewal plan, except that: 1) taxes for the regular and voter-
approved physical plant and equipment levy of a school district imposed
pursuant to Iowa Code section 298.2 and taxes for the Instructional Support
Program of a school district imposed pursuant to Iowa Code section 257.19 (but
in each case only to the extent required under Iowa Code section 403.19(2)); 2)
taxes for the payment of bonds and interest of each taxing district; 3) taxes
imposed under Iowa Code section 346.27(22) related to joint county-city
buildings; and 4) any other exceptions under Iowa Code section 403.19 in
existence as of the passage of this section shall be collected against all
taxable property within the TIF area without any limitation as hereinabove
provided.
D.   Unless or until the total assessed valuation of the taxable property in
the TIF area exceeds the total assessed value of the taxable property in the
TIF area as shown by the assessment roll referred to in subsection B of this
section, all of the taxes levied and collected upon the taxable property in the
TIF area shall be paid into the funds for the respective taxing districts as
taxes by or for the taxing districts in the same manner as all other Property
Taxes.
E.   At such time as the loans, advances, indebtedness, bonds and interest
thereon of the City of West Des Moines, State of Iowa, referred to in
subsection C of this section have been paid, all monies thereafter received
from taxes upon the taxable property in the TIF area shall be paid into the
funds for the respective taxing districts in the same manner as taxes on all
other property.
F.   All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with the provisions of
this section are hereby repealed. The provisions of this section are intended
and shall be construed so as to fully implement the provisions of section
403.19 of the Code of Iowa, as amended, with respect to the division of taxes
from property within the TIF area as described above. In the event that any
provision of this section shall be determined to be contrary to law, it shall
not affect other provisions or application of this section which shall at all
times be construed to fully invoke the provisions of section 403.19 of the Code
of Iowa with reference to the TIF area and the territory contained therein.
(Ord. 2232, 6-12-2017)
1-10B-16-1: HISTORIC WEST DES MOINES URBAN RENEWAL AREA 2019 ADDITION:
A.   Purpose. The purpose of this ordinance is to provide for the division of
taxes levied on the taxable property in the December, 2019 Historic West Des
Moines Urban Renewal Area Addition of the City, each year by and for the
benefit of the state, city, county, school districts or other taxing districts
after the effective date of this ordinance in order to create a special fund to
pay the principal of and interest on loans, moneys advanced to or indebtedness,
including bonds proposed to be issued by the City to finance projects in such
area.
B.   Definitions. For use within the remainder of this ordinance the following
terms shall have the following meanings:
CITY: Shall mean the City of West Des Moines, Iowa.
COUNTY: Shall mean Polk County, Iowa.
TAX INCREMENT FINANCING DISTRICT: Shall mean certain real property situated in
the Urban Renewal Area, legally described as follows:
A Tract of land in sections 10, 11, 14 and 15 township 78 north, range 25 west
of the fifth Principle Meridian, West Des Moines, Polk County, Iowa is included
in the Historic West Des Moines Urban Renewal Plan and is more particularly
described as follows:
Beginning at the northwest corner of Lot 1, Block 6, Valley Junction, an
official subdivision now in and forming a part of the City of West Des Moines,
Polk County, Iowa;
Thence east, along the north line of said Lot 1, to the northeast corner of
said Block 6, of said Valley Junction;
Thence north, along the east line extended of said Block 6, to the southeast
corner of Block 9, of said Valley Junction;
Thence north, along the east line of said Block 9, to the southeast corner of
Lot 1, of said Block 9, of said Valley Junction;
Thence west, along the south line of said Lot 1, to the southwest corner of
said Lot 1, of said Block 9, of said Valley Junction;
Thence north, along the west line of said Lot 1, to the north line of said
Block 9, of said Valley Junction;
Thence east, along the north line and the north line extended of said Block 9,
of said Valley Junction, to the northwest corner of Block 10 of said Valley
Junction;
Thence north, along the west line extended of said Block 10, of said Valley
Junction, to the southwest corner of Block 19, first addition to Valley
Junction, an official subdivision now in and forming a part of the City of West
Des Moines, Polk County, Iowa;
Thence north, along the west line of said Block 19, of said first addition to
Valley Junction, to the northwest corner of said Block 19, of said first
addition to Valley Junction;
Thence east, along the north line of said Block 19, to the northeast corner of
Lot 18, of said Block 19, of said first addition to Valley Junction;
Thence north, along the east line extended of said Lot 18, of said Block 19, of
said first addition to Valley Junction, to the southeast corner of Lot 11,
Block 24, of said first addition to Valley Junction;
Thence north, along the east line of Lots 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19
and 20, of said Block 24, to the northeast corner of said Lot 20, of said Block
24, of said first addition to Valley Junction;
Thence north, along the east line extended of said Lot 20, of said Block 24, of
said first addition to Valley Junction, to the southeast corner of Lot 49,
Butler's Addition to Valley Junction, an official subdivision now in and
forming a part of the City of West Des Moines, Polk County, Iowa;
Thence north, along the east line of Lots 49, 50, 51, 52, 53, 54, 55, 56, 57,
58, 59 and 60, of said Butler's Addition to Valley Junction, to the northeast
corner of said Lot 60, of said Butler’s Addition to Valley Junction;
Thence east, along the north line extended of said Lot 60, of said Butler’s
Addition to Valley Junction, to the northwest corner of said Lot 61, of said
Butler’s Addition to Valley Junction;
Thence east, along the north line and the north line extended of said Lot 61,
of said Butler’s Addition to Valley Junction, to the northwest corner of Lot
84, of said Butler’s Addition to Valley Junction;
Thence east, along the north line and north line extended of Lot 84, of said
Butler’s Addition to Valley Junction, to the northwest corner of Lot 1, Block
32, second addition to Valley Junction, an official subdivision now in and
forming a part of the City of West Des Moines, Polk County, Iowa;
Thence east, along the north line of said Lot 1, of said Block 32, of said
second addition to Valley Junction, to the northeast corner of said Lot 1, of
said second addition to Valley Junction;
Thence south, along the east line of said Lot 1, of said Block 32, of said
second addition to Valley Junction, to the northeast corner of Lot 2, of said
Block 32, of said second addition to Valley Junction;
Thence south, along the east line of said Lot 2, of said Block 32, of said
second addition to Valley Junction, to the southeast corner of said Lot 2, of
said Block 32, of said second addition to Valley Junction;
Thence west, along the south line of said Lot 2, of said Block 32, of said
second addition to Valley Junction, to the southwest corner of said Lot 2, of
said Block 32, of said second addition to Valley Junction;
Thence south, along the west line of Lots 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11 and 12,
of said Block 32, of said second addition to Valley Junction, to the southwest
corner of said Lot 12, of said Block 32, of said second addition to Valley
Junction;
Thence east, along the south line of said Lot 12, of said Block 32, of said
second addition to Valley Junction, a distance of six feet;
Thence south, to the northwest corner of Lot 1, Block 25, first addition to
Valley Junction, an official subdivision now in and forming a part of the City
of West Des Moines, Polk County, Iowa;
Thence south, along the west line of Lots 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8 and 9, of said
Block 25, of said first addition to Valley Junction, to the southwest corner of
said Lot 9, of said first addition to Valley Junction;
Thence east, along the south line of said Lot 9, of said first addition to
Valley Junction, to the east line of said Block 25, of said first addition to
Valley Junction;
Thence south, along the east line of said Block 25, of said first addition to
Valley Junction, to the southeast corner of said Block 25, of said first
addition to Valley Junction;
Thence west, along the south line of said Block 25, of said first addition to
Valley Junction, to the southwest corner of Lot 10, of said first addition to
Valley Junction;
Thence south, along the west line extended of said Lot 10, of said first
addition to Valley Junction, to the northwest corner of Lot 1, Block 18, of
said first addition to Valley Junction;
Thence south, along the west line of Lots 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6 and 7, of said Block
18, of said first addition to Valley Junction, to the northwest corner of Lot
8, of said Block 18, of said first addition to Valley Junction;
Thence east, along the north line of said Lot 8, of said Block 18, of said
first addition to Valley Junction, to the east line of said Block 18, of said
first addition to Valley Junction;
Thence south, along the east line and east line extended of said Block 18, of
said first addition to Valley Junction, to the northeast corner of Block 11,
Valley Junction, an official subdivision now in and forming a part of the City
of West Des Moines, Polk County, Iowa;
Thence south, along the east line of said Block 11, of said Valley Junction to
the northeast corner of Lot 7, of said Block 11, of said Valley Junction;
Thence east, along the north line extended of said Lot 7, of said Block 11, of
said Valley Junction, to the northwest corner of Lot 12, Block 12 of said
Valley Junction;
Thence east, along the north line of said Lot 12, of said Block 12, of said
Valley Junction, to the northeast corner of said Lot 12, of said Block 12 of
said Valley Junction;
Thence south, along the east line of Lots 10, 11 and 12, of said Block 12, of
said Valley Junction, to the southeast corner of Lot 10, of said Block 12, of
said Valley Junction;
Thence south, along the east line extended of said Lot 10, of said Block 12, of
said Valley Junction, to the northeast corner of Lot 20, Block 3, of said
Valley Junction;
Thence south, along the east line of Lots 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, and 20, of said
Block 3, of said Valley Junction, to the southeast corner of Lot 15, of Block
3, of said Valley Junction;
Thence east, along the south line extended of said Lot 15, of said Block 3, of
said Valley Junction, to the southwest corner of Lot 6, of said Block 3, of
said Valley Junction;
Thence east, along the south line and south line extended of said Lot 6, of
said Block 3, of said Valley Junction, to the southwest corner of Lot 15, Block
2, of said Valley Junction;
Thence east, along the south line and south line extended of said Lot 15, of
said Block 2, of said Valley Junction, to the southwest corner of Lot 6, of
said Block 2, of said Valley Junction;
Thence east, along the south line and south line extended of said Lot 6, of
said Block 2, of said Valley Junction, to the southwest corner of Lot 17, of
Block 1, of said Valley Junction;
Thence east, along the south line and south line extended of said Lot 17, of
said Block 1, of said Valley Junction, to the southeast corner of said Lot 17,
of said Block 1, of said Valley Junction;
Thence north, along the east line and east line extended of Lots 17, 18, 19,
20, 21 and 22, of said Block 1, of said Valley Junction, to the southeast
corner of Lot 10, Block 14, of said Valley Junction;
Thence north, along the east line and east line extended of Lots 10, 11, 12,
13, 14, 15, 16, 17 and 18, of said Block 14, of said Valley Junction, to the
southeast corner of Lot 10, Block 15, of first addition to Valley Junction, an
official subdivision now in and forming a part of the City of West Des Moines,
Polk County, Iowa;
Thence north, along the east line and east line extended of Lots 10, 11, 12,
13, 14, 15, 16, 17 and 18, of said Block 15, of said first addition to Valley
Junction, to the south right of way line of Walnut Street;
Thence easterly, along the south right of way line of Walnut Street, to the
west right of way line of 1st Street (State Highway 28);
Thence south, along the west right of way line and west right of way line
extended of 1st Street, to the south right of way line of Railroad Avenue;
Thence west, along the south right of way line of Railroad Avenue, to a point
north of and normal to the northeast corner of Goodman Industrial Park, an
official subdivision now in and forming a part of the City of West Des Moines,
Iowa;
Thence south, along a line normal to the south right of way line of Railroad
Avenue, to the northeast corner of said Goodman Industrial Park;
Thence south, along the east line of said Goodman Industrial Park, to the
southeast corner of said Goodman Industrial Park;
Thence southwesterly, along the southeasterly line of said Goodman Industrial
Park, to the southeasterly corner of West Green Industrial Park Plat 1, an
official subdivision now in and forming a part of the City of West Des Moines,
Iowa;
Thence northerly and northwesterly, along the easterly line of said West Green
Industrial Park Plat 1, to the southeast corner of part of Lot "D", Valley
Junction, an official subdivision now in and forming a part of the City of West
Des Moines, Iowa said line being the south line of property conveyed to Lillie
G. Clay and Harry W. Bailey by deed dated December 29, 1939;
Thence westerly, along said south line of conveyance to Lillie G. Clay and
Harry W. Bailey, extended to the east line of property conveyed to the City of
West Des Moines Iowa for public street purposes by deed dated October 5, 1955;
Thence northerly, along said east property line and property line extended for
public roadway, to the north right of way line of Railroad Avenue;
Thence east, along the north right of way line and north right of way line
extended of Railroad Avenue, to the west line of Lot 9, Block 34, Valley
Junction, an official subdivision now in and forming a part of the City of West
Des Moines;
Thence north, along the west line of Lots 6, 7, 8 and 9, of said Block 34, of
said Valley Junction, to the northwest corner of said Lot 6, of said Block 34,
of said Valley Junction;
Thence east, along the north line and north line extended of said Lot 6, of
said Block 34, of said Valley Junction, to the northwest corner of Lot 13,
Block 33, of said Valley Junction;
Thence east, along the north line and north line extended of said Lot 13, of
said Block 33, of said Valley Junction, to the northwest corner of Lot 6, of
said Block 33, of said Valley Junction;
Thence east, along the north line and north line extended of said Lot 6, of
said Block 33, of said Valley Junction, to the northwest corner of Lot 13,
Block 7, of said Valley Junction;
Thence east, along the north line and north line extended of said Lot 13, of
said Block 7, of said Valley Junction, to the northwest corner of Lot 6, of
said Block 7, of said Valley Junction;
Thence east, along the north line and north line extended of said Lot 6, of
said Block 7, of said Valley Junction, to the northwest corner of Lot 13, of
said Block 6, of said Valley Junction;
Thence east, along the north line and north line extended of said Lot 13, of
said Block 6, of said Valley Junction, to the southwest corner of Lot 5, of
said Block 6, of said Valley Junction;
Thence north, along the west line of Lots 1, 2, 3, 4 and 5, of said Block 6, of
said Valley Junction, to the point of beginning.
(The legal description set forth herein is the legal description of the entire
Historic West Des Moines Urban Renewal Area, including the December, 2019
Addition)
URBAN RENEWAL AREA: Shall mean the entirety of the Historic West Des Moines
Urban Renewal Area as amended from time to time.
C.   Provisions for Division of Taxes Levied on Taxable Property in the
December, 2019 Urban Renewal Area Addition. After the effective date of this
ordinance, the taxes levied on the taxable property in the 2019 Urban Renewal
Area Addition each year by and for the benefit of the State of Iowa, the City,
the County and any school district or other taxing district in which the 2019
Urban Renewal Area Addition is located, shall be divided as follows:
1   That portion of the taxes which would be produced by the rate at which the
tax is levied each year by or for each of the taxing districts upon the total
sum of the assessed value of the taxable property in the 2019 Urban Renewal
Area Addition, as shown on the assessment roll as of January 1 of the calendar
year preceding the first calendar year in which the City certifies to the
County Auditor the amount of loans, advances, indebtedness, or bonds payable
from the special fund referred to in subsection C.2. below, shall be allocated
to and when collected be paid into the fund for the respective taxing district
as taxes by or for said taxing district into which all other property taxes are
paid. For the purpose of allocating taxes levied by or for any taxing district
which did not include the territory in the 2019 Urban Renewal Area Addition on
the effective date of this ordinance, but to which the territory has been
annexed or otherwise included after the effective date, the assessment roll
applicable to property in the annexed territory as of January 1 of the calendar
year preceding the effective date of the ordinance which amends the plan for
the 2019 Urban Renewal Area Addition to include the annexed area, shall be used
in determining the assessed valuation of the taxable property in the annexed
area.
2   That portion of the taxes each year in excess of such amounts shall be
allocated to and when collected be paid into a special fund of the City to pay
the principal of and interest on loans, moneys advanced to or indebtedness,
whether funded, refunded, assumed or otherwise, including bonds issued under
the authority of Section 403.9(1), of the Code of Iowa, incurred by the City to
finance or refinance, in whole or in part, projects in the Urban Renewal Area,
and to provide assistance for low and moderate-income family housing as
provided in Section 403.22, except that taxes for the regular and voter-
approved physical plant and equipment levy of a school district imposed
pursuant to Section 298.2 of the Code of Iowa, taxes for the instructional
support program levy of a school district imposed pursuant to Section 257.19 of
the Code of Iowa and taxes for the payment of bonds and interest of each taxing
district shall be collected against all taxable property within the taxing
district without limitation by the provisions of this ordinance. Unless and
until the total assessed valuation of the taxable property in the 2019 Urban
Renewal Area Addition exceeds the total assessed value of the taxable property
in such area as shown by the assessment roll referred to in subsection C.1. of
this section, all of the taxes levied and collected upon the taxable property
in the 2019 Urban Renewal Area Addition shall be paid into the funds for the
respective taxing districts as taxes by or for said taxing districts in the
same manner as all other property taxes. When such loans, advances,
indebtedness, and bonds, if any, and interest thereon, have been paid, all
money thereafter received from taxes upon the taxable property in the 2019
Urban Renewal Area Addition shall be paid into the funds for the respective
taxing districts in the same manner as taxes on all other property.
3   The portion of taxes mentioned in subsection C.2. of this section and the
special fund into which that portion shall be paid may be irrevocably pledged
by the City for the payment of the principal and interest on loans, advances,
bonds issued under the authority of Section 403.9(1) of the Code of Iowa, or
indebtedness incurred by the City to finance or refinance in whole or in part
projects in the Urban Renewal Area.
4   As used in this section, the word "taxes" includes, but is not limited to,
all levies on an ad valorem basis upon land or real property. (Ord. 2399, 12-
16-2019)
1-10B-17: OSMIUM URBAN RENEWAL AREA (MICROSOFT PARCEL):
A.   Purpose: The purpose of this section is to provide for the division of
taxes levied on certain taxable property in the Osmium Urban Renewal Area of
the City of West Des Moines, Iowa, each year by and for the benefit of the
State, City, County, school districts or other taxing districts after the
effective date of this section in order to create a special fund to pay the
principal of and interest on loans, moneys advanced to or indebtedness,
including bonds proposed to be issued by the City of West Des Moines to finance
projects in such area.
B.   Definitions: For use within the remainder of this section the following
terms shall have the following meanings:
CITY: Shall mean the City of West Des Moines, Iowa.
COUNTIES: Shall mean Madison County and Warren County.
TAX INCREMENT FINANCING DISTRICT: Shall mean certain real property situated in
the Osmium Urban Renewal Area, legally described as follows:
The southeast quarter of the southeast quarter (SE1/4 SE1/4) section 1,
township 77 north, range 26 west of the 5th principal meridian, Madison County,
Iowa.
And
Parcel 1:
The northwest quarter of the northwest quarter (NW1/4 NW1/4) of section 7,
township 77 north, range 25 west of the 5th principal meridian, Warren County,
Iowa.
Parcel 2:
The northeast quarter of the northwest quarter (NE1/4 NW1/4) of section 7,
township 77 north, range 25 west of the 5th principal meridian, Warren County,
Iowa: except that part deeded to the State of Iowa in book 125, page 121: and
except that part deeded to the State of Iowa in book 2012, page 10015.
Parcel 3 & 4:
The southeast quarter of the southwest quarter (SE1/4 SW1/4) of section 6,
township 77 north, range 25 west of the 5th principal meridian, Warren County,
Iowa: except that part deeded to the State of Iowa in book 125, page 122: and
except that part deeded to the State of Iowa in book 2012, page 10015.
Parcel 5:
The southwest quarter of the southwest quarter (SW1/4 SW1/4) of section 6,
township 77 north, range 25 west of the 5th principal meridian, Warren County,
Iowa.
URBAN RENEWAL AREA: Shall mean the entirety of the Osmium Urban Renewal Area as
amended from time to time.
C.   Provisions For Division Of Taxes Levied On Taxable Property In The Tax
Increment Financing District: After the effective date of this section, the
taxes levied on the taxable property in the tax increment financing district
each year by and for the benefit of the State of Iowa, the City, the counties
and any school district or other taxing district in which the tax increment
financing district is located, shall be divided as follows:
1.   That portion of the taxes which would be produced by the rate at which the
tax is levied each year by or for each of the taxing districts upon the total
sum of the assessed value of the taxable property in the tax increment
financing district as shown on the assessment roll as of January 1 of the
calendar year preceding the first calendar year in which the City certifies to
the County auditors the amount of loans, advances, indebtedness, or bonds
payable from the special fund referred to in subsection C2 of this section,
shall be allocated to and when collected be paid into the fund for the
respective taxing district as taxes by or for said taxing district into which
all other Property Taxes are paid. For the purpose of allocating taxes levied
by or for any taxing district which did not include the territory in the tax
increment financing district on the effective date of this section, but to
which the territory has been annexed or otherwise included after the effective
date, the assessment roll applicable to property in the annexed territory as of
January 1 of the calendar year preceding the effective date of the ordinance
which amends the plan for the tax increment financing district to include the
annexed area, shall be used in determining the assessed valuation of the
taxable property in the annexed area.
2.   That portion of the taxes each year in excess of such amounts shall be
allocated to and when collected be paid into a special fund of the City to pay
the principal of and interest on loans, moneys advanced to or indebtedness,
whether funded, refunded, assumed or otherwise, including bonds issued under
the authority of section 403.9(1), of the Code of Iowa, incurred by the City to
finance or refinance, in whole or in part, projects in the urban renewal area,
and to provide assistance for low and moderate-income family housing as
provided in section 403.22 of the Code of Iowa, except that taxes for the
regular and voter-approved physical plant and equipment levy of a school
district imposed pursuant to section 298.2 of the Code of Iowa, taxes for the
instructional support program levy of a school district imposed pursuant to
section 257.19 of the Code of Iowa and taxes for the payment of bonds and
interest of each taxing district shall be collected against all taxable
property within the taxing district without limitation by the provisions of
this section. Unless and until the total assessed valuation of the taxable
property in the tax increment financing district exceeds the total assessed
value of the taxable property in such area as shown by the assessment roll
referred to in subsection C1 of this section, all of the taxes levied and
collected upon the taxable property in the tax increment financing district
shall be paid into the funds for the respective taxing districts as taxes by or
for said taxing districts in the same manner as all other Property Taxes. When
such loans, advances, indebtedness, and bonds, if any, and interest thereon,
have been paid, all money thereafter received from taxes upon the taxable
property in the tax increment financing district shall be paid into the funds
for the respective taxing districts in the same manner as taxes on all other
property.
3.   The portion of taxes mentioned in subsection C2 of this section and the
special fund into which that portion shall be paid may be irrevocably pledged
by the City for the payment of the principal and interest on loans, advances,
bonds issued under the authority of section 403.9(1) of the Code of Iowa, or
indebtedness incurred by the City to finance or refinance in whole or in part
projects in the urban renewal area.
4.   As used in this subsection C, the word "taxes" includes, but is not
limited to, all levies on an ad valorem basis upon land or real property. (Ord.
2294, 4-16-2018)
1-10B-18: MIDTOWN URBAN RENEWAL AREA:
A.   The taxes levied on the taxable property in the urban renewal area legally
described in the ordinance codified herein, by and for the benefit of the State
of Iowa, City of West Des Moines, County of Polk, West Des Moines Community
School District, and all other taxing districts from and after the effective
date of this section shall be divided as hereinafter in this section provided.
B.   That portion of the taxes which would be produced by the rate at which the
tax is levied each year by or for each of the taxing districts upon the total
sum of the assessed value of the taxable property in the urban renewal area, as
shown on the assessment roll as of January 1 of the calendar year preceding the
first calendar year in which the City of West Des Moines, State of Iowa,
certifies to the auditor of Polk County, Iowa the amount of loans, advances,
indebtedness, or bonds payable from the division of Property Tax revenue
described herein, shall be allocated to and when collected be paid into the
fund for the respective taxing district as taxes by or for the taxing district
into which all other Property Taxes are paid.
C.   That portion of the taxes each year in excess of the base period taxes
determined as provided in subsection B of this section shall be allocated to
and when collected be paid into a special Tax Increment Fund of the City of
West Des Moines, State of Iowa, hereby established, to pay the principal of and
interest on loans, monies advanced to, indebtedness, whether funded, refunded,
assumed or otherwise, including bonds or obligations issued under the authority
of section 403.9 or 403.12 of the Code of Iowa, as amended, incurred by the
City of West Des Moines, State of Iowa, to finance or refinance, in whole or in
part, urban renewal projects undertaken within the urban renewal area pursuant
to the urban renewal plan, except that: 1) taxes for the regular and voter-
approved physical plant and equipment levy of a school district imposed
pursuant to Iowa Code section 298.2 and taxes for the Instructional Support
Program of a school district imposed pursuant to Iowa Code section 257.19 (but
in each case only to the extent required under Iowa Code section 403.19(2)); 2)
taxes for the payment of bonds and interest of each taxing district; 3) taxes
imposed under Iowa Code section 346.27(22) related to joint county-city
buildings; and 4) any other exceptions under Iowa Code section 403.19 in effect
or of the date this section is adopted shall be collected against all taxable
property within the urban renewal area without any limitation as hereinabove
provided.
D.   Unless or until the total assessed valuation of the taxable property in
the urban renewal area exceeds the total assessed value of the taxable property
in the urban renewal area as shown by the assessment roll referred to in
subsection B of this section, all of the taxes levied and collected upon the
taxable property in the urban renewal area shall be paid into the funds for the
respective taxing districts as taxes by or for the taxing districts in the same
manner as all other Property Taxes.
E.   At such time as the loans, advances, indebtedness, bonds and interest
thereon of the City of West Des Moines, State of Iowa, referred to in
subsection C of this section have been paid, all monies thereafter received
from taxes upon the taxable property in the urban renewal area shall be paid
into the funds for the respective taxing districts in the same manner as taxes
on all other property.
F.   All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with the provisions of
this section are hereby repealed. The provisions of this section are intended
and shall be construed so as to fully implement the provisions of section
403.19 of the Code of Iowa, as amended, with respect to the division of taxes
from property within the urban renewal area as described above. In the event
that any provision of this section shall be determined to be contrary to law,
it shall not affect other provisions or application of this section which shall
at all times be construed to fully invoke the provisions of section 403.19 of
the Code of Iowa with reference to the urban renewal area and the territory
contained therein. (Ord. 2245, 9-5-2017)
1-10B-19: E.P. TRUE PARKWAY URBAN RENEWAL AREA:
A.   The taxes levied on the taxable property in the urban renewal area legally
described in the ordinance codified herein, by and for the benefit of the State
of Iowa, City of West Des Moines, County of Polk, West Des Moines Community
School District, and all other taxing districts from and after the effective
date of this section shall be divided as hereinafter in this section provided.
B.   That portion of the taxes which would be produced by the rate at which the
tax is levied each year by or for each of the taxing districts upon the total
sum of the assessed value of the taxable property in the urban renewal area, as
shown on the assessment roll as of January 1 of the calendar year preceding the
first calendar year in which the City of West Des Moines, State of Iowa,
certifies to the auditor of Polk County, Iowa the amount of loans, advances,
indebtedness, or bonds payable from the division of Property Tax revenue
described herein, shall be allocated to and when collected be paid into the
fund for the respective taxing district as taxes by or for the taxing district
into which all other Property Taxes are paid.
C.   That portion of the taxes each year in excess of the base period taxes
determined as provided in subsection B of this section shall be allocated to
and when collected be paid into a special Tax Increment Fund of the City of
West Des Moines, State of Iowa, hereby established, to pay the principal of and
interest on loans, monies advanced to, indebtedness, whether funded, refunded,
assumed or otherwise, including bonds or obligations issued under the authority
of section 403.9 or 403.12 of the Code of Iowa, as amended, incurred by the
City of West Des Moines, State of Iowa, to finance or refinance, in whole or in
part, urban renewal projects undertaken within the urban renewal area pursuant
to the urban renewal plan, except that: 1) taxes for the regular and voter-
approved physical plant and equipment levy of a school district imposed
pursuant to Iowa Code section 298.2 and taxes for the Instructional Support
Program of a school district imposed pursuant to Iowa Code section 257.19 (but
in each case only to the extent required under Iowa Code section 403.19(2)); 2)
taxes for the payment of bonds and interest of each taxing district; 3) taxes
imposed under Iowa Code section 346.27(22) related to joint county-city
buildings; and 4) any other exceptions under Iowa Code section 403.19 shall be
collected against all taxable property within the urban renewal area without
any limitation as hereinabove provided.
D.   Unless or until the total assessed valuation of the taxable property in
the urban renewal area exceeds the total assessed value of the taxable property
in the urban renewal area as shown by the assessment roll referred to in
subsection B of this section, all of the taxes levied and collected upon the
taxable property in the urban renewal area shall be paid into the funds for the
respective taxing districts as taxes by or for the taxing districts in the same
manner as all other Property Taxes.
E.   At such time as the loans, advances, indebtedness, bonds and interest
thereon of the City of West Des Moines, State of Iowa, referred to in
subsection C of this section have been paid, all monies thereafter received
from taxes upon the taxable property in the urban renewal area shall be paid
into the funds for the respective taxing districts in the same manner as taxes
on all other property.
F.   All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with the provisions of
this section are hereby repealed. The provisions of this section are intended
and shall be construed so as to fully implement the provisions of section
403.19 of the Code of Iowa, as amended, with respect to the division of taxes
from property within the urban renewal area as described above. In the event
that any provision of this section shall be determined to be contrary to law,
it shall not affect other provisions or application of this section which shall
at all times be construed to fully invoke the provisions of section 403.19 of
the Code of Iowa with reference to the urban renewal area and the territory
contained therein. (Ord. 2259, 10-30-2017)
1-10B-20: WOODLAND HILLS URBAN RENEWAL AREA:
A.   For purposes of this section, the following terms shall have the following
meanings:
SUB-AREA A: Shall mean the area of the City of West Des Moines described as
follows:
A tract of land in section 14, township 78 north, range 26 west of the 5th
principal meridian, West Des Moines, Dallas County, Iowa, is included in the
Woodland Hills Urban Renewal Area, this tract of land is more particularly
described as follows:
Beginning at the southwest corner of Lot 6, Sunset Ridge, an official
subdivision now in and forming a part of the City of West Des Moines, Dallas
County, Iowa;
Thence west, along the south line extended of said Lot 6, to the intersection
with the centerline of South 88th Street;
Thence north, along the centerline of South 88th Street, to the centerline of
Mills Civic Parkway;
Thence east, along the centerline of Mills Civic Parkway, to the east line
extended of said Sunset Ridge;
Thence south, along the east line extended and the east line of said Sunset
Ridge, to the southeast corner of said Lot 6;
Thence west, along the south line of said Lot 6, to the point of beginning.
SUB-AREA B: Shall mean the area of the City of West Des Moines described as
follows:
A tract of land in section 15, township 78 north, range 26 west of the 5th
principal meridian, West Des Moines, Dallas County, Iowa, is included in the
Woodland Hills Urban Renewal Area, this tract of land is more particularly
described as follows:
Commencing at the northwest corner of the southeast quarter of the northeast
quarter of section 15, township 78 north, range 26 west of the 5th principal
meridian;
Thence east, along the north line of Cedar Ridge, an official subdivision now
in and forming a part of the City of West Des Moines, Dallas County, Iowa, to
the northwest corner of Lot 38 of said Cedar Ridge, said point being the point
of beginning;
Thence east, along the north line of said Cedar Ridge, to the centerline of
South 88th Street;
Thence south, along the centerline of said South 88th Street, to the centerline
of Mills Civic Parkway;
Thence westerly, along the centerline of Mills Civic Parkway, to the
intersection of the west line extended of Lot 7 of said Cedar Ridge;
Thence north, along the west line of said Lot 7, to the southwest corner of Lot
21 of said Cedar Ridge;
Thence north, along the west line said Lot 21, to the northeast corner of Lot 6
of said Cedar Ridge;
Thence northeasterly, along the northwesterly line and northwesterly line
extended of Lot 21 of said Cedar Ridge, to the centerline of Lot "C" road of
said Cedar Ridge;
Thence easterly, along the centerline of said Lot "C" road, to the west line
extended of Lot 35 of said Cedar Ridge;
Thence northerly, along the westerly line of said Lot 35, to the southwest
corner of Lot 36 of said Cedar Ridge;
Thence northerly, along the westerly line of said Lot 36, to the southwest
corner of Lot 37 of said Cedar Ridge;
Thence northerly, along the westerly line of said Lot 37, to the point of
beginning.
SUB-AREA C: Shall mean the area of the City of West Des Moines described as
follows:
A tract of land in section 15, township 78 north, range 26 west of the 5th
principal meridian, West Des Moines, Dallas County, Iowa, is included in the
Woodland Hills Urban Renewal Area, this tract of land is more particularly
described as follows:
Beginning at the northwest corner of the southeast quarter of section 15,
township 78 north, range 26 west of the 5th principal meridian, Dallas County,
Iowa, said point being on the centerline of Mills Civic Parkway;
Thence north, to the north right-of-way line of Mills Civic Parkway;
Thence east, along the north right-of-way line of Mills Civic Parkway, to the
southwest corner of Lot 7 of Cedar Ridge, an official subdivision now in and
forming a part of the City of West Des Moines, Iowa;
Thence south, along the west line extended of Lot 7 of said Cedar Ridge, to the
centerline of Mills Civic Parkway;
Thence east, along the centerline of Mills Civic Parkway, to the east line
extended of outlot 'A' of Michael's Landing plat 1, an official subdivision now
in and forming a part of the City of West Des Moines, Dallas County, Iowa;
Thence south, along the east line extended and the east line of said outlot
'A', to the southeast corner of said outlot 'A';
Thence west, along the south line of said outlot 'A', to the southeast corner
of outlot 'B' of said Michael's Landing plat 1;
Thence west, along the south line and the south line extended of said outlot
'B', to the southeast corner of outlot 'C' of said Michael's Landing plat 1;
Thence west, along the south line of said outlot 'C', to the southwest corner
of said outlot 'C';
Thence north, along the west line of said outlot 'C', to the southwest corner
of street Lot 'AA' of said Michael's Landing plat 1;
Thence north, along the west line of said street Lot 'AA', to the point of
beginning.
SUB-AREA D: Shall mean the area of the City of West Des Moines described as
follows:
A tract of land in section 15, township 78 north, range 26 west of the 5th
principal meridian, West Des Moines, Dallas County, Iowa, is included in the
Woodland Hills Urban Renewal Area, this tract of land is more particularly
described as follows:
Beginning at the intersection of the centerline of South 88th Street and the
south line extended of Lot 2, Forret Acres plat 1, an official plat now in and
forming a part of the City of West Des Moines, Dallas County, Iowa;
Thence south, along the centerline of South 88th Street, to the centerline
intersection of Cascade Avenue;
Thence west, along the centerline of Cascade Avenue, to the centerline of South
91st Street;
Thence north, along the centerline of South 91st Street, to the north line
extended of outlot 'F' of Michael's Landing plat 1, an official subdivision now
in and forming a part of the City of West Des Moines, Dallas County, Iowa;
Thence east, along the north line extended and the north line of said outlot
'F', to the west line of Lot 2, Forret Acres plat 1, an official subdivision
now in and forming a part of the City of West Des Moines, Dallas County, Iowa;
Thence south, along the west line of said Lot 2, to the southwest corner of
said Lot 2;
Thence east, along the south line and the south line extended of said Lot 2, to
the point of beginning.
SUB-AREA E: Shall mean the area of the City of West Des Moines described as
follows:
A tract of land in section 15, township 78 north, range 26 west of the 5th
principal meridian, West Des Moines, Dallas County, Iowa, is included in the
Woodland Hills Urban Renewal Area, this tract of land is more particularly
described as follows:
Beginning at the intersection of the centerline of South 88th Street and the
south line extended of Lot 2, Forret Acres plat 1, an official plat now in and
forming a part of the City of West Des Moines, Dallas County, Iowa;
Thence west, along the south line extended and the south line of said Lot 2, to
the southwest corner of said Lot 2;
Thence north, along the west line of said Lot 2, to the northwest corner of
said Lot 2;
Thence east, along the north line of said Lot 2, to the southwest corner of Lot
1 of said Forret Acres plat 1;
Thence north, along the west line of said Lot 1 and Lot 1 extended, to the
centerline of Mills Civic Parkway;
Thence easterly, along the centerline of said Mills Civic Parkway, to the
centerline of South 88th Street;
Thence south, along the centerline of South 88th Street, to the point of
beginning.
SUB-AREA F: Shall mean the area of the City of West Des Moines described as
follows:
A tract of land in sections 22 and 23, township 78 north, range 26 west of the
5th principal meridian, West Des Moines, Dallas County, Iowa, is included in
the Woodland Hills Urban Renewal Area, this tract of land is more particularly
described as follows:
Beginning at the southeast corner of the northeast quarter of section 22,
township 78 north, range 26 west of the 5th principal meridian, Dallas County,
Iowa, with said point being the centerline intersection of Booneville Road and
South 88th Street;
Thence south, to the south right-of-way line of Booneville Road;
Thence west, along the south right-of-way line of Booneville Road, to the
extended centerline of South 91st Street, said intersection being on the east
line extended of Parcel "A" as recorded in book 77, page 912 in the Dallas
County Recorder's Office;
Thence north, along the east line and the east line extended of said Parcel
"A", to the centerline of Sugar Creek Drive in street Lot 'A' of Michael's
Landing plat 1, an official subdivision now in and forming a part of the City
of West Des Moines, Dallas County, Iowa;
Thence north, along the centerline of South 91st Street in street Lot 'A' and
street Lot 'I' of said Michael's Landing plat 1, to the centerline of Harper
Lane in street Lot 'F' of said Michael's Landing plat 1;
Thence north, along the centerline of 91st Street extended, to the intersection
of Stagecoach Drive extended;
Thence east, along the centerline of Stagecoach Drive extended, to the east
line of said section 22;
Thence continuing east, to the east right-of-way line of South 88th Street;
Thence south, along the east right-of-way line of South 88th Street, to the
south line of the northwest quarter of section 23, township 78 north, range 26
west of the 5th principal meridian;
Thence west, along the south line of said section 23, to the point of
beginning.
SUB-AREA G: Shall mean the area of the City of West Des Moines described as
follows:
A tract of land in section 14, township 78 north, range 26 west of the 5th
principal meridian, West Des Moines, Dallas County, Iowa, is included in the
Woodland Hills Urban Renewal Area, this tract of land is more particularly
described as follows:
Beginning at the centerline intersection of South 85th Street and Coachlight
Drive, Silverwood plat 2, an official subdivision now in and forming a part of
the City of West Des Moines, Dallas County, Iowa;
Thence south 00°37'58" west (assumed bearing), a distance of 510.0 feet;
Thence south 23°00'00" east (assumed bearing), a distance of 330.0 feet;
Thence south 00°37'58" west (assumed bearing), to the centerline of Mills Civic
Parkway;
Thence westerly, along the centerline of Mills Civic Parkway, to the centerline
of South 88th Street;
Thence northerly, along the centerline of South 88th Street, to the north line
of the southwest quarter of the northwest quarter of section 14, township 78
north, range 26 west of the 5th principal meridian;
Thence easterly, to the point of beginning.
SUB-AREA R-1: Shall mean the area of the City of West Des Moines described as
follows:
A tract of land in section 15, township 78 north, range 26 west of the 5th
principal meridian, West Des Moines, Dallas County, Iowa, is included in the
Woodland Hills Urban Renewal Area, this tract of land is more particularly
described as follows:
Beginning at the southwest corner of the northwest quarter of the southeast
quarter of section 15, township 78 north, range 26 west of the 5th principal
meridian, Dallas County, Iowa, said point being on the west line of outlot 'E'
of Michael's Landing plat 1, an official subdivision now in and forming a part
of the City of West Des Moines, Dallas County, Iowa;
Thence north, along the west line of said outlot 'E', to the north line of said
outlot 'E';
Thence east, along the north line of said outlot 'E' and the north line of said
outlot 'E' extended, to the centerline of South 91st Street in street Lot 'H'
of said Michael's Landing plat 1;
Thence south, along the centerline of South 91st Street in said street Lot 'H',
to the centerline intersection of Cascade Avenue;
Thence west, along the centerline of Cascade Avenue in street Lot 'D' of said
Michael's Landing plat 1, to the west line of the southeast quarter of said
section 15;
Thence north, along the west line of said section 15, to the point of
beginning.
SUB-AREA R-2: Shall mean the area of the City of West Des Moines described as
follows:
A tract of land in sections 15, 22 and 23, township 78 north, range 26 west of
the 5th principal meridian, West Des Moines, Dallas County, Iowa, is included
in the Woodland Hills Urban Renewal Area, this tract of land is more
particularly described as follows:
Beginning at the southwest corner of the southeast quarter of section 15,
township 78 north, range 26 west of the 5th principal meridian, Dallas County,
Iowa;
Thence north, along the west line of the southeast quarter of said section 15,
to the centerline of Cascade Avenue in street Lot 'D' of Michael's Landing plat
1, an official subdivision now in and forming a part of the City of West Des
Moines, Dallas County, Iowa;
Thence easterly, along the centerline of Cascade Avenue in said street Lot 'D',
to the east line of said section 15;
Thence south, along the east line of said section 15, to the south line
extended of Lot 6, Sunset Ridge, an official subdivision now in and forming a
part of the City of West Des Moines, Dallas County, Iowa;
Thence east, along the south line extended of said Lot 6, to the east right-of-
way line of South 88th Street;
Thence south, along the east right of way line of South 88th Street, to the
intersection of the extended centerline of Stagecoach Drive;
Thence west, along the centerline of Stagecoach Drive extended, to the east
line of street Lot 'B' of said Michael's Landing plat 1;
Thence west, along the centerline of Stagecoach Drive in said street Lot 'B',
to the west line of the northeast quarter of said section 22;
Thence north, along the west line of the northeast quarter of said section 22,
to the point of beginning.
SUB-AREA R-3: Shall mean the area of the City of West Des Moines described as
follows:
A tract of land in section 22, township 78 north, range 26 west of the 5th
principal meridian, West Des Moines, Dallas County, Iowa, is included in the
Woodland Hills Urban Renewal Area, this tract of land is more particularly
described as follows:
Beginning at the southwest corner of the southeast quarter of the northwest
quarter of section 22, township 78 north, range 26 west of the 5th principal
meridian, Dallas County, Iowa;
Thence north, along the west line of the southeast quarter of the northwest
quarter of said section 22, to the southwest corner of the northeast quarter of
the northwest quarter of said section 22;
Thence north, along the west line of the northeast quarter of the northwest
quarter of said section 22, to the northwest corner of the northeast quarter of
the northwest quarter of said section 22;
Thence east, along the north line of said section 22, to the northeast corner
of the northwest quarter of said section 22;
Thence south, along the east line of the northeast quarter of the northwest
quarter of said section 22, to the centerline of Stagecoach Drive in street Lot
'B' of Michael's Landing plat 1, an official subdivision now in and forming a
part of the City of West Des Moines, Dallas County, Iowa;
Thence easterly, along the centerline of said Stagecoach Drive extended, to the
intersection of the centerline of South 91st Street extended in street Lot 'I'
of said Michael's Landing plat 1;
Thence south, along the centerline of South 91st Street extended, to the
centerline of Harper Lane in street Lot 'F' of said Michael's Landing plat 1;
Thence south, along the centerline of South 91st Street in said street Lot 'I',
to the centerline of Sugar Creek Drive in street Lot 'A' of said Michael's
Landing plat 1;
Thence south, along the centerline and centerline extended of South 91st Street
in said street Lot 'A' and street Lot 'J' and street Lot 'X' of said Michael's
Landing plat 1, to the south right-of-way line of Booneville Road;
Thence westerly, along the south right-of-way line of Booneville Road, to the
west line of the northeast quarter of the southwest quarter of said section 22;
Thence north, along the west line of the northeast quarter of the northwest
quarter of said section 22, to the point of beginning.
URBAN RENEWAL AREA: Shall mean the areas of the City of West Des Moines, Iowa
included within sub-areas A, B, C, D, E, F, G, R-1, R-2 and R-3, each as
described in this section, and being collectively described as follows:
A tract of land in sections 14, 15, 22 and 23, township 78 north, range 26 west
of the 5th principal meridian, West Des Moines, Dallas County, Iowa, is
included in the Woodland Hills Urban Renewal Area, this tract of land is more
particularly described as follows:
Beginning at the southwest corner of the southeast quarter of the northwest
quarter of section 22, township 78 north, range 26 west of the 5th principal
meridian, Dallas County, Iowa;
Thence north, along the west line of the southeast quarter of the northwest
quarter of said section 22, to the southwest corner of the northeast quarter of
the northwest quarter of said section 22;
Thence north, along the west line of the northeast quarter of the northwest
quarter of said section 22, to the northwest corner of the northeast quarter of
the northwest quarter of said section 22;
Thence east, along the north line of said section 22, to the southwest corner
of the southeast quarter of section 15, township 78 north, range 26 west of the
5th principal meridian;
Thence north, along the west line of the southeast quarter of said section 15,
to the southwest corner of the northeast quarter of said section 15;
Thence north, along the west line of the northeast quarter of said section 15,
to the north right-of-way line of Mills Civic Parkway;
Thence east, along the north right-of-way line of Mills Civic Parkway, to the
intersection of the west line of Lot 7, Cedar Ridge an official subdivision now
in and forming a part of the City of West Des Moines;
Thence north, along the west line of said Lot 7, to the southwest corner of Lot
21 of said Cedar Ridge;
Thence north, along the west line said Lot 21, to the northeast corner of Lot 6
of said Cedar Ridge;
Thence northeasterly, along the northwesterly line and northwesterly line
extended of Lot 21 of said Cedar Ridge, to the centerline of Lot "C" road of
said Cedar Ridge;
Thence easterly, along the centerline of said Lot "C" road, to the west line
extended of Lot 35 of said Cedar Ridge;
Thence northerly, along the westerly line of said Lot 35, to the southwest
corner of Lot 36 of said Cedar Ridge;
Thence northerly, along the westerly line of said Lot 36, to the southwest
corner of Lot 37 of said Cedar Ridge;
Thence northerly, along the westerly line of said Lot 37, to the northwest
corner of said Lot 37, said point being on the north line of the southeast
quarter of the northeast quarter of section 15, township 78 north, range 26
west of the 5th principal meridian;
Thence east, along the north line of the southeast quarter of the northeast
quarter of said section 15, to the northwest corner of the southwest quarter of
the northwest quarter of section 14, township 78 north, range 26 west of the
5th principal meridian;
Thence easterly, to the centerline intersection of South 85th Street and
Coachlight Drive as shown on Silverwood plat 2, an official subdivision now in
and forming a part of the City of West Des Moines, Dallas County, Iowa;
Thence south 00°37'58" west (assumed bearing), a distance of 510.0 feet;
Thence south 23°00'00" east (assumed bearing), a distance of 330.0 feet;
Thence south 00°37'58" west (assumed bearing), to the centerline of Mills Civic
Parkway;
Thence southeasterly, to the northeast corner of Lot 1, Sunset Ridge, an
official subdivision now in and forming a part of the City of West Des Moines,
Dallas County, Iowa;
Thence south, along the east line of said Sunset Ridge, to the southeast corner
of said Lot 6;
Thence west, along the south line of said Lot 6, to the east right-of-way line
of South 88th Street;
Thence south, along the east right-of-way line of South 88th Street, to the
south line of the northwest quarter of section 23, township 78 north, range 26
west of the 5th principal meridian;
Thence west, along the south line of said section 23, to the southeast corner
of the northeast quarter of section 22, township 78 north, range 26 west of the
5th principal meridian, Dallas County, Iowa, with said point being the
centerline intersection of Booneville Road and South 88th Street;
Thence south, to the south right-of-way line of Booneville Road;
Thence westerly, along the south right-of-way line of Booneville Road, to the
west line of the northeast quarter of the southwest quarter of section 22,
township 78 north, range 26 west of the 5th principal meridian;
Thence north, along the west line of the northeast quarter of the northwest
quarter of said section 22, to the point of beginning.
URBAN RENEWAL PLAN: Shall mean the Urban Renewal Plan for the Woodland Hills
Urban Renewal Area, approved by resolution no. 11-06-27-13 on June 27, 2011.
B.   The taxes levied on the taxable property in the urban renewal area, and
each sub-area thereof, legally described in subsection A of this section, by
and for the benefit of the State of Iowa, City of West Des Moines, County of
Dallas, Waukee Community School District, and all other taxing districts from
and after the effective date of this section shall be divided as hereinafter in
this section provided.
C.   As to each of sub-areas A, B, C, D, E, F, G, R-1, R-2 and R-3, that
portion of the taxes which would be produced by the rate at which the tax is
levied each year by or for each of the taxing districts upon the total sum of
the assessed value of the taxable property in each such sub-area of the urban
renewal area, as shown on the assessment roll as of January 1 of the calendar
year preceding the first calendar year in which the City of West Des Moines,
Iowa, certifies to the auditor of Dallas County, Iowa the amount of loans,
advances, indebtedness, or bonds payable from the division of Property Tax
revenue described herein (which certification may be made separately for each
sub-area), shall be allocated to and when collected be paid into the fund for
the respective taxing district as taxes by or for the taxing district into
which all other Property Taxes are paid. The taxes so determined shall be
referred to herein as the "base period taxes" for each such sub-area.
D.   That portion of the taxes each year in excess of the base period taxes
from the urban renewal area, determined for each sub-area as provided in
subsection C of this section, shall be allocated to and when collected be paid
into a special Tax Increment Fund of the City of West Des Moines, Iowa, hereby
established, to pay the principal of and interest on loans, monies advanced to,
indebtedness, whether funded, refunded, assumed or otherwise, including bonds
or obligations issued under the authority of section 403.9 or 403.12 of the
Code of Iowa, as amended, incurred by the City of West Des Moines, Iowa, to
finance or refinance, in whole or in part, urban renewal projects undertaken
within the urban renewal area pursuant to the Urban Renewal Plan, except that
taxes for the regular and voter-approved physical plant and equipment levy of a
school district imposed pursuant to Iowa Code section 298.2, but only to the
extent authorized in Iowa Code section 403.19(2), and taxes for the payment of
bonds and interest of each taxing district shall be collected against all
taxable property within the urban renewal area without any limitation as
hereinabove provided.
E.   Unless or until the total assessed valuation of the taxable property in
the sub-areas of the urban renewal area exceeds the total assessed value of the
taxable property in the sub- areas of the urban renewal area as shown by the
assessment rolls referred to in subsection C of this section, all of the taxes
levied and collected upon the taxable property in the urban renewal area shall
be paid into the funds for the respective taxing districts as taxes by or for
the taxing districts in the same manner as all other Property Taxes.
F.   At such time as the loans, advances, indebtedness, bonds and interest
thereon of the City of West Des Moines, Iowa, referred to in subsection D of
this section have been paid, all monies thereafter received from taxes upon the
taxable property in the urban renewal area shall be paid into the funds for the
respective taxing districts in the same manner as taxes on all other property.
G.   All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with the provisions of
this section are hereby repealed. The provisions of this section are intended
and shall be construed so as to fully implement the provisions of section
403.19 of the Code of Iowa, as amended, with respect to the division of taxes
from property within the urban renewal area as described above. In the event
that any provision of this section shall be determined to be contrary to law,
it shall not affect other provisions or application of this section which shall
at all times be construed to fully invoke the provisions of section 403.19 of
the Code of Iowa with reference to the urban renewal area and the territory
contained therein. (Ord. 1935, 10-17-2011)
1-10B-20-1: WOODLAND HILLS URBAN RENEWAL AREA 2018 ADDITION:
A.   Purpose: The purpose of this section is to delete certain property from
the tax increment district for the Woodland Hills Urban Renewal Area and to
subsequently provide for the division of taxes levied on the taxable property
in the June, 2018 addition to the Woodland Hills Urban Renewal Area of the
City, each year by and for the benefit of the State, City, County, school
districts or other taxing districts after the effective date of this section in
order to create a special fund to pay the principal of and interest on loans,
moneys advanced to or indebtedness, including bonds proposed to be issued by
the City to finance projects in the such area.
B.   Definitions: For use within this section the following terms shall have
the following meanings:
CITY: Shall mean the City of West Des Moines, Iowa.
COUNTY: Shall mean Dallas County, Iowa.
DELETED PROPERTY: Shall mean the following described real property in the City
of West Des Moines, Dallas County, Iowa:
A tract of land in sections 14 and 15, township 78 north, range 26 west of the
5th P.M., City of West Des Moines, Dallas County, Iowa, is included in the
Woodland Hills Urban Renewal Area and is more particularly described as
follows:
Beginning at the southwest corner of Lot 7 Cedar Ridge, an official plat, now
included in and forming a part of the City of West Des Moines, said corner
being on the north right of way line of Mills Civic Parkway;
Thence north, along the west line of said Lot 7, to the southwest corner of Lot
21 of said Cedar Ridge;
Thence north, along the west line of said Lot 21, to the northeast corner of
Lot 6 of said Cedar Ridge, also being a bend point on the west side of Lot 21
of said Cedar Ridge;
Thence northeasterly, along the northwesterly line and northerly line extended
of Lot 21 of said Cedar Ridge, to the centerline of Lot "C" road of said Cedar
Ridge;
Thence easterly, along the centerline of said Lot "C" road, to the west line
extended of Lot 35 of said Cedar Ridge;
Thence northerly, along the westerly line of said Lot 35, to the southwest
corner of Lot 36 of said Cedar Ridge;
Thence northerly, along the westerly line of said Lot 36, to the southwest
corner of Lot 37 of said Cedar Ridge;
Thence northerly, along the westerly line of said Lot 37, to the northwest
corner of said Lot 37, said point being on the north line of the southeast
quarter of the northeast quarter of section 15, township 78 north, range 26
west of the 5th P.M.;
Thence east, along the north line of the southeast quarter of the northeast
quarter of said section 15, to the northwest corner of the southwest quarter of
the northwest quarter of section 14, township 78 north, range 26 west of the
5th P.M.;
Thence easterly, to the centerline intersection of South 85th Street and
Coachlight Drive as shown on Silverwood plat 2, an official plat, now included
in and forming a part of the City of West Des Moines, Dallas County, Iowa;
Thence south 00°37'58" west (assumed bearing), a distance of 510.0 feet;
Thence south 23°00'00" east (assumed bearing), a distance of 330.0 feet;
Thence south 00°37'58" west (assumed bearing), to the centerline of Mills Civic
Parkway;
Thence southeasterly, to the northeast corner of Lot 1, Sunset Ridge, an
official plat, now included in and forming a part of the City of West Des
Moines, Dallas County, Iowa;
Thence south, along the east line of said Sunset Ridge, to the southeast corner
of Lot 6, Sunset Ridge;
Thence west, along the south line of Lot 6, to the southwest corner of said Lot
6, being at the east right of way line of S 88th Street;
Thence south, along the east right of way line of S 88th Street, to the south
line of section 14, township 78 north, range 26 west of the 5th P.M., now
included in and forming a part of the City of West Des Moines, Dallas County,
Iowa;
Thence west, along the south line of said section 14, to the southeast corner
of section 15, township 78 north, range 26 west of the 5th P.M., now included
in and forming a part of the City of West Des Moines, Dallas County, Iowa, also
being the southeast corner of street Lot "Z" in corrected Michael's Landing
plat 1;
Thence west, along the south line of said street lot "Z", to the southwest
corner of said street Lot "Z", being also the west right of way line of S 88th
Street;
Thence north, along the west right-of-way line of said South 88th Street, to
the northeast corner of street Lot 'D' in corrected Michael's Landing plat 1,
an official plat, now included in and forming a part of the City of West Des
Moines, Dallas County, Iowa;
Thence south and westerly, along the north line of said street Lot 'D', to the
southeast corner of street Lot 'H', of said corrected Michael's Landing plat 1;
Thence northerly, along the east line of said street Lot 'H', to the
intersection point of street Lot 'AA', being the northeast corner of street Lot
'H', of said corrected Michael's Landing plat 1;
Thence westerly, along the south line of said street Lot 'AA', to the southwest
corner of said street Lot 'AA', south point being on the east line of the
southwest quarter of section 15, township 78 north, range 26 west of the 5th
P.M., City of West Des Moines, Dallas County, Iowa;
Thence north, along the west line of said street Lot 'AA', also being the east
line of the southwest quarter of said section 15, to the northwest corner of
said street Lot 'AA', also being the center of section of said section 15;
Thence east, along the north line of said street Lot 'AA', also being the north
line of the southeast quarter of said section 15, to the projection of the west
line of Lot 7 of Cedar Ridge, to the north line of street Lot 'AA', also being
on the north line of the southeast quarter of said section 15;
Thence north, along the projection of the west line of said Lot 7, to the point
of beginning.
And
A tract of land in sections 22 and 23, township 78 north, range 26 west of the
5th P.M., City of West Des Moines, Dallas County, Iowa, is included in the
Woodland Hills Urban Renewal Area and is more particularly described as
follows:
Beginning at the east quarter corner of said section 22, thence due south to
the south right of way line of Booneville Road;
Thence west, along the south line of Booneville Road, to the southerly
projection of the west line projected south of street Lot "Y" of corrected
Michael's Landing plat 1;
Thence north, along the projected west line of said street Lot "Y", to the
south line of street Lot "X" of corrected Michael's Landing plat 1;
Thence northeasterly, along the south line of said street Lot "X", to the
southeast corner of said street Lot "X";
Thence northerly, along the east line of said street Lot "X", to the northeast
corner of said street Lot "X";
Thence southwesterly, along the north line of street Lot "X" and the north
right of way line of Booneville Road, to the southwest corner of street Lot "Y"
of corrected Michael's Landing plat 1, being at the intersection of the north
right of way line of Booneville Road and the west right of way line of S 88th
Street;
Thence northeasterly thence north, along the west right of way line of S 88th
Street, to the northwest corner of said street Lot "Y";
Thence east, along the north line of said street lot "Y", to the centerline of
South 88th Street;
Thence east, along the projection of the north line of said street Lot "Y", to
the west line of Lot 1 of Sunset Ridge plat II, an official plat, now included
in and forming a part of the City of West Des Moines, Dallas County, Iowa and
the east right of way line of S 88th Street;
Thence south, along the west line of Lots 1, 2, 3 and 4 of said Sunset Ridge
plat II, to the northwest corner of Parcel 1 as shown in book 2015 page 17802
of the Dallas County Recorders Office;
Thence east, to the northeast corner of said Parcel 1, being the east right of
way line of S 88th Street;
Thence southeasterly, along the east right of way line of S 88th Street, to the
south line of Lot 5 of said Sunset Ridge plat II, being also the south line of
the northwest quarter of said section 23;
Thence west, along the south line of the northwest quarter of said section 23,
to the point of beginning.
TAX INCREMENT DISTRICT: Shall mean that portion of the June, 2018 addition to
the Woodland Hills Urban Renewal Area of the City, the legal description of
which is set out below, approved by resolution of the City Council on June 25,
2018:
Area on Booneville Road
A tract of land in section 22, township 78 north, range 26 west of the 5th
P.M., City of West Des Moines, Dallas County, Iowa, is to be included in the
Woodland Hills Urban Renewal Area and is more particularly described as
follows:
Commencing at the northeast corner of the south half of section 22, township 78
north, range 26 west of the 5th P.M., said point being the centerline
intersection of Booneville Road and South 88th Street;
Thence southwesterly, along the centerline of said Booneville Road, a distance
of 1810.94 feet, to the centerline of vacated road (from survey, book 2018,
page 3922 and book 3 page 119);
Thence south 00°09'02" east (from survey, book 2018 page 3922 and book 3 page
119), along said centerline of vacated road, a distance of 33.27 feet, to the
point of beginning, being at the south right of way line of Booneville Road;
Thence continuing south 00°09'02" east (from survey, book 2018 page 3922 and
book 3 page 119), along said centerline of vacated road, a distance of 503.32
feet;
Thence south 88°50'45" west (from survey, book 2018 page 3922 and book 3 page
119), a distance of 355.30 feet;
Thence south 00°51'07" west (from survey, book 2018 page 3922 and book 3 page
119), a distance of 101.00 feet;
Thence north 87°29'50" west (from survey, book 2018 page 3922 and book 3 page
119), a distance of 168.14 feet;
Thence north 73°39'56" west (from survey, book 2018 page 3922 and book 3 page
119), a distance of 212.02 feet;
Thence south 75°03'47" west (from survey, book 2018 page 3922 and book 3 page
119), a distance of 90.06 feet;
Thence north 45°56'21" west (from survey, book 2018 page 3922 and book 3 page
119), to the south right of way line of Booneville Road;
Thence northeast, along said south right of way of Booneville Road, to the
point of beginning.
Area west of 95th Street
A tract of land in sections 21 and 22, township 78 north, range 26 west of the
5th P.M., City of West Des Moines, Dallas County, Iowa, is to be included in
the Woodland Hills Urban Renewal Area and is more particularly described as
follows:
Beginning at the southeast corner of the southwest quarter of the northwest
quarter of section 22, township 78 north, range 26 west of the 5th P.M., Dallas
County, Iowa;
Thence south, along the east line of the southwest quarter of the northwest
quarter of said section 22, to the south right of way line of Booneville Road;
Thence southwesterly, along the south right of way line of Booneville Road, to
a point on the projection south of the southwest line, as shown on the survey
in book 2002 page 3962;
Thence north, on the projection south of the southwest line, as shown on the
survey in book 2002 page 3962, to the north right of way of Booneville Road;
Thence north 06°47'46" west, along said west line of survey in book 2002 page
3962, to a bend in the west line of said survey;
Thence north 25°46'23" west, a distance of 455.62 feet, to the southwest corner
of Lot 19 in Kings Landing plat 2, an official plat, in and forming a part of
the City of West Des Moines, Dallas County, Iowa;
Thence northwesterly, along the west line of Lot 19, to the southwest corner of
Lot 20, Kings Landing plat 2;
Thence northwesterly, along the west line of said Lot 20, to a bend in the west
line of Lot 20;
Thence northwesterly, along the west line of said Lot 20, 21, 40, street Lot
'E', 41, 59 and 60, to a bend in the west line of said Lot 60;
Thence north, along the west line of said Lot 60, 61, 77, 78, 79, 80, 81 and
82, to the northwest corner of Lot 82, Kings Landing plat 2;
Thence continuing north, along the projection north of the west line of Lot 82,
Kings Landing plat 2, to the north line of section 21, township 78 north, range
26 west of the 5th P.M., Dallas County, Iowa;
Thence east, along the north line of said section 21, to the northwest corner
of section 22, township 78 north, range 26 west of the 5th P.M., Dallas County,
Iowa;
Thence east, along the north line of the northwest quarter of the northwest
quarter of said section 22, to the northeast corner of the northwest quarter of
the northwest quarter of said section 22, also being the northeast corner of
street Lot A, Kings Landing plat 1, an official plat, now included in and
forming a part of the City of West Des Moines, Dallas County, Iowa;
Thence south, on the east line of street Lot A, and lots 11, 10, 9, 8, and 7,
Kings Landing plat 1, to the northeast corner of outlot "B", Kings Landing plat
2, being also the northeast corner of the southeast quarter of the northwest
quarter of section 22, township 78 north, range 26 west of the 5th P.M., Dallas
County, Iowa;
Thence south, on the east line of outlot "B", to the northeast corner of outlot
"Q", Kings Landing plat 2;
Thence south, on the east line of outlot "Q", also being the east line of the
southwest quarter of the northwest quarter, to the point of beginning.
URBAN RENEWAL AREA: Shall mean the entirety of the Woodland Hills Urban Renewal
Area, as amended from time-to-time.
C.   Deleted Property: The deleted property is hereby removed from the tax
increment financing district for the urban renewal area. No further division of
Property Tax revenues as provided under section 403.19 of the Code of Iowa
shall be done with respect to the deleted property, unless and until such
property is re-included in a tax increment district by action of the City
Council.
D.   Provisions For Division Of Taxes Levied On Taxable Property In The Tax
Increment District: After the effective date of this section, the taxes levied
on the taxable property in the tax increment district each year by and for the
benefit of the State of Iowa, the City, the County and any school district or
other taxing district in which the tax increment district is located, shall be
divided as follows:
1.   That portion of the taxes which would be produced by the rate at which the
tax is levied each year by or for each of the taxing districts upon the total
sum of the assessed value of the taxable property in the tax increment
district, as shown on the assessment roll as of January 1 of the calendar year
preceding the first calendar year in which the City certifies to the County
auditor the amount of loans, advances, indebtedness, or bonds payable from the
special fund referred to in subsection D2 of this section, shall be allocated
to and when collected be paid into the fund for the respective taxing district
as taxes by or for said taxing district into which all other Property Taxes are
paid. For the purpose of allocating taxes levied by or for any taxing district
which did not include the territory in the tax increment district on the
effective date of this section, but to which the territory has been annexed or
otherwise included after the effective date, the assessment roll applicable to
property in the annexed territory as of January 1 of the calendar year
preceding the effective date of the ordinance which amends the plan for the tax
increment district to include the annexed area, shall be used in determining
the assessed valuation of the taxable property in the annexed area.
2.   That portion of the taxes each year in excess of such amounts shall be
allocated to and when collected be paid into a special fund of the City to pay
the principal of and interest on loans, moneys advanced to or indebtedness,
whether funded, refunded, assumed or otherwise, including bonds issued under
the authority of section 403.9(1), of the Code of Iowa, incurred by the City to
finance or refinance, in whole or in part, projects in the urban renewal area,
and to provide assistance for low and moderate-income family housing as
provided in Iowa Code section 403.22, except that taxes for the regular and
voter-approved physical plant and equipment levy of a school district imposed
pursuant to section 298.2 of the Code of Iowa, taxes for the instructional
support program levy of a school district imposed pursuant to section 257.19 of
the Code of Iowa, and taxes for the payment of bonds and interest of each
taxing district shall be collected against all taxable property within the
taxing district without limitation by the provisions of this section. Unless
and until the total assessed valuation of the taxable property in the tax
increment district exceeds the total assessed value of the taxable property in
such area as shown by the assessment roll referred to in subsection D1 of this
section, all of the taxes levied and collected upon the taxable property in the
tax increment district shall be paid into the funds for the respective taxing
districts as taxes by or for said taxing districts in the same manner as all
other Property Taxes. When such loans, advances, indebtedness, and bonds, if
any, and interest thereon, have been paid, all money thereafter received from
taxes upon the taxable property in the tax increment district shall be paid
into the funds for the respective taxing districts in the same manner as taxes
on all other property.
3.   The portion of taxes mentioned in subsection D2 of this section and the
special fund into which that portion shall be paid may be irrevocably pledged
by the City for the payment of the principal and interest on loans, advances,
bonds issued under the authority of section 403.9(1) of the Code of Iowa, or
indebtedness incurred by the City to finance or refinance in whole or in part
projects in the urban renewal area.
4.   As used in this subsection D, the word "taxes" includes, but is not
limited to, all levies on an ad valorem basis upon land or real property. (Ord.
2315, 7-9-2018)
1-10B-20-2: WOODLAND HILLS URBAN RENEWAL AREA DELETED PROPERTY:
A.   Purpose. The purpose of this section is to delete certain property from
the tax increment financing district for the Woodland Hills Urban Renewal Area.
B.   Definitions. For use within this ordinance the following terms shall have
the following meanings:
DELETED PROPERTY: Shall mean the following real property situated in the City
of West Des Moines, Dallas County, State of Iowa:
Outlot A in Kings Landing Plat 2, an official plat, now included in and forming
a part of the City of West Des Moines, Dallas County, Iowa.
Outlot S and street lot J in corrected Michael's Landing Plat 1, an official
plat, now included in and forming a part of the City of West Des Moines, Dallas
County, Iowa.
C.   The deleted property is hereby removed from the tax increment financing
district for the Woodland Hills Urban Renewal Area. No division of property tax
revenues as provided under Section 403.19 of the Code of Iowa shall be done
with respect to the Deleted Property without further action by the City
Council. (Ord. 2400, 12-16-2019; Ord. 2414, 5-4-2020)
1-10B-21: GRAND RIDGE URBAN RENEWAL AREA:
A.   Purpose: The purpose of this section is to provide for the division of
taxes levied on the taxable property in the Grand Ridge Urban Renewal Area,
each year by and for the benefit of the State, City, County, school districts
or other taxing districts after the effective date of this section in order to
create a special fund to pay the principal of and interest on loans, moneys
advanced to or indebtedness, including bonds proposed to be issued by the City
to finance projects in such area.
B.   Definitions: For use within this section the following terms shall have
the following meanings:
CITY: Shall mean the City of West Des Moines, Iowa.
COUNTY: Shall mean Polk County, Iowa.
URBAN RENEWAL AREA: Shall mean the taxable real property situated in Grand
Ridge Urban Renewal Area, the boundaries of which are set out below, such
property having been identified in the Urban Renewal Plan approved by the City
Council by resolution adopted on October 15, 2018:
Certain real property situated in the City of West Des Moines, Polk County,
State of Iowa more particularly described as follows:
All of Lot "D" (being Grand Ridge Drive) of Quail Meadows West, as filed in
Book 8006 Page 121 of the records of the Polk County Recorder's Office, and All
of Lot 1 of Woodlink, as filed in Book 10605 Page 907 of the records of the
Polk County Recorder's Office, and All of Lots 1, 2, 3, 4 and 6 of Grand
Heights Plat 2, as filed in Book 8769 Page 959 of the records of the Polk
County Recorder's Office, all being Official Plats, now included in and forming
a part of the City of West Des Moines, Polk County, Iowa, and containing 10.82
acres, including 1.70 acres of road right of way.
C.   Provisions For Division Of Taxes Levied On Taxable Property In The Urban
Renewal Area: After the effective date of this section, the taxes levied on the
taxable property in the urban renewal area each year by and for the benefit of
the State of Iowa, the City, the County and any school district or other taxing
district in which the urban renewal area is located, shall be divided as
follows:
1.   That portion of the taxes which would be produced by the rate at which the
tax is levied each year by or for each of the taxing districts upon the total
sum of the assessed value of the taxable property in the urban renewal area, as
shown on the assessment roll as of January 1 of the calendar year preceding the
first calendar year in which the City certifies to the County auditor the
amount of loans, advances, indebtedness, or bonds payable from the special fund
referred to in subsection C2 of this section, shall be allocated to and when
collected be paid into the fund for the respective taxing district as taxes by
or for said taxing district into which all other Property Taxes are paid. For
the purpose of allocating taxes levied by or for any taxing district which did
not include the territory in the urban renewal area on the effective date of
this section, but to which the territory has been annexed or otherwise included
after the effective date, the assessment roll applicable to property in the
annexed territory as of January 1 of the calendar year preceding the effective
date of the ordinance which amends the plan for the urban renewal area to
include the annexed area, shall be used in determining the assessed valuation
of the taxable property in the annexed area.
2.   That portion of the taxes each year in excess of such amounts shall be
allocated to and when collected be paid into a special fund of the City to pay
the principal of and interest on loans, moneys advanced to or indebtedness,
whether funded, refunded, assumed or otherwise, including bonds issued under
the authority of section 403.9(1), of the Code of Iowa, incurred by the City to
finance or refinance, in whole or in part, projects in the urban renewal area,
and to provide assistance for low and moderate-income family housing as
provided in Iowa Code section 403.22, except that taxes for the regular and
voter-approved physical plant and equipment levy of a school district imposed
pursuant to section 298.2 of the Code of Iowa, taxes for the instructional
support levy program of a school district imposed pursuant to section 257.19 of
the Code of Iowa, and taxes for the payment of bonds and interest of each
taxing district shall be collected against all taxable property within the
taxing district without limitation by the provisions of this section. Unless
and until the total assessed valuation of the taxable property in the urban
renewal area exceeds the total assessed value of the taxable property in such
area as shown by the assessment roll referred to in subsection C1 of this
section, all of the taxes levied and collected upon the taxable property in the
urban renewal area shall be paid into the funds for the respective taxing
districts as taxes by or for said taxing districts in the same manner as all
other Property Taxes. When such loans, advances, indebtedness, and bonds, if
any, and interest thereon, have been paid, all money thereafter received from
taxes upon the taxable property in the urban renewal area shall be paid into
the funds for the respective taxing districts in the same manner as taxes on
all other property.
3.   The portion of taxes mentioned in subsection C2 of this section and the
special fund into which that portion shall be paid may be irrevocably pledged
by the City for the payment of the principal and interest on loans, advances,
bonds issued under the authority of section 403.9(1) of the Code of Iowa, or
indebtedness incurred by the City to finance or refinance in whole or in part
projects in the urban renewal area.
4.   As used in this subsection C, the word "taxes" includes, but is not
limited to, all levies on an ad valorem basis upon land or real property. (Ord.
2329, 10-29-2018)
1-10B-22: 1525 GRAND URBAN RENEWAL AREA:
A.   Purpose: The purpose of this section is to provide for the division of
taxes levied on the taxable property in the 1525 Grand Urban Renewal Area, each
year by and for the benefit of the State, City, County, school districts or
other taxing districts after the effective date of this section in order to
create a special fund to pay the principal of and interest on loans, moneys
advanced to or indebtedness, including bonds proposed to be issued by the City
to finance projects in such area.
B.   Definitions: For use within this section the following terms shall have
the following meanings:
CITY: Shall mean the City of West Des Moines, Iowa.
COUNTY: Shall mean Polk County, Iowa.
URBAN RENEWAL AREA: Shall mean the taxable real property situated in 1525 Grand
Urban Renewal Area, the boundaries of which are set out below, such property
having been identified in the Urban Renewal Plan approved by the City Council
by resolution adopted on March 18, 2019:
Beginning at the southwest corner of Lot C Mountain Place, an official plat,
now included in and forming a part of the City of West Des Moines, Polk County,
Iowa, being a point on the south right of way line of Grand Avenue at the
intersection of the south line of Lot D, Mountain Place with the easterly right
of way line of Grand Avenue;
Thence north, along the west line of Lot C, Mountain Place, to the northwest
corner of Lot C, being a point on the north side of Grand Avenue;
Thence northeasterly, along the north line of Lot C and the northerly right of
way line of Grand Avenue, to the southwest corner of Lot 4, Mountain Place;
Thence north along the west line of Lot 4, Mountain Place, to the northwest
corner of Lot 4, Mountain Place;
Thence northeasterly, along the north line of Lot 4 and 5, Mountain Place, to
the northeast corner of Lot 5, Mountain Place;
Thence northeasterly, along the north line of Lot 6, Mountain Place, a distance
of 64.8 feet;
Thence southeasterly, to the south line of Lot 6, Mountain Place, and the north
right of way line of Grand Avenue and also being the north line of Lot C,
Mountain Place, being located 160 feet southwesterly from the southeast corner
of Lot 6, Mountain Place;
Thence northeasterly, along the north line of Grand Avenue right of way, also
being the north line of Lot C, Mountain Place, to the northeast corner of Lot
C, Mountain Place;
Thence south, along the east line of Lot C, Mountain Place, to the southeast
corner of Lot C, Mountain Place;
Thence southwesterly, along the south right of way line of Grand Avenue, also
being the south line of Lot C, Mountain Place, to the point of beginning.
C.   Provisions For Division Of Taxes Levied On Taxable Property In The Urban
Renewal Area: After the effective date of this section, the taxes levied on the
taxable property in the urban renewal area each year by and for the benefit of
the State of Iowa, the City, the County and any school district or other taxing
district in which the urban renewal area is located, shall be divided as
follows:
1.   That portion of the taxes which would be produced by the rate at which the
tax is levied each year by or for each of the taxing districts upon the total
sum of the assessed value of the taxable property in the urban renewal area, as
shown on the assessment roll as of January 1 of the calendar year preceding the
first calendar year in which the City certifies to the County Auditor the
amount of loans, advances, indebtedness, or bonds payable from the special fund
referred to in subsection C2 of this section, shall be allocated to and when
collected be paid into the fund for the respective taxing district as taxes by
or for said taxing district into which all other Property Taxes are paid. For
the purpose of allocating taxes levied by or for any taxing district which did
not include the territory in the urban renewal area on the effective date of
this section, but to which the territory has been annexed or otherwise included
after the effective date, the assessment roll applicable to property in the
annexed territory as of January 1 of the calendar year preceding the effective
date of the ordinance which amends the plan for the urban renewal area to
include the annexed area, shall be used in determining the assessed valuation
of the taxable property in the annexed area.
2.   That portion of the taxes each year in excess of such amounts shall be
allocated to and when collected be paid into a special fund of the City to pay
the principal of and interest on loans, moneys advanced to or indebtedness,
whether funded, refunded, assumed or otherwise, including bonds issued under
the authority of section 403.9(1), of the Code of Iowa, incurred by the City to
finance or refinance, in whole or in part, projects in the urban renewal area,
and to provide assistance for low and moderate-income family housing as
provided in section 403.22 of the Code of Iowa, except that taxes for the
regular and voter-approved physical plant and equipment levy of a school
district imposed pursuant to section 298.2 of the Code of Iowa, taxes for the
instructional support levy program of a school district imposed pursuant to
section 257.19 of the Code of Iowa, and taxes for the payment of bonds and
interest of each taxing district shall be collected against all taxable
property within the taxing district without limitation by the provisions of
this section. Unless and until the total assessed valuation of the taxable
property in the urban renewal area exceeds the total assessed value of the
taxable property in such area as shown by the assessment roll referred to in
subsection C1 of this section, all of the taxes levied and collected upon the
taxable property in the urban renewal area shall be paid into the funds for the
respective taxing districts as taxes by or for said taxing districts in the
same manner as all other Property Taxes. When such loans, advances,
indebtedness, and bonds, if any, and interest thereon, have been paid, all
money thereafter received from taxes upon the taxable property in the urban
renewal area shall be paid into the funds for the respective taxing districts
in the same manner as taxes on all other property.
3.   The portion of taxes mentioned in subsection C2 of this section and the
special fund into which that portion shall be paid may be irrevocably pledged
by the City for the payment of the principal and interest on loans, advances,
bonds issued under the authority of section 403.9(1) of the Code of Iowa, or
indebtedness incurred by the City to finance or refinance in whole or in part
projects in the urban renewal area.
4.   As used in this section, the word "taxes" includes, but is not limited to,
all levies on an ad valorem basis upon land or real property. (Ord. 2353, 4-1-
2019)
1-10B-23: 8300 MILLS CIVIC PARKWAY URBAN RENEWAL AREA:
A.   Purpose: The purpose of this section is to provide for the division of
taxes levied on the taxable property in the 8300 Mills Civic Parkway Urban
Renewal Area, each year by and for the benefit of the State, City, County,
school districts or other taxing districts after the effective date of this
section in order to create a special fund to pay the principal of and interest
on loans, moneys advanced to or indebtedness, including bonds proposed to be
issued by the City to finance projects in such area.
B.   Definitions: For use within this section the following terms shall have
the following meanings:
CITY: Shall mean the City of West Des Moines, Iowa.
COUNTY: Shall mean Dallas County, Iowa.
URBAN RENEWAL AREA: Shall mean the taxable real property situated in 8300 Mills
Civic Parkway Urban Renewal Area, the boundaries of which are set out below,
such property having been identified in the Urban Renewal Plan approved by the
City Council by resolution adopted on March 18, 2019:
Certain real property situated in the City of West Des Moines, Dallas County,
State of Iowa more particularly described as follows:
Beginning at the northwest corner of Parcel "AA" as filed in book 2014 page
4167 of the Dallas County Recorder's Office, being a point on the east line of
Lot 5 Sunset Ridge as filed in book 6 page 244 of the Dallas County Recorder's
Office;
Thence north along the east line of Lots 5, 4, 3, 2, 1 and Lot C (street) of
said Sunset Ridge, to the northeast corner of said Lot C (street);
Thence north on the west line of Lot 1, of Eiler's Subdivision, as filed in
book 769 page 98 of the Dallas County Recorder's Office, to the current north
right of way line of Mills Civic Parkway, as shown on said Eiler's Subdivision;
Thence east, along said north right of way line of Mills Civic Parkway, to the
east line of Lot 3 of said Eiler's Subdivision;
Thence north, along the east line of said Lot 3, Eiler's Subdivision, to the
north line of Street Lot P, in Heritage Bend plat 1, as filed in book 2006 page
19236 of the Dallas County Recorder's Office;
Thence east, along the north line of said Street Lot P, in Heritage Bend plat
1, and projection thereof, to a point on the east line of the northwest quarter
of section 14, Township 78 north, range 28 west of the 5th P.M., Dallas County,
Iowa, being the northeast corner of Street Lot P;
Thence south along the east line of said section 14 and Street Lot P, to the
center of section 14, Township 78 north, range 26 west of the 5th P.M., Dallas
County, Iowa, being also the southeast corner of Street Lot P of Heritage Bend
plat 1;
Thence south, along the east line of the southwest quarter of said section 14,
to the southerly point of the north line of Street Lot 'B', the Cascades at
Jordan Creek plat 1, an official plat, now included in and forming a part of
the City of West Des Moines, Dallas County, Iowa;
Thence west, to the west right of way line of South 81st Street, said point
being the northwest corner of said Street Lot 'B';
Thence west and thence northwest along the southwesterly right of way of South
81st Street, to the southeast corner of Street Lot 'A' of the Cascades at
Jordan Creek plat 1, as filed in book 2015 page 13814 of the Dallas County
Recorder's Office;
Thence southwesterly, along the south line of said Street Lot 'A' of the
Cascades at Jordan Creek plat 1, to the southwest corner of said Street Lot
'A';
Thence northwesterly, along the west line of Street Lot 'A', to a point on the
north line of Parcel "AA" in book 2014 page 4167;
Thence southwesterly, along the north line of said Parcel "AA", to the point of
beginning.
C.   Provisions For Division Of Taxes Levied On Taxable Property In The Urban
Renewal Area: After the effective date of this section, the taxes levied on the
taxable property in the urban renewal area each year by and for the benefit of
the State of Iowa, the City, the County and any school district or other taxing
district in which the urban renewal area is located, shall be divided as
follows:
1.   That portion of the taxes which would be produced by the rate at which the
tax is levied each year by or for each of the taxing districts upon the total
sum of the assessed value of the taxable property in the urban renewal area, as
shown on the assessment roll as of January 1 of the calendar year preceding the
first calendar year in which the City certifies to the County Auditor the
amount of loans, advances, indebtedness, or bonds payable from the special fund
referred to in subsection C2 of this section, shall be allocated to and when
collected be paid into the fund for the respective taxing district as taxes by
or for said taxing district into which all other Property Taxes are paid. For
the purpose of allocating taxes levied by or for any taxing district which did
not include the territory in the urban renewal area on the effective date of
this section, but to which the territory has been annexed or otherwise included
after the effective date, the assessment roll applicable to property in the
annexed territory as of January 1 of the calendar year preceding the effective
date of the ordinance which amends the plan for the urban renewal area to
include the annexed area, shall be used in determining the assessed valuation
of the taxable property in the annexed area.
2.   That portion of the taxes each year in excess of such amounts shall be
allocated to and when collected be paid into a special fund of the City to pay
the principal of and interest on loans, moneys advanced to or indebtedness,
whether funded, refunded, assumed or otherwise, including bonds issued under
the authority of section 403.9(1), of the Code of Iowa, incurred by the City to
finance or refinance, in whole or in part, projects in the urban renewal area,
and to provide assistance for low and moderate-income family housing as
provided in section 403.22 of the Code of Iowa, except that taxes for the
regular and voter-approved physical plant and equipment levy of a school
district imposed pursuant to section 298.2 of the Code of Iowa, taxes for the
instructional support levy program of a school district imposed pursuant to
section 257.19 of the Code of Iowa, and taxes for the payment of bonds and
interest of each taxing district shall be collected against all taxable
property within the taxing district without limitation by the provisions of
this section. Unless and until the total assessed valuation of the taxable
property in the urban renewal area exceeds the total assessed value of the
taxable property in such area as shown by the assessment roll referred to in
subsection C1 of this section, all of the taxes levied and collected upon the
taxable property in the urban renewal area shall be paid into the funds for the
respective taxing districts as taxes by or for said taxing districts in the
same manner as all other Property Taxes. When such loans, advances,
indebtedness, and bonds, if any, and interest thereon, have been paid, all
money thereafter received from taxes upon the taxable property in the urban
renewal area shall be paid into the funds for the respective taxing districts
in the same manner as taxes on all other property.
3.   The portion of taxes mentioned in subsection C2 of this section and the
special fund into which that portion shall be paid may be irrevocably pledged
by the City for the payment of the principal and interest on loans, advances,
bonds issued under the authority of section 403.9(1) of the Code of Iowa, or
indebtedness incurred by the City to finance or refinance in whole or in part
projects in the urban renewal area.
4.   As used in this section, the word "taxes" includes, but is not limited to,
all levies on an ad valorem basis upon land or real property. (Ord. 2354, 4-1-
2019)
1-10B-24: IOWA CLINIC URBAN RENEWAL AREA:
A.   Purpose: The purpose of this section is to provide for the division of
taxes levied on the taxable property in the Iowa Clinic Urban Renewal Area,
each year by and for the benefit of the State, City, County, school districts
or other taxing districts after the effective date of this section in order to
create a special fund to pay the principal of and interest on loans, moneys
advanced to or indebtedness, including bonds proposed to be issued by the City
to finance projects in such area.
B.   Definitions: For use within this section the following terms shall have
the following meanings:
CITY: Shall mean the City of West Des Moines, Iowa.
COUNTY: Shall mean Dallas County, Iowa.
URBAN RENEWAL AREA: Shall mean the taxable real property situated in Iowa
Clinic Urban Renewal Area, the boundaries of which are set out below, such
property having been identified in the Urban Renewal Plan approved by the City
Council by resolution adopted on May 20, 2019:
Lot 5 in West Lakes Office Park plat 9, an official plat, now included in and
forming a part of the City of West Des Moines, Dallas County, Iowa;
And
Lot 1 in West Lakes Office Park plat 10, an official plat, now included in and
forming a part of the City of West Des Moines, Dallas County, Iowa.
C.   Provisions For Division Of Taxes Levied On Taxable Property In The Urban
Renewal Area: After the effective date of this section, the taxes levied on the
taxable property in the urban renewal area each year by and for the benefit of
the State of Iowa, the City, the County and any school district or other taxing
district in which the urban renewal area is located, shall be divided as
follows:
1.   That portion of the taxes which would be produced by the rate at which the
tax is levied each year by or for each of the taxing districts upon the total
sum of the assessed value of the taxable property in the urban renewal area, as
shown on the assessment roll as of January 1 of the calendar year preceding the
first calendar year in which the City certifies to the County Auditor the
amount of loans, advances, indebtedness, or bonds payable from the special fund
referred to in subsection C2 of this section, shall be allocated to and when
collected be paid into the fund for the respective taxing district as taxes by
or for said taxing district into which all other Property Taxes are paid. For
the purpose of allocating taxes levied by or for any taxing district which did
not include the territory in the urban renewal area on the effective date of
this section, but to which the territory has been annexed or otherwise included
after the effective date, the assessment roll applicable to property in the
annexed territory as of January 1 of the calendar year preceding the effective
date of the ordinance which amends the plan for the urban renewal area to
include the annexed area, shall be used in determining the assessed valuation
of the taxable property in the annexed area.
2.   That portion of the taxes each year in excess of such amounts shall be
allocated to and when collected be paid into a special fund of the City to pay
the principal of and interest on loans, moneys advanced to or indebtedness,
whether funded, refunded, assumed or otherwise, including bonds issued under
the authority of section 403.9(1), of the Code of Iowa, incurred by the City to
finance or refinance, in whole or in part, projects in the urban renewal area,
and to provide assistance for low and moderate-income family housing as
provided in section 403.22 of the Code of Iowa, except that taxes for the
regular and voter-approved physical plant and equipment levy of a school
district imposed pursuant to section 298.2 of the Code of Iowa, taxes for the
instructional support levy program of a school district imposed pursuant to
section 257.19 of the Code of Iowa, and taxes for the payment of bonds and
interest of each taxing district shall be collected against all taxable
property within the taxing district without limitation by the provisions of
this section. Unless and until the total assessed valuation of the taxable
property in the urban renewal area exceeds the total assessed value of the
taxable property in such area as shown by the assessment roll referred to in
subsection C1 of this section, all of the taxes levied and collected upon the
taxable property in the urban renewal area shall be paid into the funds for the
respective taxing districts as taxes by or for said taxing districts in the
same manner as all other Property Taxes. When such loans, advances,
indebtedness, and bonds, if any, and interest thereon, have been paid, all
money thereafter received from taxes upon the taxable property in the urban
renewal area shall be paid into the funds for the respective taxing districts
in the same manner as taxes on all other property.
3.   The portion of taxes mentioned in subsection C2 of this section and the
special fund into which that portion shall be paid may be irrevocably pledged
by the City for the payment of the principal and interest on loans, advances,
bonds issued under the authority of section 403.9(1) of the Code of Iowa, or
indebtedness incurred by the City to finance or refinance in whole or in part
projects in the urban renewal area.
4.   As used in this section, the word "taxes" includes, but is not limited to,
all levies on an ad valorem basis upon land or real property. (Ord. 2366, 6-3-
2019)
1-10B-25: UNIVERSITY AVENUE CORRIDOR URBAN RENEWAL AREA (CLAIM DOC PARCEL):
A.   The taxes levied on the taxable property in the Claim Doc Parcel of the
Urban Renewal Area legally described in the ordinance codified herein, by and
for the benefit of the State of Iowa, City of West Des Moines, County of Polk,
West Des Moines Community School District, and all other taxing districts from
and after the effective date of this Ordinance shall be divided as hereinafter
in this Ordinance provided.
B.   That portion of the taxes which would be produced by the rate at which the
tax is levied each year by or for each of the taxing districts upon the total
sum of the assessed value of the taxable property in the Claim Doc Parcel of
the Urban Renewal Area, as shown on the assessment roll as of January 1 of the
calendar year preceding the first calendar year in which the City of West Des
Moines, State of Iowa, certifies to the Auditor of Polk County, Iowa the amount
of loans, advances, indebtedness, or bonds payable from the division of
property tax revenue described herein, shall be allocated to and when collected
be paid into the fund for the respective taxing district as taxes by or for the
taxing district into which all other property taxes are paid.
C.   That portion of the taxes each year in excess of the base period taxes
determined as provided in Section 2 of this Ordinance shall be allocated to and
when collected be paid into a special tax increment fund of the City of West
Des Moines, State of Iowa, hereby established, to pay the principal of and
interest on loans, monies advanced to, indebtedness, whether funded, refunded,
assumed or otherwise, including bonds or obligations issued under the authority
of Section 403.9 or 403.12, Code of Iowa, as amended, incurred by the City of
West Des Moines, State of Iowa, to finance or refinance, in whole or in part,
urban renewal projects undertaken within the Urban Renewal Area pursuant to the
Urban Renewal Plan, except that (i) taxes for the regular and voter-approved
physical plant and equipment levy of a school district imposed pursuant to
Section 298.2, Code of Iowa, and taxes for the instructional support program of
a school district imposed pursuant to Section 257.19, Code of Iowa, (but in
each case only to the extent required under Section 403.19(2), Code of Iowa);
(ii) taxes for the payment of bonds and interest of each taxing district; (iii)
taxes imposed under Section 346.27(22), Code of Iowa, related to joint county-
city buildings; and (iv) any other exceptions under Section 403.19, Code of
Iowa, shall be collected against all taxable property within the Claim Doc
Parcel of the Urban Renewal Area without any limitation as hereinabove
provided.
D.   Unless or until the total assessed valuation of the taxable property in
the Claim Doc Parcel of the Urban Renewal Area exceeds the total assessed value
of the taxable property in the Claim Doc Parcel of the Urban Renewal Area as
shown by the assessment roll referred to in Section 2 of this Ordinance, all of
the taxes levied and collected upon the taxable property in the Claim Doc
Parcel of the Urban Renewal Area shall be paid into the funds for the
respective taxing districts as taxes by or for the taxing districts in the same
manner as all other property taxes.
E.   At such time as the loans, advances, indebtedness, bonds and interest
thereon of the City of West Des Moines, State of Iowa, referred to in Section 3
hereof have been paid, all monies thereafter received from taxes upon the
taxable property in the Claim Doc Parcel of the Urban Renewal Area shall be
paid into the funds for the respective taxing districts in the same manner as
taxes on all other property.
F.   All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with the provisions of
this Ordinance are hereby repealed. The provisions of this Ordinance are
intended and shall be construed so as to fully implement the provisions of
Section 403.19, Code of Iowa, as amended, with respect to the division of taxes
from property within the Claim Doc Parcel of the Urban Renewal Area as
described above. In the event that any provision of this Ordinance shall be
determined to be contrary to law, it shall not affect other provisions or
application of this Ordinance which shall at all times be construed to fully
invoke the provisions of Section 403.19, Code of Iowa, with reference to the
Claim Doc Parcel of the Urban Renewal Area and the territory contained therein.
(Ord. 2461, 3-15-2021)
1-10B-26: GRAND PRAIRIE PARKWAY URBAN RENEWAL AREA (MICROSOFT PARCELS):
A.   The taxes levied on the taxable property in the Microsoft Parcels of the
Urban Renewal Area legally described in the ordinance codified herein, by and
for the benefit of the State of Iowa, City of West Des Moines, County of
Dallas, Waukee Community School District, and all other taxing districts from
and after the effective date of this Ordinance shall be divided as hereinafter
in this Ordinance provided.
B.   That portion of the taxes which would be produced by the rate at which the
tax is levied each year by or for each of the taxing districts upon the total
sum of the assessed value of the taxable property in the Microsoft Parcels of
the Urban Renewal Area, as shown on the assessment roll as of January 1 of the
calendar year preceding the first calendar year in which the City of West Des
Moines, State of Iowa, certifies to the Auditor of Dallas County, Iowa the
amount of loans, advances, indebtedness, or bonds payable from the division of
property tax revenue described herein, shall be allocated to and when collected
be paid into the fund for the respective taxing district as taxes by or for the
taxing district into which all other property taxes are paid.
C.   That portion of the taxes each year in excess of the base period taxes
determined as provided in Section 2 of this Ordinance shall be allocated to and
when collected be paid into a special tax increment fund of the City of West
Des Moines, State of Iowa, hereby established, to pay the principal of and
interest on loans, monies advanced to, indebtedness, whether funded, refunded,
assumed or otherwise, including bonds or obligations issued under the authority
of Section 403.9 or 403.12, Code of Iowa, as amended, incurred by the City of
West Des Moines, State of Iowa, to finance or refinance, in whole or in part,
urban renewal projects undertaken within the Urban Renewal Area pursuant to the
Urban Renewal Plan, except that (i) taxes for the regular and voter-approved
physical plant and equipment levy of a school district imposed pursuant to
Section 298.2, Code of Iowa, and taxes for the instructional support program of
a school district imposed pursuant to Section 257.19, Code of Iowa, (but in
each case only to the extent required under Section 403.19(2), Code of Iowa);
(ii) taxes for the payment of bonds and interest of each taxing district; (iii)
taxes imposed under Section 346.27(22), Code of Iowa, related to joint county-
city buildings; and (iv) any other exceptions under Section 403.19, Code of
Iowa, shall be collected against all taxable property within the Microsoft
Parcels of the Urban Renewal Area without any limitation as hereinabove
provided.
D.   Unless or until the total assessed valuation of the taxable property in
the Microsoft Parcels of the Urban Renewal Area exceeds the total assessed
value of the taxable property in the Microsoft Parcels of the Urban Renewal
Area as shown by the assessment roll referred to in Section 2 of this
Ordinance, all of the taxes levied and collected upon the taxable property in
the Microsoft Parcels of the Urban Renewal Area shall be paid into the funds
for the respective taxing districts as taxes by or for the taxing districts in
the same manner as all other property taxes.
E.   At such time as the loans, advances, indebtedness, bonds and interest
thereon of the City of West Des Moines, State of Iowa, referred to in Section 3
hereof have been paid, all monies thereafter received from taxes upon the
taxable property in the Microsoft Parcels of the Urban Renewal Area shall be
paid into the funds for the respective taxing districts in the same manner as
taxes on all other property.
F.   All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with the provisions of
this Ordinance are hereby repealed. The provisions of this Ordinance are
intended and shall be construed so as to fully implement the provisions of
Section 403.19, Code of Iowa, as amended, with respect to the division of taxes
from property within the Microsoft Parcels of the Urban Renewal Area as
described above. In the event that any provision of this Ordinance shall be
determined to be contrary to law, it shall not affect other provisions or
application of this Ordinance which shall at all times be construed to fully
invoke the provisions of Section 403.19, Code of Iowa, with reference to the
Microsoft Parcels of the Urban Renewal Area and the territory contained
therein. (Ord. 2467, 4-19-2021)
1-10B-27: ALLUVION URBAN RENEWAL AREA (2021 PARCELS):
A.   The taxes levied on the taxable property in the 2021 Parcels of the Urban
Renewal Area legally described in the ordinance codified herein, by and for the
benefit of the State of Iowa, City of West Des Moines, County of Polk, West Des
Moines Community School District, and all other taxing districts from and after
the effective date of this Ordinance shall be divided as hereinafter in this
Ordinance provided.
B.   That portion of the taxes which would be produced by the rate at which the
tax is levied each year by or for each of the taxing districts upon the total
sum of the assessed value of the taxable property in the 2021 Parcels of the
Urban Renewal Area, as shown on the assessment roll as of January 1 of the
calendar year preceding the first calendar year in which the City of West Des
Moines, State of Iowa, certifies to the Auditor of Polk County, Iowa the amount
of loans, advances, indebtedness, or bonds payable from the division of
property tax revenue described herein, shall be allocated to and when collected
be paid into the fund for the respective taxing district as taxes by or for the
taxing district into which all other property taxes are paid.
C.   That portion of the taxes each year in excess of the base period taxes
determined as provided in Section 2 of this Ordinance shall be allocated to and
when collected be paid into a special tax increment fund of the City of West
Des Moines, State of Iowa, hereby established, to pay the principal of and
interest on loans, monies advanced to, indebtedness, whether funded, refunded,
assumed or otherwise, including bonds or obligations issued under the authority
of Section 403.9 or 403.12, Code of Iowa, as amended, incurred by the City of
West Des Moines, State of Iowa, to finance or refinance, in whole or in part,
urban renewal projects undertaken within the Urban Renewal Area pursuant to the
Urban Renewal Plan, except that (i) taxes for the regular and voter-approved
physical plant and equipment levy of a school district imposed pursuant to
Section 298.2, Code of Iowa, and taxes for the instructional support program of
a school district imposed pursuant to Section 257.19, Code of Iowa, (but in
each case only to the extent required under Section 403.19(2), Code of Iowa);
(ii) taxes for the payment of bonds and interest of each taxing district; (iii)
taxes imposed under Section 346.27(22), Code of Iowa, related to joint county-
city buildings; and (iv) any other exceptions under Section 403.19, Code of
Iowa, shall be collected against all taxable property within the 2021 Parcels
of the Urban Renewal Area without any limitation as hereinabove provided.
D.   Unless or until the total assessed valuation of the taxable property in
the 2021 Parcels of the Urban Renewal Area exceeds the total assessed value of
the taxable property in the 2021 Parcels of the Urban Renewal Area as shown by
the assessment roll referred to in Section 2 of this Ordinance, all of the
taxes levied and collected upon the taxable property in the 2021 Parcels of the
Urban Renewal Area shall be paid into the funds for the respective taxing
districts as taxes by or for the taxing districts in the same manner as all
other property taxes.
E.   At such time as the loans, advances, indebtedness, bonds and interest
thereon of the City of West Des Moines, State of Iowa, referred to in Section 3
hereof have been paid, all monies thereafter received from taxes upon the
taxable property in the 2021 Parcels of the Urban Renewal Area shall be paid
into the funds for the respective taxing districts in the same manner as taxes
on all other property.
F.   All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with the provisions of
this Ordinance are hereby repealed. The provisions of this Ordinance are
intended and shall be construed so as to fully implement the provisions of
Section 403.19, Code of Iowa, as amended, with respect to the division of taxes
from property within the 2021 Parcels of the Urban Renewal Area as described
above. In the event that any provision of this Ordinance shall be determined to
be contrary to law, it shall not affect other provisions or application of this
Ordinance which shall at all times be construed to fully invoke the provisions
of Section 403.19, Code of Iowa, with reference to the 2021 Parcels of the
Urban Renewal Area and the territory contained therein. (Ord. 2487, 8-16-2021)
1-10B-28: PONDEROSA URBAN RENEWAL PLAN-REMOVING PROPERTY:
A.   For purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall have the following
meanings:
1.   After the adoption of Amendment No. 1 to the Urban Renewal Plan, the Urban
Renewal Area includes the lots and parcels located within the area legally
described as follows:
LOTS "B", "C", "D", "E", "G", "H", "J", "K", 28, 29, 30, 31, 33, 35, 44, 47,
48, 49, 51 AND OUTLOT "T", THE VILLAGE OF PONDEROSA, AN OFFICIAL PLAT IN THE
CITY OF WEST DES MOINES, POLK COUNTY, IOWA.
AND
LOTS 1, 3, 4, 5, 6 AND 7, THE VILLAGE OF PONDEROSA PLAT THREE, AN OFFICIAL PLAT
IN THE CITY OF WEST DES MOINES, POLK COUNTY, IOWA.
OUTLOT "Z", VILLAGE OF PONDEROSA PLAT 9, AN OFFICIAL PLAT IN THE CITY OF WEST
DES MOINES, POLK COUNTY, IOWA.
AND
ALL OF WEST GLEN VILLAGE NORTH, AN OFFICIAL PLAT IN THE CITY OF WEST DES
MOINES, POLK COUNTY, IOWA.
EXCEPT
Lot 28 and Outlot T, The Village of Ponderosa, an Official Plat, now included
in and forming a part of the City of West Des Moines, Polk County, Iowa.
B.   The taxes levied on the taxable property in the Urban Renewal Area,
legally described in Section 1 hereof, by and for the benefit of the State of
Iowa, County of Polk, Iowa, West Des Moines Community School District, and all
other taxing districts from and after the effective date of this chapter shall
be divided as hereinafter in this chapter provided.
C.   That portion of the taxes which would be produced by the rate at which the
tax is levied each year by or for each of the taxing districts upon the total
sum of the assessed value of the taxable property in the Urban Renewal Area, as
shown on the assessment roll as of January 1 of the calendar year preceding the
first calendar year in which the City of West Des Moines, State of Iowa,
certifies to the Auditor of Polk County, Iowa the amount of loans, advances,
indebtedness, or bonds payable from the division of property tax revenue
described herein, shall be allocated to and when collected be paid into the
fund for the respective taxing district as taxes by or for the taxing district
into which all other property taxes are paid.
D.   That portion of the taxes each year in excess of the base period taxes
determined as provided in division C. of this chapter shall be allocated to and
when collected be paid into a special tax increment fund of the City of West
Des Moines, State of Iowa, hereby established, to pay the principal of and
interest on loans, monies advanced to, indebtedness, whether funded, refunded,
assumed or otherwise, including bonds or obligations issued under the authority
of Section 403.9 or 403.12, Code of Iowa, as amended, incurred by the City of
West Des Moines, State of Iowa, to finance or refinance, in whole or in part,
urban renewal projects undertaken within the Urban Renewal Area pursuant to the
Urban Renewal Plan, except that:
1.   Taxes for the regular and voter-approved physical plant and equipment levy
of a school district imposed pursuant to Section 298.2, Code of Iowa, and taxes
for the instructional support program of a school district imposed pursuant to
Section 257.19, Code of Iowa, (but in each case only to the extent required
under Section 403.19(2), Code of Iowa);
2.   Taxes for the payment of bonds and interest of each taxing district;
3.   Taxes imposed under Section 346.27(22), Code of Iowa, related to joint
county-city buildings; and
4.   Any other exceptions under Section 403.19, Code of Iowa, shall be
collected against all taxable property within the Urban Renewal Area without
any limitation as hereinabove provided.
E.   Unless or until the total assessed valuation of the taxable property in
the Urban Renewal Area exceeds the total assessed value of the taxable property
in the Urban Renewal Area as shown by the assessment roll referred to in
division C. of this chapter, all of the taxes levied and collected upon the
taxable property in the Urban Renewal Area shall be paid into the funds for the
respective taxing districts as taxes by or for the taxing districts in the same
manner as all other property taxes.
F.   At such time as the loans, monies advanced, bonds and interest thereon and
indebtedness of the City of West Des Moines, State of Iowa, referred to in
division D. hereof have been paid, all monies thereafter received from taxes
upon the taxable property in the Urban Renewal Area shall be paid into the
funds for the respective taxing districts in the same manner as taxes on all
other property.
G.   All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with the provisions of
this chapter are hereby repealed. The provisions of this chapter are intended
and shall be construed so as to fully implement the provisions of Section
403.19, Code of Iowa, as amended, with respect to the division of taxes from
property within the Urban Renewal Area as described above. In the event that
any provision of this chapter shall be determined to be contrary to law, it
shall not affect other provisions or application of this chapter which shall at
all times be construed to fully invoke the provisions of Section 403.19, Code
of Iowa, with reference to the Urban Renewal Area and the territory contained
therein. (Ord. 2575, 7-17-2023; amd. Ord. 2610, 5-20-2024)
TITLE 2
BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
Planning And Zoning Commission   1
Board Of Adjustment   2
Civil Service Commission   3
Water Utility Board Of Trustees   4
Human Services Advisory Board   5
Board Of Trustees Of The Library   6
Park And Recreation Advisory Board   7
ADA Compliance   8
Human Rights Commission   9
City Shade Tree Commission   10
Public Arts Advisory Commission   11
Bicycle Advisory Commission   12
Sister Cities Commission   13
CHAPTER 1
PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION
SECTION:
2-1-1: Creation; Number Of Members; Qualifications
2-1-2: Term Of Office
2-1-3: Vacancies
2-1-4: Compensation
2-1-5: Powers And Duties
2-1-1: CREATION; NUMBER OF MEMBERS; QUALIFICATIONS:
There shall be a City Planning and Zoning Commission appointed by the Mayor,
subject to the approval of the Council 1 , hereinafter referred to as the
commission consisting of seven (7) members, who shall be citizens of the City
and qualified by knowledge or experience to act in matters pertaining to the
development of a City plan and who shall not hold any elective office in the
City government. (1985 Code §6-4.01)
 
Notes
1 1. See also subsection
  1-6A-3E of this Code.
2-1-2: TERM OF OFFICE:
The term of office of the members of the commission shall be staggered five (5)
year terms expiring on April 1. (1985 Code §6-4.02; amd. 1993 Code)
2-1-3: VACANCIES:
If any vacancy shall exist on the commission caused by resignation, or
otherwise, a successor for the residue of said term shall be appointed in the
same manner as the original appointee. (1985 Code §6-4.03)
2-1-4: COMPENSATION:
All members of the commission shall serve without compensation, except their
actual expenses, which shall be subject to the approval of the Council. (1985
Code §6-4.04)
2-1-5: POWERS AND DUTIES:
The commission shall have and exercise the following powers and duties:
A.   Selection Of Officers: The commission shall choose annually at its first
regular meeting in April of each year, one of its members to act as Chairman
and another as Vice Chairman, who shall perform all the duties of the Chairman
during his absence of disability.
B.   Appointment Of Assistants: Subject to the limitations contained in this
chapter as to the expenditure of funds, it may appoint such assistants as it
may deem necessary and prescribe and define their respective duties and fix and
regulate the compensation to be paid to the several persons employed by it.
C.   Adopt Rules And Regulations: The commission shall adopt such rules and
regulations governing its organization and procedure as it may deem necessary.
D.   Annual Report: The commission shall each year make a report to the Mayor
and Council of its proceedings, with a full statement of the progress of its
work during the preceding fiscal year.
E.   Comprehensive Plan:
1.   Generally: It shall have full power and authority to make or cause to be
made such surveys, studies, maps, plans or charts of the whole or any portion
of the City or of any land outside thereof which, in the opinion of the
commission bears relation to the Comprehensive Plan and shall bring to the
attention of the Council and may publish its studies and recommendations.
2.   Preparation: For the purpose of making a Comprehensive Plan for the
physical development of the City, the commission shall make careful and
comprehensive studies of present conditions and future growth of the City and
with due regard to its relation to neighboring territory. The plan shall be
made with the general purpose of guiding and accomplishing a coordinated,
adjusted and harmonious development of the City and its environs which will, in
accordance with the present and future needs, best promote health, safety,
morals, order, convenience, prosperity and general welfare as well as
efficiency and economy in the process of development.
3.   Public Hearing: Before adopting a Comprehensive Plan as referred to in the
preceding paragraph, or any part of it, or any substantial amendment thereof,
the commission shall hold at least one public hearing thereon, notice of the
time of which shall be given by one publication in a newspaper of general
circulation in the City not less than four (4) days nor more than twenty (20)
days before the date of hearing. The adoption of the plan or part or amendment
thereof shall be by resolution of the commission. After adoption of said plan
by the commission, an attested copy thereof shall be certified to the Council,
and the Council may approve the same. When said plan or any modification or
amendment thereof shall receive the approval of the Council, the said plan
until subsequently modified or amended as hereinbefore authorized, shall
constitute the official City plan.
4   Amendments: When the Comprehensive Plan as hereinbefore provided has been
adopted, no substantial amendment or modification thereof shall be made without
the commission holding at least one public hearing, as referred to in the
preceding paragraph, on such proposed change for its recommendation. If the
commission disapproves the proposed change, it may be adopted by the Council
only by the affirmative vote of at least three-fourths (3/4) of the members of
the said Council.
F.   Recommendations Of Improvements: No memorial in a public place, and no
public building, public structure or appurtenances, shall be located or
erected, nor shall any permit be issued by any department of the City for the
erection or location thereof until and unless the design shall have been
submitted to the commission and its recommendations thereon obtained, except
such requirements and recommendations shall not act as a stay upon action for
any such improvement when the commission, after thirty (30) days' written
notice requesting such recommendations, shall have failed to file same.
G.   Review And Comment On Preliminary Plats: All preliminary plats in the City
or within the extraterritorial review area shall first be considered by the
Planning and Zoning Commission. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall, by
written resolution, provide a recommendation to the City Council for their
consideration in making the approval decision.
H.   Review And Comment Of Park Improvements: No plan for any park or other
public improvement affecting the City plan shall be finally approved by the
City or the character or location thereof determined, unless such proposal
shall first have been submitted to the commission, and the latter shall have
had thirty (30) days within which to file its recommendations thereon.
I.   Zoning: The commission shall have and exercise all the powers and duties
and privileges in preparing, administering and amending the City Zoning Code as
provided by chapter 414 of the Code of Iowa. When proposed changes in the
zoning regulations or districts are referred to the commission by the Director
of Development Services, the commission shall, within thirty (30) days
thereafter, file its recommendations approving, disapproving, or modifying such
proposed changes with the Council. (1985 Code §6-4.05; amd. 1993 Code; Ord.
1905, 1-24-2011; Ord. 2255, 10-16-2017; Ord. 2527, 7-5-2022)
CHAPTER 2
BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT
SECTION:
2-2-1: Board Created
2-2-2: Meetings
2-2-3: Appeals
2-2-4: Jurisdiction; Powers
2-2-1: BOARD CREATED:
A Board of Adjustment is hereby established which shall consist of five (5)
members appointed by the Mayor with approval of City Council to five (5) year
staggered terms expiring April 1. (Ord. 1240, 4-7-1997)
2-2-2: MEETINGS:
The meetings of the Board of Adjustment shall be held at the call of the
Chairman, and at such other times as the Board may determine. Such Chairman, or
in his absence the acting Chairman, may administer oaths and compel the
attendance of witnesses. All meetings of the Board shall be open to the public.
The Board shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each
member on each question, or, if absent or failing to vote, indicating such
fact, and shall keep records of its examinations and other official actions,
all of which shall be immediately filed in the Office of the Board and shall be
a public record. The presence of three (3) members shall be necessary to
constitute a quorum. (Ord. 1240, 4-7-1997)
2-2-3: APPEALS:
A.   How Instituted And When: Appeals to the Board of Adjustment may be taken
by any person aggrieved or by any officer, department, board or bureau of the
City affected by any decision of the Director of Community Development, or
designee. Such appeal shall be taken within ten (10) days by filing with the
Director of Community Development, or designee and with the Board a notice of
appeal specifying the grounds thereof, the Director of Community Development,
or designee shall forthwith transmit to the Board all papers constituting the
record upon which the action appealed from is taken.
B.   Stay: An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action
appealed from, unless the Director of Community Development, or designee
certifies to the Board, after notice of appeal shall have been filed with him,
that by reason of the facts stated in the certificate a stay would, in his
opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property. In such case, proceedings
shall not be stayed otherwise than by a restraining order which may be granted
by the Board or by a court of record on application on notice to the Director
of Community Development, or designee and on due cause shown.
C.   Submittal Of An Application: The Board shall fix a hearing date within
thirty (30) days upon receiving a completed application for the appeal, give
public notice thereof, as well as due notice to the parties in interest, and
decide the same within a reasonable time. At the hearing any party may appear
in person or by agent or by attorney. Each application request for any appeals
shall be accompanied by the fee specified by the City Council resolution before
it is accepted for filing and processing.
D.   Determination Of Completeness: Within thirty (30) days of the date of
acceptance of an application for a variance, the Director of Community
Development or designee shall determine whether an application includes the
information required by this chapter, and shall notify the applicant of the
results of that determination. Failure of the Director or designee to respond
within thirty (30) days of acceptance of an application with a determination as
to completeness shall be deemed as a determination that the application is
complete.
If an applicant is notified that a submitted application is incomplete, the
time used by the applicant for preparation and submittal of the required
additional information shall be excluded from the period within which the
Director or designee must complete the determination of completeness. Submittal
of the additional staff requested information establishes a new thirty (30) day
period for a determination of completeness. (Ord. 1240, 4-7-1997)
E.   Notice For Public Hearings: The Community Development Department shall set
a date, time and place for the matter to be heard and shall give notice of said
hearing by mailing a written notice, postage prepaid, containing the date, time
and place of hearing, not less than four (4) calendar days and not more than
twenty (20) calendar days prior to the date of the hearing, to the applicant,
the owners of the property involved, and the owners of the property situated
within a radius of three hundred seventy feet (370'), including public right-
of-way, of the exterior boundaries of the parcel(s) on which the proposed
variance request is to be located. In addition to the mailed notice, a notice
shall be given by publication in a newspaper of general circulation in
accordance with the Iowa Code. (Ord. 1494, 10-28-2002)
2-2-4: JURISDICTION; POWERS:
A.   Powers: The Board of Adjustment shall have the following powers:
1   To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is error in any order,
requirement, decision or determination made by the Director of Development
Services, or designee in the enforcement of the zoning regulations in title 9
of this Code.
2   To hear and decide special exceptions to the terms of title 9 of this Code
upon which the Board is required to pass.
a   A "special exception" is known as a permitted conditional use and permits
in a particular district a use not otherwise permitted when certain conditions
specifically set out in title 9 of this Code are satisfied.
b   Required Permitted Conditional Use Permit Findings: Permitted conditional
use permits (Pc) may only be granted if all of the following findings are made;
or if conditions and limitations, as the Board of Adjustment deems necessary,
are imposed to allow it to make said findings. It shall be the responsibility
of the applicant to prove to the satisfaction of the Board of Adjustment that
the following findings can be made:
(1)   That the proposed use is consistent with the West Des Moines
comprehensive plan and any applicable subarea plan.
(2)   That the proposed use does assure compatibility of property uses within
the zone and general area.
(3)   That all applicable standards and conditions have been imposed which
protect the public health, safety and welfare.
(4)   That there is adequate on-site and off-site public infrastructure to
support the proposed use.
(5)   That the proposed use has met all the requirements contained in this
Code.
(6)   That the proposed use be in keeping with the scale and nature of the
surrounding neighborhood.
3   To hear and decide a zoning exception from the terms of title 9 of this
Code when such relief is reasonably needed to overcome practical difficulties
related to the subject property. Practical difficulties may be shown by special
circumstances which apply to the property such that the terms of title 9 cannot
be satisfied.
a   A "zoning exception" is an exception to one of the following specifically
listed numerical regulations established by title 9 of this Code. The Board of
Adjustment is authorized to hear the following exceptions from the requirements
of the zoning ordinance as related to existing single-family detached
dwellings, but not in cases of new construction:
(1)   Reduction by no more than fifty percent (50%) of City Code required side
and rear yard setback(s) of twenty feet (20') or less for principal structures.
(2)   Reduction by no more than twenty-five percent (25%) of City Code required
side and rear yard setback(s) greater than twenty feet (20') for principal
structures.
(3)   Reduction by no more than twenty-five percent (25%) of City Code required
front yard setback for principal structures.
(4)   Reduction by no more than fifty percent (50%) of City Code required side
and rear yard setback(s) for accessory structures.
(5)   Increase the maximum allowable gross square footage of a detached
accessory structure by no more than three hundred (300) square feet.
(6)   Increase the maximum allowable percentage of front yard paving of vehicle
use areas by no more than ten percent (10%) above the maximum allowed per the
zoning district.
(7)   Decrease the minimum square footage of an enclosed parking space as
required by no more than one hundred (100) square feet.
(8)   Increase the height of a detached accessory structure by no more than ten
percent (10%) above the maximum allowed per the zoning district.
b   Required zoning exception findings: A zoning exception may be approved only
when the Board of Adjustment determines that all of the following standards and
criteria have been met. It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to
prove to the satisfaction of the Board that the following findings can be made:
(1)   Without the requested exception, strict compliance with the ordinance
prevents improvement of the property in a manner which is reasonable,
customary, and consistent with other properties in the area;
(2)   Without the requested exception, strict compliance with the ordinance
results in a practical difficulty. A "practical difficulty" may be shown by:
(A)   Significant or unjustified expense in light of the scope of the project;
or
(B)   Destruction or demolition of significant or attractive features of the
property, or similar reasons; or
(C)   Unique physical attributes of the subject property such as exceptional
narrowness, shallowness, size, shape, mature and desirable vegetation, natural
water features such as streams, creeks, and ponds, or topographical conditions
of the subject property that restrict the placement of the intended
improvement; or
(D)   Orientation or interior configuration of the existing structure which
impacts the logical function of the intended improvement unless additional
modifications are made to the existing layout or use of the existing structure.
(3)   The requested exception is the minimum necessary to achieve the purpose
of the request.
(4)   The requested exception will not have a substantial negative impact on
the character and context of the neighborhood.
(5)   The requested exception will not be detrimental to the public health,
safety, or general welfare.
(6)   The requested exception does not authorize or expand a use or activity
not otherwise expressly authorized by the regulations within the zoning
district in which the property is located.
4   To hear and decide a variance from the terms of title 9 of this Code when
due to special conditions, without the granting of the variance strict
application of the zoning regulations will result in an unnecessary hardship.
a   A "variance" is authority extended to the owner to improve the property in
a manner prohibited by title 9 of this Code in the situation where the plight
of the owner is due to special or exceptional circumstances, not to the general
conditions in the neighborhood and where literal enforcement would cause the
owner unnecessary hardship.
b   Required Variance Findings: Approval by the Board of Adjustment shall only
be granted if all of the following findings are made; or if conditions and
limitations, as the Board deems necessary, are imposed to allow it to make said
findings. It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to prove to the
satisfaction of the Board that the following findings can be made:
(1)   That the granting of the variance shall not be contrary to the public
interest.
(2)   That without the granting of the variance, and due to special conditions,
a strict application of the zoning regulations as they apply to the subject
property will result in an unnecessary hardship. An "unnecessary hardship"
exists when:
(A)   The subject property cannot yield a reasonable return from any use or
improvement permitted by the subject zoning regulations. Failure to yield a
reasonable return may only be shown by proof that the owner has been deprived
of all beneficial or productive use of the subject property. It is not
sufficient to merely show that the value of the land has been depreciated by
the regulations or that a zoning variance would permit the owner to increase
the value in the subject property; and
(B)   The plight of the owner is due to unique circumstances not of the owner's
making and not due to the general conditions in the neighborhood; and
(C)   The use or construction to be authorized by the variance will not alter
the essential character of the neighborhood.
(3)   That the spirit of the ordinance shall be observed when the variance is
granted; and
(4)   Substantial justice shall be done as a result of granting the variance.
B.   Applicability Of Approval:
1   Any zoning exception or variance granted by the Board shall be for the
specific project as stated in the request. Any subsequent expansions or
additions which would be non-compliant with the applicable regulations set
forth in title 9 of this Code shall be required to be reviewed by the Board of
Adjustment through the established applicable zoning exception or variance
process.
2   Completion Of Construction: For any special exception, zoning exception or
variance granted by the Board for the construction of a specific project, the
applicant shall have a period of one year from the date of the filing of the
Board's action to obtain site plan approval, if necessary, execute a building
permit and commence with construction. If after the one-year period these
requirements have not been met, the special exception, zoning exception or
variance shall become null and void. If the project cannot meet the one-year
time frame and valid reason exists for an extension, a request to the Board for
approval of an extension may be submitted by the applicant a minimum of thirty
(30)-days prior to the expiration of the one-year deadline.
C.   Action: In exercising the above mentioned powers, the Board may, in
conformity with the provisions of law, reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or
may modify the order, requirement, decision or determination appealed from and
may make such order, requirement, decision, or determination as it believes
proper. The concurring vote of three (3) of the members of the Board shall be
necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision or determination of the
Development Services Director or designee, or to decide in favor of the
applicant on any matter upon which it is required to pass under this chapter;
provided, however, that the action of the Board shall not become effective
until after the resolution of the Board, setting forth the full reason for its
decision and the vote of each member participating therein has been recorded in
the minutes. Such resolution, immediately following the Board's final decision,
shall be filed with the City and shall be open to the public inspection.
1   Basis For Decision; Board Approval: Every decision of the Board shall be
supported by written testimony or evidence submitted in connection therewith. A
resolution of findings will be approved by the Board and recorded with the
County.
2   Denial: Once an application is denied by the Zoning Board of Adjustment,
the Board may decline to consider an application that is substantially the same
for a period of twelve (12) months after a decision by the Board or court on
the earlier application.
3   Appeals: Any person or persons, jointly or severally, aggrieved by any
decision of the Board of Adjustment under the provisions of this chapter, or,
any taxpayer, or any officer, department, board or bureau of the City, or any
person or persons jointly or severally aggrieved by any decision of the Board
may present to a court of record a petition pursuant to the Code of the State
of Iowa. Such petition shall be presented to the court within thirty (30) days
after the filing of the decision. (Ord. 1240, 4-7-1997; amd. Ord. 2274, 2-5-
2018; Ord. 2447, 10-19-2020; Ord. 2473, 5-17-2021)
CHAPTER 3
CIVIL SERVICE COMMISSION
SECTION:
2-3-1: Purpose
2-3-2: Appointment, Term And Compensation
2-3-3: Qualifications
2-3-4: Applicability; Exceptions
2-3-5: Officers
2-3-6: Director Of Human Rights Commission Ex Officio Member Of Civil Service
Commission
2-3-7: Other Powers And Duties
2-3-8: Records
2-3-9: Rooms And Supplies
2-3-10: Preference By Service
2-3-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the appointment, powers and
duties of a civil service commission in accordance with the requirements of
state law 1 . (1985 Code §1-1.0601)
 
Notes
1 1. IC §400.20 et seq.
2-3-2: APPOINTMENT, TERM AND COMPENSATION:
A.   Appointment And Term: A civil service commission consisting of three (3)
members shall be appointed by the mayor with the approval of the council 1 .
Following appointment of the initial commission according to law, one member
shall be appointed after each regular municipal election to hold office for a
term of four (4) years commencing the first Monday of April following such
municipal election. In the event that a vacancy occurs in the membership of the
commission by death, resignation or otherwise prior to the normal expiration of
the appointee's term, the mayor, with the approval of the city council, shall
appoint a person to serve out the remainder of the unexpired term. (Ord. 1626,
4-25-2005)
B.   Compensation: Civil service commissioners shall serve without
compensation. (1985 Code §1-1.0605)
 
Notes
1 2. See also subsection
  1-6A-3B of this code.
2-3-3: QUALIFICATIONS:
Commissioners must be citizens of Iowa, eligible electors and residents of the
city. No person, while on said commission, shall hold or be a candidate for any
office of public trust. (1985 Code §1-1.0603; amd. 1993 Code)
2-3-4: APPLICABILITY; EXCEPTIONS:
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all full time police officers and
firefighters and all appointive full time employees, except:
A.   City clerk, deputy city clerk, city attorney, assistant attorney,
assessor, finance director, auditor, civil engineer, health physician, market
master, city manager and administrative assistants to the manager, and any
other department heads except police and fire chiefs who are subject to
sections 400.13 and 400.14, code of Iowa.
B.   Election officials.
C.   Secretary to the mayor, city manager or department heads.
D.   Boards and commissioners of any kind.
E.   Casual employees. (1985 Code §1-1.0610; amd. 1993 Code)
2-3-5: OFFICERS:
A.   Chairman: The chairman of the commission, for each biennial period, shall
be the member whose term first expires. (1985 Code §1-1.0606)
B.   Clerk: The city clerk shall be clerk of the commission. (1985 Code §1-
1.0607)
2-3-6: DIRECTOR OF HUMAN RIGHTS COMMISSION EX OFFICIO MEMBER OF CIVIL SERVICE
COMMISSION:
Notwithstanding the provisions of section
2-3-3 of this chapter, when a human rights commission has been established, the
director thereof shall ex officio be a member, without vote, of the civil
service commission. (1985 Code §1-1.0604)
2-3-7: OTHER POWERS AND DUTIES:
The commission shall have, exercise and perform all the powers and duties as
are provided by chapter 400 of the code of Iowa or amendments thereto. (1985
Code §1-1.0616)
A.   Examinations; Appointments: The commission shall conduct examinations and
make appointments as provided by law. (1985 Code §1-1.0614)
B.   Removal, Demotion Or Suspension: The removal, demotion or suspension of
persons covered by civil service provisions shall be as provided by law. (1985
Code §1-1.0615)
2-3-8: RECORDS:
The civil service commission shall keep a record of all its meetings and also a
complete individual service record of each civil service employee, which record
shall be permanent and kept up to date. (1985 Code §1-1.0608)
2-3-9: ROOMS AND SUPPLIES:
The council shall provide suitable rooms in which the commission may hold its
meetings and supply the commission with all necessary equipment and a qualified
shorthand reporter to enable it properly to perform its duties. (1985 Code §1-
1.0609)
2-3-10: PREFERENCE BY SERVICE:
An employee regularly serving in or holding a position when the position
becomes subject to this chapter or when the position is reclassified by the
city shall retain the position and have full civil service rights in the
position under any of the following conditions:
A.   The employee meets the minimum qualifications established for the position
and has completed the required probationary period for the position.
B.   The employee has served satisfactorily in the position for a period equal
to the probationary period of the position, and passes a qualifying
noncompetitive examination for the position but does not meet the minimum
qualifications established for the position.
C.   An employee who has not completed the required probationary period but who
otherwise meets the requirements of subsection A or B of this section shall
receive full civil service rights in the position upon the completion of the
probationary period.
Appointments made after the effective date hereof are subject to this chapter.
(1993 Code)
Nothing in this section shall apply to any person temporarily acting in a
position regularly held by another, or in a vacancy, except to establish his
rights in his own regular position. (1985 Code §1-1.0613)
CHAPTER 4
WATER UTILITY BOARD OF TRUSTEES
SECTION:
2-4-1: Purpose
2-4-2: Appointment of Trustees; Compensation
2-4-3: Vacancies
2-4-4: Powers and Duties of Board
2-4-5: Funds and Rates
2-4-6: Discontinuance of Board
2-4-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this Chapter is to provide for the operation of the Municipally
owned water utility by a Board of Trustees. (1985 Code §6-1.01)
2-4-2: APPOINTMENT OF TRUSTEES; COMPENSATION:
The Mayor shall appoint, subject to the approval of the Council, 1  five (5)
persons to serve as Trustees. Trustees appointed shall serve staggered six (6)
year terms expiring on December 31. No public officer or salaried employee of
the City may serve on the Board. The Council shall, by resolution, set the
compensation of Board members. (1985 Code §§6-1.03, 6-1.04; 1993 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. See subsection
  1-6A-3D of this Code.
2-4-3: VACANCIES:
An appointment to fill a vacancy on the Board shall be made in the same manner
as an original appointment, except that such appointment shall be for the
balance of the unexpired term. (1985 Code §6-1.05)
2-4-4: POWERS AND DUTIES OF BOARD:
The Board of Trustees may exercise all powers of a City in relation to the City
utility, City utilities or combined utility system it administers, with the
following exceptions:
A.   Taxes, Ordinances and Bonds: The Board may not certify taxes to be levied,
pass ordinances or amendments, or issue general obligation or special
assessment bonds.
B.   Property: Title to all property must be in the name of the City, but the
Board has full control of such property subject to limitations imposed by law.
C.   Reports to Council: The Board shall make a detailed annual report to the
Council including a complete financial statement.
D.   Proceedings Published: Immediately following a regular or special meeting,
the Board secretary shall prepare and cause to be published in a newspaper of
general circulation in the City a condensed statement of proceedings including
a list of all claims. (1985 Code §6-1.06)
2-4-5: FUNDS AND RATES:
A.   Control of Funds: The Board shall control tax revenues allocated to it as
well as all monies derived from operations. (1985 Code §6-1.07)
B.   Accounting: Utility moneys must be held in a separate utility fund, with a
separate account or accounts for each utility or combined utility system. (1985
Code §6-1.08)
C.   Discriminatory Rates Illegal: A utility may not provide use or service at
a discriminatory rate, except to the City or its agencies, as provided in
section 384.91, Code of Iowa. (1985 Code §6-1.09)
2-4-6: DISCONTINUANCE OF BOARD:
A proposal, on motion of the Council or upon receipt of a valid petition, to
discontinue a utility board is subject to the approval of the voters of the
City, except that a Board may be discontinued by resolution of the Council when
the City utility, City utilities, or combined utility system it administers is
disposed of or leased for a period of over five (5) years. (1985 Code §6-1.10)
CHAPTER 5
HUMAN SERVICES ADVISORY BOARD
SECTION:
2-5-1: Purpose
2-5-2: Definitions
2-5-3: Board Established
2-5-4: Membership; Qualifications; Appointment; Compensation
2-5-5: Organization; Meetings; Quorum
2-5-6: Term; Vacancies; Transition; Removal
2-5-7: Powers And Duties
2-5-8: Administrative And Other City Policies
2-5-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to establish a Human Services Advisory Board to
advise and assist the West Des Moines City Council in meeting the mission of
the City of West Des Moines. That mission is to provide opportunities for
community residents to achieve healthy, stable and productive lives through the
provision of necessary human services to meet needs for food, housing,
education, employment, health and general welfare. (Ord. 2652, 3-24-2025)
2-5-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, certain terms or words used herein shall be
interpreted as follows:
A.   “Board” means the Human Services Advisory Board of the City of West Des
Moines, Iowa.
B.   “Department” means the Human Services Department of the City of West Des
Moines, Iowa. (Ord. 2652, 3-24-2025)
2-5-3: BOARD ESTABLISHED:
The Human Services Advisory Board is hereby established for the purpose of
advising the City Council, performing the duties of the Board, as stated
herein, and as the Council shall direct, formulating, initiating, facilitating,
administering and guiding services to be provided for the disadvantaged in the
City. Subject to Council approval, the Board shall establish rules,
regulations, operating procedures and policies designed to effectively carry
out the above purpose as stated in the purpose of this chapter. All persons
and/or organizations establishing, conducting and operating human service
programs and other similar services for the benefit of the disadvantaged
residents of the City shall coordinate and cooperate with the City. Nothing in
this chapter shall be intended to interfere with or preclude the provision of
services to families and individuals as set forth by State or Federal Statute
and as administered by any branch or political subdivision of said State or
Federal government. (Ord. 2652, 3-24-2025)
2-5-4: MEMBERSHIP; QUALIFICATIONS; APPOINTMENT; COMPENSATION:
A.   The Board shall consist of no less than nine (9) members and no more than
twelve (12) members, appointed by the Mayor with the approval of the City
Council.
B.   Membership shall be open to a mixture of representatives of the community
at large who are either a resident of the City of West Des Moines or have
demonstrated knowledge or expertise in areas that would be of benefit to the
Board, as determined by the director of the Department. Preference shall be
given to individuals who reside in West Des Moines or have a direct connection
to the City. Members shall not hold any other elective or appointed office
within city government.
C.   One (1) seat on the Board is designated for and shall be filled by an
individual who regularly utilizes the services of the Department or who, in the
recent past, has utilized such services.
D.   The appointment of each member of the Board shall be staggered terms of
three (3) years expiring June 30.
E.   All members of the Board shall serve without compensation except for
reimbursement of reasonable and necessary expenses, subject to the approval of
the City Council. (Ord. 2652, 3-24-2025)
2-5-5: ORGANIZATION; MEETINGS; QUORUM:
A.   The Board, at its first full meeting after July 1 each year, shall elect
one member as Chair, one as Vice Chair, and one as Secretary. The Chair, Vice
Chair, and Secretary shall serve one-year terms, but are eligible for
reelection. The Chair shall preside over all board meetings, help set the
agenda, and act as the voice of the board. The Vice Chair shall assume the
duties of the Chair when the Chair is absent and assume the role of the Chair
for the remainder of the Chair’s term should the Chair resign or otherwise be
removed from the Board. The Secretary shall maintain written record of all
meetings to include accurate board decisions and actions.
B.   The director of the Department, or designee, shall act as a City liaison
to the Board.
C.   The Board shall hold regular meetings and maintain a written record of its
proceedings.
D.   A majority of the membership of the Board shall constitute a quorum. (Ord.
2652, 3-24-2025)
2-5-6: TERM; VACANCIES; TRANSITION; REMOVAL:
A.   Board members may serve a maximum of two (2) full three-year terms absent
a compelling reason to make an exception as approved by the Mayor.
B.   If a Board vacancy exists, a new Board member shall be appointed by the
Mayor with the approval of the City Council. Efforts should be made to fill
such vacancies within sixty (60) days after the position becomes vacant.
Successors in a vacated seat shall serve for the remainder of the original term
and then may serve two consecutive full terms.
C.   Any Board member may be removed from the Board by the Mayor, with the
concurrence of the City Council. Any such removal shall be stated in writing
and filed with the City Clerk’s Office and a copy thereof filed with the Chair
of the Board. Continued absence of any member from meetings of the Board shall,
at the discretion of the Mayor, render any such member subject to immediate
removal from appointment, with final approval of the City Council. Any member
consistently absent from Board meetings, without sufficient excuse, shall be
considered to have vacated his or her appointment.
(Ord. 2652, 3-24-2025)
2-5-7: POWERS AND DUTIES:
The Board shall have the following powers and duties:
A.   Support the mission of the Department and promote provision of identified
human service needs.
B.   Review and provide advice regarding plans designed to meet human service
needs.
C.   Provide input in the preparation of the budget for human services
programs.
D.   Explore and advocate for new, noncity sources of funding for human service
needs.
E.   Prepare an annual report to the City Council summarizing the Board’s
activities during the preceding year and recommendations for the proposed
activities for the succeeding year. (Ord. 2652, 3-24-2025)
2-5-8: ADMINISTRATIVE AND OTHER CITY POLICIES:
All administrative, accounting, budgetary, and procurement policies of the City
shall govern the Board in all of its operations. (Ord. 2652, 3-24-2025)
CHAPTER 6
BOARD OF TRUSTEES OF THE LIBRARY
SECTION:
2-6-1: Purpose
2-6-2: Membership
2-6-3: Organization Of The Board; Compensation
2-6-4: Public Library Designated
2-6-5: Powers And Duties
2-6-6: Contracting With Other Libraries
2-6-7: Nonresident Use
2-6-8: Expenditures
2-6-9: Annual Report
2-6-10: Injury To Books Or Property
2-6-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the appointment of a city library
board of trustees, and to specify that board's powers and duties. (1985 Code
§4-1.01)
2-6-2: MEMBERSHIP:
The board of trustees of the library, hereinafter referred to as the board,
consists of seven (7) resident members. All members are to be appointed by the
mayor with the approval of the council 1 . All members of the board shall be
bona fide citizens and residents of the city. Resident members shall be over
the age of eighteen (18) years. (1985 Code §§4-1.03, 4-1.04)
 
Notes
1 1. See subsection
  1-6A-3C of this code.
2-6-3: ORGANIZATION OF THE BOARD; COMPENSATION:
The organization of the board shall be as follows:
A.   Term Of Office: All appointments to the board shall be for four (4) years,
except to fill vacancies. Each term shall commence on July 1. Appointments
shall be made every year of one-fourth (1/4) the total number, or as near as
possible, to stagger the terms. (Ord. 1091, 5-23-1994)
B.   Vacancies: The position of any trustee shall be vacant if he moves
permanently from the city, or if he is absent from six (6) consecutive regular
meetings of the board, except in the case of sickness or temporary absence from
the city. Vacancies in the board shall be filled by appointment of the mayor,
with approval of the council, and the new trustee shall fill out the unexpired
term for which the appointment is made.
C.   Compensation: Trustees shall receive no compensation for their services.
(1985 Code §4-1.05)
2-6-4: PUBLIC LIBRARY DESIGNATED:
The public library for the city shall be known as the West Des Moines Public
Library. It shall be referred to in this chapter as the library. (1985 Code §4-
1.02)
2-6-5: POWERS AND DUTIES:
The board shall have and exercise the following powers and duties: (1985 Code
§4-1.06; amd. 1993 Code)
A.   Officers: To meet and elect from its members a president, a secretary, and
such other officers as it deems necessary. The city finance director shall
serve as board treasurer but shall not be a member of the board. (1985 Code §4-
1.06; amd. 1993 Code; Ord. 1878, 8-23-2010, eff. 9-17-2010)
B.   Physical Plant: To have charge, control and supervision of the public
library, its appurtenances, fixtures and rooms containing the same.
C.   Charge Of Affairs: To direct and control all affairs of the library.
D.   Hiring Of Personnel: To employ a librarian, and authorize the librarian to
employ such assistants and employees as may be necessary for the proper
management of the library, and fix their compensation; provided, however, that
prior to such employment, the compensation of the librarian, assistants and
employees shall have been fixed and approved by a majority of the members of
the board voting in favor thereof.
E.   Removal Of Personnel: To remove the librarian, by a two-thirds (2/3) vote
of the board, and provide procedures for the removal of the assistants or
employees for misdemeanor, incompetency or inattention to duty, subject
however, to the provisions of chapter 70, code of Iowa.
F.   Purchases: To select, or authorize the librarian to select, and make
purchases of books, pamphlets, magazines, periodicals, papers, maps, journals,
other library materials, furniture, fixtures, stationery and supplies for the
library within budgetary limits set by the board.
G.   Use By Nonresidents: To authorize the use of the library by nonresidents
of the city and to fix charges therefor.
H.   Rules And Regulations: To make and adopt, amend, modify or repeal rules
and regulations not inconsistent with code and the law for the care, use,
government and management of the library and the business of the board, fixing
and enforcing penalties for violations.
I.   Expenditures: To have exclusive control of the expenditure of all funds
allocated for library purposes by the council, and of all monies available by
gift or otherwise for the erection of library buildings, and of all other
monies belonging to the library including fines and rentals collected under the
rules of the board.
J.   Gifts: To accept gifts of real property, personal property or mixed
property, and devises and bequests, including trust funds; to take the title to
said property in the name of the library; to execute deeds and bill of sale for
the conveyance of said property; and to extend the funds received by them from
such gifts for the improvement of the library.
K.   Enforce The Performance Of Conditions On Gifts: To enforce the performance
of conditions on gifts, donations, devises and bequests accepted by the city by
action against the council.
L.   Record Of Proceedings: To keep a record of its proceedings.
M.   County Historical Association: To have authority to make agreements with
the local county historical association where such exists, and to set apart the
necessary room and to care for such articles as may come into the possession of
the association. The trustees are further authorized to purchase necessary
receptacles and materials for the preservation and protection of such articles
as are in their judgment of a historical and educational nature and pay for the
same out of funds allocated for library purposes. (1985 Code §4-1.06; amd. 1993
Code)
2-6-6: CONTRACTING WITH OTHER LIBRARIES:
The board shall have power to contract with other libraries in accordance with
the following:
A.   Contracting: The board may contract with any other boards of trustees of
free public libraries, any other city, school corporation, private or
semiprivate organization, institution of higher learning, township or county,
or with the trustees of any county library district for the use of the library
by their respective residents.
B.   Termination: Such a contract may be terminated at any time by mutual
consent of the contracting parties. It also may be terminated by a majority
vote of the electors represented by either of the contracting parties. Such a
termination proposition shall be submitted to the electors by the governing
body of a contracting party on a written petition of not less than five percent
(5%) in number of the electors who voted for governor in the territory of the
contracting party at the last general election. The petition must be presented
to the governing body not less than forty (40) days before the election. The
proposition may be submitted at any election provided by law that is held in
the territory of the party who is seeking to terminate the contract. (1985 Code
§4-1.07)
2-6-7: NONRESIDENT USE:
The board may authorize the use of the library by persons not residents of the
city in any one or more of the following ways:
A.   Lending: By lending the books or other materials of the library to
nonresidents on the same terms and conditions as to residents of the city, or
upon payment of a special nonresident library fee.
B.   Depository: By establishing depositories of library books or other
materials to be loaned to nonresidents.
C.   Bookmobiles: By establishing bookmobiles or a traveling library so that
books or other library materials may be loaned to nonresidents.
D.   Branch Library: By establishing branch libraries for lending books or
other library materials to nonresidents. (1985 Code §4-1.08)
2-6-8: EXPENDITURES:
All money appropriated by the council for the operation and maintenance of the
library shall be set aside in an account for the library. Expenditures shall be
paid for only on orders of the board, signed by its president and secretary.
The check writing officer is the finance director. (1985 Code §4-1.09; amd.
1993 Code; Ord. 1878, 8-23-2010, eff. 9-17-2010)
2-6-9: ANNUAL REPORT:
The board shall make a report to the city council immediately after the close
of the fiscal year. This report shall contain statements as to the condition of
the library, the number of books added, the number circulated, the amount of
fines collected and the amount of money expended in the maintenance of the
library during the year, together with such further information as may be
required by the council. (1985 Code §4-1.10)
2-6-10: INJURY TO BOOKS OR PROPERTY:
Any person who shall wilfully, maliciously or wantonly tear, deface, mutilate,
injure or destroy, in whole or in part, any newspaper, periodical, book, map,
pamphlet, chart, picture or other property belonging to the library or reading
room shall be in violation of this code. (1985 Code §4-1.11; amd. 1993 Code)
CHAPTER 7
PARK AND RECREATION ADVISORY BOARD
SECTION:
2-7-1: Board Created; Appointed; Term
2-7-2: Organization; Compensation
2-7-3: Qualifications
2-7-4: Powers And Duties
2-7-5: Responsibilities
2-7-6: Administrative And Other City Policies
2-7-1: BOARD CREATED; APPOINTED; TERM:
There shall be a Park and Recreation Advisory Board for the City consisting of
seven (7) citizens of legal age whose members shall be appointed by the Mayor
with the approval of the City Council for staggered terms of four (4) years
each, expiring December 31. (Ord. 1189, 6-3-1996; amd. Ord. 2480, 7-6-2021)
2-7-2: ORGANIZATION; COMPENSATION:
A.   Organization: At its first meeting in January of each year, the Board
shall elect one of its members as Chair, one as Vice Chair and one as
Secretary. Officers shall serve one year terms but would be eligible for
reelection.
B.   A majority of the membership of the board shall constitute a quorum. The
director of parks and recreation, or designee, shall act as city staff to the
commission.
C.   Committee Appointments: The Chair shall make all committee appointments,
with the approval of the majority of Board members present.
D.   Removal: Any board member may be removed from the board by the Mayor, with
the concurrence of the Council. Any such removal shall be stated in writing and
filed with the city clerk’s office and a copy thereof filed with the chair of
the board. Continued absence of any member from meetings of the board shall, at
the discretion of the mayor, render any such member subject to immediate
removal from appointment, with final approval by the city council. Any member
consistently absent from the board meetings, without sufficient excuse, shall
be considered to have vacated their appointment. In the event a vacancy arises,
a new board member shall be appointed by the mayor with the approval of the
city council, and the board member so appointed shall serve the balance of the
unexpired term. Any such vacancies shall be filled within sixty (60) days after
the position becomes vacant.
E.   Compensation: There shall be no compensation attached to the Park and
Recreation Advisory Board, and all services performed by said Board member(s)
shall be rendered without compensation therefor except for reimbursement of
reasonable and necessary expenses, subject to the approval of the City Council.
(Ord. 1189, 6-3-1996; amd. Ord. 2480, 7-6-2021)
2-7-3: QUALIFICATIONS:
Membership shall be open to a balanced, diverse mixture of citizen
representatives of the community at large who are recognized for their interest
or experience in connection with parks and recreation. Members shall reside in
the city. Members shall not hold any other elected or appointed office within
the city government. (Ord. 2480, 7-6-2021)
2-7-4: POWERS AND DUTIES:
The Board shall have the following powers and duties:
A.   Recommend plans for the development of the park and recreation system,
consistent with the overall City Comprehensive Plan;
B.   Make recommendations on the purchase, sale, lease or exchange of park
property;
C.   Make recommendations on policies and regulations for the control,
operation, supervision and maintenance of park and recreation programs;
D.   Make recommendations on fees and charges and any conditions under which
services may be rendered to users of park and recreation facilities;
E.   Make recommendations on applications for grants or subsidies from any
other unit of government;
F.   Provide input in the preparation of the operating and capital budget
requests for park and recreation programs;
G.   Recommend agreements for use, under reasonable rules and requirements, of
parks or portions thereof, as follows:
1.   For a period not in excess of ten (10) days to charitable, fraternal and
patriotic organizations, for the purpose of permitting such organizations to
conduct special events.
2.   For a period not to exceed five (5) years, as the board shall deem proper,
for the purpose of permitting the playing of amateur or professional contests
or games, programs and recreational programs;
H.   Have access to City staff to carry out the powers and duties described in
this Section, per the authority of the City Council. (Ord. 1189, 6-3-1996; amd.
Ord. 2480, 7-6-2021)
2-7-5: RESPONSIBILITIES:
It shall be the responsibility of the Board to hold regular public meetings and
maintain a written record of its proceedings. (Ord. 1189, 6-3-1996; amd. Ord.
2480, 7-6-2021)
2-7-6: ADMINISTRATIVE AND OTHER CITY POLICIES:
All administrative, accounting, budgetary and procurement policies of the City
shall govern the Board in all of its operations. (Ord. 1189, 6-3-1996; amd.
Ord. 2480, 7-6-2021)
CHAPTER 8
ADA COMPLIANCE
SECTION:
2-8-1: Purpose
2-8-2: Definitions
2-8-3: Grievance Procedure
2-8-4: Appeals Procedure
2-8-5: Hearing Procedure
2-8-6: Ruling
2-8-7: Complainant's Right To Other Remedies
2-8-8: Record Of Action
2-8-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this Chapter is to establish a grievance procedure for the sole
purpose of providing a forum for individuals to file a complaint and receive
prompt and equitable resolution of the complaint which alleges that the City
has taken action which is prohibited under the rules governing
nondiscrimination on the basis of disability. (Ord. 1030, 9-28-1992)
2-8-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this Chapter, the following words as used herein shall be
construed to have the meanings herein ascribed thereto:
CITY: The City of West Des Moines, Iowa, conducting business at 4000 George M.
Mills Civic Parkway, P.O. Box 65320, West Des Moines, Iowa 50265-0320.
PETITIONER (Also Referred To As "Complainant"): Any person who is aggrieved by
a decision of the ADA Coordinator and files a written petition of appeal with
the Mayor and City Council. (Ord. 1293, 3-23-1998)
2-8-3: GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE:
All complaints regarding access or alleged discrimination based on disability
shall be submitted in writing to the City's ADA Coordinator for resolution.
Letters should be clearly addressed to: City of West Des Moines' ADA
Coordinator, c/o City Manager's Office; P.O. Box 65320; West Des Moines, Iowa
50265-0320.
The ADA Coordinator will provide a written response, in the form of a decision,
to the complainant within fifteen (15) working days. The decision will describe
any action to be taken by the City and an expected compliance date. A copy of
the complaint and the action will be maintained in the office of the ADA
Coordinator.
If the complaint cannot be resolved to the satisfaction of the complainant by
the designated local governmental official, it will be forwarded to the Mayor
and City Council. (Ord. 1293, 3-23-1998)
2-8-4: APPEALS PROCEDURE:
Any person aggrieved by any decision made by the ADA Coordinator regarding the
access or alleged discrimination to public facilities or services and programs
may appeal to the Mayor and City Council. The appeal shall be completed by
filing with the City Clerk within ten (10) days from the date of the written
decision by the ADA Coordinator, a notice of appeal requesting a hearing of the
appeal setting forth the complaint of discrimination.
Failure to file a timely written petition as required herein shall constitute a
waiver of the right to appeal and the decision of the ADA Coordinator shall
constitute a final determination.
Upon receipt of a timely filed written petition with the Mayor and City
Council, the City Clerk shall place the appeal on the next regular City Council
agenda. Written notification of the time, place and nature of the hearing shall
be given to the petitioner within five (5) working days after the written
petition is filed with the City Clerk.
The hearing shall be scheduled no later than twenty (20) working days after the
date on which the written petition was filed and may be extended for a
reasonable period by the Mayor, at his or her discretion, or upon written
request from the petitioner or the ADA Coordinator, for good cause shown. A
hearing notice shall be placed with a wide range of media. Request will be made
that notice shall appear in at least one of each of the following as is
available in the media market: newspaper, radio and closed caption television.
Upon written notification of the petitioner or any interested citizen, the City
Clerk will provide information in Braille or on audiocassettes for vision
impaired. Further, a sign language interpreter for the hearing impaired will be
available at the hearing, upon written notice made to the City Clerk seven (7)
working days in advance of the hearing.
Due to the failure of a petitioner to appear at a scheduled hearing of an
appeal, the Mayor and City Council may proceed with the hearing and make a
decision in the absence of the petitioner. (Ord. 1293, 3-23-1998)
2-8-5: HEARING PROCEDURE:
A.   The hearing shall be open to the public and shall be recorded,
transcripted and maintained. Opportunity shall be afforded all parties to
respond and present evidence and argument on all issues involved. Parties may
represent themselves or may be represented by legal counsel or other
individuals of their choosing.
B.   Documentary evidence may be received in the form of copies or excerpts, if
the original is not readily available. Upon request, parties shall be given an
opportunity to compare the copy with the original, if available.
C.   Witnesses at the hearing, or available persons whose testimony has been
submitted in written form, shall be subject to cross-examination by any party
as necessary for a full and true disclosure of the facts.
D.   The Mayor shall conduct the hearing and have the power to administer
oaths. The Mayor and City Council may cause subpoenas to be issued for such
witnesses and the production of such books and papers as either party may
designate. The subpoenas may be signed by the Mayor and City Council.
E.   No hearing shall be valid unless a majority of the Mayor and City Council
is present and no decision at the hearing shall be valid and binding unless
reached by a majority of those members of the Mayor and City Council present
and eligible to vote on the item. (Ord. 1293, 3-23-1998)
2-8-6: RULING:
The Mayor and City Council shall issue a written decision within thirty (30)
days of the hearing. The Mayor and City Council decision may affirm, modify or
reverse any decision of the ADA Coordinator. The decision shall include
findings of fact. Following the decision of the Mayor and City Council, all
parties shall be notified of the decision by personal service or by certified
mail, return receipt requested. (Ord. 1293, 3-23-1998)
2-8-7: COMPLAINANT'S RIGHT TO OTHER REMEDIES:
The complainant's right to prompt and equitable resolution of the complaint
shall not be impaired by the pursuit of other remedies, such as the filing of a
complaint with the United States Department of Justice or any other appropriate
Federal agency. Furthermore, the filing of a lawsuit in State or Federal
district court can occur at any time. (Ord. 1293, 3-23-1998)
2-8-8: RECORD OF ACTION:
A record of action taken on each request or complaint must be maintained as a
part of the records or minutes at each level of the grievance process and shall
be made a part of the official record held in the office of the ADA
Coordinator. (Ord. 1293, 3-23-1998)
CHAPTER 9
HUMAN RIGHTS COMMISSION
SECTION:
2-9-1: Purpose
2-9-2: Definitions
2-9-3: Commission Appointed
2-9-4: Responsibilities
2-9-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to establish a nonjudicial Human Rights
Commission consistent with the Iowa Civil Rights Act; to recognize the
authority of the Iowa Civil Rights Commission and foster use of its procedures
and programs; and to proclaim a public policy of nondiscrimination by securing
freedom from discriminatory practices, protecting individual dignity, ensuring
their full productive capacities, preserving the public safety, health, and
general welfare, and promoting the interests, rights, and privileges of
individual citizens within the City. (Ord. 1344, 12-14-1998)
2-9-2: DEFINITIONS:
When used in this chapter, unless the context otherwise requires:
COMMISSION: The West Des Moines Human Rights Commission created by this
chapter.
COMMISSIONER: A member of the commission.
COMMUNITY DIVERSITY APPRECIATION TEAM: A community-wide coalition organized for
the purpose of developing and implementing a community plan to appreciate
diversity and to discourage or eliminate discriminatory practices.
DISABILITY: The physical or mental condition of a person which constitutes a
substantial handicap, and the condition of a person with a positive human
immunodeficiency virus test result, a diagnosis of acquired immune deficiency
syndrome, a diagnosis of acquired immune deficiency syndrome-related complex,
or any other condition related to acquired immune deficiency syndrome.
EMPLOYEE: Any person employed by an employer.
EMPLOYER: The State of Iowa or any political subdivision, board, commission,
department, institution, or school district thereof, and every other person
employing employees within the State.
PERSON: One or more individuals, partnerships, associations, corporations,
legal representatives, trustees, receivers, and the State of Iowa and all
political subdivisions and agencies thereof.
STUDY CIRCLE: A small group of community members which meets regularly with a
trained facilitator to address critical public issues in an open, participatory
deliberation of personal experiences and perspectives.
YOUTH EX OFFICIO MEMBER: A non-voting member of the commission that resides in
West Des Moines and is a current student enrolled in 9th through 12th grade.
(Ord. 1344, 12-14-1998; amd. Ord. 2573, 7-17-2023)
2-9-3: COMMISSION APPOINTED:
A.   The City Human Rights Commission shall consist of seven (7) members and
one (1) non-voting youth ex officio member appointed by the Mayor with approval
of the City Council. Appointments shall take into consideration the various
racial, religious, cultural, and social groups and geographical areas within
the City insofar as may be practicable.
B.   The term of appointment for members shall be three (3) years from January
1 of the year in which the appointment is made, except that for the purpose of
maintaining an appropriate staggering of terms, the Mayor may prescribe a
shorter term for any appointment or reappointment. The term of appointment for
the non-voting youth ex officio member shall be one (1) year from July 1 of the
year in which the appointment is made. In the event that a vacancy occurs in
the membership of the commission by death, resignation or otherwise prior to
the normal expiration of the appointee's term, the Mayor, with the approval of
the City Council, shall appoint a person to serve out the remainder of the
unexpired term.
C.   Any member or all members of the commission may be removed from office at
any time by the Mayor with the approval of the City Council. The commission
shall annually elect one (1) of its voting members to be Chairperson.
D.   The members of the commission shall serve without salary, wages or other
compensation provided that they may receive reimbursement for actual and
necessary expenses incurred as allowed by the City Council pursuant to such
procedures and policies for the reimbursement of expenses as shall be
established by the City from time to time. (Ord. 2261, 11-13-2017; amd. Ord.
2573, 7-17-2023)
2-9-4: RESPONSIBILITIES:
The commission shall have the following responsibilities: (Ord. 1344, 12-14-
1998)
A.   Study the existence, character, causes, and extent of discrimination
within the City because of race, creed, color, sex, sexual orientation, gender
identity, national origin, religion, ancestry or disability, and to attempt the
elimination of such discrimination by education and understanding. (Ord. 2213,
4-17-2017)
B.   Issue such publications and reports of research as in the judgment of the
commission shall tend to promote good will among the various racial, religious,
and ethnic groups within the City and which shall tend to minimize or eliminate
discriminatory practices. The commission shall prepare and distribute a
brochure explaining its mission and purpose for dissemination within the City.
C.   Formulate and carry out a comprehensive educational program designed to
prevent and eliminate discriminatory practices, including the provision of
training and educational services to business, professional groups, and
educational agencies requesting workshops, seminars, or speakers to address
specific issues and concerns, as well as maintaining as a part of the
commission's formal educational program a series of public forums addressing
various matters about which there is the need to increase public awareness and
response.
D.   Encourage participation of citizens in study circles and small-group
deliberations to address discriminatory practices in a democratic and
collaborative way; and to advocate participation in community diversity
appreciation teams comprised of representatives from business, schools, law
enforcement, realtors, local government and other community representatives to
facilitate public forums and activities, to foster acceptance, to create
opportunity for all community members, to lessen tensions, or to improve
understanding within the community.
E.   Provide intake assistance for complaints from individuals who may be
victims of discriminatory practices and refer such complaints to the Iowa Civil
Rights Commission for investigation and adjudication.
F.   Recommend responsibilities of designated staff consistent with this
chapter. The staff shall be a person or persons designated by the City Manager.
G.   With approval of the City Council, to receive, administer, dispense and
account for any City funds that may be allocated, any donations that may be
voluntarily contributed to the commission, or any grants that may be awarded to
the commission for furthering the purposes of this chapter.
H.   Utilize volunteers to aid in the conduct of the commission's activities
and functions. (Ord. 1344, 12-14-1998)
I.   Make recommendations to the City Council for such further legislation
concerning discrimination because of race, creed, color, sex, sexual
orientation, gender identity, national origin, religion, ancestry or disability
as it may deem necessary and desirable. (Ord. 2213, 4-17-2017)
J.   Prepare and transmit to the Mayor and City Council from time to time, but
not less often than once each year, reports describing its activities and
functions. (Ord. 1344, 12-14-1998)
CHAPTER 10
CITY SHADE TREE COMMISSION
SECTION:
2-10-1: Purpose
2-10-2: Creation And Establishment
2-10-3: Responsibilities
2-10-4: Appeal Procedure
2-10-5: Hearing Procedure
2-10-6: Ruling
2-10-1: PURPOSE:
To recognize the value of trees on public and private properties within the
City, and to encourage the citizens of West Des Moines to become involved in
the planning, proper planting, and care of public and private trees within the
City. (Ord. 1397, 3-20-2000)
2-10-2: CREATION AND ESTABLISHMENT:
A.   There is hereby created and established a City Shade Tree Commission which
shall consist of six (6) members and one City Council representative appointed
by the Mayor and confirmed by the City Council. Representatives chosen by the
City Parks and Recreation Department and Public Works Department shall advise
this Commission.
B.   The term of appointment shall be three (3) years from January 1 of the
year in which the appointment is made, except that for the purpose of
maintaining an appropriate staggering of terms, the Mayor may prescribe a
shorter term for any appointment or reappointment. In the event that a vacancy
occurs in the membership of the Commission by death, resignation or otherwise
prior to the normal expiration of the appointee's term, the Mayor, with the
approval of the City Council, shall appoint a person to serve out the remainder
of the unexpired term.
C.   Any member or all members of the Commission may be removed from office at
any time by the Mayor with the approval of the City Council. No person shall
serve on the Commission for more than six (6) years.
D.   The members of the Commission shall serve without salary, wages or other
compensation, provided that they may receive reimbursement for actual and
necessary expenses incurred as allowed by the City Council pursuant to such
procedures and policies for the reimbursement of expenses as shall be
established by the City from time to time. (Ord. 1397, 3-20-2000)
2-10-3: RESPONSIBILITIES:
A.   It shall be the responsibility of the Commission to study, investigate,
counsel, and develop plans and recommendations for the planting, maintenance,
care, removal, and replacement of trees and shrubs on City rights of way,
alleys, and boulevards or parkways.
B.   The Commission, when requested by City Council, shall consider,
investigate, make findings, report, and propose recommendations on any special
matter of questions within the scope of its work.
C.   The Commission shall establish its own rules and regulations, and shall
keep a record of its proceedings. A majority of the Commission members shall be
a quorum for the transaction of business. (Ord. 1397, 3-20-2000)
2-10-4: APPEAL PROCEDURE:
A.   Any person aggrieved by any decision made by the City Forester regarding
the pruning, treatment or removal of public trees/shrubs or private trees/
shrubs may appeal to this Commission. The appeal shall be completed by filing
with the City Clerk within ten (10) days from the date of a written decision by
the City Forester, a notice of appeal requesting a hearing and setting forth
the reasons for the appeal.
B.   Failure to file a timely written petition as required herein shall
constitute a waiver of the right to appeal and the decision of the City
Forester shall constitute a final determination.
C.   Upon receipt of a timely filed written petition, a hearing shall be
scheduled within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt, giving public notice of
the hearing, and providing due notice to the parties in interest.
D.   An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed
from, unless the City Forester certifies to the Commission, after notice of
appeal shall have been filed with him/her, that by reason of the facts stated
in the petition, a stay would, in his/her opinion, cause imminent peril to life
or property. In such case, proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than by a
restraining order which may be granted by the Commission or by a court of
record on application on notice to the City Forester and on due cause shown.
(Ord. 1397, 3-20-2000)
2-10-5: HEARING PROCEDURE:
A.   The hearing shall be open to the public and shall be recorded. Opportunity
shall be afforded all parties to respond and present evidence and argument on
all issues involved. Parties may represent themselves or may be represented by
legal counsel or other individuals of their choosing.
B.   In the event of the failure of a petitioner to appear at a scheduled
hearing of an appeal, the Commission may proceed with the hearing and make a
decision in the absence of the petitioner.
C.   Documentary evidence may be received in the form of copies or excerpts, if
the original is not readily available. Upon request, parties shall be given an
opportunity to compare the copy with the original, if available.
D.   Witnesses at the hearing, or unavailable persons whose testimony has been
submitted in written form, shall be subject to cross-examination by any party
as necessary for a full and true disclosure of the facts.
E.   The chairperson shall conduct the hearing and have the power to administer
oaths. No hearing shall be valid unless a majority of the Commission is
present, and no decision at the hearing shall be valid and binding unless
reached by a majority of those Commission members present. (Ord. 1397, 3-20-
2000)
2-10-6: RULING:
The Commission shall issue a written decision within thirty (30) days of the
hearing. The decision may affirm, modify or reverse any decision of the City
Forester. The decision shall include findings of fact. All parties shall be
notified of the decision by personal service or by certified mail, return
receipt requested. (Ord. 1397, 3-20-2000)
CHAPTER 11
PUBLIC ARTS ADVISORY COMMISSION
SECTION:
2-11-1: Purpose
2-11-2: Commission Created; Appointment; Term
2-11-3: Organization; Compensation; Removal
2-11-4: Qualifications
2-11-5: Powers And Duties
2-11-6: Appeal
2-11-7: Administrative And Other City Policies
2-11-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to establish a public arts advisory commission,
hereinafter referred to as the "arts commission", to advise and assist the West
Des Moines city council in the promotion of public art within the city's
physical environment and public spaces. (Ord. 1904, 1-24-2011)
2-11-2: COMMISSION CREATED; APPOINTMENT; TERM:
The arts commission shall consist of seven (7) members, appointed by the mayor
with the approval of the city council. The appointment of each member of the
arts commission shall be for staggered terms of four (4) years. At the time of
the initial appointment, the mayor shall designate the length of term for each
member to provide for staggered terms. (Ord. 1904, 1-24-2011)
2-11-3: ORGANIZATION; COMPENSATION; REMOVAL:
A.   Upon appointment, the arts commission shall be called together by the
mayor and shall organize by electing one member as chair and one as secretary
from any of its members. The chair and secretary shall each serve one year
terms, but would be eligible for reelection.
B.   A majority of the membership of the commission shall constitute a quorum.
The director of parks and recreation, or designee, shall act as city staff to
the commission.
C.   All members of the arts commission shall serve as such without
compensation except for reimbursement of reasonable and necessary expenses,
subject to the approval of the city council.
D.   Any commission member may be removed from the arts commission by the
mayor, with the concurrence of the council. Any such removal shall be stated in
writing and filed with the city clerk's office and a copy thereof filed with
the chair of the commission. Continued absence of any member from meetings of
the arts commission shall, at the discretion of the mayor, render any such
member subject to immediate removal from appointment, with final approval by
the city council. Any member consistently absent from the arts commission
meetings, without sufficient excuse, shall be considered to have vacated his or
her appointment. In the event a vacancy arises, a new commission member shall
be appointed by the mayor with the approval of the city council, and the
commission member so appointed shall serve the balance of the unexpired term.
Any such vacancies shall be filled within sixty (60) days after the position
becomes vacant. (Ord. 1904, 1-24-2011)
2-11-4: QUALIFICATIONS:
Membership shall be open to a balanced, diverse mixture of citizen
representatives of the community at large who are recognized for their interest
or experience in connection with visual arts. Members shall reside in the city.
Members shall not hold any other elective or appointed office within the city
government. (Ord. 1904, 1-24-2011)
2-11-5: POWERS AND DUTIES:
The arts commission shall have the following powers and duties:
A.   Advise the city council on the acquisition, placement, and maintenance of
public art on property of the city, including public art in connection with a
capital improvement program project. No public art shall be installed or
existing work of public art removed from public spaces without a review by the
arts commission.
B.   Hold regular public meetings and maintain a written record of its
proceedings.
C.   Establish guidelines to carry out the public art program which shall
include methods of selecting artists or public art and for the placement of
public art. These guidelines, to be adopted by the city council, may enumerate
in detail the arts commission's roles and responsibilities in overseeing the
public art program.
D.   Make recommendations to the city council on the amount and allocation of
budgeted city funding for visual arts programs and services.
E.   Prepare an annual report to the city council summarizing its activities
during the preceding year and recommendations for the proposed activities for
the succeeding year.
F.   Adopt and present to the city council for its consideration and approval,
such rules and regulations to govern its internal organization and procedures
as it may deem necessary and which are not in conflict with federal, state, and
municipal laws.
G.   Consistent with city council policy, serve as advocates for public art
with the city council, as well as the private sector, local, regional, state,
and federal governments.
H.   Explore and advocate for new, noncity sources of funding for the visual
arts.
I.   Receive input from the city manager and city council regarding the
operation and maintenance expenses associated with a work of public art. If the
proposed work of art requires extraordinary operation or maintenance expenses,
the arts commission shall recommend another work of art or submit a statement
of overriding consideration why the public art should be utilized
notwithstanding its extraordinary operation or maintenance expense. (Ord. 1904,
1-24-2011)
2-11-6: APPEAL:
Any person aggrieved by a decision by the arts commission may file an appeal
with the city clerk within thirty (30) days of the date the action was taken or
decision was made. The city council shall have the ultimate authority regarding
these matters. (Ord. 1904, 1-24-2011)
2-11-7: ADMINISTRATIVE AND OTHER CITY POLICIES:
All administrative, accounting, budgetary, and procurement policies of the city
shall govern the arts commission in all of its operations. (Ord. 1904, 1-24-
2011)
CHAPTER 12
BICYCLE ADVISORY COMMISSION
SECTION:
2-12-1: Purpose
2-12-2: Membership; Appointment; Term
2-12-3: Organization; Compensation; Removal
2-12-4: Qualifications
2-12-5: Powers And Duties
2-12-6: Administrative And Other City Policies
2-12-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to establish a Bicycle Advisory Commission,
hereinafter referred to as the "commission", to advise and assist the West Des
Moines City Council in the development, maintenance and promotion of bicycle
facilities and programs within the City. (Ord. 1914, 4-18-2011)
2-12-2: MEMBERSHIP; APPOINTMENT; TERM:
The commission shall consist of seven (7) members, appointed by the Mayor with
the approval of the City Council. The appointment of each member of the
commission shall be for staggered terms of three (3) years. At the time of the
initial appointment, the Mayor shall designate the length of term for each
member to provide for staggered terms. (Ord. 2342, 2-4-2019)
2-12-3: ORGANIZATION; COMPENSATION; REMOVAL:
A.   Upon appointment, the commission shall be called together by the Mayor and
shall organize by electing one member as Chair and one as Secretary from any of
its members. The Chair and Secretary shall each serve one year terms, but would
be eligible for reelection.
B.   A majority of the membership of the commission shall constitute a quorum.
The Parks and Recreation Director or designee shall act as lead City staff to
the commission. The City Engineer, as well as other City department
representatives as needed, shall also serve the commission in an advisory
capacity.
C.   All members of the commission shall serve as such without compensation
except for reimbursement of reasonable and necessary expenses, subject to the
approval of the City Council.
D.   Any commission member may be removed from the commission by the Mayor,
with the concurrence of the Council. Any such removal shall be stated in
writing and filed with the City Clerk's Office and a copy thereof filed with
the Chair of the commission. Continued absence of any member from meetings of
the commission shall, at the discretion of the Mayor, render any such member
subject to immediate removal from appointment, with final approval by the City
Council. Any member consistently absent from the commission meetings, without
sufficient excuse, shall be considered to have vacated his or her appointment.
In the event a vacancy arises, a new commission member shall be appointed by
the Mayor with the approval of the City Council, and the commission member so
appointed shall serve the balance of the unexpired term. Any such vacancies
shall be filled within sixty (60) days after the position becomes vacant. (Ord.
1914, 4-18-2011)
2-12-4: QUALIFICATIONS:
Membership shall be open to a balanced, diverse mixture of citizen
representatives of the community at large who are recognized for their interest
or experience in connection with bicycling. Members shall reside in the City,
shall work for companies with their headquarters located in the City, or shall
work for one of the top ten (10) major employers ranked by the highest number
of employees working within the City. There shall be a minimum of six (6)
members of the commission who are residents of West Des Moines, and only one
nonresident of West Des Moines can be appointed in any given year. Members
shall not hold any other elective or appointed office within the City
government. (Ord. 1914, 4-18-2011)
2-12-5: POWERS AND DUTIES:
The commission shall have the following powers and duties:
A.   Make recommendations to the City Council on the planning and development
of the City's bicycle network and facilities.
B.   Advise the City Council on updating City plans, ordinances and programs
related to bicycling.
C.   Collaborate with other cities and agencies to facilitate a regional
bicycle network.
D.   Hold regular public meetings and maintain a written record of its
proceedings.
E.   Prepare an annual report to the City Council summarizing the commission's
activities during the preceding year and recommendations for the proposed
activities for the succeeding year.
F.   Adopt and present to the City Council for its consideration and approval,
such rules and regulations to govern its internal organization and procedures
as it may deem necessary and which are not in conflict with Federal, State, and
Municipal laws.
G.   Explore and advocate for new, noncity sources of funding for bicycling.
(Ord. 1914, 4-18-2011)
2-12-6: ADMINISTRATIVE AND OTHER CITY POLICIES:
All administrative, accounting, budgetary, and procurement policies of the City
shall govern the commission in all of its operations. (Ord. 1914, 4-18-2011)
CHAPTER 13
SISTER CITIES COMMISSION
SECTION:
2-13-1: Purpose
2-13-2: Board Created; Appointment; Term
2-13-3: Organization; Compensation; Removal
2-13-4: Qualifications
2-13-5: Powers And Duties
2-13-6: Administrative And Other City Policies
2-13-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to establish a Sister Cities Commission,
hereinafter referred to as the "commission", to advise and assist the West Des
Moines City Council in:
A.   Allowing community citizens and the people of similar cities in foreign
nations to acquire a mutual understanding of one another as individuals, as
members of their communities, as citizens of their countries and as members of
the family of nations.
B.   To promote educational and cultural exchanges between institutions and
citizens in our community and citizens of West Des Moines sister cities.
C.   To coordinate and facilitate communication between businesses in the Des
Moines metropolitan area wishing to make contact with businesses in sister
cities, and to coordinate business and trade inquiries from West Des Moines
sister cities directed to potential business partners.
D.   To assist individuals and educational institutions in the Des Moines
metropolitan area in acquiring and exchanging professional and technical skills
with individuals and institutions in sister cities.
E.   To develop awareness of the international sister cities program, its
goals, missions, and accomplishments, and to create a bridge of understanding
between different cultures of the world. (Ord. 1980, 3-18-2013)
2-13-2: BOARD CREATED; APPOINTMENT; TERM:
The commission shall consist of seven (7) members, appointed by the Mayor with
the approval of the City Council. The appointment of each member of the
commission shall be for staggered terms of three (3) years. At the time of the
initial appointment, the Mayor shall designate the length of term for each
member to provide for staggered terms. (Ord. 1980, 3-18-2013)
2-13-3: ORGANIZATION; COMPENSATION; REMOVAL:
A.   Upon appointment, the commission shall be called together by the Mayor and
shall organize by electing one member as Chair and one as Secretary from any of
its members. The Chair and Secretary shall each serve one year terms, but would
be eligible for reelection.
B.   A majority of the membership of the commission shall constitute a quorum.
The City Manager or his/her designee shall act as lead City staff to the
commission. The Director of Community and Economic Development, as well as
other City department representatives as needed, shall also serve the
commission in an advisory capacity.
C.   All members of the commission shall serve as such without compensation
except for reimbursement of reasonable and necessary expenses, subject to the
approval of the City Council.
D.   Any commission member may be removed from the commission by the Mayor,
with the concurrence of the Council. Any such removal shall be stated in
writing and filed in the City Clerk's Office and a copy thereof filed with the
Chair of the commission. Continued absence of any member from meetings of the
commission shall, at the discretion of the Mayor, render any such member
subject to immediate removal from appointment, with final approval by the City
Council. Any member consistently absent from the commission meetings, without
sufficient excuse, shall be considered to have vacated his or her appointment.
In the event a vacancy arises, a new commission member shall be appointed by
the Mayor with the approval of the City Council, and the commission member so
appointed shall serve the balance of the unexpired term. Any such vacancies
shall be filled within sixty (60) days after the position becomes vacant. (Ord.
1980, 3-18-2013)
2-13-4: QUALIFICATIONS:
Membership shall be open to a balanced, diverse mixture of citizen
representatives of the community at large who are recognized for their interest
or experience in economic or educational development, community growth or
international relations. Members shall reside in the City, or shall work for
companies with their headquarters located in the City, or shall work for one of
the top ten (10) major employers ranked by the highest number of employees
working within the metropolitan Des Moines area, or shall have relevant
expertise regarding a foreign nation that would assist the commission in the
performance of its duties. There shall be a minimum of five (5) members of the
commission who are residents of West Des Moines, and a maximum of two (2)
nonresidents of West Des Moines may be members of the commission in any given
year. Members shall not hold any other elective or appointed office within the
City government. (Ord. 2330, 11-12-2018)
2-13-5: POWERS AND DUTIES:
The commission shall have the following powers and duties:
A.   To further economic cooperation and cultural and educational exchanges on
the basis of mutual friendship and amity between similar worldwide
municipalities;
B.   To develop, compile, coordinate and exchange information with officials
and citizens of such cities;
C.   To plan and/or develop and carry out and/or facilitate mutual economic,
educational and cultural activities with officials and/or citizens of sister
cities, other cities outside the United States, or foreign visitors;
D.   To encourage and cultivate mutual understanding of the respective economic
situations and cultural development of sister cities;
E.   To recommend to the Mayor and West Des Moines City Council as to the
potential designation of official sister cities;
F.   Hold regular public meetings and maintain a written record of its
proceedings;
G.   Prepare an annual report to the Mayor and City Council summarizing the
commission's activities during the preceding fiscal year and recommendations
for the proposed activities for the succeeding fiscal year;
H.   Adopt and present to the City Council for its consideration and approval,
such rules and regulations to govern its internal organization and procedures
as it may deem necessary and which are not in conflict with Federal, State, and
Municipal laws. (Ord. 1980, 3-18-2013)
2-13-6: ADMINISTRATIVE AND OTHER CITY POLICIES:
All administrative, accounting, budgetary, and procurement policies of the City
shall govern the commission in all of its operations. (Ord. 1980, 3-18-2013)
TITLE 3
BUSINESS AND LICENSING
General Licensing Provisions   1
Beer And Liquor Control   2
Hotel And Motel Tax   3
Alarm Systems   4
Bankrupt, Going Out Of Business, Fire Sales (Rep. by Ord. 2009, 10-14-2013)   5
Massage Establishments And Technicians   6
Solicitors And Mobile Food Units   7
Pawnbrokers And Secondhand Dealers   8
House Movers   9
Cigarette Sales   10
Public Dance Halls (Rep. by Ord. 1649, 9-26-2005)   11
Animal Drawn Vehicles   12
After Hours Businesses   13
Sale Of Fireworks   14
CHAPTER 1
GENERAL LICENSING PROVISIONS
SECTION:
3-1-1: Licenses Required
3-1-2: Application for License or Permit
3-1-3: Persons Subject to License
3-1-4: Signatures Required
3-1-5: Investigations
3-1-6: Fees
3-1-7: Vehicle Tag
3-1-8: Bond or Insurance Prerequisite to Issuance
3-1-9: Termination of Licenses
3-1-10: Buildings and Premises
3-1-11: Change of Location
3-1-12: Nuisances
3-1-13: Posting of Licenses Required
3-1-14: Waiver of Fees for Disabled Veterans
3-1-15: Inspections; Analyses; Penalty for Interference
3-1-16: Revocation; Suspension; No Refund of Fee
3-1-17: Notice of Revocation; Request for Hearing; Suspension or Revocation
3-1-1: LICENSES REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in or carry on any business,
occupation or pursuit mentioned in this Title, or for which a license is
required by any other provision of this Code, within the City, without having
first obtained a license therefor, issued by the City Clerk. (1993 Code)
3-1-2: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE OR PERMIT:
Applications for all licenses and permits required by this Code shall be made
in writing to the City Clerk in the absence of provision to the contrary. Each
application shall state the name of the applicant, the permit or license
desired, the location to be used, if any, the period for which requested and
the fee to be paid; and each application shall contain such additional
information as may be needed for the proper guidance of the City officials in
the issuance of the permit or license applied for. (1993 Code)
3-1-3: PERSONS SUBJECT TO LICENSE:
Whenever in this Code a license is required for the maintenance, operation or
conduct of any business or establishment, or for doing business or engaging in
any activity or occupation, any person or corporation shall be subject to such
requirement if, by himself or through an agent, employee or partner, he holds
himself forth as being engaged in such business or occupation, or solicits
patronage therefor, actively or passively, or performs or attempts to perform
any part of such business or occupation within the City. (1993 Code)
3-1-4: SIGNATURES REQUIRED:
Each license or permit issued shall bear the signature of the City Clerk in the
absence of any provision to the contrary. (1993 Code)
3-1-5: INVESTIGATIONS:
Upon the receipt of an application for a license or permit where provisions of
this Code necessitate an inspection or investigation before the issuance of
such permit or license, the City Clerk shall refer such application to the
proper officer for making such investigation within forty eight (48) hours of
the time of such receipt. The officer charged with the duty of making the
investigation or inspection shall make a report thereon, favorable or
otherwise, within ten (10) days after receiving the application or a copy
thereof. The Health Officer shall make or cause to be made inspections in
regard to such licenses with respect to the care and handling of food, the
preventing of nuisances and the spread of disease, for the protection of the
public health; the Chief Building Inspector shall make or cause to be made any
such inspections relative to the construction of buildings or other structures.
All other investigations, except where otherwise provided, shall be made by the
Chiefs of the Police or Fire Departments, the Director of Public Works or by
some other officer designated by the City Manager. (1993 Code)
3-1-6: FEES:
In the absence of provision to the contrary, all fees and charges for licenses
or permits shall be paid in advance at the time application therefor is made to
the City Clerk, and no such fee shall be less than the annual amount provided
therefor, unless more than six (6) months of the current fiscal year has
expired in which case one-half (1/2) the annual fee shall be paid. (1993 Code)
3-1-7: VEHICLE TAG:
Whenever the number of vehicles or machines used is the basis for any license
fee, the City Clerk shall furnish each licensee with a tag, emblem or sticker
for each vehicle or machine covered by the license, and such tag, emblem or
sticker shall be posted in a permanent and conspicuous place on each such
vehicle or machine while it is in use. (1993 Code)
3-1-8: BOND OR INSURANCE PREREQUISITE TO ISSUANCE:
Wherever a bond or insurance is required by any provision of this Code as a
prerequisite to the issuance of any license, no license shall be issued until
all requirements relating thereto have been complied with and a satisfactory
certificate of indemnity, cash or insurance is filed with the City Clerk. (1993
Code)
3-1-9: TERMINATION OF LICENSES:
All annual licenses shall terminate on the last day of the fiscal year of the
City, where no provision to the contrary is made.
The City Clerk shall mail to all licensees of the City a statement of the time
of expiration of the license held by the licensee, if annual, three (3) weeks
prior to the date of such expiration; provided, however, that a failure to send
out such notice, or the failure of the licensee to receive it, shall not excuse
the licensee from a failure to obtain a new license, or a renewal thereof, nor
shall it be defense in an action for operation without a license. (1993 Code)
3-1-10: BUILDINGS AND PREMISES:
No license shall be issued for the conduct of any business, and no permit shall
be issued for any thing or act, if the premises and buildings to be used for
the purpose do not fully comply with all provisions of this Code.1. See Title
8, Chapter 2 of this Code.1 No such license or permit shall be issued for the
conduct of any business or performance of any act which would involve a
violation of the zoning regulations of the City.2. See Title 9 of this Code.2
(1993 Code)
3-1-11: CHANGE OF LOCATION:
The location of any licensed business or occupation, or of any permitted act,
may be changed, provided that ten (10) days' written notice thereof is given to
the City Clerk, in the absence of any provision to the contrary; provided
further, that all building, zoning and frontage consent requirements of this
Code are complied with. (1993 Code)
3-1-12: NUISANCES:
No business, whether licensed or unlicensed, shall be so conducted or operated
as to constitute a nuisance in fact.3. See Title 4, Chapter 5 of this Code.3
(1993 Code)
3-1-13: POSTING OF LICENSES REQUIRED:
It shall be the duty of any person conducting or operating any licensed
business within the City to keep the license therefor posted in a prominent
place, and at all times, upon the premises used for such business or upon such
vehicle or machine in the manner prescribed by the City Clerk. (1993 Code)
3-1-14: WAIVER OF FEES FOR DISABLED VETERANS:
The City Council shall have the power to waive the fees for vending licenses
required under any provisions of this Code, upon application for such license
by disabled veterans who are residents of the City. (1993 Code)
3-1-15: INSPECTIONS; ANALYSES; PENALTY FOR INTERFERENCE:
A.   Whenever inspections of the premises used for or in connection with the
operation of a licensed business or occupation are provided for or required by
law, or are reasonably necessary to secure compliance with any provision of
this Code, or to detect violations thereof, it shall be the duty of the
licensee, or the person in control of the premises to be inspected, to admit
thereto for the purpose of making the inspection any officer or employee of the
City who is authorized to make such inspection, at any reasonable hour that
admission is requested.
B.   Whenever an analyses of any commodity or material is reasonably necessary
to secure conformance with any provision of this Code, or to detect violations
thereof, it shall be the duty of the licensee whose business is governed by
such provision to give to any authorized officer or employee of the City
requesting the same sufficient samples of such material or commodity for such
analysis upon request.
C.   In addition to any other penalty which may be provided, the City Manager
may revoke the license of any proprietor of any business in the City who
refuses to permit any such officer or employee who is authorized to make such
inspection or take such sample to make such analysis or take an adequate sample
of the said commodity, or who interferes with such officer or employee while in
the performance of his duty in making such inspection. Provided, however, that
no license shall be revoked for such cause unless written demand is made upon
the licensee or person in control of the premises, in the name of the City,
stating that such inspection or sample is desired at the time it is sought to
make the inspection or obtain the sample. (1993 Code)
3-1-16: REVOCATION; SUSPENSION; NO REFUND OF FEE:
A.   Any license or permit may be revoked, or suspended for a limited time, by
the City Manager at any time during the duration of such license or permit for
any violation by the licensee or permittee or their agents of any provision of
this Code relating to such license or permit, including the failure to secure
the same or the intentional misrepresentation as to any material fact upon the
application therefor, or to the premises occupied or used, or of any State or
Federal law relating thereto; and such revocation or suspension may be in
addition to any monetary fine imposed.
B.   In case of revocation or suspension of any license, no part of any license
fee shall be refunded by the City. (1993 Code)
3-1-17: NOTICE OF REVOCATION; REQUEST FOR HEARING; SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION:
A.   Unless any provision of this Code provides to the contrary, no revocation
or suspension of any license or permit issued hereunder shall be deemed
effective until notice thereof has been served personally upon or mailed to the
named licensee or permittee at the address specified in the application for the
said license or permit.
B.   If, within five (5) days of the date of notice of the revocation or
suspension of any license or permit, the named licensee or permittee submits to
the City Clerk in writing a request for a hearing concerning such revocation or
suspension, said revocation or suspension shall be suspended until such time as
the City Council shall grant the licensee or permittee a special hearing.
C.   If the Council after such hearing affirms the revocation or suspension of
said license or permit, the same shall become immediately effective; if the
Council by a majority vote overrules the revocation or suspension, the same
shall be deemed null and void. (1993 Code)
CHAPTER 2
BEER AND LIQUOR CONTROL
SECTION:
3-2-1: Definitions
3-2-2: License Or Permit Required
3-2-3: Nature Of A License Or Permit And Transferability
3-2-4: Classes Of Licenses And Permits, Application, Investigation, Approval,
Fees, And Refunds
3-2-5: Investigation Procedure
3-2-6: Location Of Premises
3-2-7: Outdoor Service Areas
3-2-8: Expiration And Seasonal Permits
3-2-9: Civil Liability
3-2-10: Public Consumption Of Alcohol
3-2-11: Persons Under Legal Age; Penalty
3-2-12: Parental And School Notification For Persons Under Eighteen
3-2-13: Miscellaneous Prohibitions
3-2-14: Unlimited Servings
3-2-15: Advertisements For Alcoholic Liquor, Wine Or Beer
3-2-16: Persons Under The Legal Age (“Minors”) In Licensed, Permitted Or BYOB
Establishments
3-2-17: Criminal And Civil Penalties
3-2-18: Suspension Or Revocation Of License Or Permit; Civil Penalty
3-2-19: Hearing On Suspension Or Revocation
3-2-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the definitions provided in Iowa Code (2005)
section 123.3 are adopted and shall govern the meaning of language in this
chapter unless such term is specially defined elsewhere. In addition, the
following definitions are adopted for this chapter:
BAR (also known as DRINKING PLACE): Establishment primarily engaged in the
retail sale of alcoholic drinks, such as beer, ale, wine, and liquor for
consumption on the premises where the selling of food does not occur.
BAR/RESTAURANT: Establishment engaged in the retail sale of food and where the
sale of alcoholic drinks, such as beer, ale, wine, and liquor also occur. Food
and alcoholic drinks are primarily consumed on the premises where sold;
however, the take-out of food & drink may occur. For the purposes of
determining if Class 1 or Class 2, a Bar/Restaurant shall be categorized in
accordance with the Classification Flowchart in section
3-2-16 (E) of this title.
CLASS 1: Establishment whose primary business purpose is not the sale of
alcoholic beverages, wine or beer and can establish that on average over a
calendar year more than fifty percent (50%) of the establishment's gross sales
on the premises are from the sale of goods or services other than alcoholic
beverages, wine or beer.
CLASS 2: Establishment whose primary business purpose is the sale of alcoholic
beverages, wine or beer and is unable to establish that on average over a
calendar year more than fifty percent (50%) of the establishment's gross sales
on the premises are from the sale of goods or services other than alcoholic
beverages, wine or beer.
BRING YOUR OWN BEVERAGE ("BYOB") ESTABLISHMENT: Establishment that allows
guests/patrons to bring in and consume alcoholic beverages, wine or beer, but
does not engage in the retail sale of alcoholic beverages, wine or beer.
CHILDCARE CENTER: A facility that provides childcare or preschool services as
defined by Iowa Code (2005) section 237A.1(4), which is adopted by reference.
CHURCH: Any building or site whose primary use is public religious worship.
OUTDOOR SERVICE AREA: An area outside of but immediately adjacent to a building
housing a licensed or permitted premises, which area has been approved for use
for the sale, dispensing or consumption of alcoholic beverages or beer pursuant
to the provisions of this chapter, chapter 123, code of Iowa, as amended, and
chapter 150 of the Iowa administrative code, as amended. An outdoor service
area shall include any outdoor area where beer or liquor is to be sold, served,
carried or consumed by the public and shall be considered as part of the
licensed premises. The same federal and state laws and local ordinances which
apply to the licensed premises shall also apply to the outdoor service area.
PRESCHOOL: A facility as defined by Iowa Code (2005) section 237A.1(14) which
is adopted by reference.
SCHOOL: A public or private elementary, middle, junior or senior high school.
(Ord. 1648, 9-26-2005; amd. Ord. 2566, 5-15-2023)
3-2-2: LICENSE OR PERMIT REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, offer or keep for sale alcoholic
liquor, beer, or wine without first securing a liquor control license, beer
permit, or wine permit in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and
state law. Iowa Code (2005) sections 123.2, 123.122, or 123.171 are adopted
herein by reference. (Ord. 1648, 9-26-2005)
3-2-3: NATURE OF A LICENSE OR PERMIT AND TRANSFERABILITY:
The provisions of Iowa Code (2005) section 123.38 are hereby adopted by
reference. The council may, in its discretion, authorize a licensee or
permittee to transfer the license or permit from one location to another within
the city; provided, that the premises to which the transfer is to be made would
have been eligible for a license or permit in the first instance, and such
transfer will not result in the violation of any law or ordinance. An applicant
for such a transfer shall file with the application a transfer fee in the
amount of fifty dollars ($50.00). (Ord. 1648, 9-26-2005)
3-2-4: CLASSES OF LICENSES AND PERMITS, APPLICATION, INVESTIGATION, APPROVAL,
FEES, AND REFUNDS:
The following sections of the code of Iowa (2005) are adopted by reference and
shall govern the classes of permits and licenses under this chapter, and the
application, investigation, approval, and fees of such applications and fee
refunds: sections 123.30, 123.31, 123.32, 123.35, 123.36, 123.123, 123.124,
123.125, 123.127, 123.128, 123.129, 123.130, 123.131, 123.132, 123.134,
123.139, 123.140, 123.172, 123.173, 123.174, 123.175, 123.177, 123.178,
123.178A, 123.178B, 123.179. (Ord. 1648, 9-26-2005)
3-2-5: INVESTIGATION PROCEDURE:
A.   Upon submission of an original application for a liquor license or beer or
wine permit to the city clerk, each person listed in the original application,
or who possesses an ownership interest in the establishment, shall also obtain
and provide the city clerk with an officially sealed Iowa division of criminal
investigation ("DCI") personal background check at that person's own expense.
Each such person who is not a resident of the state of Iowa shall submit an
officially sealed criminal investigation personal background check issued from
that person's state of residence. The city clerk may forward a copy of the
original application documents to the police chief. The police chief may then
conduct an investigation as to the truth of the facts averred in the
application documents and transmit the results to the city clerk who will make
a recommendation to the city council for approval or disapproval of the
application. No approval of the license or permit shall occur until the city
clerk has received the results of any such investigation.
B.   Upon submission of an application for renewal of a current liquor license
or beer or wine permit to the city clerk, any person listed in the renewal
application, or who possesses an ownership interest in the establishment, who
did not previously obtain and provide the City Clerk with an officially sealed
DCI personal background check must do so at that person's own expense. Each
such person who is not a resident of the State of Iowa shall submit an
officially sealed criminal investigation personal background check issued from
that person's state of residence. The City Clerk may forward a copy of the
renewal application documents to the Police Chief. The Police Chief may then
review and comment on the renewal application to the City Clerk who will make a
recommendation to the City Council for approval or disapproval of the renewal
application except such liquor license(s) that is subject to automatic renewal
pursuant to Iowa Code Chapter 123. No approval for renewal of a license or
permit shall occur until the City Clerk has received the results of any such
investigation. (Ord. 1912, 3-7-2011; amd. Ord. 2559, 3-20-2023)
3-2-6: LOCATION OF PREMISES:
A licensed or permitted premises must be located where the applicable Zoning
Ordinance allows such land use. In addition, a licensed or permitted premises
must be in compliance with applicable Fire and Building Codes. No such licensed
or permitted premises in which a Class A, B, C, or D liquor control license or
a Class B beer permit or Class C native wine permit shall be located within two
hundred feet (200') of a church, school, preschool, or childcare center
building if said premises is a "bar" or "bar/restaurant class 2" as defined in
this chapter. In determining the distance set out in this section, the
measurements shall be taken on a direct line from the nearest point of a
building wherein the said licensed premises is located to the nearest part of a
church, school, preschool, or childcare center building. Any licensed or
permitted premises that held such license and permit prior to September 26,
2005, and which does not conform to the provisions of this section, or any
licensed or permitted premises that is rendered out of compliance with this
section by the establishment of a church, school, preschool or childcare center
within two hundred feet (200') of such preexisting bar or bar/restaurant class
2, shall be permitted to continue at such location, providing the applicant for
such license or permit is qualified and complies with the provisions of chapter
123 of the Code of Iowa, as amended, and there is no discontinuance of such use
of the premises for a period of six (6) months. (Ord. 1648, 9-26-2005; amd.
Ord. 2586, 5-15-2023)
3-2-7: OUTDOOR SERVICE AREAS:
A.   Intent: To provide standards for the approval of requests for outdoor
service areas in conjunction with a bar/restaurant or bar in which the serving
and consumption of alcoholic beverages is permitted.
B.   Application: A licensee or permittee pursuant to this chapter may apply to
the City Clerk's Office for local permission to serve the type of alcoholic
liquor, beer or wine permitted by the license or permit in an outdoor service
area. Such local approval is subject to the approval of the Iowa Alcoholic
Beverages Division. The licensee or permittee must demonstrate through its
application and support materials the following:
1   The outdoor area is contiguous with the licensed establishment.
2   The boundary of an outdoor area shall be delineated by a barrier that is a
minimum of 3.5 feet in height and discourages the free movement of people
between the outdoor service area and non- licensed areas. An alternative method
which clearly delineates the outdoor service area from the non-licensed areas
may be approved by the City for large-use areas including, but not limited to,
golf courses, outdoor sports complexes, outdoor recreational areas.
3   If the outdoor service area is to be used for more than a two (2) week
period, the delineating barrier shall be permanent in nature and be constructed
of a material that is complementary to the architecture of the building housing
the use and shall be in character with the surrounding areas, unless otherwise
approved by the City. All open designed barriers shall include a top rail with
lower intermediate rails spaced so that a twelve inch (12") sphere cannot pass
through. Densely planted shrubbery may be permitted as a delineating barrier if
it is determined that the intent is met.
4   The outdoor service area must provide emergency exits sized and spaced in
accordance with the Fire and Building Codes. Such exits shall be clearly
identified and provide unobstructed areas to a public way.
5   The outdoor service area shall not reduce the width of any existing or
proposed pedestrian pathway to be less than four feet (4') of clear pathway or
minimum of six feet (6') of clear pathway when adjacent to head in parking.
6   The outdoor areas and any operable storefront such as windows, garage
doors, other facade openings not used primarily for entry, that are located
within three hundred feet (300') of the nearest Residentially zoned or
comprehensively planned property, shall be out of the line of sight of the
residential property and oriented to direct light and sound away from the
residential property. The outdoor areas and facade openings shall not be used
or open after ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. Distance to residential is measured from
the closest point of the outdoor area's barrier or facade opening to the
nearest residential property line, shall be out of the line of sight of the
residential property and oriented to direct light and sound away from the
residential property.
C.   Construction, Expansion Or Redevelopment: Construction, expansion or
redevelopment of an outdoor service area shall be subject to all other
applicable zoning, development, building, and fire safety provisions of this
Code. Prior to such construction, expansion or redevelopment of an outdoor
service area, the applicant must submit the following materials to the City
Clerk's Office for review by applicable City departments and approval:
1   A diagram which illustrates the outdoor area, in relation to the adjacent
licensed establishment and other adjacent buildings.
2   A dimensioned plan of the proposed outdoor area that identifies all
exitways.
3   An illustration of the barrier which identifies materials, dimensions and
the method of anchoring. (Ord. 1648, 9-26-2005; amd. Ord. 2364, 6-3-2019; Ord.
2410, 4-6-2020; Ord. 2586, 5-15-2023)
3-2-8: EXPIRATION AND SEASONAL PERMITS:
Iowa Code (2005) section 123.34 is adopted herein by reference. (Ord. 1648, 9-
26-2005)
3-2-9: CIVIL LIABILITY:
Iowa Code (2005) section 123.92 is adopted herein by reference. (Ord. 1648, 9-
26-2005)
3-2-10: PUBLIC CONSUMPTION OF ALCOHOL:
It shall be unlawful for any person to consume or drink any alcoholic beverages
on any public street, highway, sidewalk, alley, or public walkway in the City,
except as expressly authorized by the City Council or specifically allowed
elsewhere in this Code. A violation of this section is a simple misdemeanor and
shall be punished as provided in Iowa Code (2009) 903.1.1(a), maximum sentence
for misdemeanants, which is adopted by reference. (Ord. 1841, 9-21-2009)
3-2-11: PERSONS UNDER LEGAL AGE; PENALTY:
Iowa Code (2005) section 123.47, subsections (1), (2), and (3) are adopted
herein by reference. (Ord. 1648, 9-26-2005)
3-2-12: PARENTAL AND SCHOOL NOTIFICATION FOR PERSONS UNDER EIGHTEEN:
Iowa Code (2005) section 123.47B is adopted herein by reference. (Ord. 1648, 9-
26-2005)
3-2-13: MISCELLANEOUS PROHIBITIONS:
A.   A person shall not sell, dispense, or give to an intoxicated person, or
one simulating intoxication, any alcoholic liquor, wine, or beer.
1.   A person other than a person required to hold a license or permit under
Iowa Code chapter 123 who dispenses or gives an alcoholic beverage, wine, or
beer in violation of this subsection is not civilly liable to an injured person
or the estate of a person for injuries inflicted on that person as a result of
intoxication by the consumer of the alcoholic beverage, wine, or beer.
2.   The Iowa general assembly declares that this subsection shall be
interpreted so that the holding of Clark v. Mincks, 364 N.W.2d. 226 (Iowa 1985)
is abrogated in favor of prior judicial interpretation finding the consumption
of alcoholic beverages, wine, or beer rather than the serving of alcoholic
beverages, wine, or beer as the proximate cause of injury inflicted upon
another by an intoxicated person.
B.   A person or club holding a liquor control license or retail wine or beer
permit under Iowa Code chapter 123, and the person's or club's agents or
employees, shall not do any of the following:
1.   Knowingly permit any gambling, except in accordance with Iowa Code chapter
99B, 99D, 99F, or 99G, or knowingly permit solicitation for immoral purposes,
or immoral or disorderly conduct on the premises covered by the license or
permit.
2.   Sell or dispense any alcoholic beverage or beer on the premises covered by
the license or permit, or permit its consumption thereon between the hours of
two o'clock (2:00) A.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M. on a weekday, and between
the hours of two o'clock (2:00) A.M. on Sunday and six o'clock (6:00) A.M. on
the following Monday, however, a holder of a liquor control license or retail
beer permit granted the privilege of selling alcoholic liquor or beer on Sunday
may sell or dispense alcoholic liquor or beer between the hours of eight
o'clock (8:00) A.M. on Sunday and two o'clock (2:00) A.M. on the following
Monday.
3.   Sell alcoholic beverages, wine, or beer to any person on credit, except
with a bona fide credit card. This provision does not apply to sales by a club
to its members, to sales by a hotel or motel to bona fide registered guests,
nor to retail sales by the managing entity of a convention center, civic
center, or events center.
4.   Keep on premises covered by a liquor control license any alcoholic liquor
in any container except the original package purchased from the Iowa alcohol
beverages division, and except mixed drinks or cocktails mixed on the premises
for immediate consumption. This prohibition does not apply to common carriers
holding a class D liquor control license.
5.   Reuse for packaging alcoholic liquor or wine any container or receptacle
used originally for packaging alcoholic liquor or wine; or adulterate, by the
addition of any substance, the contents or remaining contents of an original
package of an alcoholic liquor or wine; or knowingly possess any original
package which has been so reused or adulterated.
6.   Employ a person under eighteen (18) years of age in the sale or serving of
alcoholic liquor, wine, or beer for consumption on the premises where sold.
7.   Allow any person other than the licensee, permittee, or employees of the
licensee or permittee, to use or keep on the licensed premises any alcoholic
liquor in any bottle or other container which is designed for the transporting
of such beverages, except as permitted in Iowa Code section 123.95. This
subsection does not apply to the lodging quarters of a class B liquor control
licensee or wine or beer permittee, or to common carriers holding a class D
liquor control license.
8.   Sell, give, or otherwise supply any alcoholic beverage, wine, or beer to
any person, knowing or failing to exercise reasonable care to ascertain whether
the person is under legal age, or permit any person, knowing or failing to
exercise reasonable care to ascertain whether the person is under legal age, to
consume any alcoholic beverage, wine, or beer.
9.   In the case of a retail beer or wine permittee, knowingly allow the mixing
or adding of alcohol or any alcoholic beverage to beer, wine, or any other
beverage in or about the permittee's place of business.
10.   Knowingly permit or engage in any criminal activity on the premises
covered by the license or permit.
11.   Sell or dispense any wine on the premises covered by the permit or permit
the consumption on the premises between the hours of two o'clock (2:00) A.M.
and six o'clock (6:00) A.M. on a weekday, and between the hours of two o'clock
(2:00) A.M. on Sunday and six o'clock (6:00) A.M. on the following Monday,
however, a holder of a wine permit authorized to sell wine on Sunday may sell
or dispense wine between the hours of eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. on Sunday and
two o'clock (2:00) A.M. on the following Monday.
C.   A person under legal age shall not misrepresent the person's age for the
purpose of purchasing or attempting to purchase any alcoholic beverage, wine,
or beer from any licensee or permittee. If any person under legal age
misrepresents the person's age, and the licensee or permittee establishes that
the licensee or permittee made reasonable inquiry to determine whether the
prospective purchaser was over legal age, the licensee or permittee is not
guilty of selling alcoholic liquor, wine, or beer to a person under legal age.
D.   No privilege of selling alcoholic liquor, wine, or beer on Sunday as
provided in Iowa Code sections 123.36, subsection 6, and 123.134, subsection 5,
shall be granted to a club or other organization which places restrictions on
admission or membership in the club or organization on the basis of sex, race,
religion, or national origin. However, the privilege may be granted to a club
or organization which places restrictions on membership on the basis of sex, if
the club or organization has an auxiliary organization open to persons of the
other sex. (Ord. 1726, 1-29-2007)
3-2-14: UNLIMITED SERVINGS:
A person or club holding a liquor control license or beer or wine permit, and
the person's or club's agents or employees shall be permitted to sell, offer to
sell, dispense or serve for on premises consumption an unlimited number of
servings of alcoholic liquor, wine or beer for a fixed price only between the
hours of eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. and three o'clock (3:00) P.M. on Sunday, and
between the hours of six o'clock (6:00) A.M. and three o'clock (3:00) P.M.
Monday through Saturday.
Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit a holder of a liquor
control license or wine or beer permit, or its employees or agents, from: a)
including servings or drinks of alcoholic liquor, wine or beer as part of a
hotel or motel package which includes overnight accommodations; b) providing a
fixed price for an unlimited or indefinite amount of drinks for a "private
event", which is defined as an event restricted to a particular group or
persons, provided that the licensee or permittee shall provide means or method
by which to identify persons participating in the private event, such as the
use of a separate room or a means to identify such participants; or c) as
otherwise permitted for a special event by the city council (provided, however,
that no permit holder shall be allowed to hold such a special event under this
provision c more than twice per year). (Ord. 1648, 9-26-2005; amd. Ord. 2620,
7-1-2024)
3-2-15: ADVERTISEMENTS FOR ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR, WINE OR BEER:
Iowa Code (2005) section 123.51 is adopted herein by reference. (Ord. 1648, 9-
26-2005)
3-2-16: PERSONS UNDER THE LEGAL AGE ("MINORS") IN LICENSED, PERMITTED OR BYOB
ESTABLISHMENTS:
A.   In determining whether an establishment is a Bar/Restaurant Class 1 or a
Bar/Restaurant class 2, a licensee may be required to provide a verified
statement from an accountant which establishes whether on the average over a
calendar year more or less than fifty percent (50%) of the gross sales on the
premises are from the sale of goods or services other than alcoholic beverages,
wine or beer.
1   Income from fees charged to gain entry to or remain on the premises, such
as cover charges, as well as drink mixes, or any part of an alcoholic beverage
as defined by state code are to be counted as alcohol sales.
2   Entertainment fees shall not be considered nonalcoholic sales.
B.   Minors prohibited in Bars or BYOB Establishments.
1   It is unlawful for a person under twenty-one (21) years of age to enter or
be in a Bar or a BYOB Establishment, as defined by this Chapter, or for any
person employed with respect to such premises to knowingly permit or fail to
take reasonable measures to prevent the entry onto such premises of any and all
persons under twenty-one (21) years of age.
2   It shall be the duty of the licensee or permittee and of the person(s)
managing such premises to cause to be posted and maintained at all times an
easily readable notice stating that persons under twenty-one (21) years of age
are prohibited from entering the premises.
3   The provisions of subsection 1 shall not apply when:
a   The underage person is an employee of the license/permit holder or
performing a contracted service with respect to said premises and is on the
premises during their scheduled work hours.
b   The underage person is working in conjunction with a law enforcement agency
in performance of their official duties.
c   The licensee or permittee applies for and is granted an Exception
certificate from the chief of police which shall allow the holder to provide
entertainment to persons under legal age, as provided in this Chapter.
C.   Minors prohibited in Bar/Restaurants.
1   Bar/Restaurant Class 1: Persons under twenty-one (21) years of age shall
not be prohibited from entering or remaining on the premises at any time.
2   Bar/Restaurant Class 2: It is unlawful for a person under twenty-one (21)
years of age to enter or remain after nine o’clock (9:00) p.m. in a bar/
restaurant class 2, as defined by this Chapter, unless:
a   The underage person is an employee of the license/permit holder or
performing a contracted service with respect to said premises and is on the
premises during their scheduled work hours.
b   The underage person is accompanied by a parent, guardian, spouse or
domestic partner who is of legal age for the purchase of alcoholic beverages.
c   The underage person is working in conjunction with a law enforcement agency
in performance of their official duties.
d   The licensee or permittee applies for an qualifies for an exception
certificate as defined in this Chapter.
3   It shall be the duty of the licensee or permittee of a Bar/Restaurant Class
2 and of the person(s) managing such premises to cause to be posted and
maintained at all times an easily readable notice stating that persons under
twenty-one (21) years of age are prohibited from entering or remaining on the
premises after 9:00 p.m.
D.   Exception Certificates:
1   General Exception Certificate. A general exception certificate may be
granted by the chief of police or designee, which shall allow persons under
twenty-one (21) years of age to enter or remain in the establishment after 9:00
p.m., as follows:
a   Submission of a verified statement from a certified public accountant which
establishes that more than fifty percent (50%) of the licensee's or permittee's
gross sales are from the sale of goods or services other than for the sale of
alcoholic beverages, wine or beer which shall not include income from cover
charges, entertainment fees, drink mixes or nonalcoholic beverages.
b   In addition to the statement from a certified public accountant, proof of
qualification may include state and federal tax records for the previous year,
articles of incorporation, and receipts from specific vendors which itemize
goods purchased related to the applicant's primary business purpose from the
previous six months as requested by the chief of police or designee.
c   Minors shall only remain on the premises during such time that the evidence
shows the establishment serves more than 50% gross sales from goods/services
other than alcohol.
2   Underage Event Exception Certificate. An exception certificate for an
underage event may be granted by the chief of police or designee which shall
allow the establishment to provide entertainment to person under legal age, as
follows:
a   A licensee, permittee, or BYOB establishment may qualify for a special
event exception when an application is submitted to the chief of police or
designee at least seven business days prior to the proposed event. Such
application shall include the name and addressed of the licensed, permitted, or
BYOB establishment, the type of event for which an exception is applied, the
proposed date for the event and the time of the event.
b   All alcoholic liquor, wine or beer is removed or stored so that it is not
available for sale or consumption during the period of the special event.
c   No alcoholic liquor, wine or beer shall be allowed to be brought in by any
patron or customer regardless of their age.
d   A special event exception shall be valid through the date of the special
event.
3   Entertainment Venue Exception Certificate. An exception certificate may be
granted by the chief of police or designee for an entertainment venue, which
shall allow minors aged sixteen (16) through twenty (20) to enter and remain in
the designated venue until midnight (12:00 a.m.) and minors under age sixteen
(16) to enter and remain in the designated venue until nine o’clock (9:00)
p.m., as follows:
a   The licensee or permittee is a venue defined as booking at least one
hundred (100) live performances per year, with a dedicated and install stage,
and permanently installed professional lighting and sound systems.
b   The designated venue shall demand photo identification at the door and
shall identify, by use of a wristband or other equally effective means, those
persons twenty-one (21) years of age and older who may legally purchase
alcoholic beverages.
c   The venue shall be responsible for the security of the venue and any other
areas such as parking lots under its ownership or control.
d   The venue shall make its best effort to provide the police chief or
designee with a schedule of events at least thirty (30) days in advance. When
an event is booked after submission of the monthly schedule, the venue shall
notify the chief of police or designee by telephone or electronic mail at least
ten (10) days before the event, in which case the event shall be submitted as
part of the next monthly schedule.
e   The venue must demonstrate to the police department that at least fifty
percent (50%) of its gross receipts are derived from items other than alcohol
sales, which may include, but are not limited to, income from cover charges,
ticket sales, entertainment fees, articles of apparel, food, drink mixes or
non-alcoholic beverages.
4   Special Outdoor Event Exception Certificate. An exception for an outdoor
event may be granted by the chief of police or designee for special events not
exceeding five days in duration where a street closure has been authorized by
the city council and a temporary liquor control license has been issued. Such
exception shall be limited to the outdoor areas covered by the temporary liquor
control license. The chief of police or designee, in determining whether to
approve or deny the exception certificate, has discretion including but not
limited to past experience with policing the same event, staffing, and any
special difficulties in policing the proposed event.
5   No certificate will be issued if any of the following are true:
a   A preponderance of the evidence shows that the licensee, permittee, or any
employee or agent thereof sold, gave or delivered alcohol to any patron under
the legal drinking age more than once within the last year.
b   Where operation under the exception certificate would be detrimental to the
safety, health and welfare of the residents of the city.
6   Exception certificates may be revoked by the chief of police or designee
for good cause, which includes, but is not limited to, the following:
a   Where a preponderance of the evidence shows that the licensee, permittee,
or any employees or agents thereof, sold, gave, or delivered alcohol to any
patron under the legal drinking age more than once within the last year; or
b   Where the establishment has failed to cooperate fully with the police
department;
c   Where the establishment has failed to comply with the terms of the
exception certificate; or
d   Where continued operation under the exception certificate would be
detrimental to the safety, health and welfare of the residents of the city.
e   Length of Revocation.
(1)   A first revocation of an exception certificate shall last for six (6)
months.
(2)   A second or subsequent revocation within five (5) years shall last for
one (1) year.
E.   Classification Flowchart:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5dd626f68508237cd281a645678e92f34786b23f/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3383.png]
 
(Ord. 2566, 5-15-2023)
3-2-17: CRIMINAL AND CIVIL PENALTIES:
A.   Any person who violates any of the provisions of section
3-2-13 of this chapter, or Iowa Code section 123.49, except subsection
3-2-13B8 of this chapter, shall be guilty of a simple misdemeanor. A person who
violates subsection
3-2-13B8 of this chapter, or Iowa Code section 123.49, commits a simple
misdemeanor punishable as a scheduled violation under Iowa Code section 805.8C,
subsection 2.
B.   The conviction of any liquor control licensee, wine permittee, or beer
permittee for a violation of any of the provisions of section
3-2-13 of this chapter, or Iowa Code section 123.49, subject to subsection C of
this section, is grounds for the suspension or revocation of the license or
permit by the Iowa alcohol beverages division or the local authority. However,
if any liquor control licensee is convicted of any violation of subsection
3-2-13B1, B4 or B5 of this chapter, or any wine or beer permittee is convicted
of a violation of subsection
3-2-13B1 or B5 of this chapter, the liquor control license, wine permit, or
beer permit shall be revoked and shall immediately be surrendered by the
holder, and the bond, if any, of the license or permit holder shall be
forfeited to the Iowa alcohol beverages division.
C.   If any licensee, wine permittee, beer permittee, or employee of a licensee
or permittee is convicted or found in violation of subsection
3-2-13B8 of this chapter, or Iowa Code section 123.49, the administrator or
local authority shall, in addition to criminal penalties fixed for violations
by this section, assess a civil penalty as follows:
1   A first violation shall subject the licensee or permittee to a civil
penalty in the amount of five hundred dollars ($500.00). Failure to pay the
civil penalty as ordered under Iowa Code section 123.39 shall result in
automatic suspension of the license or permit for a period of fourteen (14)
days.
2   A second violation within two (2) years shall subject the licensee or
permittee to a thirty (30) day suspension and a civil penalty in the amount of
one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00).
3   A third violation within three (3) years shall subject the licensee or
permittee to a sixty (60) day suspension and a civil penalty in the amount of
one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00).
4   A fourth violation within three (3) years shall result in revocation of the
license or permit.
5   For purposes of this subsection:
a   The date of any violation shall be used in determining the period between
violations.
b   Suspension shall be limited to the specific license or permit for the
premises found in violation.
c   Notwithstanding Iowa Code section 123.40, revocation shall be limited to
the specific license or permit found in violation and shall not disqualify a
licensee or permittee from holding a license or permit at a separate location.
D.   In addition to any other penalties imposed under this section or chapter,
the Iowa alcohol beverages division shall assess a civil penalty up to the
amount of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) upon a class E liquor control
licensee when the class E liquor license is revoked for a violation of Iowa
Code section 123.59. Failure to pay the civil penalty as required under this
subsection shall result in forfeiture of the bond to the Iowa alcohol beverages
division. (Ord. 1725, 1-29-2007)
3-2-18: SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF LICENSE OR PERMIT; CIVIL PENALTY:
Iowa Code (2005) section 123.39 is adopted herein by reference. (Ord. 1648, 9-
26-2005)
3-2-19: HEARING ON SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION:
The city council shall conduct a hearing on each suspension or revocation in
the following manner:
A.   Notice: The permit holder, and the surety on his bond, shall be served
with written notice containing a copy of the complaint against him, the
ordinance provisions or state statutes allegedly violated and the date, time
and place for hearing on the matter.
B.   Hearing: The council shall conduct a hearing, at which both the permit
holder and complainants shall be present, the purpose of which is to determine
the truth of the facts alleged in the complaint. Should the permit holder or
his authorized representative fail to appear without good cause, the council
may proceed to a determination of the complaint.
C.   Rights Of Permit Holder: The permit holder shall have the right to be
represented by counsel, to testify and present witnesses in his own behalf and
to cross examine adverse witnesses.
D.   Evidence: The council shall admit only reliable and substantial evidence
into the revocation or suspension proceeding and shall give all admitted
evidence its natural probative value.
E.   Criminal Charges: In the event that criminal charges have been brought
against the permit holder on the same facts and circumstances as are the basis
for the revocation or suspension complaint, the council shall await a judgment
in the criminal action before conducting the revocation or temporary suspension
hearing required by this section.
F.   Record And Determination: The council shall make and record findings of
fact and conclusions of law, and shall revoke or suspend a permit under this
section only when, upon review of the entire record, it finds clear and
convincing evidence of a substantial violation of this chapter or state law.
(Ord. 1648, 9-26-2005)
CHAPTER 3
HOTEL AND MOTEL TAX
SECTION:
3-3-1: Imposition; Rate
3-3-2: Definitions
3-3-3: Payment Of Tax
3-3-4: Effective Date
3-3-1: IMPOSITION; RATE:
A tax is hereby imposed upon the gross receipts from the renting of any and all
rooms, apartments or sleeping quarters in any hotel or motel as defined herein,
at the rate of seven percent (7%) of such gross receipts derived from the
renting of a room, apartment or sleeping quarter while rented by the same
person for a period of not more than thirty (30) consecutive days. (1985 Code
§1-5.01; amd. 1993 Code; Ord. 2560, 4-3-2023)
3-3-2: DEFINITIONS:
Unless otherwise expressly stated or the context clearly indicates a different
intention, the following terms shall, for the purpose of this chapter, have the
meanings in this section:
HOTEL AND MOTEL: Any hotel, motel, inn, or any place where sleeping
accommodations are furnished to transient guests for rent, whether with or
without meals, except the rental of sleeping rooms in dormitories and in
memorial unions of universities and colleges.
RENTAL, LONG TERM: Lodging within a dwelling or dwelling unit available for use
or used to accommodate guests paying a fee or other compensation for a period
of more than thirty (30) consecutive days.
RENTAL, SHORT TERM: Lodging within a dwelling or dwelling unit available for
use or is used to accommodate guests paying a fee or other compensation for a
period of thirty (30) consecutive days or less.
RENTING AND RENT: Any kind of direct or indirect charge for any room, apartment
or sleeping quarters in a hotel, motel or short term or "long term rental" as
defined herein. (Ord. 2136, 1-26-2016; amd. Ord. 2560, 4-3-2023)
3-3-3: PAYMENT OF TAX:
Such tax shall be paid as is provided in senate file 336, acts of the 67th
general assembly, second session1. IC §422B.8 et seq. 1 , and the proceeds of
such tax shall be used for the purposes stated in section 2, subsection 4 of
said act:
(1985 Code §1-5.04)
 
Notes
     The revenue derived from any hotel and motel tax authorized by this Act
  shall be used as follows:
  A. Each county or city which levies the tax shall spend at least fifty
  percent of the revenues derived therefrom for the acquisition of sites for,
  or constructing, improving, enlarging, equipping, repairing, operating, or
  maintaining of recreation, convention, cultural, or entertainment facilities
  including but not limited to memorial buildings, halls and monuments, civic
  center convention buildings, auditoriums, coliseums, and parking areas or
  facilities located at those recreation, convention, cultural, or
  entertainment facilities or the payment of principal and interest, when due,
  on bonds or other evidence of indebtedness issued by the county or city for
1 those recreation, convention, cultural, or entertainment facilities; or for
  the promotion and encouragement of tourist and convention business in the
  city or county and surrounding areas.
  The remaining revenues may be spent by the city or county which levies the
  tax for any city or county operations authorized by law as a proper purpose
  for the expenditure within statutory limitations of city or county revenues
  derived from ad valorem taxes.
  Any city or county which levies and collects the hotel and motel tax
  authorized by this Act may pledge an amount not to exceed thirty percent of
  the revenues derived therefrom to the payment of bonds which the city or
  county may issue for one or more of the purposes set forth in paragraph (A)
  of this subsection. Any revenue pledged to the payment of such bonds may be
  credited to the spending requirement of paragraph (A) of this subsection.
3-3-4: EFFECTIVE DATE:
The tax herein established shall be imposed after voter approved, and such tax
shall then be imposed upon the first day of the calendar quarter following such
election; i.e., January 1, April 1, July 1 or September 1, as to which
effective notice of such imposition can be given. (1985 Code §1-5.03; amd. 1993
Code)
CHAPTER 4
ALARM SYSTEMS
SECTION:
3-4-1: Purpose
3-4-2: Definitions
3-4-3: Licensing, Installation And Penalties
3-4-4: Initial Registration Fee, Monthly Monitoring Fee
3-4-5: Issuance Of Permit
3-4-6: Service Available
3-4-7: Response
3-4-8: False Alarms
3-4-9: Liability Of City Limited
3-4-10: Audible Alarms; Time Out
3-4-11: Suspension Or Revocation And False Alarm Fees
3-4-12: Appeal Procedure
3-4-13: Administrative Procedures
3-4-1: PURPOSE:
It is the purpose of this chapter to protect the general public traveling the
streets and the West Des Moines police, fire and emergency medical services
departments and their personnel from dangers created in response to erroneous,
false and mistaken response calls from security, fire or other specialized
electronic or mechanical alarms or alarm systems.
It is the further purpose of this chapter to provide penalties for the
operation of faulty alarm systems and penalties for the unnecessary expenditure
of resources due to erroneous, false and mistaken response calls. (Ord. 1569,
2-2-2004)
3-4-2: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and terms as used in this chapter shall be deemed to mean
and be construed as follows, unless the context specifically indicates
otherwise:
ALARM COMPANY: Any person, firm, partnership, corporation or association who
owns, manages, conducts or carries on the business of installing, servicing,
maintaining, repairing, monitoring, replacing, moving or removing, or leasing
in any building or other property within the jurisdiction of the city any known
alarm system as defined herein.
BUILDING: Includes any house, dwelling, apartment, business, structure or place
within the city.
BURGLAR ALARM SYSTEM: Any assembly of equipment, mechanical or electrical and
including all forms of audible exterior and interior alarms arranged to signal
the occurrence of an illegal entry, holdup, and/or medical or other activity,
requiring urgent attention, and to which police officers or emergency medical
technicians are expected to respond.
CHIEF: Refers to the police, EMS and/or fire chief (or their designee) of the
city.
CITY: Refers to the West Des Moines police, fire and emergency medical service
departments and their authorized personnel and may be one or more of such
departments where appropriate.
FALSE ALARM: Any alarm that is activated on purpose or by accident or by system
malfunction when there is no intrusion, fire, smoke or medical emergency. The
city shall have full authority and discretion to determine those situations
and/or circumstances that may constitute a false alarm but which are not
defined below. However, such determinations shall be subject to the appeal
process set forth in section
4-4-9 of this code.
A.   Error Or Mistake: Any action by any person, firm, corporation or other
entity owning or operating any dwelling, building, or place, or any action by
an agent or employee of said person, firm, corporation, or any other entity
which results in the activation of an alarm system when no emergency exists.
B.   Malfunction: Any unintentional activation of any alarm system caused by a
mechanical malfunction, flaw in the design, installation, or maintenance of the
system. This shall not include any activation caused by extraordinary violent
conditions of nature such as tornadoes, floods and earthquakes.
C.   Intentional Misuse: Any intentional activation of an alarm system when no
burglary, holdup, fire or other emergency exists or is in progress.
D.   Canceled Alarms: Alarms that are canceled by the alarm companies before
the responding police officer arrives at the scene will not be classified as a
false alarm. However, with the exception of fire alarms, if an alarm has been
canceled three (3) times during the same thirty (30) day period (month), the
fourth alarm will constitute a false alarm.
FIRE ALARM SYSTEM: Any assembly of equipment, mechanical or electrical and
including all forms of audible exterior and interior alarms arranged to signal
the occurrence of a fire emergency requiring urgent attention, and to which
firefighters and emergency medical technicians are expected to respond.
OWNER: Includes any person, firm, corporation, entity or leaseholder causing
any alarm system to be installed in any "building" as defined herein. The
owner, or designee on behalf of the owner, shall make application for a permit
as required by this chapter.
PERMIT (OR REGISTRATION): Authorization granted by the chief to an owner to
operate an alarm system.
RECURRING ALARM: Three (3) or more alarms in a twenty four (24) hour period.
TAGGED OR TAGGING: The method by which the fire department identifies the
condition of the alarm system and/or the system's compliance with all relevant
city codes.
VERIFY: An attempt to avoid an unnecessary burglar alarm dispatch request by
the monitoring company, or its representative, by attempting to contact the
burglar alarm site and/or burglar alarm user by telephone or other electronic
means to determine whether an alarm signal is valid before requesting law
enforcement dispatch. As a minimum, a second call shall be made to a different
number if the first verification call attempt fails to reach a burglar alarm
user who can properly identify themselves to determine whether an alarm signal
is valid before requesting law enforcement dispatch. Audio verification, video
verification, or cross zoning shall be permitted in addition to the first and
second verification call.
WESTCOM: A joint emergency dispatch center providing services for the cities of
Clive, Urbandale and West Des Moines. (Ord. 1569, 2-2-2004)
3-4-3: LICENSING, INSTALLATION AND PENALTIES:
A.   Alarm Company Licensing: Any alarm company operating within the
jurisdiction of the city shall be licensed with the city clerk or the clerk's
designee prior to conducting business within the jurisdiction of the city.
1.   Alarm installation licenses shall be issued annually on a calendar year
basis. All applications for licenses shall be filed with the city clerk on
forms provided for that purpose. The annual license fee shall be one hundred
dollars ($100.00), except, however, if an application is filed on or after July
1 of a calendar year the license fee shall be fifty dollars ($50.00). A license
shall thereafter be renewed annually on January 1. Combined license fees for
companies installing both security and fire alarms will be assessed an
additional twenty five dollars ($25.00). License fees shall be payable to the
city clerk prior to the issuance of the annual license.
2.   An alarm company also providing monitoring of alarms shall have a separate
monitoring license. Additional annual license fees are twenty five dollars
($25.00).
3.   The completed alarm company license application, license fee and if
applicable, the names and copies of the certifications of those individuals
that will be stamping plans as required by subsection B2 of this section shall
be included with the license application.
B.   Installation Of Fire Alarm Systems:
1.   Commercial Buildings: Installations, servicing, maintaining, repairing,
replacing, moving or removing, or causing to be sold, or leasing of fire alarm
systems in any commercial building within the city shall be installed in
accordance with the most recently adopted edition of NFPA 72 and the most
recently adopted West Des Moines fire code.
2.   Commercial Fire Alarm Plans: All commercial fire alarm plans submitted for
review shall be designed and stamped by an individual holding at a minimum one
or more certifications or designations as required and adopted in the most
recent addition to the West Des Moines fire code.
3.   Testing Commercial Systems: All new commercial fire alarm systems shall be
tested according to the most recently adopted edition of NFPA 72 prior to the
final inspection by the fire department. The fire department will observe a
cursory test during the final inspection. Copies of inspections regarding
maintenance, revision and repair of commercial fire alarm systems that have
been tagged "RED", indicating noncompliance with this code, shall be provided
to the fire department within five (5) working days after completion of such
maintenance, revision or repair.
4.   Monitoring Systems: Fire alarm systems shall be monitored by an
Underwriters Laboratory (UL) or Factory Mutual (FM) listed monitoring company.
Documents associated with such listings or certifications shall be submitted
for approval by the fire department. Tagging of fire alarm systems shall be by
tags approved by the fire department.
5.   Licensing Conditions: No system shall be designed to signal an alarm
directly to the Westcom dispatch center. No system shall be placed in service
until the owner has applied for or obtained a permit from the city clerk's
office. As a condition of licensing all alarm companies are required to use a
UL or FM listed or an approved listed system for monitoring all fire alarm
systems. The fire chief shall have the right to review the type of installation
of any fire alarm system being installed. Such review shall not constitute an
approval of the type, installation or method of signalization being utilized or
employed.
6.   Initiating Device Installed: Beginning March 1, 2002, all new fire alarm
systems shall be installed with each initiating device on a separate point or
zone.
7.   Control Panel: Only one fire alarm control panel is allowed per building.
8.   Registration Form And Fee: Alarm companies are responsible for providing
the owner with an alarm permit registration form provided by the city clerk's
office. They are also responsible for collecting the ten dollar ($10.00)
registration fee and submitting the fee and fully completed registration form
to the city clerk's office within three (3) working days of receipt. Licensed
alarm companies/installers shall provide a quarterly list of actively monitored
customers and addresses indicating where service is provided in the city of
West Des Moines.
9.   Notification Of Changes: All alarm companies shall, upon notice from a
customer of cessation of existing service, notify the city clerk's office in
the next required quarterly list. The quarterly cessation of existing service
list must be clearly differentiated from the quarterly actively monitored
customers lists.
C.   Installation Of Burglar Alarm Systems:
1.   Beginning March 1, 2002, only security control panels that comply with the
ANSI/SIA CP-01 standard and dual technology or PIR-01 compliant motion sensors
shall be installed.
2.   Multiple tenants of a building should each have their own separate
security system. A separate permit must be obtained for each alarm system
within a multiple tenant building indicating the alarm holder's unique address,
including suite or unit number. Businesses, condominium owners, apartment
leasers and other occupied spaces which are located inside of a building such
as a mall, strip mall or business suite which may be secured at a centralized
entrance will be responsible for their own burglar alarm and for making
arrangements on how public safety personnel will gain access to their
respective property when responding to the alarm. A property manager will not
be held liable for tenant/occupant's false alarms. Monitoring devices active at
shared entrances to, or shared areas within, a multiple tenant building must be
registered to a single responsible party or the property manager/owner.
3.   Alarm companies are responsible for providing the owner with an alarm
permit registration form provided by the city clerk's office. They are also
responsible for collecting the ten dollar ($10.00) registration fee and
submitting the fee and fully completed registration form to the city clerk's
office within three (3) working days of receipt. Licensed alarm companies/
installers shall provide a quarterly list of actively monitored customers and
addresses indicating where service is provided in the city of West Des Moines.
4.   All alarm companies shall, upon notice from a customer of cessation of
existing service, notify the city clerk's office in the next required quarterly
list. The quarterly cessation of existing service list must be clearly
differentiated from the quarterly actively monitored customers lists.
5.   All new multizone burglar alarms activated after July 1, 2003, shall have
a "swinger suppression" function. "Swinger suppression" is a feature that is
activated at the panel which can deactivate a bad sensor or zone alarm.
D.   Penalties:
1.   Penalties For Violation Of Licenses: Unless otherwise provided by section
1-4-1 of this code and/or Iowa Code section 364.22, violation of any rule or
regulation as provided in this chapter shall result in a fine of up to two
hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for the first violation. A second violation
within one year of license issuance shall result in a fine of up to five
hundred dollars ($500.00). A third violation within one year of license
issuance shall result in a fine of up to seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00)
and revocation of the license for the remainder of the license period. An alarm
company operating without a license shall be subject to the penalty of two
hundred fifty dollars ($250.00). Any outstanding fines shall be paid by the
license applicant before a new license is issued. (Ord. 1569, 2-2-2004)
3-4-4: INITIAL REGISTRATION FEE, MONTHLY MONITORING FEE:
A.   All residential or business property locations in which an alarm system
has been or will be installed shall be registered with the city. The
registration fee shall be ten dollars ($10.00). The owner or occupant of the
residential or business property shall complete the alarm permit registration,
using the form provided by the city clerk for that purpose, and pay the
registration fee to the alarm company representative, who shall be responsible
for the collection of the alarm permit registration and registration fee for
alarms the company sells and/or services. The alarm company representative
shall forward the alarm permit registration and registration fee within three
(3) working days of receipt to the city clerk's office.
B.   Any owner causing any alarm system to be installed in any building shall,
prior to allowing such alarm system to be placed in service, provide to the
alarm company, on the form provided by the city clerk's office, a completed
alarm permit registration form that lists the name, address and telephone
number of one person responsible for the alarm system. This person shall be
designated as the primary responsible person, and another person, if available
shall be designated as having secondary responsibility. Each responsible person
shall have access to the building and the alarm system and shall have the
knowledge and ability to make the system secure in the case of activation. The
owner shall also provide on the alarm permit registration form, the name,
address and telephone number of any person, firm, or corporation responsible
for servicing and monitoring (where applicable) the alarm system. It shall
remain the responsibility of the owner of any alarm system to ensure that the
names and telephone numbers of the responsible persons maintained by the city
clerk are current.
C.   Each newly installed burglar alarm system shall be placed in a test mode
for seven (7) days prior to the monitoring and reporting of alarms to the city.
This test period provides an opportunity for the new users to become thoroughly
familiar with the operation of the system without risking a response to a false
alarm. Deviations from this requirement shall require the approval of the
chief.
D.   Alarm companies will be required to collect a monthly monitoring fee from
customers whose alarms they monitor. Monitoring fees will be one dollar ($1.00)
per month for residential dwellings and two dollars ($2.00) per month for
commercial establishments. The monitoring fees shall be remitted by the alarm
company to the city clerk's office on a quarterly basis with a listing of the
names and addresses of all actively monitored customers as well as the
locations and owner information of any newly installed, unmonitored alarms.
E.   Alarm companies shall submit to the city clerk's office, on a quarterly
basis, a listing of the names and addresses of all actively monitored customers
as well as the locations and owners of any newly installed, unmonitored alarms.
This quarterly list must clearly differentiate between alarm companies'
actively monitored customers and newly installed unmonitored alarms. (Ord.
1569, 2-2-2004)
3-4-5: ISSUANCE OF PERMIT:
A.   The city clerk, upon receipt of the required alarm permit registration and
registration fee for all security or residential fire alarms, shall issue or
renew a permit.
B.   The city clerk, upon receipt of the required alarm permit registration and
registration fee for all commercial fire alarms, and upon written approval of
the chief, shall issue or renew a permit. (Ord. 1569, 2-2-2004)
3-4-6: SERVICE AVAILABLE:
Every alarm company or agent doing business within the city shall have an alarm
agent, supplies and equipment so located as to be able to respond within twenty
four (24) hours to a request for repair, service, or adjustment on any alarm
system that such business or agent sold, maintains, or inspects. (Ord. 1569, 2-
2-2004)
3-4-7: RESPONSE:
A.   Prior to notification to the city that a burglar alarm has occurred, the
monitoring company shall attempt to "verify" (as defined under section
3-4-2, "Definitions", of this chapter) every such alarm. When the city is aware
that any alarm system is activated, the police, EMS or fire department shall
notify the person or persons listed pursuant to subsection
3-4-4B of this chapter. Said person(s) shall immediately go to the location of
the alarm to meet the police, EMS and/or fire personnel at a safe distance from
the facility. The person(s) shall, under the direction of the applicable
department, secure the building and reset the alarm. In the case of a fire
alarm, the alarm shall not be reset until the fire department has had the
opportunity to fully investigate the location within any building and determine
the reason for the alarm signal. The owner in control of the premises may enter
into an agreement with an alarm company to make the responses required herein.
In the event of a recurring burglar alarm, the decision to respond will be
within the discretion of the police supervisor.
B.   Any person responsible for any alarm system who refuses or fails to
respond when notified of the alarm's activation shall be subject to the
penalties provided in subsection
3-4-11A5 of this chapter. (Ord. 1569, 2-2-2004)
3-4-8: FALSE ALARMS:
A.   No alarm system shall be activated by error, mistake, intentional misuse,
or malfunction in any dwelling, building or place when no emergency exists.
B.   No person shall knowingly or intentionally activate any alarm system when
no emergency situation exists. Any person who knowingly or intentionally
activates any false alarm shall be guilty of a municipal infraction pursuant to
sections 1-4-1 and 1-4-2 of this code.
C.   No person shall knowingly or intentionally test any actively monitored
alarm system without first notifying and receiving approval from the Westcom
dispatch center. (Ord. 1569, 2-2-2004)
3-4-9: LIABILITY OF CITY LIMITED:
A.   Upon receipt of an alarm signal by Westcom or the city, the city shall act
upon the signal with reasonable dispatch. The city shall not be liable for:
1.   Any defects in the operation of any alarm devices or signal lines system;
2.   Any failure or neglect to respond upon receipt of notification from an
alarm system;
3.   The failure or neglect of any person or entity regarding the installation
and/or operation of the alarm system; and
4.   The transmission of alarm signals or the delaying of such signals. (Ord.
1569, 2-2-2004)
3-4-10: AUDIBLE ALARMS; TIME OUT:
Any exterior audible burglar alarm system installed on or within any building,
structure, residence or place of business shall be designed and installed to
"time out" or cease omitting its signaling activities within fifteen (15)
minutes of activation. However, commercial or residential fire alarm systems
shall not be designed or installed to "time out" or cease emitting
annunciation. (Ord. 1569, 2-2-2004)
3-4-11: SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION AND FALSE ALARM FEES:
A.   Grounds For Suspension Or Revocation And Applicable Service Charges And
Penalties:
1.   Grounds For Suspension Or Revocation: The following shall constitute
grounds for suspension and/or revocation of a license or permit:
a.   The violation of any of the provisions of this chapter; or
b.   When an alarm system is knowingly activated by a licensee, permit holder,
owner or an employee or agent of said parties, in a situation where no
burglary, fire, intrusion, robbery, medical emergency or other emergency is
actually in progress; or
c.   When the licensee, permit holder, owner or an employee or agent of said
parties has knowingly made any false, misleading or fraudulent statement of
material fact in the application for a license, permit, or in any report or
record required to be filed with the city; or
d.   When an alarm system actuates excessive false alarms and thereby
constitutes a public nuisance. Three (3) false alarms, as defined herein, in
the period of one calendar year shall be deemed excessive. New alarm
installations shall be granted a thirty (30) day break-in and adjustment period
before being subject to the provisions of this subsection; or
e.   When the person or persons listed pursuant to subsection
3-4-4B of this chapter refuse or fail to respond promptly, or are frequently
unavailable for notification of alarm activation pursuant to section
3-4-7 of this chapter; or
f.   Failure to pay applicable fees.
2.   Service Charge: A service charge shall be made for each false alarm beyond
the number permitted in this section. The service charge for each false alarm
shall be:
 
Number Of False Alarms In One Calendar Year Service Charge
3 or less                                   $ 0.00
4                                           50.00
5                                           100.00
6 or more                                   100.00 for each occurrence
 
3.   Revocation Or No Permit Service Charge: If a permit is under revocation or
if no permit has been issued, the service charge shall be twice the service
charge established above.
4.   Nonregistered Alarms: If an alarm has not been registered pursuant to the
requirements of this code, the owner or responsible party will have thirty (30)
days following notification by the city to register the alarm. Failure of the
owner or responsible party to register within thirty (30) days of notification
will subject the owner or responsible party to a two hundred fifty dollar
($250.00) penalty.
5.   Failure To Respond Penalty: After being personally notified, failure of an
alarm owner or responsible party to respond to the location of an activated
alarm following a request from the police, fire or EMS department to do so will
subject the owner or responsible party to a two hundred fifty dollar ($250.00)
penalty.
B.   Procedure: The city clerk, in the case of suspension, shall serve the
permit holder with a written order of suspension stating the reasons for the
suspension. The order shall be effective immediately if personally served or
five (5) working days after the order of suspension has been deposited by
ordinary mail postage prepaid in the U.S. mail to the address provided on the
permit. When an order becomes effective, the permit holder shall immediately
discontinue the use of any alarm system requiring a permit under this chapter
and cease all operations conducted under the authority of any permit, unless
such alarm is mandated or required as a matter of federal, state, or local law
and cannot be disconnected. If the owner or operator of such alarm system
continues to maintain the use of the alarm, for each "false alarm" as defined
in section
3-4-2 of this chapter, the owner or operator of the alarm shall be charged a
fee per response according to the provisions contained in subsections A2 and A3
of this section.
C.   Revocation: A suspension shall become a revocation fifteen (15) days after
the order of suspension becomes effective unless the permit holder files an
appeal of the order of suspension in the manner as set forth in section
4-4-9 of this code. When an appeal is filed, the order of suspension shall be
stayed pending final determination of the appeal. The suspension shall become a
revocation if the decision of the hearing officer upholds the suspension unless
the decision is ultimately overruled by an appellate body pursuant to section
4-4-9 of this code. The suspension shall be dissolved immediately if the
decision of the hearing officer reverses the suspension. If the hearing officer
and/or the appellate body concur in the suspension and at least fifteen (15)
days have elapsed since notification to the permit holder of the suspension,
the suspension shall be deemed a revocation of the permit.
D.   Surrender Of Permit: If any permit is revoked pursuant to this chapter,
the permit holder shall immediately surrender the permit to the city clerk.
E.   Reinstatement Of Alarm Privilege: Whenever an alarm system which is under
suspension, revocation or renewal has been repaired or modified so as to be
capable of functioning properly, or as appropriate, additional user training
has been provided and the chief has received from a properly licensed alarm
company written certification to such effect, the chief may recommend to the
city clerk reinstatement of the alarm permit, and the permit shall then be
issued or reinstated. (Ord. 1569, 2-2-2004)
3-4-12: APPEAL PROCEDURE:
Any permit holder aggrieved by the decision of the city shall have the right of
appeal regarding a denial of an application for a permit or renewal thereof, or
for any penalty assessed or any order of suspension issued. The appeal will
follow the process set forth in section
4-4-9 of this code. (Ord. 1569, 2-2-2004)
3-4-13: ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURES:
The city finance director or his/her designee shall have the authority to
promulgate rules, procedures and forms in order to carry out the terms of this
chapter. Said director or designee shall have the authority to interpret the
terms of this chapter in order to effectuate the intent of this chapter. (Ord.
1569, 2-2-2004; amd. Ord. 1878, 8-23-2010, eff. 9-17-2010)
CHAPTER 5
BANKRUPT, GOING OUT OF BUSINESS, FIRE SALES
(Rep. by Ord. 2009, 10-14-2013)
CHAPTER 6
MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENTS AND TECHNICIANS
SECTION:
3-6-1: Purpose
3-6-2: Definitions
3-6-3: License Required
3-6-4: License Fee
3-6-5: License Application
3-6-6: Granting Or Denial Of License
3-6-7: Conditions Governing Issuance
3-6-8: License Period
3-6-9: Exemptions
3-6-10: Grounds For Denial, Suspension, Or Revocation Of License
3-6-11: Notice; Appeal
3-6-12: Restrictions And Regulations
3-6-13: Unlawful Acts; Penalty
3-6-1: PURPOSE:
State of Iowa licensed massage therapists and businesses offering massage
therapy services perform an important service in addressing the health and
well-being of West Des Moines residents. Unfortunately, there are businesses
that advertise they provide massage therapy and/or other therapeutic services,
but they engage in various illegal activities, which may include prostitution
and/or human trafficking. It is not the intention of this chapter to discourage
legitimate, licensed massage therapists or massage therapy businesses from
providing their services within West Des Moines. The purpose of this chapter is
to identify and address businesses that engage in the practice of massage
therapy without valid licenses and/or are involved in illegal activities, which
may include prostitution and/or human trafficking. Businesses providing massage
therapy, but also conducting various types of illegal activity, are harmful to
the health, safety, and welfare of the City and negatively impact the massage
therapy profession. The implementation of this chapter will better enable the
City to proactively screen, monitor, and remove businesses that engage in
illegal activity. (Ord. 2268, 12-27-2017)
3-6-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases have the
meanings herein set forth, unless it is apparent from the context that a
different meaning is intended.
APPLICANT: Means any person, firm, corporation, or other legal entity applying
for a license to operate a massage therapy business.
EMPLOYEE: Means any person who performs any service on the premises of a
massage therapy business on a full time, part time, or contract basis,
regardless of whether the person is considered an employee, independent
contractor, agent, apprentice, trainee, or otherwise.
LICENSE: Means permission granted by competent authority to exercise a certain
privilege that, without such authorization, would constitute an illegal act.
The document that confers permission to a person engaged in massage therapy
shall be issued by the State of Iowa Board of Massage Therapy. Massage therapy
business licenses shall be issued by the City of West Des Moines.
MASSAGE PATRON: Means any person who receives, or pays to receive, a massage or
massage services from a massage therapist for value.
MASSAGE THERAPIST: Means a person licensed to practice the health care service
of the healing art of massage therapy under Iowa Code chapter 152C.
MASSAGE THERAPY: Means performance for compensation of massage, myotherapy,
massotherapy, bodywork, bodywork therapy, or therapeutic massage, including
hydrotherapy, superficial hot and cold applications, vibration and topical
applications, or other therapy which involves manipulation of the muscle and
connective tissue of the body, excluding osseous tissue, to treat the muscle
tonus system for the purpose of enhancing health, muscle relaxation, increasing
range of motion, reducing stress, relieving pain, or improving circulation.
MASSAGE THERAPY BUSINESS: Means any business or place of business, including
mobile, temporary, and transient businesses, wherein, or on whose behalf, any
of the treatments, techniques, or methods of treatment referred to as "massage
therapy" are administered, practiced, used, given, or applied.
PREMISES: Means the real property, or portion thereof, upon which the massage
therapy business is located, including but not limited to, the buildings,
grounds, private walkways, parking lots, and parking garages through which the
business has access, control, or ownership.
REFLEXOLOGY: Means manipulation of the soft tissues of the human body which is
restricted to the hands, feet, or ears, performed by persons who do not hold
themselves out to be massage therapists or to be performing massage therapy.
SPECIFIED CRIMINAL ACTIVITY: Means any of the following specified crimes:
A.   Any crime identified in Iowa Code chapter 709 - Sexual Abuse (2017), Iowa
Code chapter 710 - Kidnapping and Related Offenses (2017), or Iowa Code chapter
710A - Human Trafficking (2017);
B.   Prostitution, leasing premises for prostitution, pimping, or pandering, as
those crimes have been identified in Iowa Code chapter 725 (2017), or any crime
identified in Iowa Code chapter 726 - Protection of the Family and Dependent
Persons (2017);
C.   Any crime identified in Iowa Code chapter 728 - Obscenity (2017);
D.   Any crime that requires sex offender registration pursuant to Iowa Code
chapter 692A - Sex Offender Registry (2017);
E.   Any crime involving serious injury or death to another person, robbery,
burglary, felony theft, fraud, forgery, identity theft, aggravated harassment,
or stalking; and
F.   Any criminal offense in another jurisdiction that, had the predicate act
(s) been committed in Iowa, would have constituted any of the foregoing
offenses. (Ord. 2268, 12-27-2017)
3-6-3: LICENSE REQUIRED:
No person, firm, corporation, or other legal entity shall operate a massage
therapy business, either exclusively or in connection with another business,
without first obtaining a license from the City as provided in this chapter.
Licenses shall be subject to renewal on an annual basis. A separate license
shall be obtained for each business or place of business. The licensee shall
display the license in a prominent place in the licensed business at all times.
(Ord. 2268, 12-27-2017)
3-6-4: LICENSE FEE:
At the time of submittal of a massage therapy business license application, the
applicant shall pay to the City Clerk the applicable license fee. The City
Council shall establish the amount of the license fee for initial and renewal
licenses by resolution. Any licenses surrendered, suspended, or revoked prior
to the date of expiration shall not be entitled to a refund of any portion of
the license fee. (Ord. 2268, 12-27-2017)
3-6-5: LICENSE APPLICATION:
Application for a massage therapy business license shall be submitted on forms
provided by the City Clerk's Office. The application shall include the
following information:
A.   The address of the massage therapy business property and documentation
establishing the applicant's interest in the premises on which the business
will be located, which shall be in the form of a lease, deed, or other document
that establishes the applicant's interest in the property.
B.   The full legal name, date of birth, and residential address of each
applicant, owner, manager, employee, agent, contractor, or other person who is
or will be present on the premises to perform massage therapy, regardless of
the legal relationship between the licensee and the persons performing massage
therapy services.
C.   Dates and locations of other places the applicant has owned or operated as
a massage therapy business.
D.   Reserved by Ord. 2450, 11-2-2020 for future use.
E.   Reserved by Ord. 2450, 11-2-2020 for future use.
F.   A statement as to whether each applicant, owner, manager, employee, agent,
contractor, or other person providing massage therapy on behalf of the massage
therapy business has ever been convicted of specified criminal activity as
defined in this chapter. The statement shall include details regarding the type
of each charge and the date and location of the incident(s) in question.
G.   A statement as to whether the applicant, owner, manager, employee, agent,
contractor, or other person providing massage therapy on behalf of the massage
therapy business has had any license to perform massage therapy denied,
revoked, or suspended in any city, county, state, or any country and the reason
for the denial, revocation, or suspension.
H.   A copy of a state government issued photo identification of each new
applicant, owner, manager, employee, agent, contractor, or other person present
on the premises who has or will provide massage therapy, or other proof that
the person is legally authorized to work in the United States.
I.   Provide proof of current State of Iowa massage therapy licenses for all
persons present on the premises who have or will provide massage therapy.
J.   All applicants and licensees shall be required to promptly notify the City
during the application review or the term of the license if there are any new
owners, managers, employees, agents, contractors, or other persons who are or
will be present on the premises to perform massage therapy and shall
immediately submit updated information to the City pursuant to this chapter,
including but not limited to a personal background check, photographing,
fingerprinting, and proof of identification, as well as any amendments to the
statements provided as required by this chapter. (Ord. 2268, 12-27-2017; amd.
Ord. 2450, 11-2-2020)
3-6-6: GRANTING OR DENIAL OF LICENSE:
License applications shall be reviewed by the City and the City shall either
grant or deny the license. The City shall inform the applicant regarding the
reasons for a license denial. (Ord. 2268, 12-27-2017)
3-6-7: CONDITIONS GOVERNING ISSUANCE:
A.   No license shall be issued if the applicant or any of its owners,
managers, employees, contractors, agents, or other persons performing massage
therapy at the massage therapy business has a criminal conviction for specified
criminal activity as defined in this chapter or who is a registered sex
offender. No license shall be issued if the applicant has been denied a license
by another community unless the applicant has provided the City with sufficient
proof that the basis for the license denial has been remedied.
B.   Licenses shall be issued only if the applicant and all of its owners,
managers, employees, contractors, agents, or other persons performing massage
therapy at the massage therapy business are free of convictions for specified
criminal activity as defined in this chapter or which relate directly to such
person's ability or fitness to legally and safely perform the duties and
discharge the responsibilities of the licensed activity.
C.   Licenses shall only be issued to applicants who have provided all of the
information requested in the application, have paid required license fees, and
have cooperated with the City during its review of the application.
D.   If issued, the license shall be displayed in a conspicuous place on the
business premises so that it can be readily seen by the public upon entering
the business. (Ord. 2268, 12-27-2017)
3-6-8: LICENSE PERIOD:
Licenses shall be granted by the City on an annual, calendar year basis. Each
license issued shall terminate on December 31 of that year. Licensees shall
obtain a renewal license from the City prior to expiration of an existing
license. Licensees shall apply to the City for a renewal license by December 1
of that year to allow the City sufficient time to review a license renewal
application. (Ord. 2268, 12-27-2017)
3-6-9: EXEMPTIONS:
This chapter shall not apply to the following businesses:
A.   Businesses who employ or provide the services of persons who are licensed
to practice medicine or surgery, osteopathic medicine or surgery, chiropractic,
cosmetology arts and sciences, or podiatry in the State of Iowa; or athletic
trainers, nurses, occupational therapists, physical therapists, or physician
assistants licensed, certified, or registered in the State of Iowa or acting
under the prescription or supervision of a person licensed to practice medicine
or surgery or osteopathic medicine and surgery in the State of Iowa.
B.   Massage therapists who are employed or are contracted to perform massage
therapy in a business identified in subsection A of this section.
C.   Businesses who employ or provide the services of persons who are licensed,
registered, or certified in another state, territory, the District of Columbia,
or a foreign country when incidentally and temporarily present in the State of
Iowa to teach a course of instruction related to massage and bodywork therapy.
D.   Businesses which offer the services of students enrolled in a program
recognized by the State of Iowa Board of Massage Therapy while completing a
clinical requirement for graduation performed under the supervision of a
licensed person.
E.   Businesses who employ or provide the services of persons practicing
reflexology.
F.   Businesses who employ or provide the services of persons engaged within
the scope of practice of a profession with established standards and ethics
utilizing touch, words, and directed movement to deepen awareness of existing
patterns of movement in the body as well as to suggest new possibilities of
movement, provided that the practices performed or services rendered are not
designated or implied to be massage therapy. Such practices include, but are
not limited to, the Feldenkrais method, the Trager approach, and mind-body
centering.
G.   Businesses who employ or provide the services of persons engaged within
the scope of practice of a profession with established standards and ethics in
which touch is limited to that which is essential for palpitation and
affectation of the human energy system, provided that the practices performed
or services rendered are not designated or implied to be massage therapy.
H.   Businesses who employ or provide the services of persons incidentally
present in the State of Iowa to provide services as part of an emergency
response team working in conjunction with disaster relief officials. (Ord.
2268, 12-27-2017)
3-6-10: GROUNDS FOR DENIAL, SUSPENSION, OR REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
In addition to any other reasons set forth in this chapter, it shall be grounds
for denial, suspension, and/or revocation of a massage therapy application or
business license if one or more of the following conditions have occurred:
A.   If the applicant or licensee has not complied with or has a history of
violations of the laws and ordinances that might adversely impact public health
or safety.
B.   If the applicant or licensee solicits or advertises to offer services that
are in violation of this chapter.
C.   If the applicant or licensee has been convicted of any violation,
reasonably related to the activity to be or that has been licensed, or has
occurred on the licensed premises, of any City ordinance, State Statute, or
Federal law.
D.   If there has been any fraud or deception involved in the license
application process.
E.   If the licensee has been found to be in control or possession of any
narcotic drugs or controlled substances on the business premises for which they
are licensed to operate, possession of which is illegal as defined by City
ordinance, State Statute, or Federal law.
F.   If the applicant or licensee has engaged in willful disregard of Health or
Safety Codes and regulations.
G.   If the applicant fails to provide all of the information required by this
chapter, including any failure to promptly submit updated information.
H.   If the licensee permits an unlicensed individual or unlicensed individuals
to conduct massage therapy services at the licensee's premises.
I.   If the licensee refuses to allow any police officers or government
officials to inspect the premises or operations.
J.   If the licensee has been found to be in violation of the provisions of
this chapter or the Iowa Code.
K.   If the business promotes its services through websites that are known to
advertise services that are illegal. (Ord. 2268, 12-27-2017)
3-6-11: NOTICE; APPEAL:
A.   Notice: The City Clerk shall have the applicant or licensee served with
notice either in person or by regular mail to the licensee's address shown on
the license application notifying the licensee of the license denial,
suspension, or revocation and the specific reason(s) for such action. The
applicant or licensee shall be prohibited from any further activities covered
by the license during the term of any suspension or revocation, including
during any appeal periods unless otherwise allowed by court order.
B.   Appeal: The applicant or licensee shall have ten (10) calendar days from
the date of the notice to appeal the City's denial, suspension, or revocation
of a massage therapy business license. The appeal must be in writing and filed
with the City Clerk during normal City Hall business hours. The Municipal Code
Hearing Officer, as provided in section
4-4-10 of this Code, shall hear the appeal and may reverse, modify, or affirm
the City's decision.
C.   Appeal Of Adverse Appeal Decision: The applicant or licensee or the City
may then appeal an adverse decision by the Municipal Code Hearing Officer to
the Polk County, Iowa, District Court within thirty (30) calendar days from the
date of the Hearing Officer's decision.
D.   Waiver To Contest: Failure to appeal any decision within the provided time
frame shall constitute a waiver of any right to contest the decision. (Ord.
2268, 12-27-2017)
3-6-12: RESTRICTIONS AND REGULATIONS:
A.   Compliance With Law: The licensee and all of its employees and contractors
shall comply with all applicable regulations and laws of the City and State of
Iowa.
B.   Person In Charge: If the applicant or licensee is a partnership,
corporation, or other legal entity, the applicant or licensee shall designate a
local representative to serve as agent for service of notices and other process
relating to the business and provide the local representative's telephone
number, e-mail address, and mailing address. The applicant or licensee shall
promptly notify the City Clerk in writing of any change to the identity or
contact information of the local representative.
C.   Hours Of Business: The licensed premises shall not be open for business
nor shall patrons be permitted on the premises between the hours of ten o'clock
(10:00) P.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. No person shall be or remain inside
the licensed premises between the hours of eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M. and six
o'clock (6:00) A.M., unless the premises is a residence with a valid home
occupancy permit.
D.   Therapist Required On Premises: Each licensed business shall have at least
one licensed massage therapist on the premises at all hours that the business
is occupied by patrons or is open to the public. If, during an inspection,
there is no licensed massage therapist on the premises, the business must cease
operations and close until a licensed massage therapist is on the premises.
(Ord. 2268, 12-27-2017)
3-6-13: UNLAWFUL ACTS; PENALTY:
A.   A person who commits or attempts to commit, conspires to commit, or aids
or abets in the commission of an act constituting a violation of this chapter,
whether individually or in connection with one or more persons, or as
principal, agent, or accessory, has committed an unlawful act for purposes of
this chapter. A person who falsely, fraudulently, forcibly, or willfully,
induces, causes, coerces, permits, or directs another person to violate a
provision of this chapter has also committed an unlawful act for purposes of
this chapter.
B.   Commission of any act declared unlawful and in violation of the provisions
of this chapter shall constitute a simple misdemeanor punishable as provided in
section
5-2-1 of this Code. Failure to comply with the provisions of this chapter shall
also constitute a Municipal infraction punishable pursuant to section
1-4-1 of this Code. (Ord. 2268, 12-27-2017)
CHAPTER 7
SOLICITORS AND MOBILE FOOD UNITS
SECTION:
3-7-1: Purpose
3-7-2: Definitions
3-7-3: Solicitor Regulations And Requirements
3-7-4: Mobile Food Units
3-7-5: Unlawful Acts
3-7-6: Suspension Or Revocation Of License
3-7-7: Penalty
3-7-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to protect residents against fraud, protect them
from intrusion into the privacy of their homes, and to ensure the safety of the
residents by licensing and regulating solicitors and mobile food units. (Ord.
2166, 8-22-2016)
3-7-2: DEFINITIONS:
APPROVED EVENT: A larger event, such as a farmers' market, music festival, or
similar activity that has been approved by the city through a special event
permit (typically on public property), a temporary use permit (on private
property) or a block party permit. An approved event would also include events
within the city park with the approval of the director of parks and recreation
or their designee.
CATERED EVENT: For the purposes of this title, any event where a business or
entity has requested the mobile food unit to provide food for a targeted
audience and which the food is served to the customers within a building,
structure, or facility and not directly from the mobile food unit, or where the
business or entity requesting the service is paying for the food in a single
lump sum payment rather than individual patrons paying for their food
themselves.
CATERING BUSINESS: A business, social or home catering service providing food
and incidental services for a social affair, event, or for a private dwelling,
which does not use commercial vehicles that are equipped in any manner for the
purpose of the distribution of food directly from such vehicles to individually
paying patrons.
MOBILE FOOD UNIT: Any type of annually licensed food establishment that is a
readily movable vehicle (on wheels), that is self-propelled (driven), or can be
pulled or pushed to a location and used for the vending of food or beverage
items to the public.
MOBILE FOOD UNIT CLASSIFICATION: The type of mobile food unit based upon the
type of menu items being served and preparation and storage requirements for
the defined menu items based upon the Iowa department of inspections and
appeals "Mobile Food Unit Guide".
MOBILE FOOD VENDOR: A person engaged in the business of selling food or
beverages from a mobile food unit.
PERSON: Natural persons, corporations, firms, and organizations of any
description, whether acting in person or through agents, employees, or other
persons.
PUSHCART: A nonself-propelled mobile food unit that is pushed or pulled by the
mobile food vendor to a location and serves a limited offering of food or
beverage items.
SOLICITOR: Any person who initiates or attempts to initiate personal contact
with other persons at or near residences or businesses, including upon private
driveways, parking lots, or public sidewalks in an apparent effort to solicit
or attempt to solicit monies or orders for goods, services, subscriptions, or
merchandise to be delivered immediately or at a future date.
STATE LICENSING LEVEL CLASSIFICATION: The Iowa department of inspections and
appeals has established classification levels for mobile food vendors that will
be referenced as a part of this chapter. There are more requirements for each
of the levels but in general the levels are as follows:
Class I: Nonrefrigerated vending units that serve only intact, nonpotentially
hazardous commercially prepackaged food and beverages. Examples include chips,
crackers, cookies, soda, and sweets in manufacturer's packaging.
Class II: Refrigerated or hot vending units that serve potentially and
nonpotentially hazardous commercially prepackaged foods from an approved
source. Examples include packaged sandwiches, ice cream bars, individually
wrapped and cooked hot dogs. No cooking is allowed as part of a class II unit.
Class III: Units that serve potentially and nonpotentially hazardous packaged
food and unpackaged foods with limited assembly. These units are limited to
precooked foods from an approved source that may be reheated on the unit.
Examples include pushcart operations, packaged salads, hot dogs, shaved ice.
Class IV: Units that serve potentially and nonpotentially hazardous foods that
are prepared, cooked, cooled or reheated and assembled on the unit. Examples
include self-contained mobile food units, food trucks and any units that are
capable of preparing and producing food items from precooked and/or raw
products (meat, fish, poultry, plant foods and dairy products) to finished
product for consumption.
TRANSIENT MERCHANT: Any person who engages in a temporary or itinerant
merchandising business selling direct to the public from a temporary location
or structure through a temporary association with a local property owner or
business owner. The term "transient merchant" does not include mobile food
vendors. Transient merchants shall be regulated by the provisions of the
temporary use permit regulations within title 9, "Zoning", of this code, unless
defined and regulated elsewhere within this code. (Ord. 2166, 8-22-2016)
3-7-3: SOLICITOR REGULATIONS AND REQUIREMENTS:
Any person defined in section
3-7-2 of this chapter as a "solicitor", shall comply with the following
requirements:
A.   License Required: No solicitor shall engage in business in the city
without having first obtained a license as provided by this chapter.
B.   License Fee: At the time of the submittal of a license application, the
applicant shall pay to the city clerk the applicable license fee in addition to
the nonrefundable application fee. If after review the determination is made
that the request should be denied, the license fee will be refunded.
1.   The city council shall establish the amount of the license fee for thirty
(30) day and ninety (90) day solicitor licenses by resolution.
2.   Any licensee who surrenders his/her license prior to the date of
expiration shall not be entitled to a refund of any portion of the fee.
C.   License Application: An application for a solicitor license shall be filed
with the city clerk. The application shall contain the following information:
1.   Name, permanent and local address, and local phone number;
2.   Date of birth and physical description;
3.   Company name and address;
4.   Description of merchandise;
5.   Last three (3) places of business, including the complete addresses from
which business was conducted;
6.   Applicant's supervisor or manager and his/her local address;
7.   Length of time to be covered by license;
8.   A list of all convictions for criminal misdemeanor offenses (excluding
traffic offenses) during the ten (10) years prior to application, and a list of
all convictions for criminal felony offenses during the applicant's lifetime.
The lists shall include the type of offense, the city, county, and state where
the offense occurred, and the date of conviction of each offense;
9.   A list of all pending criminal misdemeanor and felony charges, including
the type of offense charged, and the city, county, and state where the offense
allegedly occurred.
10.   Applicants who reside in the state of Iowa shall provide, at the
applicant's expense, an officially sealed state of Iowa division of criminal
investigation (DCI) personal background check to the city, which is dated no
more than thirty (30) days prior to the application. Applicants who do not
reside in the state of Iowa shall provide, at the applicant's expense, an
equivalent personal background check from the applicant's state of residence.
D.   Photographing And Fingerprinting Of Applicant: Each applicant shall be
fingerprinted and a photograph shall be taken of each applicant by the city's
police department and at the applicant's expense.
E.   Issuance Of Solicitor's License: The city clerk, upon review of said
license application request with the city's development services department,
the police department, and any other appropriate department or agency, shall
determine whether a license will be issued to the applicant. A waiting period
of not less than five (5) business days from date of application shall be in
effect to provide sufficient time for the city clerk's decision making process.
In making his/her decision, the city clerk shall consider the following
factors:
1.   The information in the application is found to be correct.
2.   The required bond is paid.
3.   The applicant has not been convicted of an offense involving sexual abuse
and/or a crime requiring sex offender registration.
4.   The applicant has not been convicted of a criminal offense involving
serious injury or death to another person, kidnapping, false imprisonment,
robbery, burglary, theft, fraud, forgery, identity theft, trespass, harassment,
or stalking.
5.   Any other relevant considerations that, in the city clerk's determination,
would undermine the stated purposes of this chapter.
F.   License Exemptions: The following are excluded from the application of
this chapter, except such persons or entities must comply with subsection K of
this section and section
3-7-5 of this chapter:
1.   Newspaper carriers.
2.   Members of local Boy Scout, Girl Scout, Camp Fire or 4-H clubs, and Future
Farmers Of America, if the sales are to benefit the parent organization in its
recognized operation and programs.
3.   Students representing local schools or local youth sports organizations
conducting projects sponsored by organizations recognized by the schools or
youth sports organizations.
4.   City, county, state, or federal government officials and employees while
in the performance of their official duties.
5.   Representatives of any public utility lawfully doing business in the city,
while acting in such capacity.
G.   Charitable And Nonprofit Organizations:
1.   Representatives of charitable organizations exempt from federal taxation
and/or nonprofit organizations shall be subject to the requirements of this
chapter, except that they shall not be required to submit license fees nor
provide a bond. They shall be required to submit an application and application
fees under subsection C of this section. In addition to this application, all
such organizations shall be required to submit in writing to the city clerk the
following information:
a.   Name of organization;
b.   Federal identification number;
c.   A description of the proposed activity, including use for any money
solicited;
d.   Period during which activities will take place;
e.   Whether any commissions, fees, or wages are to be charged by the solicitor
for his/her efforts and the amount thereof;
f.   Names and addresses of officers and directors of the organization; and
g.   Names and addresses of all people who will be soliciting or distributing
in the name of the organization.
2.   If the city clerk shall find that the organization qualifies for the
exemption provisions and if he/she finds that all required information has been
submitted in writing, he/she shall issue a license without payment of the
required license fees under subsection B of this section.
3.   The city clerk may elect to waive the application and fee requirements for
charitable and nonprofit organizations based upon the following considerations:
a) if there are many persons soliciting on behalf of the organization; b) if
the many persons soliciting on behalf of the organization are all volunteers;
c) if there is a limited duration for the organization's soliciting efforts;
and d) if there is a limited location for the organization's soliciting
efforts. The city clerk shall not waive the application and fee requirements
for charitable and nonprofit organizations that solicit or attempt to solicit
from residences and businesses.
H.   Bond: At the time of application, the applicant shall file with the city
clerk a personal surety bond in the amount of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00)
conditioned that the applicant shall comply fully with all ordinances of the
city and laws of the state of Iowa regulating solicitors and transient
merchants, guaranteeing attendance at all scheduled hearings and court
appearances, and guaranteeing to any resident of the city that all money paid
as a down payment will be accounted for and applied according to the
representations of the licensee. Action on such bond may be brought by the
person aggrieved and for whose benefit, among others, the bond is given. Said
bond shall provide an expiration period not less than twelve (12) months from
the date of the application for a license.
I.   Display Of License: Upon the approval of a solicitor license, the city
shall provide each solicitor with a city issued license that the solicitor must
wear around his/her neck with a lanyard or upon another conspicuous place on
his/her person so that other persons can readily see the license at all times
while the person engages in soliciting. The city clerk may elect to waive these
license display requirements based upon the considerations detailed in
subsection G3 of this section.
J.   Hours To Do Business: All licenses issued to solicitors shall be in force
and effect only between nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. and the time of sunset. No
soliciting shall occur on nationally recognized holidays. Any person found to
be acting as a solicitor without a license shall also be limited to these
hours.
K.   Prohibited Solicitor Activities:
1.   Prohibited Soliciting: No solicitor shall do business or attempt to do
business upon any property on which is posted notice that peddling and/or
soliciting is prohibited.
2.   Supervisor Or Employer: No person supervising or employing another to
solicit or as defined in this chapter shall knowingly allow a person under
their supervision or employment to engage in an unlawful act as defined in this
section. Each such unlawful act by each employee or supervised person may be
charged as a separate offense. There shall be a rebuttable presumption that the
supervisor or employer has knowledge of such unlawful acts if a police officer
or employee of the city clerk's office gives notice to the supervisor or
employer of such unlawful acts and, subsequently, further unlawful acts are
committed by the employee or person supervised.
3.   Solicitors On Travel Portion Of Streets Or Highways: No person, with or
without a solicitor license, shall stand, sit, or otherwise be present in or on
the travel portion of a public or private street or highway in order to solicit
or attempt to solicit from pedestrians or vehicle occupants. The entire width
of the roadway shall be deemed the travel portion of a public or private street
or highway, including the edge or curb of the roadway and any median or island
that separates directional traffic on the street or highway. Solicitors may
submit a written request to the city clerk to be allowed to solicit from a
traffic median or island. Any such request shall include a diagram or map
indicating the location for the proposed solicitation, and a specific date and
time for the proposed solicitation. Upon receiving such a written request, the
city clerk shall provide the requesting party with the city's expectations that
must be satisfied before the city clerk decides to grant or deny the request.
The city clerk shall then grant or deny the request in part or in its entirety.
(Ord. 2166, 8-22-2016)
3-7-4: MOBILE FOOD UNITS:
A.   Mobile Food Unit Licensing: It shall be unlawful for any person to engage
in the sale of food or beverages to the public from a temporary or mobile
facility within the corporate limits of the city of West Des Moines without
first obtaining a mobile food unit license from the city, in addition to any
other state, federal, or county permits, certifications and licenses.
1.   A mobile food unit license is an annual license that expires at eleven
fifty nine o'clock (11:59) P.M. on April 14 each year and must be renewed prior
to the first event after that date.
2.   Each mobile food unit shall be licensed separately. No license transfer is
allowed.
3.   Although certain activities may be exempt from the licensing requirements
of this chapter, any food service to the public in the city of West Des Moines
is expected to comply with all other local, county and state requirements for
health inspections, licensing, safety and fire code requirements.
4.   The following shall be exempt from this requirement:
a.   Catering businesses.
b.   Grilling and food preparation activities of brick and mortar
establishments on the establishments' premises for immediate consumption by
patrons or employees.
c.   Concession stands associated with sports or recreational venues that have
been approved as part of a site plan or permitted conditional use permit for
the venue.
B.   License Fee: At the time of the submittal of a license application, the
applicant shall pay to the city clerk the applicable license and permit fees in
addition to any application fees.
1.   The city council shall establish the amount of the license fee by
resolution.
2.   Any licensee who surrenders their license prior to the date of expiration
shall not be entitled to a refund of any portion of the fee.
C.   Fire Department Inspection:
1.   All mobile food units that have cooking facilities or use products with
grease laden vapors (class III and class IV state licenses) shall be inspected
by the fire department prior to initiation of business operations within the
city.
2.   Inspections are required annually and prior to submittal of a license
application to the city. It shall be the obligation of the mobile food vendor
to schedule the inspection with the fire department. Class I and II state
license classifications are not required to meet this inspection requirement.
3.   All class III and IV mobile food units shall have an acceptable
suppression system, as determined by the West Des Moines fire department,
installed by April 15, 2017.
4.   Upon completion of the annual fire inspection, if the fire department
determines that the mobile food unit passes the inspection, the fire marshal or
his/her designee shall sign the mobile food unit vendor license application and
identify any conditions for operation as deemed appropriate as a result of said
inspection.
5.   At the discretion of the West Des Moines fire department, they may accept
the inspection of the mobile food unit by another city's fire inspector to
satisfy the annual inspection requirement. Applicant is obligated to contact
the fire department to verify whether or not another community's inspection is
adequate to fulfill obligation of city inspection requirements. The license
application will still need to be signed by the West Des Moines fire
department.
D.   Mobile Food Unit Vendor Licensing Application:
1.   License Required: All mobile food vendors operating within the city of
West Des Moines, including those participating under a multiple vendor permit,
short term temporary use permits, long term temporary food and beverage permit,
or special event permit issued by the city must obtain a mobile food vendor
license from the city.
Application requests shall be filed with the city clerk on the form provided by
the city. No application request shall be accepted for filing and processing
unless it conforms to the requirements of this title. This would include a
complete and true application and all of the required materials and information
prescribed, accompanied by the appropriate fees.
2.   Submission Time Frame: Applications must be submitted not less than ten
(10) business days prior to the proposed start date of the mobile food unit
activities. The city reserves the right to reject any applications that have
not been timely submitted to the city. The city clerk shall have the
discretionary right to accept an application made less than ten (10) business
days prior to desired start date.
3.   Additional Approvals: Receiving approval of a mobile food unit license
from the city shall not preclude, supersede, circumvent, or waive the
applicant's responsibility to obtain any additional permits, licenses, and
approvals for other applicable local, state, and federal regulations.
4.   Application Contents: Application shall be made on a form provided by the
city and shall include:
a.   Full name of the applicant.
b.   Applicant's contact information including mailing address, phone numbers
and e-mail address.
c.   State health inspection certificate with the classification level of the
state license identified.
d.   Description of the kitchen facilities, cooking facilities, preparation
area, safety features (suppression system, etc.) of the mobile food unit.
e.   Photographs of the mobile food unit.
f.   Make, model and year of vehicle to be used.
g.   County, state and license plate number.
h.   Overall size of the vehicle; length and width.
i.   Fire department signature on application confirming a passing fire
department inspection of class III and class IV mobile food units.
j.   Application and license fee(s).
5.   Applications Deemed Withdrawn: Any application received shall be deemed
withdrawn if it has been held in abeyance, awaiting the submittal of additional
requested information from the applicant, and if the applicant has not
communicated in writing with the city and made reasonable progress within
thirty (30) days from the last written notification from the city to the
applicant. The application fee is nonrefundable. Any application deemed
withdrawn shall require submission of a new application and fees to begin a new
review and approval process.
6.   Issuance Of License: Upon completion of the review process and a
determination of compliance with the applicable regulations, the city clerk
will issue a mobile food unit license and a sticker. The sticker shall be
placed in the upper left (passenger side) of the front windshield or the left
front side of a trailer or cart to aid in the visual verification of the
licensing for that year.
7.   Modification Of License After Issuance: Should the mobile food vendor
change the food or beverage being offered during the term of an issued license
that would change the designation of the mobile food unit to a higher state
licensing level classification, a new application and fire inspection shall be
required.
E.   Mobile Food Units On Public Property: No mobile food unit may be operated
on public property except as part of an event approved under a special event
permit by the city clerk's office or as authorized by the director of parks and
recreation, or their designee, within a city park.
F.   Unattended Mobile Food Unit: No mobile food unit shall be left unattended
on any site overnight, unless that property is under the ownership of the
operator of the unit and in compliance with all other city code requirements.
No mobile food unit shall be allowed to be stored on a site that is not zoned
appropriately for storage and warehousing, screened in accordance with city
code requirements, and/or having received prior city council approval through
an entitlement process. Any mobile food unit found unattended shall be
considered in violation of these regulations and subject to license revocation,
municipal infraction, towing, or any other action legally allowed.
G.   Music And Sound Making Devices: The use of music or sound making devices
as a part of a mobile food unit shall be prohibited, unless expressly allowed
as part of an approved event.
H.   Mobile Food Unit Performance Standards: Persons conducting business from a
mobile food unit must do so in compliance with the following standards:
1.   The mobile food vendor must obtain expressed written consent of the
property owner to use the business property on which they propose to operate.
The written consent must be kept in the unit at all times that the unit is on
the property.
2.   The operator of the mobile food unit shall display their city license in
full view of the public in the unit, and have the annual sticker placed in the
upper left (passenger side) of the front windshield, or left front side of a
trailer or cart.
3.   Mobile food units shall only be allowed on nonresidential properties,
unless part of an approved event permit.
4.   Mobile food units within three hundred feet (300') of a residential use or
residentially zoned property, shall be limited to hours of operation between
seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. and ten thirty o'clock (10:30) P.M.
5.   Mobile food units shall be limited to a maximum duration of eight (8)
hours per day on any site, unless part of an approved event permit. A mobile
food unit shall be at one location a maximum of five (5) consecutive days per
week (Sunday through Saturday).
6.   Only one mobile food unit shall be allowed on a property, unless part of
an approved event or the property has received a multiple vendor permit. Mobile
food units not under a multiple vendor permit and on adjacent properties must
maintain a minimum separation between units of fifty feet (50').
7.   Mobile food units shall serve patrons which are on foot only; no drive-up
service to the mobile food unit itself shall be provided or allowed.
8.   The mobile food unit must be located on a paved surface, unless approved
as part of an event permit.
9.   No mobile food unit may be located on a vacant property or lot with a
vacant building.
10.   No mobile food unit may operate within one hundred feet (100') of a
permanent restaurant or business offering food or beverage services unless they
receive expressed written consent of the restaurant or business owner.
11.   No alcoholic beverages may be sold as a part of a mobile food unit.
12.   Any class I or II mobile food unit, or any class III or IV units that
have a city approved suppression system, shall maintain a minimum five foot
(5') separation from a building as measured to the closest building element
including awnings or canopies, tents or membrane structures. Location of the
mobile food unit shall not impede pedestrian entering or exiting of a building.
Prior to April 15, 2017, a class III or IV mobile food unit that does not have
a suppression system, shall maintain a minimum fifteen foot (15') separation
from a building as measured to the closest building element including awnings
or canopies, tents or membrane structures.
13.   The window or area where a patron orders and receives their purchase
shall be located so as to not require a patron to stand, or create a line that
may cause pedestrians to be in the public right of way, vehicle travel lane,
including parking lot drive aisles, or similar situation that may create a
potential safety hazard. Adequate safe space for patrons waiting for their
order must be available on the property where the mobile food unit is located.
14.   With the exception of pushcarts as allowed herein, no mobile food unit
shall be placed on a public or private sidewalk. Pushcarts may locate on or
adjacent to a private sidewalk or may locate on a public sidewalk as part of an
approved event permit, however, a minimum forty eight inch (48") open walkway
must be maintained for passing pedestrians. The placement of the pushcart shall
be in such a manner so as to minimize encroachment into the forty eight inch
(48") walkway by patrons waiting in line for service from the pushcart.
15.   Signs are limited to those that are attached to the exterior of the
mobile unit and must be mounted flat against the unit and not project more than
six inches (6") from the exterior of the unit. No freestanding signs, banners,
flags, etc., are allowed. Off premises signs directing patrons to the mobile
food unit are prohibited.
16.   During business hours, the mobile food vendor shall provide a trash
receptacle for use by customers.
17.   The mobile food vendor shall keep the area around the mobile food unit
clear of litter and debris at all times.
18.   All mobile food units shall be located in such a manner as to not create
a safety hazard, such as blocking emergency access to buildings and the site,
obstructing access to fire hydrants and fire department connections, impeding
entering and exiting from a building, creating a visual impediment for the
motoring public at drive entrances, intersections, pedestrian crossings, etc.
19.   No mobile food unit shall be parked in or otherwise impact access to/from
ADA parking stalls.
I.   Multiple Vendor Permit: The intent of allowing multiple food vendors
within a site shall be to provide services to a targeted audience and not to
create pop up commercial centers. A property owner may obtain an annual
multiple vendor permit from the city to allow more than one mobile food unit on
a property at a given time. Said permit shall be valid from twelve o'clock (12:
00) midnight April 15 to eleven fifty nine o'clock (11:59) P.M. April 14 of the
following year. A maximum of four (4) vendors shall be allowed within a
grouping within a site/development with the approval of a multiple vendor
permit. Multiple groupings may be allowed. Groupings shall be separated by a
minimum of five hundred feet (500') as measured along the shortest anticipated
pedestrian pathway or otherwise separated by a four (4) lane major collector,
major arterial or minor arterial roadway or other obstacle that impacts and/or
limits pedestrian movement, such as, but not limited to, water retention ponds,
vegetation, or topography. The multiple vendor permit shall be kept readily
available for review in the event issues arise with operations within the site.
The city shall maintain the right to determine the maximum number of mobile
food units appropriate for a site. In making that determination the city shall
consider the following: adequate emergency access into and through a site,
pedestrian safety and presence of potential pedestrian and vehicle conflicts,
availability of parking to accommodate the mobile food units and patrons
without affecting the functioning of the primary use of the site, potential
impact to adjacent streets and/or properties and other potential safety issues
that may arise from or be related to the proposed operation. Additionally, the
city shall maintain the right to modify the permit to decrease the number of
mobile food units allowed, or prohibit multiple food units altogether should
problems arise with regards to safety or negative impacts on the function of
the primary use, adjacent roadways, or adjacent properties. Site activities
which are deemed to be an event (e.g., multiple mobile food units within a site
in conjunction with an advertised car show) shall be governed and permitted
under a short term temporary use permit. Additionally, a short term temporary
use permit shall be required anytime that the number of mobile food units
desired for a site exceeds the maximum number allowed under an approved
multiple vendor permit.
J.   Property Owner Responsibility: By allowing the mobile food unit on their
property, the property owner shares in the responsibility of ensuring that the
performance standards listed above and the safety of pedestrians and access of
emergency vehicles to and around the site are maintained. Failure to do so
could result in the property owner being party to any enforcement actions or
penalties allowed by law, including, but not limited to, the alteration or
revocation of a multiple vendor permit. (Ord. 2166, 8-22-2016)
3-7-5: UNLAWFUL ACTS:
A.   Fraudulent Representation/Harassment: No licensee shall falsely or
fraudulently misrepresent the quality, character, or quantity of any article,
item, or commodity offered for sale, or sell any unwholesome or tainted food or
foodstuffs. No licensee shall harass, intimidate, coerce, or threaten any
individual to induce a sale.
B.   Other Licenses And Permits To Be Maintained: Failure of any applicant to
maintain the appropriate county, state and federal licenses and permits, during
the term of the local license or permits shall be considered an unlawful act
and subject to revocation or any other penalties available to the city. (Ord.
2166, 8-22-2016)
3-7-6: SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
A.   Any license issued under the provisions of this chapter may be suspended
or revoked by the city as follows:
1.   Grounds: The city clerk may suspend any license issued under this chapter,
pending the outcome of an administrative hearing, for any of the following
reasons:
a.   The licensee has made fraudulent statements in his/her application for the
license or in the conduct of his/her business.
b.   The licensee has violated this chapter or any other chapter of this code
or has otherwise conducted his/her business in an unlawful manner.
c.   The licensee has conducted his/her business in such manner as to endanger
the public welfare, safety, order, or morals.
d.   The city clerk has received and investigated three (3) or more found
complaints during the licensed period related to the manner in which the
licensee is conducting business.
2.   Notice: The city clerk shall have the licensee served with notice either
in person or by regular mail to the licensee's address shown on the license
application notifying them of the license suspension, the specific reason(s)
for such action, and date and time of hearing with the city clerk to review the
particulars of the suspension. The licensee shall be prohibited from any
further activities covered by the license until such time that the hearing has
been held and a determination of suspension and revocation resolved.
3.   Hearing: A hearing shall be conducted by the city clerk not more than five
(5) business days after he/she has suspended a license. The licensee and any
complainants may be present to determine the truth of the alleged violation of
this chapter. Should the licensee or his/her authorized representative fail to
appear without good cause, the city clerk may proceed with the hearing and make
his/her findings.
4.   Revocation: After the city clerk has reviewed the facts, he/she shall
revoke a license if he/she finds by the preponderance of the evidence that a
violation has occurred. The revocation shall be effective immediately.
5.   Appeal: If the city clerk revokes or refuses to issue a license, the
licensee or the applicant shall have a right to a hearing before the municipal
code hearing officer as provided in section
 4-4-9 of this code. The municipal code hearing officer may reverse, modify, or
affirm the decision of the city clerk.
6.   Effect Of Revocation: Revocation or denial of any license shall bar the
licensee or applicant from being eligible for any license under this chapter
for a period of one year from the date of the revocation or denial. There shall
be no refund of any fees for any revocation. (Ord. 2166, 8-22-2016)
3-7-7: PENALTY:
Commission of any act declared unlawful and in violation of the provisions of
this chapter shall constitute a simple misdemeanor punishable as provided in
Iowa Code section 903.1. Failure to comply with the provisions of this chapter
shall also constitute a municipal infraction, punishable pursuant to section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 2166, 8-22-2016)
CHAPTER 8
PAWNBROKERS AND SECONDHAND DEALERS
SECTION:
3-8-1: Definitions
3-8-2: License Required
3-8-3: Application Contents
3-8-4: Execution Of Application
3-8-5: Granting Or Denial Of License
3-8-6: License Period
3-8-7: License Fees
3-8-8: Separate License Required; Transferability
3-8-9: License Denial, Suspension Or Revocation
3-8-10: Notice; Appeal
3-8-11: Bond Required
3-8-12: Reports And Records Required
3-8-13: Prohibited Acts
3-8-14: Secondhand Goods; Requirements For
3-8-15: Stolen Property
3-8-16: Penalty
3-8-1: DEFINITIONS:
Unless otherwise expressly stated or the context clearly indicates a different
intention, the following terms shall, for the purpose of this Chapter, have the
following meaning:
DEALER: Any pawnbroker, secondhand dealer, and any principal, employee, agent,
or servant thereof, engaged in or conducting business for purchase, sale,
barter, exchange, or pawn of tangible personal property, is a "Dealer" within
the meaning of this Chapter.
PAWNBROKER: Every person who makes loans or advancements upon pawn, pledge, or
deposit of personal property, or who receives actual possession of personal
property as security for loans, with or without a mortgage, or bill of sale
thereon, or who by advertisement, sign or otherwise holds himself/herself out
as a pawnbroker, is a "Pawnbroker" within the meaning of this Chapter.
SECONDHAND DEALER: Any person engaged in the business of buying or selling
secondhand goods, excluding consignment of secondhand goods or the sale of
secondhand goods donated without compensation, is a "Secondhand Dealer" within
the meaning of this Chapter. This definition shall include the use of any
automated or camera-enabled kiosk used to purchase secondhand goods from a
seller without the buyer's physical presence.
SECONDHAND GOODS: Tangible personal property previously owned by another
person, whether used or not, which property, in its present state, possesses
utility for the purpose for which it was originally intended.
TANGIBLE PERSONAL PROPERTY: Items including:
1.   Items made in whole or in part of gold, silver, platinum, copper or other
precious metal;
2.   Items containing or consisting of precious or semiprecious gemstones or
other polished stones used for decoration or jewelry;
3.   Items with serial numbers, model numbers, or other identifying marks,
including, but not limited to bicycles, appliances, tools, radios, stereo
equipment, radar detectors, televisions, cellular phones, video recorders,
camcorders, video equipment, computers, computer equipment and accessories,
digital music recorders and players, cameras, video game consoles, clothes
washers, clothes dryers, refrigerators, and handbags and purses;
4.   Musical instruments;
5.   Rifles, shotguns, handguns, and other firearms;
6.   One or more coins collected or exchanged for their numismatic value, where
the scarcity, historical significance, quality, and other unique factors
determine the market value of a coin rather than the commodity price of the
metals that comprise it. (Ord. 2503, 2-21-2022)
3-8-2: LICENSE REQUIRED:
No person or organization shall engage in or carry on the business of a dealer,
who is subject to section
3-8-12 herein, in the City, without obtaining a license as required by this
Chapter. (Ord. 2503, 2-21-2022)
3-8-3: APPLICATION CONTENTS:
An application for a license shall be filed with the City Clerk. The
application shall contain the following information:
A.   Name, date of birth and residential address of the applicant and owner.
B.   The name and address of the business property and documentation
establishing the applicant's or owner's interest in the premises on which the
business will be located, which shall be in the form of a lease, deed, or other
document that establishes the applicant's or owner's interest in the property.
C.   A statement whether, within the preceding ten (10) years, the applicant or
owner has been convicted of any public offense relating to theft, damage or
trespass to property, or operation of a business and the nature and date of the
offense and the penalty assessed.
D.   Applicants and owners who reside in the state of Iowa shall provide, at
the applicant's or owner's expense, State of Iowa Division of Criminal
Investigation (DCI) personal background check to the city, which is dated no
more than thirty (30) days prior to the application. Applicants and owners who
do not reside in the state of Iowa shall provide, at the applicant's or owner's
expense, an equivalent personal background check from the applicant's or
owner's state of residence. For renewal application, a new DCI report is not
required unless there is a change in ownership.
E.   All applicants and licensees shall be required to promptly notify the City
during the application review or the term of the license if there are any new
owners. (Ord. 2503, 2-21-2022)
3-8-4: EXECUTION OF APPLICATION:
If the applicant is a natural person, the application shall be signed and sworn
to by the person; if a corporation, by an agent authorized to sign; if a
partnership, by a partner. (Ord. 2503, 2-21-2022)
3-8-5: GRANTING OR DENIAL OF LICENSE:
License applications shall be reviewed by the City and the City shall either
grant or deny the license. The City shall inform the applicant regarding the
reasons for a license denial. (Ord. 2503, 2-21-2022)
3-8-6: LICENSE PERIOD:
Licenses shall be granted by the City on an annual basis. Each license issued
shall terminate on April 30 of that year. Licensees shall obtain a renewal
license from the City prior to expiration of an existing license. Licensees
shall apply to the City for a renewal license by April 1 of that year to allow
the City sufficient time to review a license renewal application. (Ord. 2503,
2-21-2022)
3-8-7: LICENSE FEES:
At the time of submittal of a license application, the applicant shall pay to
the City the applicable license fee. The City Council shall establish the
amount of the license fee for initial and renewal licenses by resolution. Any
licenses surrendered, suspended, or revoked prior to the date of expiration
shall not be entitled to a refund of any portion of the license fee. (Ord.
2503, 2-21-2022)
3-8-8: SEPARATE LICENSE REQUIRED; TRANSFERABILITY:
A license under this Chapter shall authorize the licensee to carry on its
business only at the fixed premises designated in the license. No license may
be transferred to a different location or to a different person. No licensee or
agent thereof shall store any items at any location other than the address
listed on the license. Any person or organization conducting several or
separate places of business shall pay the license fee and procure a license for
each such place. (Ord. 2503, 2-21-2022)
3-8-9: LICENSE DENIAL, SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION:
Any license under this Chapter may be denied, suspended, or revoked for any of
the following reasons:
A.   The proposed use is in conflict with the West Des Moines Zoning Ordinance.
B.   The proposed use is in conflict with any health, building, building
maintenance or other provisions of the City Code or State law.
C.   The violation of any provision of this Chapter.
D.   Fraud, misrepresentation, or false statements in securing a license.
E.   Fraud, misrepresentation, or false statements made in the course of the
licensee's business.
F.   Conviction within the preceding ten (10) years, or any public offense
relating to theft, damage or trespass to property, or operation of a business.
G.   A finding that the applicant or licensee is not a person of good moral
character.
H.   No license shall be issued if the applicant has been denied a license by
another community unless the applicant has provided the City with sufficient
proof that the basis for the license denial has been remedied. (Ord. 2503, 2-
21-2022)
3-8-10: NOTICE; APPEAL:
A.   Notice: The City Clerk shall have the applicant or licensee served with
notice either in person or by regular mail to the licensee's address shown on
the license application notifying the licensee of the license denial,
suspension, or revocation and the specific reason(s) for such action. The
applicant or licensee shall be prohibited from any further activities covered
by the license during the term of any suspension or revocation, including
during any appeal periods unless otherwise allowed by court order.
B.   Appeal: The applicant or licensee shall have ten (10) calendar days from
the date of the notice to appeal the City's denial, suspension, or revocation
of a license. The appeal must be in writing and filed with the City Clerk
during normal City Hall business hours. The Municipal Code Hearing Officer, as
provided in Title 4, Chapter 4 of this Code, shall hear the appeal and may
reverse, modify, or affirm the City's decision.
C.   Appeal Of Adverse Appeal Decision: The applicant or licensee or the City
may then appeal an adverse decision by the Municipal Code Hearing Officer to
the Polk County, Iowa, District Court within thirty (30) calendar days from the
date of the Hearing Officer's decision.
D.   Waiver To Contest: Failure to appeal any decision within the provided time
frame shall constitute a waiver of any right to contest the decision. (Ord.
2503, 2-21-2022)
3-8-11: BOND REQUIRED:
Before a license will be issued, the applicant shall submit a one thousand
dollar ($1,000.00) bond per establishment, which shall be conditioned that the
principal named will observe all laws in relationship to pawnbrokers and
secondhand dealers and will conduct business in conformity thereto, and that
the principal will account for and deliver to any person legally entitled any
goods which may have come into the principal's hand through the principal's
business as a pawnbroker and secondhand dealers, or in lieu thereof, will pay
the reasonable value in money to the person. (Ord. 2503, 2-21-2022)
3-8-12: REPORTS AND RECORDS REQUIRED:
A.   The Chief of Police shall designate an Internet-based property tracking
service. Every dealer shall report each transaction of secondhand goods within
twenty-four (24) hours of the transaction to the Internet-based tracking
service. The record of each transaction shall include:
1.   A description of the person selling, purchasing, pawning, trading, or
exchanging the item, which description shall include the person's first and
last name, address of residence, date of birth, sex, and driver's license or
state issued identification card number including the state;
2.   Serial and model numbers, a transcription of any engraving or other
identifying labels, markings, or writings located on the item, the brand name
and model name;
3.   An estimated value of each item;
4.   The amount paid, advanced, or loaned for each item;
5.   The date and time of the transaction;
6.   The number and description of any decorative precious or semiprecious
gems, stones, or jewelry;
7.   Any mortgage or bill of sale taken, or receipt or pawn ticket given;
8.   When, and by whom, the item was bought back or redeemed;
9.   When, to whom, and how, an item was disposed of, if not redeemed; and
10.   A clear and recognizable digital photograph of each item, which shall
only be required if the item lacks a serial or model number.
B.   The records required in subsection A above shall be the property of the
City, and the Dealer shall be the custodial keeper of such records and make the
same available to the City or its designee at any time so that the records may
be examined or upon demand by the City or its designee, the dealer shall
immediately surrender possession of such records to the City or its designee.
Such records shall be retained for at least a three (3) year period. (Ord.
2503, 2-21-2022)
3-8-13: PROHIBITED ACTS:
A.   No dealer, nor any agent or employee thereof, shall purchase or receive
any secondhand goods from any person under eighteen (18) years of age.
B.   No dealer shall conceal or destroy for the purpose of concealing, any
secondhand good purchased or received by him/her for the purpose of preventing
identification thereof by a police officer of any person claiming to own the
same.
C.   No pawnbroker shall sell or otherwise dispose of any secondhand good
during the time any person has the right to buy back or redeem the same.
D.   No pawnbroker shall clean, repair, dye, or alter in any manner whatsoever
any item of clothing taken in pawn or purchased outright for a period of ten
(10) days following receipt thereof.
E.   No dealer, nor any agent or employee thereof, shall purchase or receive on
deposit any item from a person of unsound mind or an intoxicated person.
F.   No dealer, nor any agent or employee thereof, shall acquire, by purchase,
barter, exchange or pawn, any item bearing evidence of a serial number which
has been tampered with or scratch or obliterated in any manner unless such
person immediately contacts the West Des Moines Police Department.
G.   No dealer shall sell, or permit to be redeemed or otherwise dispose of any
secondhand good which the individual has reason to believe has been stolen, or
which is adversely claimed by any person, or which the individual has been
notified in writing by a police officer not to sell, release, or otherwise
dispose of. The dealer shall acknowledge receipt of notification by the police
officer, and such notification not to sell, release or dispose of any item
shall not exceed thirty (30) days from acknowledgment of notice by the dealer.
H.   Any dealer, agent or employee thereof who fails to keep records as
required under this Chapter, or fails to make the required record entries, or
shall intentionally or knowingly make any false or unintelligible record entry,
or make any record entry which he or she has reason to believe is untrue, or
who fails to make the reasonable inquiries necessary to enable him or her to
make bona fide record entries, or who fails to produce records upon request by
a police officer having authority to examine the records, or who shall destroy
or negligently permit the records to be destroyed or lost, shall be guilty of a
prohibited act under this Chapter. (Ord. 2503, 2-21-2022)
3-8-14: SECONDHAND GOODS; REQUIREMENTS FOR:
A.   Destroying, Disposing, Or Dismantling Secondhand Goods For Ten (10) Days:
No dealer purchasing or receiving any secondhand goods described in this
Chapter shall melt, alter, mutilate, destroy, sell, dismantle or dispose of the
same within ten (10) days after the report required by this Chapter is made to
the Police Department except upon written consent from the Chief of Police or
designee.
B.   Change Or Mutilation Of Jewelry: No item of jewelry shall be changed in
its form or altered, dismantled, or mutilated in any way within the time fixed
for sale or redemption. (Ord. 2503, 2-21-2022)
3-8-15: STOLEN PROPERTY:
A.   Search For Stolen Property: Whenever any police officer shall have reason
to believe that any dealer has in its possession or on the premises listed on
the license any stolen property, the officer shall have the right and duty to
enter and search the premises of such dealer for the purpose of discovering
stolen property.
B.   Examination Of Premises By A Police Officer: No dealer, agent or employee
thereof or any other person shall refuse, resist or attempt to prevent any
police officer with or without a warrant, from examining the premises listed on
the license by the dealer for the purpose of discovering stolen property.
C.   Separation Of Suspected Stolen Goods: Every dealer shall, upon request of
a police officer, separate items or categories of items which said police
officer reasonably suspects may be stolen goods. All segregated items shall be
held for thirty (30) days unless sooner released from segregation by the police
officer ordering such segregation. (Ord. 2503, 2-21-2022)
3-8-16: PENALTY:
Commission of any act declared unlawful and in violation of the provisions of
this Chapter shall constitute a simple misdemeanor punishable as provided in
Iowa Code section 903.1. Failure to comply with the provisions of this chapter
shall also constitute a municipal infraction, punishable pursuant to section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 2503, 2-21-2022)
CHAPTER 9
HOUSE MOVERS
SECTION:
3-9-1: Purpose
3-9-2: House Mover Defined
3-9-3: Permit Required; Fee
3-9-4: Application
3-9-5: Permit Issuance and Term
3-9-6: Bond and Insurance Requirements
3-9-7: Time Limit
3-9-8: Protection of Life and Property
3-9-9: Removal by City
3-9-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this Chapter is to protect and preserve the public safety and
well-being by licensing and regulating house and building movers. (1985 Code
§7-1.0201)
3-9-2: HOUSE MOVER DEFINED:
A "house mover" shall mean any person who undertakes to move a building or
similar structure upon, over or across the public streets, alleys, walks or
property using skids, jacks, dollies or any method other than upon a properly
licensed motor vehicle. (1985 Code §7-1.0202)
3-9-3: PERMIT REQUIRED; FEE:
A.   Permit Required: It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the
activity of house mover as herein defined without a valid permit from the City
for each house, building or similar structure to be moved. (1985 Code §7-
1.0203)
B.   Permit Fee: A permit fee of twenty five dollars ($25.00) shall be payable
at the time of filing the application with the City Clerk. A separate permit
shall be required for each house, building or similar structure to be moved.
(1985 Code §7-1.0207)
3-9-4: APPLICATION:
Application for a house mover's permit shall be made in writing to the Clerk.
The application shall include:
A.   Name and Address: The applicant's full name and address and if a
corporation the names and addresses of it's principal officers.
B.   Building Location; An accurate description of the present location and
future site of the building or similar structure to be moved.
C.   Routing Plan: A routing plan approved by the Police Chief, City Engineer
and public utility officials. The route approved shall be the shortest route
compatible with the greatest public convenience and safety. (1985 Code §7-
1.0204)
3-9-5: PERMIT ISSUANCE AND TERM:
Upon approval of the application, filing of bond and insurance certificate, and
payment of the required fee the Clerk shall issue a permit. Such permits shall
be valid only for a period of six (6) months following their issuance. (1985
Code §7-1.0208)
3-9-6: BOND AND INSURANCE REQUIREMENTS:
A.   Bond Required: The applicant shall post with the Clerk a penal bond in the
sum of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) issued by a surety company authorized
to issue such bonds in the State. The bond shall guarantee the permittee's
payment for any damage done to the City or to public property, and payment of
all costs incurred by the City in the course of moving the building or
structure. (1985 Code §7-1.0205; 1993 Code)
B.   Insurance Required: Each applicant shall also have filed a certificate of
insurance indicating that he is carrying public liability insurance in effect
for the duration of the permit covering himself and his agents and employees
for the following minimum amounts:
1.   Bodily Injury: Two hundred fifty thousand dollars ($250,000.00) per
person; five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) per accident.
2.   Property Damage: Five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) per accident.
(1985 Code §7-1.0206; 1993 Code)
3-9-7: TIME LIMIT:
No house mover shall permit or allow a building or similar structure to remain
upon any street or other public way for a period of more than twelve (12) hours
without having first secured the written approval of the City. (1985 Code §7-
1.0210)
3-9-8: PROTECTION OF LIFE AND PROPERTY:
A.   Public Safety: At all times when a building or similar structure is in
motion upon any street, alley, sidewalk or public property, the permittee shall
maintain flagmen at the closest intersections or other possible channels of
traffic to the sides, behind and ahead of the building or structure. At all
times when the building or structure is at rest upon any street, alley,
sidewalk or public property, the permittee shall maintain adequate warning
signs or flares at the intersections or channels of traffic to the sides,
behind and ahead of the building or structure. (1985 Code §7-1.0210)
B.   It shall be unlawful to move any house or building of any kind over any
pavement, unless the wheels or rollers upon which the house or building is
moved shall be at least one inch (1") in width for each one thousand (1,000)
pounds of weight of such building. If there is any question as to the weight of
a house or building, the estimate of the Engineer as to such weight shall be
final. (1985 Code §7-1.0212; 1993 Code)
C.   Electric Wires: The holder of any permit to move a building shall see that
all telephone, telegraph and electric wires and poles are removed when
necessary and replaced in good order and shall be liable for the costs of the
same. The holder of the permit for moving a building shall give twenty four
(24) hours notice to the owner of any telephone, telegraph or electric wires to
remove such wires, and the owner of such wires may either remove or direct the
removal and replacing of such wires, and the holder of the permit shall pay the
reasonable costs thereof. (1985 Code §7-1.0213)
3-9-9: REMOVAL BY CITY:
In the event any building or similar structure is found to be in violation of
Section
3-9-7 of this Chapter, the City is authorized to remove such building or
structure and assess the costs thereof against the permit holder and the surety
on his bond. (1985 Code §7-1.0211)
CHAPTER 10
CIGARETTE SALES
SECTION:
3-10-1: Definitions
3-10-2: Permit Required; Fees
3-10-3: Application
3-10-4: Issuance; Term
3-10-5: Permits Not Transferrable
3-10-6: Revocation
3-10-7: Renewal After Revocation
3-10-1: DEFINITIONS:
For use in this Chapter the following terms are defined:
CIGARETTE: Any roll for smoking made wholly or in part of tobacco, irrespective
of size or shape and irrespective of being flavored, adulterated or mixed with
any other ingredient, where such roll has a wrapper or cover made of paper or
any other material. It also shall mean cigarette papers, wrappers and tubes. It
shall further include cigarillos provided their weight does not exceed three
(3) pounds per thousand. However, this definition shall not be construed to
include cigars.
PLACE OF BUSINESS: Any building or structure in which cigarettes are sold, or
are kept for the purpose of sale, by a retailer.
RETAILER: Every individual, firm, corporation or other association that sells,
distributes or offers for sale for consumption, or possesses for the purpose of
sale for consumption, cigarettes, irrespective of the quantity or amount or the
number of sales. (1985 Code §7-2.01)
3-10-2: PERMIT REQUIRED; FEES:
A.   Permit Required: No retailer shall distribute, sell or solicit the sale of
any cigarettes within the City without a valid permit for each place of
business. The permit shall be displayed publicly in the place of business so
that it can be seen easily by the public. No permit shall be issued to a minor.
(1985 Code §7-2.02)
B.   Fees: The fees for issuing or renewing a cigarette permit shall be as
follows:
 
For Permits Issued or Renewed During Fee
 
July, August or September         $100.00
October, November or December     75.00
January, February or March           50.00
April, May or June                   25.00
 
(1985 Code §7-2.04)
C.   Refunds: A retailer may surrender an unrevoked permit and receive a refund
from the City, except during April, May or June, as follows:
 
Permits Surrendered During       Amount of Refund
 
July, August or September     $75.00
October, November or December  50.00
January, February or March    25.00
 
(1985 Code §7-2.08)
3-10-3: APPLICATION:
A completed application on forms provided by the State Department of Revenue
and accompanied by the fee provided in subsection
3-10-2B shall be filed with the Clerk. Renewal applications shall be filed at
least five (5) days prior to the last regular meeting of the Council in June.
If a renewal application is not timely filed, and a special Council meeting is
called to act on the application the costs of such special meeting shall be
paid by the applicant. (1985 Code §7-2.03)
3-10-4: ISSUANCE; TERM:
A.   Issuance: The Council shall issue or renew a permit upon a determination
that such issuance or renewal will not be detrimental to the public health,
safety or morals, and shall certify its action in issuing a permit to the State
Department of Revenue.
B.   Term: Permits expire on June 30 of each year. (1985 Code §7-2.07)
3-10-5: PERMITS NOT TRANSFERABLE:
A permit shall not be transferable to another place of business or retailer.
However, if a retailer who holds a valid permit changes his place of business,
the Council, if it decides to issue a new permit to him, shall not charge any
additional fee for the unexpired term of the original permit if the retailer
has not received a refund for surrender of the original permit. (1985 Code §7-
2.06)
3-10-6: REVOCATION:
The Council, after notice and hearing, shall revoke a permit if it finds the
retailer has substantially violated the provisions of this Chapter or chapter
98, Code of Iowa, or if grounds exist that would be sufficient for refusal to
issue such a permit. The Clerk shall give five (5) days' written notice to the
retailer by mailing a copy of the notice by certified mail to the place of
business as it appears on his application for a permit. The notice shall state
the reason for the contemplated revocation and the time and place at which he
may appear and be heard. The hearing shall be held at the regular meeting place
of the Council. (1985 Code §7-2.09)
3-10-7: RENEWAL AFTER REVOCATION:
Upon revocation, no new permit shall be issued to the retailer or for the place
of business for one year from the date of revocation unless good cause to the
contrary is shown the Council. (1985 Code §7-2.10)
CHAPTER 11
PUBLIC DANCE HALLS
(Rep. by Ord. 1649, 9-26-2005)
CHAPTER 12
ANIMAL-DRAWN VEHICLES
SECTION:
3-12-1: Permit Required
3-12-2: Permit Issuance Requirements; Fee; Term
3-12-3: Restrictions
3-12-4: Vehicle Compliance with Code
3-12-5: Health and Sanitation
3-12-6: Damages and Expenses
3-12-7: Permit Revocation; Appeal
3-12-8: Penalty
3-12-1: PERMIT REQUIRED:
No person shall operate an animal-drawn vehicle for commercial purposes on any
street or for any purpose on a street within the City except in accordance with
the terms of a permit issued in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter.
(Ord. 932, 10-1-90)
3-12-2: PERMIT ISSUANCE REQUIREMENTS; FEE; TERM:
A.   Issuance Requirements: Upon application, the City Clerk shall issue an
animal-drawn vehicle permit if it is found that:
1.   The proposed animals, vehicles, routes, hours, frequency and other aspects
of use of the streets will not unreasonably interfere with the efficient
movement of other traffic.
2.   The applicant presents a workable plan for sanitation and the disposal of
animal excrement.
3.   If the applicant houses animals in the City, the applicant presents a
workable plan for feeding, sheltering, quartering and stabling the animals used
that is in compliance with this Code and all other applicable law.
4.   The commercial use applicant provides an insurance certificate to the City
issued by an insurance company licensed to do business in the State,
demonstrating insurance coverage to the applicant with a minimum liability of
five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) for the injury or death of any one
person and subject to the same limit per person, a minimum liability of five
hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) for the injury or death of any number of
persons in one accident, and a minimum liability of five hundred thousand
dollars ($500,000.00) for damage to property of others, but excluding property
of the insured. The insurance certificate shall provide that notice shall be
given to the City Clerk thirty (30) days prior to any cancellation or
termination of insurance. The cancellation or termination of the insurance
shall automatically revoke the permit.
B.   Fee: The applicant shall pay a permit fee of thirty dollars ($30.00) per
commercial use vehicle.
C.   Term: The term of a permit is one year, beginning on the date of approval.
(Ord. 932, 10-1-90)
3-12-3: RESTRICTIONS:
The City Clerk shall prescribe the form of the application and may require such
information as is reasonably necessary to make the required findings. The City
Clerk shall place in the permit such restrictions on time, place and manner as
reasonably necessary to meet the requirements of this Section. Permittees are
in any case restricted to operating within the terms of their own application.
(Ord. 932, 10-1-90)
3-12-4: VEHICLE COMPLIANCE WITH CODE:
All animal-drawn vehicles shall comply with all applicable statutes of the
State and this City Code. (Ord. 932, 10-1-90)
3-12-5: HEALTH AND SANITATION:
The permit holder shall comply with all applicable health and sanitation laws
and regulations of the City, County and State, and further shall meet at least
the following specific sanitation conditions:
At the permit holder's expense, the operator or permit holder of an animal-
drawn vehicle shall, as soon as possible, remove any animal excrement caused by
said animal that falls upon the City streets. (Ord. 932, 10-1-90)
3-12-6: DAMAGES AND EXPENSES:
A permit holder shall pay, and, by acceptance of a permit, specifically agrees
to pay, any and all damages or penalties that the City may be legally required
to pay as a result of the permittee's operation or maintenance of an animal-
drawn vehicle under this Chapter, whether or not the acts or omissions
complained of are authorized, allowed or prohibited by the City.
A permit holder shall also pay all expenses incurred by the City in defending
itself with regard to any and all damages and penalties mentioned in this
Chapter. These expenses include all out-of-pocket expenses, including
reasonable attorneys' fees and the reasonable value of services rendered by any
employee of the City. (Ord. 932, 10-1-90)
3-12-7: PERMIT REVOCATION; APPEAL:
A permit may be revoked for violations of this Chapter. Prior to revocation,
the permit holder shall be given ten (10) days' written notice. Upon request,
the permit holder may appear before the City Clerk to appeal the revocation.
The permit holder may appeal the City Clerk's final decision to the City
Council if such appeal is filed with the City Clerk within ten (10) days of
that decision. The City Clerk may refuse to re-issue a permit for a period of
one year for violations of this Chapter. (Ord. 932, 10-1-90)
3-12-8: PENALTY:
Any violation of the provisions of this Chapter shall be punished as set forth
in Section
1-4-1 of this City Code. (Ord. 932, 10-1-90)
CHAPTER 13
AFTER HOURS BUSINESSES
SECTION:
3-13-1: Purpose; Findings
3-13-2: Definitions
3-13-3: License Or Permit Required; Eligibility
3-13-4: Conditions For License Approval
3-13-5: License Application
3-13-6: Security Required; Security Employee Training
3-13-7: Investigation Procedure
3-13-8: License Fees
3-13-9: License Renewals
3-13-10: Scope Of License; Sale, Transfer, And Assignability
3-13-11: Examination Of Premises
3-13-12: Violation By Clerks, Agents, And Employees
3-13-13: Procedures For Suspension, Revocation, Or Civil Penalty
3-13-14: Enforcement Alternatives
3-13-15: Causes For Suspension, Revocation, Or Civil Penalty
3-13-16: Emergency Suspension
3-13-17: Effect Of Revocation
3-13-18: Appeal
3-13-1: PURPOSE; FINDINGS:
The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the reasonable regulation of
existing after hours businesses within the city of West Des Moines and to
prohibit new after hours businesses from entering the city of West Des Moines.
The city council finds that the existence of after hours businesses, which
allow the on premises consumption of alcohol during early morning hours, in the
greater Des Moines metropolitan area has caused detrimental effects on the
health, safety, welfare, and quality of life of residents, visitors, and upon
cities in general. The city council has deemed it necessary to limit the number
of after hours businesses located within the city of West Des Moines. The city
council also intends that the existing after hours businesses within the city
of West Des Moines eventually will be discontinued, removed, or replaced by
other types of businesses. Based on these findings and intentions, the city
council has enacted the following regulations for after hours businesses in the
city of West Des Moines. (Ord. 1899, 12-27-2010)
3-13-2: DEFINITIONS:
The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have
the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly
indicates a different meaning:
ABANDONED: The building or part of the building which houses the after hours
business has not been occupied for that business purpose for a period of six
(6) consecutive months. An after hours business license suspension or
revocation shall be included in the calculation of the six (6) month
abandonment period.
AFTER HOURS BUSINESS: Any business open during any time between the hours of
two o'clock (2:00) A.M. to six o'clock (6:00) A.M. any day of the week and
where patrons are allowed to bring their own beer and wine onto the business
premises.
BEER: Any liquid capable of being used for beverage purposes made by the
fermentation of an infusion in potable water of barley, malt, and hops, with or
without unmarred grains or decorticated and degerminated grains or made by the
fermentation of or by distillation of the fermented products of fruit, fruit
extracts, or other agricultural products, containing more than one-half (1/2)
of one percent (1%) of alcohol by volume but not more than five percent (5%) of
alcohol by weight but not including mixed drinks or cocktails; or, as otherwise
defined by succeeding state legislation.
BUSINESS PREMISES OR LICENSED PREMISES: All buildings and properties including
parking lots owned or leased for the benefit of the operation of the after
hours business.
DESIGNATED SECURITY EMPLOYEE: An agent, contract employee, independent
contractor, servant, or employee of a licensee or permittee who works in a
security position in any capacity at a commercial establishment licensed or
permitted under this chapter.
HOTEL OR MOTEL: Premises licensed by the state department of inspections and
appeals and regularly or seasonally kept open in a bona fide manner for the
lodging of transient guests and with twenty (20) or more sleeping rooms.
OCCUPIED: Operating the after hours business on a regular basis, which consists
of allowing members of the public to enter the premises at least once a week
for the purposes for which the person obtained the after hours business
license.
PERSON: Any individual, association, partnership, corporation, or club owning
or operating an after hours business.
PERSON OF GOOD MORAL CHARACTER (Or As Otherwise Defined By Succeeding State
Legislation): Any person who meets all of the following requirements:
A.   The person has such financial standing and good reputation as will satisfy
the city that the person will comply with this chapter and all laws,
ordinances, and regulations applicable to the person's operations under this
chapter.
1.   In evaluating an applicant's "financial standing" the city may consider
the following: an applicant's "financial standing" may include, but is not
limited to, verified source(s) of financial support and adequate operating
capital for the applicant's proposed after hours business, a record of prompt
payment of local or state taxes due, a record of prompt payment to the city and
the various utility companies of fees or charges due the city or the utility
companies for municipal services or utilities provided, and prompt payment of
or satisfaction of any fee, fine, or civil penalty imposed pursuant to any
chapter of this code.
2.   In evaluating an applicant's "good reputation", the city may consider such
factors as, but not limited to, the following: a pattern or practice of
violating any of the requirements or prohibitions set out in this chapter to
which the licensee or licensee's agents or employees have pleaded guilty or
been found guilty in a criminal court or have been otherwise sanctioned under
this chapter, a pattern or practice of violating any of the state alcoholic
beverages laws and regulations for which corrective action has been taken,
convictions of licensee of laws relating to operating a motor vehicle while
under the influence of drugs or alcohol, convictions of any laws relating to
illegal drug use, possession or sale, convictions of misdemeanor charges, their
recency and severity.
B.   The person is not subject to or prohibited from obtaining a liquor control
license or a wine or beer permit.
C.   Notwithstanding subsection E of this definition, the applicant is a
citizen of the United States and a resident of the state of Iowa, or licensed
to do business in the state of Iowa in the case of a corporation.
Notwithstanding subsection E of this definition, in the case of a partnership,
only one general partner need be a resident of the state of Iowa.
D.   The person has not been convicted of a felony. However, if the person's
conviction of a felony occurred more than five (5) years before the date of the
application for a license or permit, and if the person's rights of citizenship
have been restored by the governor, the city may determine that the person is
of good moral character notwithstanding such conviction.
E.   The requirements of this definition apply to the following:
1.   Each of the officers, directors, and partners of such person.
2.   A person who directly or indirectly owns or controls ten percent (10%) or
more of any class of stock of such person.
3.   A person who directly or indirectly has an interest of ten percent (10%)
or more in the ownership or profits of such person.
4.   For the purposes of this subsection, an individual and the individual's
spouse shall be regarded as one person.
WINE: Any beverage containing more than five percent (5%) of alcohol by weight
but not more than seventeen percent (17%) of alcohol by weight or twenty one
and twenty five hundredths percent of alcohol by volume obtained by the
fermentation of the natural sugar contents of fruits or other agricultural
products but excluding any product containing alcohol derived from malt or by
the distillation process from grain, cereal, molasses, or cactus; or, as
otherwise defined by succeeding state legislation. (Ord. 1899, 12-27-2010)
3-13-3: LICENSE OR PERMIT REQUIRED; ELIGIBILITY:
No person shall operate an after hours business in the city without first
applying for and paying the license fee to procure an after hours business
license. This chapter, however, shall not apply to hotels or motels. Upon
meeting the requirements imposed by this chapter, a person who is of good moral
character as defined by this chapter, may apply for and hold an after hours
business license. For a corporation or partnership, the officers of the
corporation and the partners of a partnership shall be persons of good moral
character as defined by this chapter or state law. (Ord. 1899, 12-27-2010)
3-13-4: CONDITIONS FOR LICENSE APPROVAL:
The following conditions and regulations must be met by an applicant for an
after hours business license:
A.   The applicant must give consent in writing on the application that members
of the fire and police departments and the building inspector may enter upon
the business premises without warrant to inspect for violations of the
provisions of state and municipal law, as well as for compliance with other
applicable fire, building, and health code regulations.
B.   The premises for which an after hours business license is sought must be
located within an area where such business is permitted and conforms to the
city's zoning requirements.
C.   The premises for which an after hours business license is sought must also
have been lawfully established as an after hours business on or before December
31, 2010, and must have been in active use. The applicant shall bear the burden
of proof to show that the premises have been actively used as an after hours
business on or before December 31, 2010, and that the use has not been
abandoned.
D.   All applicable permits and licenses provided for by this code shall be
displayed in a conspicuous place on the premises of the license holder and at
all times shall be subject to inspection.
E.   No after hours business license shall be approved for premises which do
not conform to all applicable laws, ordinances, resolutions, and health and
fire regulations. (Ord. 1899, 12-27-2010)
3-13-5: LICENSE APPLICATION:
All applicants for an after hours business license shall apply in writing to
the city clerk. Applications for the issuance of an after hours business
license shall be filed at the time and in the number of copies as the city
clerk shall prescribe, on forms prescribed by the city clerk.
All applications shall be made in the name of the owner of the business,
whether an individual, a partnership, or a corporation, and shall contain the
following:
A.   The full name, residence address, business address, date of birth, and
social security number of the applicant and, when the applicant is a
partnership or corporation, of the partners or officers.
B.   If the applicant is a corporation, the name of the corporation shall be
set forth exactly as shown in its articles of incorporation together with the
names and residence addresses of each of the officers, directors, and each
stockholder holding more than ten percent (10%) of the stock of the
corporation; if the applicant is a partnership, the application shall set forth
the name and the residence address of each of the partners, including limited
partners. If one or more of the partners is a corporation, the subsections of
this section pertaining to a corporate application apply.
C.   The name and address of the owner of the building where such after hours
business will be located.
D.   If required by the city clerk, a sketch or diagram of the proposed
licensed premises, in such form and containing such information as the city
clerk may require.
E.   A copy of a valid Iowa sales tax permit for operation of the after hours
business. (Ord. 1899, 12-27-2010)
3-13-6: SECURITY REQUIRED; SECURITY EMPLOYEE TRAINING:
A.   An after hours business license holder shall provide adequate security to
provide for crowd control and the safety of patrons.
B.   The city may, as a condition of obtaining and holding an after hours
business license or permit, require a "designated security employee" as defined
in this chapter to be trained and certified in security methods. This training
shall include, but is not limited to, mediation techniques, civil rights or
unfair practices awareness, and providing instruction on the proper physical
restraint methods used against a person who has become combative. (Ord. 1899,
12-27-2010)
3-13-7: INVESTIGATION PROCEDURE:
A.   Upon submission of an original application for an after hours business
license to the city clerk, each person listed in the original application shall
also obtain and provide the city clerk with an officially sealed Iowa division
of criminal investigation ("DCI") personal background check at that person's
expense. The city clerk may forward a copy of the original application
documents to the police chief. The police chief may then conduct an
investigation as to the truth of the facts averred in the application documents
and transmit the results to the city clerk who will make a recommendation to
the city council for approval or disapproval of the application. No approval of
the license or permit shall occur until the city clerk has received the results
of any such investigation.
B.   Upon submission of an application for renewal of a current after hours
business license to the city clerk, any person listed in the renewal
application who did not previously obtain and provide the city clerk with an
officially sealed DCI personal background check must do so at that person's own
expense. The city clerk may forward a copy of the renewal application documents
to the police chief. The police chief may then review and comment on the
renewal application to the city clerk who will make a recommendation to the
city council for approval or disapproval of the renewal application. No
approval for renewal of a license or permit shall occur until the city clerk
has received the results of any such investigation.
C.   The city's building official, zoning enforcement officer, and the fire
chief or their designees shall inspect the premises to determine if they
conform to the city's requirements. No license or permit shall be approved or
issued unless or until the city clerk finds that the applicant has fully
complied with all requirements of this chapter and all applicable ordinances
and codes regulating fire, buildings, health, and zoning. (Ord. 1899, 12-27-
2010)
3-13-8: LICENSE FEES:
A.   An applicant for an after hours business license shall submit a fee to the
city clerk at the time of filing the application.
B.   All after hours business licenses, unless sooner suspended or revoked,
shall expire at six o'clock (6:00) A.M., one year from the date of issuance.
C.   An applicant who files for renewal less than thirty (30) days prior to the
date of any license expiration shall pay a late fee.
D.   If the application is denied or if the application is withdrawn before
final action is taken by the city clerk, a portion of the application fee shall
be retained by the city clerk for the cost of administration.
E.   The license fee, its nonrefundable portion, and the late fee for the after
hours business license shall be in the amounts set in the schedule of fees
adopted by the city council by resolution. (Ord. 1899, 12-27-2010)
3-13-9: LICENSE RENEWALS:
Every person operating an after hours business shall apply for an after hours
business license annually as if for an original license. There shall be no
automatic renewal. Such application shall be filed and the fee paid not less
than thirty (30) days prior to the expiration of the current license. (Ord.
1899, 12-27-2010)
3-13-10: SCOPE OF LICENSE; SALE, TRANSFER, AND ASSIGNABILITY:
A.   An after hours business license shall be a personal privilege and is
revocable for cause. It is not property nor is it subject to attachment and
execution nor alienable nor assignable, and it shall cease upon the death of
the permittee or licensee, or terminate upon sale.
B.   Every permit or license shall be issued in the name of the applicant, and
no person holding a permit or license shall allow any other person to use the
permit or license.
C.   No after hours business license shall be sold or transferred. The
purchaser of any after hours business or of the majority of the stock of any
corporation operating an after hours business shall make application for and
obtain a new license before operating such business at the location for which
the license has been issued. The after hours business license shall not be
assignable. (Ord. 1899, 12-27-2010)
3-13-11: EXAMINATION OF PREMISES:
It shall be unlawful for a person to refuse, resist, or attempt to prevent any
city employee or any authorized city agent from making a reasonable examination
of the business premises. (Ord. 1899, 12-27-2010)
3-13-12: VIOLATION BY CLERKS, AGENTS, AND EMPLOYEES:
Every clerk, agent, or employee of any after hours business shall be subject to
and bound by this chapter and state law and be liable for the same penalties
and to the same extent as his or her employer or principal for any violation of
this chapter or state law. Any violation of this chapter or state law by any
clerk, agent, or employee of a licensee shall be deemed the act of the licensee
and shall subject the license of said licensee to civil penalty, suspension, or
revocation. (Ord. 1899, 12-27-2010)
3-13-13: PROCEDURES FOR SUSPENSION, REVOCATION, OR CIVIL PENALTY:
A.   Whenever the city council finds that the licensee or its employees or
agents have furnished any false information required under this chapter, or has
violated or failed to comply with any of the requirements of this chapter or
state law, the city council may impose a civil penalty not to exceed five
hundred dollars ($500.00) upon the licensee and/or suspend or revoke the
license.
B.   No civil penalty, suspension, or revocation shall issue except upon notice
delivered to the licensee by mailing notice via regular mail, addressed to the
licensee at the licensed premises, a minimum of ten (10) days prior to the date
set for hearing. Such notice shall inform the licensee of the time, date, and
place of hearing and shall set out briefly the reasons for the hearing.
C.   If, after such hearing, the city council makes a finding based on
substantial evidence that a violation of this chapter or state law did in fact
take place as alleged, the city council may impose an appropriate civil penalty
and/or suspend or revoke the license. The determination of whether to impose a
civil penalty and/or suspend or revoke such license shall be in the discretion
of the city council, and shall be dependent upon the circumstances surrounding
the violation and its severity.
D.   A licensee whose license has been revoked shall not be eligible for
another such license for a period of two (2) years after such revocation.
E.   Failure to pay a civil penalty imposed within thirty (30) days of the
resolution imposing such penalty, if not stayed by appeal, shall result in an
automatic suspension of the after hours business license for thirty (30)
consecutive days. The city clerk shall issue a suspension order and the thirty
(30) day suspension shall commence at six o'clock (6:00) P.M. five (5) business
days following service of the order via ordinary mail to the last known address
of the licensee or permittee. (Ord. 1899, 12-27-2010)
3-13-14: ENFORCEMENT ALTERNATIVES:
Any person who fails to perform an act required by this chapter or state law,
or who commits an act prohibited by this chapter or state law, may be subject
to a municipal infraction, punishable as provided in title 1, chapter 4,
"Municipal Infractions", of this code or pursuant to state law, as an
alternative to the penalty procedures of section
3-13-13 of this chapter. (Ord. 1899, 12-27-2010)
3-13-15: CAUSES FOR SUSPENSION, REVOCATION, OR CIVIL PENALTY:
A criminal conviction is not a prerequisite to suspend, revoke, or impose a
civil penalty pursuant to this chapter. An after hours business licensee or
permittee may be required to pay a civil penalty and/or have the license
suspended for a period not to exceed one year or revoked for violations of this
chapter, following notice and hearing for any of the following causes:
A.   Misrepresentation of any material fact in the application for the after
hours business license.
B.   Violation of any of the provisions of state or municipal law pertaining to
the operation of the after hours business.
C.   Any change in the ownership or interest in the business, which was not
previously reported to and approved by the city.
D.   Any event which would have resulted in disqualification from receiving
such license or permit when originally issued or renewed.
E.   Any sale, hypothecation, or transfer of such license or permit.
F.   The failure or refusal on the part of the licensee or permittee to render
any report or remit any taxes to the internal revenue service of the state of
Iowa that is required by state law. (Ord. 1899, 12-27-2010)
3-13-16: EMERGENCY SUSPENSION:
A.   Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, the chief of police
or his or her designee may temporarily suspend the after hours business license
and order a temporary closure of the business in a situation involving an
immediate danger to public health, safety, or welfare.
B.   The police department shall give written notice of the temporary
suspension and closure order along with a brief statement of the facts and
reasons for the decision to suspend to persons who are required to comply with
the order. Such notice shall state that the matter of temporary suspension and
closure will be heard by the city council at the first regularly scheduled
council meeting after expiration of five (5) calendar days from the temporary
suspension/closure. The suspension and order of closure is effective when
issued and will remain effective until the city council reviews the facts,
circumstances, and reasons for the temporary suspension and closure.
C.   A copy of the written notice of suspension and closure shall be sent to
the city clerk. Such hearing shall be placed on the city council agenda for the
next regularly scheduled council meeting after expiration of five (5) calendar
days from the temporary suspension and closure.
D.   The city council may take any action it is authorized to take under
section
3-13-13 of this chapter and/or reinstatement of the after hours business
license. (Ord. 1899, 12-27-2010)
3-13-17: EFFECT OF REVOCATION:
A.   Any licensee whose license or permit is revoked shall not thereafter be
permitted to hold a license in the city for a period of two (2) years from the
date of such revocation.
B.   A spouse or business associate holding ten percent (10%) or more of the
capital stock or ownership interest in the business of a person whose license
or permit has been revoked shall not be issued a license and no license shall
be issued which covers any business in which such person has a financial
interest for a period of two (2) years from the date of such revocation.
C.   If a license is revoked, the premises covered by such license shall not be
relicensed as an after hours business for one year. (Ord. 1899, 12-27-2010)
3-13-18: APPEAL:
A.   The right of appeal to the city council shall be afforded an applicant for
an after hours business license or for a renewal license whose license has been
denied by the city clerk. Such appeal shall be in writing and filed with the
city clerk's office within ten (10) days after notice of denial is sent by
ordinary mail.
B.   Any applicant who feels aggrieved by a decision of the city council
penalizing, suspending, revoking, or disapproving issuance of a license may
appeal from such decision within thirty (30) days to the Polk County district
court. (Ord. 1899, 12-27-2010)
CHAPTER 14
SALE OF FIREWORKS
SECTION:
3-14-1: Consumer Fireworks Retail Facility Permit
3-14-2: Consumer Fireworks Retail Sale Permit
3-14-3: Temporary Retail Sales In Temporary Structures - Regulations
3-14-4: Temporary Retail Sales In Permanent Structures - Regulations
3-14-5: Wholesale And Storage
3-14-6: Violation
3-14-1: CONSUMER FIREWORKS RETAIL FACILITY PERMIT:
A.   A consumer fireworks retail facility permit for the retail or wholesale
sale or storage of consumer fireworks as defined in Iowa Code section 727.2 may
be issued subject to the provisions of Iowa Code section 10A.519, and, title 4,
chapter 3 and title 9 of this Code.
B.   The West Des Moines Fire Chief or designee shall promulgate rules and
regulations for the purpose of safeguarding life and property from fire or
other hazards arising from the storage and handling of consumer and display
fireworks. Such rules and regulations shall be incorporated in and made part of
the consumer fireworks retail facility permit.
C.   In addition to the rules and regulations referenced in subsection B of
this section, the consumer fireworks retail facility permit shall conform to
the following. (Ord. 2226, 5-30-2017; amd. Ord. 2609, 5-20-2024)
3-14-2: CONSUMER FIREWORKS RETAIL SALE PERMIT:
A.   A permit application for the retail sale of consumer fireworks must be
filed with the City Clerk. No permit application shall be accepted for filing
and processing unless it conforms to the requirements of this title. This
includes a complete and true application, all of the required materials and
information prescribed and accompanied by all appropriate fees.
B.   A permit application must be submitted not less than ten (10) calendar
days prior to the proposed start date of the retail sale activities. The City
reserves the right to reject any application that has not been timely submitted
to the City. The City Clerk shall have the discretionary right to accept an
application made less than ten (10) days prior to desired start date.
C.   Receiving approval of a consumer fireworks retail sale permit from the
City shall not preclude, supersede, circumvent, or waive the applicant's
responsibility to obtain any additional permits, licenses, and approvals for
other applicable local, State and Federal regulations. (Ord. 2226, 5-30-2017)
3-14-3: TEMPORARY RETAIL SALES IN TEMPORARY STRUCTURES - REGULATIONS:
A consumer fireworks temporary retail sales facility within a temporary
structure shall comply with the following regulations:
A.    General:
1.   Fireworks facilities may only be located within an allowable zoning
district as provided in Title 9 of this Code.
2.   Maximum square footage of all temporary establishments within the
property, including garden centers, food vendors, fireworks sales and storage
areas, and other retail vendors shall not occupy more than twenty percent (20%)
of parking stalls.
3.   Vendors are responsible for compliance with all applicable accessibility
requirements. City approval of permit should not be viewed as confirmation of
compliance with requirements.
4.   Fireworks facilities shall be secured when unoccupied and not open for
business unless fireworks are not kept in the facility during such time. If the
facility cannot be adequately secured (such as a tent), and the fireworks are
kept in the facility when unoccupied, on-site security must be provided for
those hours the facility is unoccupied and not open for business.
5.   No person is to inhabit, dwell, or live in a temporary structure that is
used as a consumer fireworks retail facility. RVs may be located within the
property for employees and/or security personnel during the duration of
fireworks sales operations as outlined below.
6.   Fireworks related business signage collectively shall not exceed thirty-
two (32) square feet (excludes City required emergency signage/postings). No
directional signs within the site or off-premises signs directing people to the
fireworks sales operation are allowed. Any off-premises signs found will be
confiscated and destroyed.
7.   Set-up within the building subject to a fireworks sales permit may occur
prior to one week before the selling seasons as outlined per the State of
Iowa’s fireworks regulations. No retail sales of fireworks may occur prior to
the selling seasons as outlined per the State of Iowa’s fireworks regulations.
Compliance with all regulations contained within this Code is required for any
sales or storage facility.
8.   All sales and storage structures and components must be removed from the
site by one week after the allowed sales date as outlined per the State of
Iowa’s fireworks regulations, and the site restored to its pre-retail facility
condition and all garbage and debris removed from the site.
B.   Site:
1.   Posters related to regulations on the discharge of fireworks shall be
displayed in a highly visible location at all check-out locations and within
fifteen feet (15') of every entrance as approved by the City.
2.   Smoking shall not be allowed within fifty feet (50') of any sales or
storage structure. Approved “No Smoking” signs shall be placed at each entrance
and within ten feet (10') of every aisle.
3.   All sales and storage areas are to be located on pavement or gravel unless
otherwise approved by the Fire Marshal.
4.   All customer parking areas are to be located on pavement - asphalt or
concrete. Grass or gravel parking is not allowed.
5.   Ten (10) parking stalls shall be provided for every one thousand (1,000)
square feet of retail sales area. The number of accessible stalls shall be
provided in accordance with State Code.
6.   Emergency vehicle access shall be located within one hundred fifty feet
(150') of all sides of a sales or storage structure.
7.   Access drives shall be paved or gravel surfaced able to hold seventy-five
thousand (75,000) pounds GVW.
8.   Separation Requirements:
a.   Sales and storage facilities cannot be located closer than three hundred
feet (300') to any above ground bulk storage tanks or bulk dispensing areas for
flammable or combustible liquid, flammable gas or flammable liquified gas.
b.   Sales and storage facilities cannot be located closer than fifty feet
(50') to any of the following:
(1)   Motor vehicle fuel dispensing stations, including convenience stores;
(2)   Propane dispensing stations;
(3)   Compressed natural gas dispensing stations;
(4)   Any above ground storage tanks for flammable or combustible liquid,
flammable gas or flammable liquified gas.
c.   Sales and storage facilities cannot be located closer than thirty feet
(30') to any combustibles such as dry grass, dry brush and combustible debris
or materials as determined by the Fire Marshal.
d.   Sales and storage facilities cannot be located closer than twenty feet
(20') to any of the following:
(1)   Other storage or sales facilities (unless otherwise noted in NFPA-1124,
2006 edition);
(2)   Public road right-of-way or the interior edge of a private road;
(3)   Other buildings and recreational vehicles that are within the site or on
adjacent properties;
(4)   Generators and other internal power sources which shall be isolated with
appropriate barriers to prevent contact with the public;
(5)   Separation requirements for fuel capacity of and fuel storage for
generators shall comply with NFPA-1124 2006;
(6)   Combustible liquids, gas and fuels, including stored fuels for
generators, equipment, and vehicles.
Fuel storage capacity shall comply with NFPA-1124 2006.
e.   Parking areas are to be located a minimum of ten feet (10') from any sales
or storage facility.
f.   Sales and storage facilities shall meet separation requirements from
electrical utility equipment as required by MidAmerican Energy.
C.   Facility:
1.   All fireworks storage and sales facilities shall be in a container or
building that complies with the NFPA 101, Life Safety Code, for mercantile
occupancies.
2.   Aisles in the sales facility shall be a minimum of forty-eight inches
(48") in width. No dead-end aisles are allowed.
3.   Continuous display of merchandise and/or fireworks shall not exceed
sixteen feet (16') in length. A flame break aisle at least forty-eight inches
(48") wide shall separate continuous displays.
4.   Fireworks shall not be displayed greater than six feet (6') above the
walking surface.
5.   Not less than fifty percent (50%) of the available floor area within the
retail sales area shall be open space, unoccupied by retail displays and used
only for aisles and cross-aisles.
6.   Exits shall be kept clear of any merchandise and/or obstacles.
7.   Each sales facility shall provide not less than 3 exits, or as determined
in accordance with the NFPA 101, Life
Safety Code, whichever number is greater. Minimum exit width is forty-four
inches (44") and maximum travel distance to an exit is seventy-five feet (75').
8.   Only electrical lighting per the National Electric Code shall be utilized.
9.   Illuminated exit signs and emergency lighting shall be provided if the
sales facility is open after dusk. Illuminated exit signs and emergency
lighting shall be in accordance with the NFPA 101, Life Safety Code.
10.   Fire extinguishers shall be provided as required for extra (high) hazard
occupancy per the NFPA 10, Standards for Portable Fire Extinguishers. No fewer
than 2 extinguishers with a minimum rating of 2A, and with a minimum of one
being a pressurized water type, shall be provided per facility. Maximum travel
distance from any point in a sales facility to an extinguisher shall not exceed
thirty-five feet (35'). (Ord. 2656, 4-7-2025)
3-14-4: TEMPORARY RETAIL SALES IN PERMANENT STRUCTURES - REGULATIONS:
A consumer fireworks temporary retail sales facility within a permanent
structure shall comply with the following regulations:
A.    General:
1.   Fireworks facilities may only be located within an allowable zoning
district as provided in Title 9 of this Code.
2.   Maximum square footage of all exterior temporary sales or storage areas
within the property, including garden centers, food vendors, fireworks sales
and storage areas, and other retail vendors shall not occupy more than twenty
percent (20%) of parking stalls.
3.   Vendors are responsible for compliance with all applicable accessibility
requirements. City approval of permit should not be viewed as confirmation of
compliance with requirements.
4.   Fireworks facilities shall be secured when unoccupied and not open for
business unless fireworks are not kept in the facility during such time.
5.   No person is to inhabit, dwell, or live in a structure that is used as a
consumer fireworks retail facility. RVs may be located within the property for
employees and/or security personnel during the duration of fireworks sales
operations as outlined below.
6.   Total allowable signage shall be in accordance with the City’s Sign Code
for the building. This signage shall be for all businesses within a property -
permanent and temporary. No additional signage square footage will be granted
for a temporary retail facility within a building that has a different business
the remainder of the year. No directional signs within the site or off-premises
signs directing people to the fireworks retail facility are allowed. Any off-
premises signs found will be confiscated and destroyed.
7.   Set-up within the building subject to a fireworks sales permit may occur
prior to one week before the selling seasons as outlined per the State of
Iowa’s fireworks regulations. No retail sales of fireworks may occur prior to
the selling seasons as outlined per the State of Iowa’s fireworks regulations.
Compliance with all regulations contained within this Code is required for any
sales or storage facility.
8.   All fireworks components must be removed from the building or site by one
week after the allowed sales date as outlined per the State of Iowa’s fireworks
regulations.
9.   A tenant improvement permit application may be required if interior
modifications are to be done. Said permit, applicable fees, and improvement
plans shall be submitted to the West Des Moines Building Division.
10.   A minor modification permit application may be required if exterior site
modifications are to be done. Said permit, applicable fees, and improvement
plans shall be submitted to the West Des Moines Planning Division.
B.   Site:
1.   Posters related to regulations on the discharge of fireworks shall be
displayed in a highly visible location at all check-out locations and within
fifteen feet (15') of every entrance as approved by the City.
2.   Smoking shall not be allowed within fifty feet (50') of any sales or
storage structure. Approved “No Smoking” signs shall be placed at each entrance
and within ten feet (10') of every aisle.
3.   All storage facilities are to be located on pavement or gravel unless
otherwise approved by the Fire Marshal.
4.   All customer parking areas are to be located on pavement - asphalt or
concrete. Grass or gravel parking is not allowed.
5.   Ten (10) parking stalls shall be provided for every one thousand (1,000)
square feet of retail sales area. The number of accessible stalls shall be
provided in accordance with State Code.
6.   Emergency vehicle access shall be located within one hundred fifty feet
(150') of all sides of a sales or storage structure.
7.   Access drives shall be paved or gravel surfaced able to hold seventy-five
thousand (75,000) pounds GVW.
8.   Separation Requirements:
a.   Sales and storage facilities cannot be located closer than three hundred
feet (300') to any above ground bulk storage tanks or bulk dispensing areas for
flammable or combustible liquid, flammable gas or flammable liquified gas.
b.   Sales and storage facilities cannot be located closer than fifty feet
(50') to any of the following:
(1)   Motor vehicle fuel dispensing stations, including convenience stores;
(2)   Propane dispensing stations;
(3)   Compressed natural gas dispensing stations;
(4)   Any above ground storage tanks for flammable or combustible liquid,
flammable gas or flammable liquified gas.
c.   Sales and storage facilities cannot be located closer than thirty feet
(30') to any combustibles such as dry grass, dry brush and combustible debris
or materials as determined by the Fire Marshal.
d.   Sales and storage facilities cannot be located closer than twenty feet
(20') to any of the following:
(1)   Other storage or sales facilities (unless otherwise noted in NFPA-1124,
2006 edition);
(2)   Public road right-of-way or the interior edge of a private road;
(3)   Other buildings and recreational vehicles that are within the site or on
adjacent properties;
(4)   Generators and other internal power sources which shall be isolated with
appropriate barriers to prevent contact with the public;
(5)   Separation requirements for fuel capacity of and fuel storage for
generators shall comply with NFPA-1124 2006;
(6)   Combustible liquids, gas and fuels, including stored fuels for
generators, equipment, and vehicles. Fuel storage capacity shall comply with
NFPA-1124 2006.
e.   Parking areas are to be located a minimum of ten feet (10') from any sales
or storage facility.
f.   Sales and storage facilities shall meet separation requirements from
electrical utility equipment as required by MidAmerican Energy.
C.   Facility:
1.   All fireworks sales facilities shall be in a building that complies with
the NFPA 101, Life Safety Code, for mercantile occupancies.
2.   All fireworks storage facilities not contained in a building shall be in a
container that complies with the NFPA 101, Life Safety Code, for mercantile
occupancies.
3.   Existing permanent structures utilized for the temporary retail sales of
fireworks must have been constructed in accordance with the City of West Des
Moines Fire Code with local amendments, this Section, and the City of West Des
Moines Building Code. This includes the most recently adopted version of the
NFPA 13 standard.
4.   Consumer fireworks may not be sold out of buildings that are greater than
one-story in height; or which have a basement.
5.   Aisles in the sales facility shall be a minimum of forty-eight inches
(48") in width. No dead-end aisles are allowed.
6.   Continuous display of merchandise and/or fireworks shall not exceed
sixteen feet (16') in length. A flame break aisle at least forty-eight inches
(48") wide shall separate continuous displays.
7.   Fireworks shall not be displayed greater than six feet (6') above the
walking surface.
8.   Not less than fifty percent (50%) of the available floor area within the
retail sales area shall be open space, unoccupied by retail displays and used
only for aisles and cross-aisles.
9.   Exits shall be kept clear of any merchandise and/or obstacles.
10.   Each sales facility shall provide not less than 3 exits, or as determined
in accordance with the NFPA 101, Life Safety Code, whichever number is greater.
Minimum exit door width is thirty-six inches (36") and maximum travel distance
to an exit is seventy-five feet (75').
11.   Illuminated exit signs shall be provided. Emergency lighting shall be
provided for the means of egress whenever the building is occupied. Illuminated
exit signs and emergency lighting shall be in accordance with the NFPA 101,
Life Safety Code
12.   Fire extinguishers shall be provided as required for extra (high) hazard
occupancy per the NFPA 10, Standards for Portable Fire Extinguishers. No fewer
than 2 extinguishers with a minimum rating of 2A, and with a minimum of one
being a pressurized water type, shall be provided per facility. Maximum travel
distance from any point in a sales facility to an extinguisher shall not exceed
thirty-five feet (35'). (Ord. 2656, 4-7-2025)
3-14-5: WHOLESALE AND STORAGE:
The wholesale sale and storage of consumer and display fireworks shall be
regulated as provided in title 4, chapter 3 and title 9 of this Code. (Ord.
2226, 5-30-2017)
3-14-6: VIOLATION:
Failure to conform to or comply with any provision of this chapter shall
prevent the issuance of a consumer fireworks retail facility permit. Any
person, firm, partnership or corporation undertaking, directing or allowing the
sale of consumer fireworks without a validly issued consumer fireworks retail
facility permit as required by this chapter commits a simple misdemeanor and
shall be subject to a fine of not less than six hundred twenty five dollars
($625.00) for each day the violation continues. The West Des Moines Fire Chief
or designee shall be authorized to immediately seize all consumer fireworks
sold by or offered for sale by the person, firm, partnership or corporation
responsible for the violation. (Ord. 2226, 5-30-2017)
TITLE 4
HEALTH AND SAFETY REGULATIONS
Fire Department   1
Emergency Ambulance Service   2
Fire Code   3
Nuisances   4
Solid Waste Control   5
Construction And Demolition Activities   5A
Transfer Stations   5B
Fees And Charges   5C
Municipal Recycling   6
Noise Control   7
Stormwater Management   8
Systems And Facilities   8A
Fees   8B
Social Host   9
Maintenance Of Foreclosing Properties   10
CHAPTER 1
FIRE DEPARTMENT
SECTION:
4-1-1: Establishment And Purpose
4-1-2: Membership; Qualifications
4-1-3: Appointment Of Fire Personnel
4-1-4: Compensation; Oath Of Office
4-1-5: Training
4-1-6: Fire Chief
4-1-7: Departmental Rules
4-1-8: Insurance
4-1-9: Calls Outside The City
4-1-10: Mutual Aid
4-1-11: Emergencies
4-1-12: Injury To Fire Equipment
4-1-1: ESTABLISHMENT AND PURPOSE:
A career and volunteer fire department is hereby established to prevent and
extinguish fires and to protect lives and property against fires, to promote
fire prevention and fire safety, and to answer all emergency calls for which
there is no other established agency. (Ord. 914, 7-9-1990; amd. 1993 Code)
4-1-2: MEMBERSHIP; QUALIFICATIONS:
The department shall consist of the fire chief and such other officers and
personnel as may be authorized by the city council. In no case shall any person
be recruited, selected or appointed as a member of the department unless such
person: (1985 Code §§2.2-1.0102, 2.2-1.0103)
A.   Department Member: Unless otherwise required by a collective bargaining
agreement, department members shall reside in such proximity to the city as to
provide a safe and adequate response in all situations to meet the requirements
of the department. The determination regarding the residence of a department
member shall be made by the fire chief, based upon established criteria. (Ord.
1436, 2-20-2001; amd. Ord. 1490, 9-30-2002)
B.   Age: Is at least eighteen (18) years of age.
C.   Driver's License: Has a current active Iowa driver's license.
D.   Alcohol And Drugs: Is not addicted to the use of drugs or alcohol.
E.   Character: Is of good moral character as determined by a thorough
investigation.
F.   Education: Is a high school graduate with a diploma, or possesses an
equivalency certificate acceptable by the state department of public
instruction.
G.   Health: Prior to appointment has been examined by accredited professionals
to determine if free from physical, drugs, emotional or mental condition which
might adversely affect the performance of duties. (1985 Code §2.2-1.0103; amd.
1993 Code)
4-1-3: APPOINTMENT OF FIRE PERSONNEL:
A.   Volunteer: The city manager, after receiving the recommendation of the
fire chief, may appoint such volunteer firefighters as deemed necessary to act
as firefighters to perform duties auxiliary to and in general support of the
fire department. Such volunteer firefighters, once approved, shall give such
assistance to the fire department as shall be determined by the city manager,
after receiving the recommendation of the fire chief, and as permitted by the
code of Iowa.
B.   Career: The fire chief shall appoint and promote subordinate officers and
other members of the department subject to civil service procedures, and
chapter 35C, code of Iowa, when appropriate. In case of absence of the fire
chief, an officer designated by the fire chief shall be in charge and have and
exercise all the powers of fire chief. (Ord. 1702, 7-31-2006)
4-1-4: COMPENSATION; OATH OF OFFICE:
A.   Compensation: Members of the department shall be designated by rank and
receive such compensation as shall be determined by resolution of the council.
(1985 Code §2.2-1.0106)
B.   Oath: The fire chief and career personnel, before entering upon the duties
of the position, shall qualify by taking the oath prescribed by section
1-7-1 of this code. (1985 Code §2.2-1.0109; amd. 1993 Code)
4-1-5: TRAINING:
All members of the department shall attend and actively participate in regular
or special training drills or programs as directed by the chief. (1985 Code
§2.2-1.0105)
4-1-6: FIRE CHIEF:
A.   Appointed: The fire chief shall be appointed by the city manager as
provided by chapter 400.13, code of Iowa, or as amended thereto. (Ord. 914, 7-
9-1990)
B.   Duties: The fire chief or designee shall have the following powers and
duties:
1.   General: Perform all duties required of the fire chief by law or
ordinance.
2.   Enforce Laws: Enforce all ordinances and, where enabled, state laws
regulating the following:
a.   Fire prevention.
b.   Maintenance and use of fire escapes.
c.   The investigation of the cause, origin and circumstances of fires.
d.   The means and adequacy of exit in case of fire from halls, theaters,
churches, hospitals, asylums, lodging houses, schools, factories and all other
buildings in which the public congregates for any purpose.
e.   The installation and maintenance of private fire alarm systems and fire
extinguishing equipment.
3.   Command: Be charged with the duty of maintaining the efficiency,
discipline and control of the fire department. The members of the fire
department shall, at all times, be subject to the direction of the fire chief.
4.   Property: Exercise and have full control over the disposition of all fire
apparatus, tools, equipment and other property used by or belonging to the fire
department. (1985 Code §2.2-1.0110)
5.   Authority And Investigative Powers:
a.   Investigation1. I.C. §102.2.1: Direct an operation as necessary to
extinguish or control a fire, perform a rescue operation, investigate the
existence of a suspected or reported fire, gas leak or other hazardous
condition, or take any other action as deemed necessary in the reasonable
performance of the department's duties. In exercising this power, the fire
chief may prohibit an individual, vehicle or vessel from approaching a fire
scene and may remove from the scene any object, vehicle, vessel or individual
that may impede or interfere with the operations of the fire department.
b.   Authority To Barricade2. I.C. §102.3.2: Place or erect ropes, guards,
barricades or other obstructions across a street, alley, right of way or
private property near the location of the fire or emergency so as to prevent
accidents or interference with the firefighting efforts of the fire department,
to control the scene until any required investigation is complete, or to
preserve evidence related to the fire or other emergency.
Any person who disobeys an order of the fire chief, other officer of the fire
department, or peace officer assisting the fire department which is issued
pursuant to subsection B5a or B5b of this section is guilty of a simple
misdemeanor1. I.C. §102.5.1. (1993 Code)
6.   Right Of Entry: Have the right, during reasonable hours and upon consent
of the occupant, to enter any building or premises within his jurisdiction for
the purpose of making such investigation or inspection which under law or
ordinance he may consider necessary to be made and is reasonably necessary to
protect the public health, safety and welfare.
7.   Recommendation: Make such recommendations to owners, occupants, caretakers
or managers of buildings necessary to eliminate fire hazards.
8.   Assist State Fire Marshal: At the request of the state fire marshal, and
as provided by law, aid said marshal in the performance of his duties by
investigating, preventing and reporting data pertaining to fires.
9.   Records: Cause to be kept records of the fire department personnel,
operating cost and efficiency of each element of firefighting equipment,
depreciation of all equipment and apparatus, the number of responses to alarms,
their cause and location, and an analysis of losses by value, type and location
of buildings.
10.   Reports: Compile and submit to the mayor and city council an annual
report of the status and activities of the department as well as such other
reports as may be requested by the mayor or city council. (1985 Code §2.2-
1.0110)
11.   Municipal Emergency Management Coordinator: Be designated as the
municipal emergency management coordinator and be responsible for the
development, implementation and revision of a municipal emergency management
operations plan approved in writing by the city manager. The municipal
emergency management operations plan shall complement and supplement the Polk
County multi-hazard emergency operations plan. The municipal emergency
management coordinator shall coordinate all components of the emergency
management program in the city of West Des Moines, including hazard analysis,
preparedness, mitigation and response and recovery activities for all natural
and technological disaster emergencies. (Ord. 1436, 2-20-2001)
4-1-7: DEPARTMENTAL RULES:
The fire chief shall establish such rules, not in conflict with the city code
and subject to the approval of the city manager, as may be necessary for the
operation of the department including rules governing the following:
A.   Rules Of Conduct: The conduct and activity of members of the department
during regular and off-duty hours.
B.   Communication: The procedures, use and care of the radio and other
communication systems.
C.   Training: The nature, time and attendance requirements for inservice
training of members of the department.
D.   Emergencies: Temporary rules for the protection and functioning of the
department as may be necessary in the event of an emergency until such rules
may be considered by the city council.
E.   Other: Such other rules as may be deemed necessary and advisable in
assuring efficient and proper performance of the duties of the department.
F.   Penalties: The penalties which may be imposed for violation of established
departmental rules by members.
G.   Notice: The fire chief shall give written notice to any member charged
with a violation of departmental rules specifying the rule violated, the nature
of the violation and the penalty to be imposed.
H.   Appeal: A volunteer member of the department charged with a violation of
rules may request a hearing before the city manager. The city manager shall
review the facts and affirm, modify or revoke the action of the fire chief. A
career member of the department may request a hearing before the civil service
commission in accordance with the civil service laws of the city and the state
of Iowa. (Ord. 914, 7-9-1990; amd. 1993 Code)
4-1-8: INSURANCE:
A.   Accidental Injury Insurance: The council shall contract to insure the city
against liability for workers' compensation and against statutory liability for
the costs of hospitalization, nursing and medical attention for firefighters
injured in the performance of their duties as firefighters whether within or
outside the corporate limits of the city. All firefighters shall be covered by
the contract. (1985 Code §2.2-1.0113; amd. 1993 Code)
B.   Liability Insurance: The council shall contract to insure against
liability of the city or members of the department for injuries, death or
property damage arising out of and resulting from the performance of
departmental duties within or outside the corporate limits of the city. (1985
Code §2.2-1.0114)
4-1-9: CALLS OUTSIDE THE CITY:
The department shall answer calls to fires and other emergencies outside the
city limits if the fire chief determines that such emergency exists and that
such action will not endanger persons and property within the city limits.
(1985 Code §2.2-1.0115)
4-1-10: MUTUAL AID:
Subject to approval by resolution of the council, the department may enter into
mutual aid agreements with other legally constituted fire departments. Copies
of any such agreements shall be filed with the clerk. (1985 Code §2,2-1.0116)
4-1-11: EMERGENCIES:
The mayor may take command of a fire scene and govern the city by proclamation
when a time of emergency or public danger exists. Within the city limits, he
has all the powers conferred upon the sheriff to suppress disorders. (Ord. 914,
7-9-1990)
4-1-12: INJURY TO FIRE EQUIPMENT:
It shall be unlawful for a person to wilfully destroy or injure any engine,
hose, hook and ladder truck or other thing used and kept for extinguishment of
fires. (1985 Code §2.1-1.0505)
CHAPTER 2
EMERGENCY AMBULANCE SERVICE
SECTION:
4-2-1: Purpose
4-2-2: Definitions
4-2-3: Determination of Emergency; Liability of City
4-2-4: Ambulance Fees
4-2-5: Payment of Fees
4-2-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this Chapter is to establish fees to be charged users of the
City ambulance service, to provide a method for enforcing collection of fees,
determining emergency when ambulance service shall be furnished to user and the
City's liability in connection therewith. (1985 Code §3-6.01)
4-2-2: DEFINITIONS:
For use in this Chapter the following terms are defined:
AMBULANCE: Any vehicle operated by the City in transporting persons who are
injured or sick.
EMERGENCY: A sudden or unexpected occasion for action or an unforeseen
occurrence or condition which appears to require the use of an ambulance by the
user in need of medical attention.
USER: Any person who shall be furnished transportation by ambulance, except
"user" shall not be deemed to include those persons who may accompany such
person utilizing the service nor such personnel manning said ambulance. The
term "user" shall be only such persons located within the boundaries of West
Des Moines, Iowa, unless otherwise warranted, but then only at the discretion
of the City. (1985 Code §3-6.02)
4-2-3: DETERMINATION OF EMERGENCY; LIABILITY OF CITY:
The City shall determine if an emergency exists warranting the dispatching of
an ambulance to the user. The City accepts no responsibility or liability for
any act or omission arising out of medical attention needed by the user. (1985
Code §§3-6.04, 3-6.05)
4-2-4: AMBULANCE FEES:
Any user receiving the services or transportation by City ambulance shall pay a
fee as set forth by the City Council in resolution form. The City Council may
by resolution, and in addition to the fee, provide special fees for those
unforeseen circumstances that are not anticipated by the rate prescribed. (Ord.
862, 11-7-88)
4-2-5: PAYMENT OF FEES:
All ambulance fees and charges are due upon presentation of a statement by the
City, and shall be promptly paid by the user, his legal guardian, or in case of
death of user, by his user's estate. After a reasonable time following
presentation of the statement by the City, the City may cause a suit to be
brought for the collection of any fees or charges for ambulance services. The
City Council, by resolution and at its discretion and under special
circumstances, may waive fees as set forth in this Chapter. (1985 Code §3-6.06)
CHAPTER 3
FIRE CODE
SECTION:
4-3-1: Adoption Of International Fire Code
4-3-2: Duties Of Fire Department
4-3-3: Storage Of Flammables; Districts Established
4-3-4: Amendments To International Fire Code
4-3-5: Appeals
4-3-6: New Materials, Processes, Or Occupancies Which May Require Permits
4-3-7: Liability For Damages
4-3-8: Violations And Penalties
4-3-9: Repealer
4-3-10: Saving Clause
4-3-11: Effective Date
4-3-1: ADOPTION OF INTERNATIONAL FIRE CODE:
The International Fire Code (IFC), 2021 Edition, published by the International
Fire Code Council, is adopted and incorporated herein by this reference as
fully as though set forth herein in its entirety, excepting only such portions
as are hereinafter added, deleted, modified, or amended. (Ord. 2594, 12-18-
2023)
4-3-2: DUTIES OF FIRE DEPARTMENT:
The International Fire Code, as adopted and amended herein, shall be enforced
by the Fire Prevention Bureau of the City, which is hereby established and
which shall be operated under the supervision of the Chief of the Fire
Department. (Ord. 2594, 12-18-2023)
4-3-3: STORAGE OF FLAMMABLES; DISTRICTS ESTABLISHED:
A.   The establishment of limits and districts referred to and placed upon
certain sections of The International Fire Code, 2021 Edition, are as follows:
1   The limits referred to in section 5504.3.1.1 in which flammable cryogenic
fluids storage in stationary containers are prohibited are hereby established
as follows: The entire City of West Des Moines, Iowa, except (L1) light
industrial district and (G1) general industrial district.
2   The limits that are placed on chapter 57 in which outside above-ground
storage of flammable or combustible liquids are restricted are hereby
established as follows: The entire City of West Des Moines, Iowa, except (L1)
light industrial district and (G1) general industrial district.
Exception:
a   An aggregate amount of one thousand (1,000) gallons or less may be stored
above ground on a premise if used exclusively for heating fuel oil. A permit is
required and the proposed installation must be approved by the Fire Code
Official prior to the issuance of a permit.
b   After July 20, 1992, any new above ground installations of class I liquids,
other than gasoline, shall have an aggregate total of one thousand one hundred
(1,100) gallons or less; Gasoline shall have an aggregate total of 5,000
gallons or less. Class II liquids shall have an aggregate total of five
thousand (5,000) gallons or less, more than one thousand one hundred (1,100)
gallons shall be stored in an approved vaulted tank above ground in L1 and GI
zoning districts; or ten thousand (10,000) gallons or less of class I and/or
class II liquids on construction sites, per legal lot or contiguous lots under
common ownership. A permit is required and the proposed installation must be
approved by the Fire Code Official prior to the issuance of a permit. All above
ground tanks shall provide approved vehicle impact protection, break away fuel
hoses and emergency shut off buttons.
c   After July 1, 2001, any new outside installation of a generator, the fuel
storage shall be limited to a maximum of one thousand five hundred (1,500)
gallons of type II fuel in a NFPA/UL compliant sub-base tank; quantities
greater than one thousand five hundred (1,500) gallons but less than five
thousand one (5,001) gallons of a type II fuel shall be stored in an approved
vaulted tank.
Exception: Fuel storage requirements for generator use only, shall not be
limited to only L1 and L2 zoning districts.
3   The limits that are placed on chapter 57 in which new bulk plants and
terminals for flammable or combustible liquids are prohibited are hereby
established as follows: The entire City of West Des Moines, Iowa.
4   The limits that are placed on section 6104.2 (see section 4 3 4 of this
chapter) in which storage of liquefied petroleum gases is to be restricted to
are hereby established as follows: The entire City of West Des Moines, Iowa.
5   The limits that are placed on section 5601.1 in which storage of explosives
and blasting agents is to be restricted to are hereby established as follows:
The entire City of West Des Moines, Iowa.
6   The limits that are placed on section 5301.1, exception 2, in which the
storage of compressed natural gas is prohibited, are hereby established as
follows: The entire City of West Des Moines, Iowa, with the exception of L1 and
G1 zoning districts. (Ord. 2594, 12-18-2023)
4-3-4: AMENDMENTS TO INTERNATIONAL FIRE CODE:
The International Fire Code is amended and changed in the following respects:
Amend section 101.1. These regulations shall be known as the Fire Code of the
City of West Des Moines, hereinafter referred to as “this code.”
Amend section 103.1 Creation of agency. The City of West Des Moines Fire
Department is hereby created and the official in charge thereof, or a duly
authorized representative, shall be known as the Fire Code Official. The
function of the agency shall be the implementation, administration and
enforcement of the provisions of this code.
Add section 103.1.1 Definitions.
   4-3-2: “DEFINITIONS”: Wherever the word “jurisdiction” is used in the
International Fire Code, it is the City of West Des Moines, Iowa.
   Whenever the words “Department of Fire Prevention” are used, they shall be
held to mean “Fire Prevention Bureau”.
   The word “shall” is mandatory and the word “may” is permissive.
Amend section 105.5 Required Operational Permits. The Fire Code Official is
authorized to issue operational permits for the operations as set forth in
sections 105.5.3, 105.5.5, 105.5.9, 105.5.10, 105.5.13, 105.5.15, 105.5.16
105.5.18, 105.5.22, 105.5.24, 105.5.27, 105.5.32, 105.5.34, 105.5.38, 105.5.39,
105.5.40, 105.5.42, 105.5.44, 105.5.46, 105.5.49.
Amend section 105.5.29 LP-gas. An operational permit is required for:
   1.   Storage and use of LP-gas.
      Exception: A permit is not required for permanently installed individual
containers with 1,000 gallons or less serving one and two family dwellings (R-
3), for the typical tank used for LP-gas grills and the use of less than 500
gallons per tank or an aggregate total of less than 1,000 gallons for
individual containers for temporary installations.
Delete section 105.5.34 Exception: Recreational fires.
Amend section 105.6 Required construction permits. The Fire Code Official is
authorized to issue construction permits for work as set forth in sections
105.6.1, 105.6.6, 105.6.7, 105.6.8, 105.6.9, 105.6.11, 105.6.12, 105.6.13,
105.6.14, 105.6.15, 105.6.19, 105.6.20, 105.6.21, 105.6.22, 105.6.23, 105.6.24,
105.6.25.
Amend section 107 Fees.
Add section 107.2 General. A fee for operational permits and construction
permits that are required by this Ordinance shall be paid to the City of West
Des Moines at Fire Administration Offices. A permit shall be obtained from the
Fire Prevention Bureau prior to engaging in activities, operations, practices,
or functions set forth in sections 105.5 through 105.6 as amended. Refer to
amended sections 105.5 and 105.6.
Add section 107.7 Fees. Each operational permit fee, with the exception of
105.5.16, 105.5.39 and 105.5.49 shall be $50.00; this permit includes one hour
of inspection time; an hourly rate of $30.00 after the first hour may be
charged by the Fire Code Official; first re-inspection is at no charge during
normal business hours (8:00 a.m. to 4:30 p.m., Monday through Friday).
The construction permit/plan review fee schedule is square footage based and
shall be as follows:
0-6,000 Square Feet: $100.00
6,001-12.000 square feet: $200.00
12,001 - 24,000 square feet: $300.00
24,001 - 50,000 square feet: $400.00
50,001 - 100,000 square feet: $500.00
100,001 - 500,000 square feet $1,000.00
500,001 - 1,000.00 square feet $1,500.00
1,000,001 and above: $1,500.00 + $100.00 for every 6,000 square feet above
1,000,000
Construction permits include two (2) hours of inspection time; an hourly rate
of $30.00 after the 2nd hour may be charged by the Fire Code Official; first
re-inspection is at no charge during normal business hours (8:00 a.m. to 4:30
p.m., Monday through Friday).
-105.6.14 Fee to conduct a firework display is $200.00 which includes an
inspection prior to the start of the show.
-105.6.37 Fees are occupant load based (Occupant load shall be determined by
the Fire Code Official) and are as follows:
 
Occupant load of 49 or less:      $50.00
Occupant load of 50-499:          $100.00
Occupant load of 500-999:         $150.00
Occupant load greater than 1,000: $200.00
 
-105.6.47 Fee is $50.00. If the permit application for the tent or inflatable
is not received within 5 business days prior to the date of the event, the fee
shall be $100.00.
This permit includes two hours of inspection time; an hourly rate of $30.00
after the first hour may be charged by the Fire Code Official; first re-
inspection is at no charge during normal business hours (8:00 a.m. to 4:30
p.m., Monday through Friday).
Any inspection to include operational and construction permit inspections,
performed after normal business hours (8:00 a.m. to 4:30 p.m., Monday through
Friday), shall have inspection fees of $150.00 per hour per inspector.
Any inspection to include operational and construction permit inspections shall
have a first re-inspection at no charge providing it is conducted during normal
business hours (8:00 a.m. to 4:30 p.m., Monday through Friday.) Additional re-
inspections shall be charged according to the following fee schedule:
 
Re-inspection Fees: First re-inspection         No Charge
                    Second re-inspection        $100.00
                    Third re-inspection         $300.00
                    Fourth re-inspection        $600.00
                    Fifth or more re-inspection $1,000.00
 
All of the above noted fees are base fees and subject to an annual revision, by
City Council Resolution, based on a rate equivalent to a positive September
Consumer Price Index (CPI-W), and rounded to the nearest whole dollar, for
subsequent fiscal year (July 1st).
Add section 107.8 Mitigation Reimbursement Fees. Reimbursement fees that are
actual and necessary expenses incurred in carrying out the mitigation of
specialized emergencies including, but not limited to, hazardous materials,
specialized rescue, and crime scenes (including arson) shall be invoiced to the
responsible person, firm, or corporation. An available fee schedule shall be
reviewed and posted annually by the Fire Chief’s Office. Fees may include, but
not limited to, personnel compensation, apparatus use, equipment use, and
specialized contract labor associated with the mitigation of the specialized
emergency.
Amend section 111: Refer to section 4-3-5(A) (Appeals) of the West Des Moines
Fire Code.
Add Section 114.8 Fire-Damaged Premises After Fire Event
Add section 114.8.1 Securing Fire-Damaged Premises After Any Fire Event.
   1.   The following definitions apply to this section:
      “Fire event” means a response by the West Des Moines Fire Department to
extinguish a fire within a building, dwelling or other structure that commences
with the dispatching of fire department resources and concludes with the fire
officer in charge terminating the incident.
      “Fire-damaged structure” means a building, dwelling or other structure
within the corporate limits of the city that has been partially burned during a
fire event.
      “Nuisance” means injurious or dangerous to public safety and constituting
an emergency requiring immediate abatement pursuant to title 4, chapter 4 of
the City Code and/or other applicable City Code section(s).
      “Property owner” means the record titleholder(s) and/or contract
purchaser(s) of the real property upon which a fire-damaged structure is
located.
   2.   A fire-damaged structure in an unsecured condition may be determined by
a designated fire department official, in his or her sole discretion, to
constitute a nuisance.
   3.   The designated fire department official may but is not required to give
notice to the property owner(s) of such a determination of nuisance requiring
immediate abatement, and opportunity for a hearing regarding the existence of
the nuisance pursuant to section 4-4-10 of this code which may be held if
practical under the circumstances, but shall not be required to be held if
impractical under the circumstances, prior to abatement of the nuisance by the
property owner or the city.
   4.   A fire-damaged structure determined to constitute a nuisance shall be
secured by the property owner(s), at the property owner’s sole expense, in
accordance with this section and within the time allowed by the designated fire
department official, in his or her sole discretion, unless the designated fire
official determines that securing of the fire-damaged structure during the fire
event is required.
   5.   Prior to securing a fire-damaged structure determined to constitute a
nuisance, the property owner(s) shall remove or cause to be removed all living
beings from such structure.
   6.   The property owner(s) shall secure all windows, doors, and other
structural openings of the fire-damaged structure determined to constitute a
nuisance to prevent access by unauthorized persons.
   7.   A fire-damaged structure determined to constitute a nuisance which
cannot be properly secured from access to the interior by the use of window
locks, door locks, padlocks, or other appropriate locking mechanisms, shall be
secured by the property owner(s) as follows:
      a.   Completely enclosing and continually maintaining over all structural
openings (windows, doors, roof openings) on the exterior of such fire-damaged
structure with materials approved by the fire Fire Code Official prior to
installation; and/or
      b.   Completely enclosing and continually maintaining such fire-damaged
structure with a temporary snow fence of not less than forty-eight (48") inches
in height; and/or
      c.   On site security as shall be required as deemed necessary by the
fire Fire Code Official; and/or
      d.   By any different and/or additional measures set forth in any written
notice given by the designated fire department official to the property owner
(s).
   8.   If the property owner(s) fails to secure a fire-damaged structure
determined to constitute a nuisance in accordance with the requirements of this
section, or if the designated fire official determines that securing of the
fire-damaged structure during the fire event is required, the fire chief or his
or her designee, which designee may include the public services department
director or his or her designee, may cause such fire-damaged structure to be
secured and assess the costs thereof against the real property upon which such
fire-damaged structure is located for collection in the same manner as a
property tax, following hearing, if requested, in accordance with title 4,
chapter 4 of the City Code and/or other applicable City Code sections.
   9.   Property owner(s) shall be joint and severally liable for performing
the actions required by this section and for any property assessments arising
from failure to perform such actions.
Add Section 114.8.2. Abandoned Fire-Damaged Premises After Any Fire Event.
   1.   Fire-damaged structure which persistently or repeatedly become
unprotected or unsecured, which have been occupied by unauthorized persons or
for illegal purposes or which present a danger of structural collapse, fire
spread to adjacent properties, risk to emergency responders or are deemed a
nuisance due to no active rehabilitation, repairs or removal of the structural
within eighteen (18) months of the date of the fire event; shall be considered
to be abandoned, declared unsafe and abated by demolition in accordance with
the International Property Maintenance Code and the International Building
Code.
   2.   If the property owner(s) fails to demolish an abandoned fire-damaged
structure as defined in this section, the fire chief or his or her designee may
cause such fire-damaged structure to be demolished and assess the costs thereof
against the real property upon which such fire-damaged structure is located for
collection in the same manner as a property tax, following hearing, if
requested, in accordance with title 4, chapter 4 of the City Code and/or other
applicable City Code sections.
Add section 115 Life Safety Contractor/Designer Permits. All installations,
modifications, maintenance, or servicing of life safety systems are to be
performed by an approved State of Iowa licensed business or person(s). A
business or person(s) shall obtain a permit to do work in the City of West Des
Moines from the Fire Administration Office.
Add section 115.1 Life Safety Plans. All life safety plans submitted for review
to include, but not limited to, fire sprinkler system plans, fire alarm system
plans, fire pump plans, hood suppression system plans, and clean agent system
plans shall be designed and stamped by a person with a minimum of a NICET III
certification, fire protection engineer, qualified engineer with two (2) years
demonstrated experience in life safety system design, or equivalency as
determined by the Fire Code Official. Plan approval will be based upon the
plans submitted by the equipment supplier utilizing the above requirements. All
NEW fire sprinkler systems, fire alarm system, fire pumps, clean agent systems,
kitchen hood suppression systems shall be submitted to West Des Moines
contracted third party engineer for review. A copy of the application and fee
schedule can be obtained from the West Des Moines Fire Department web site or
at West Des Moines Fire Administration. The Fire Code Official has the
authority to require additions to existing fire sprinkler systems and fire
alarm systems to be sent to the West Des Moines contracted third party engineer
for review. If required life safety plans are not received at the West Des
Moines Fire Department prior to 7 days before the final certificate of
occupancy inspection is scheduled, a fee of $200 shall be paid by the
submitting company prior to the inspection taking place and the inspection will
be re-scheduled for a date as determined by the Fire Code Official.
Add Section 115.1.1 Life Safety Plan Submittal Fee For Internal Fire Department
Review.
Life Safety plans submitted for initial review that are not required to go to
the West Des Moines contracted third party engineer by the Fire Code Official
shall pay a review fee of $100.00. Plans that are required to be reviewed by
the West Des Moines contracted third party engineer are not subject to this
fee.
   Note: Persons passing the competency-based examination are only allowed to
stamp    plans for the company through which they are licensed to work.
The above noted $100 fee is a base fee and subject to an annual revision, by
City Council Resolution, based on a rate equivalent to a positive September
Consumer Price Index (CPI-W), and rounded to the nearest whole dollar, for
subsequent fiscal year (July 1st).
Add section 115.2 Penalties for Violation of State Licenses/Life Safety
Contractor/Designer Permits. Violation of rules and regulations pertaining to
State licensing/Life Safety Contractor/Designer Permits shall result in a fine
of $500.00 for the first violation. A second violation within one (1) year of
permit issuance shall result in a fine of $750.00. A third violation within one
(1) year of permit issuance shall result in a fine of $1,000.00 and revocation
of the permit for the remainder of the permit issuance period.
Add section 116 Inspection Tags. West Metro tags for inspection of fire
suppression systems, fire extinguishers, and fire alarm systems are required to
be purchased from the West Des Moines Fire Prevention Bureau for use in the
City of West Des Moines.
Add section 117 Additions to Buildings or Structures
Add section 117.1 General. Additions to buildings or structures shall comply
with all of the requirements of section 903.2 of this Code for new buildings or
structures. The entire building or structure, existing and proposed additions,
shall comply with all of the requirements of the fire sprinkler section 903.2
of the Fire Code for new buildings and structures, when the total of all the
additions to the building or structure made after November 15, 1973, exceeds
twenty five (25) percent of the pre-November 15, 1973, gross area of the
building or structure.
Add section 118: Multiple Occupancy Requirement.
Add section 118.1 General. When a building is used for more than one occupancy
purpose or use, the entire building shall meet the requirements of the fire
sprinkler section 903.2 of the Fire Code based on the requirements for the most
restrictive occupancy group as defined in Chapter 2 of the 2021 International
Fire Code.
Chapter 2 DEFINITIONS
Amend Section 202 [M] Commercial Cooking Appliances:
[M] Commercial Cooking Appliances. Appliances used in a commercial food service
establishment for heating or cooking food and which produce grease vapors,
steam, fumes, smoke or odors that are required to be removed through a local
exhaust ventilations system. Such appliances include deep fat fryers; upright
broilers; griddles; broilers; steam-jacketed kettles; hot-top ranges; under-
fired broilers (Charbroilers); ovens; barbecues; rotisseries; residential
stoves/ovens and similar appliances. For the purpose of this definition, a food
service establishment shall include any commercial building or a portion
thereof used for the preparation and serving of food including for employee
purposes.
Delete section 202 Occupancy Classification [BG] Small buildings and tenant
spaces and Exceptions 1 and 2 under [BG] Small assembly spaces.
Add to section 202 Business is a commercial enterprise or establishment that is
not part of a home occupation, for the purposes of this Ordinance.   
Add to section 202 Commercial Buildings or Structures are buildings or
structures that are used for purposes other than detached dwellings, for the
purposes of this Ordinance.
Add to section 202 Condominium is a building or structure of residential
occupancies containing sleeping units or more than two dwelling units where the
occupants are primarily permanent in nature, having public space, unless as
defined as a townhouse, for the purposes of this Ordinance.
Add to section 202 Dwelling is a detached building on a building site designed
for and used exclusively for residential purposes by one or two families and
containing one or two dwelling units, for the purposes of this Ordinance.   
Add to section 202 Apartment Building is a building containing two or more
dwelling units, at least one of which is located all or in part above another
dwelling unit. (Stacked flat)
Add to section 202 Fire Prevention Bureau is the Fire Department of the
jurisdiction.
Add to section 202 Home Occupation is any occupation or profession conducted
solely by the resident occupants in their place of abode, involving primarily
service and limited sale of commodities upon the premises, for the purposes of
this Ordinance.
Add to section 202 Licensed Day Care is a daycare that is licensed with the
State of Iowa.
Add to section 202 Licensed Fire Alarm Monitoring Service is a business that
supplies and/or contracts with a UL listed remote station monitoring service.
Add to section 202 Self-luminous is having the ability to self generate light
without the aid of batteries or electrical current.
Add to section 202 Townhouse is a single-family dwelling unit constructed in a
group of three or more attached units in which each unit extends from
foundation to roof and with open space on at least two sides, for the purpose
of this Ordinance.
Add to section 202 WestCom is the dispatch center that is jointly shared by the
Cities of Clive, Urbandale, and West Des Moines.
Chapter 3 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS
Add section 307.2.1.1 Responsible Agencies for Open Burning. Within the City
limits of West Des Moines; in Polk County, approval from Polk County Water, Air
and Waste Management Department, and the Fire Code Official; in Dallas County,
Warren County and Madison County, approval from State of Iowa DNR and the Fire
Code Official; future annexed land shall use the County Water, Air and Waste
Management Department of record, and/or DNR and the Fire Code Official.
Add section 307.2.1.2 Business that sell fire pits, chiminea and other outdoor
recreational devices. Within the City limits of West Des Moines, any business
that sells fire pits, chiminea and other outdoor recreational fire/ember
producing devices are required to have signage installed on the display devices
notifying customers they are not allowed to be used within the City limits of
West Des Moines.
Delete sections 307.4.1, 307.4.2, 307.4.3 (Including the exception), and 307.5.
Replace with: 307.4.1 Bonfires are only allowed with a permit issued by the
West Des Moines Fire Prevention Bureau. The only firepits or portable outdoor
fireplaces that are allowed to be used within the city limits of West Des
Moines are those that do not produce smoke.
Amend section 308.1.4 Open-flame Cooking Devices.
No barbeque grills or other devices which produce ashes or embers shall be
operated or stored within 20 feet of multi-story buildings, such as apartment
buildings and/or condominiums. Cooking devices and/or propane cylinders shall
not be stored inside the living unit of apartment buildings and/or
condominiums.
A maximum of one 20 lb. propane cylinder attached to the cooking device shall
be allowed per living unit.
   Exception: One and two-family dwellings and townhouses.
Amend section 311.3 Removal of Combustibles.
Persons owning, or in charge or control of, a vacant building, or portion
thereof, shall remove therefrom all accumulations of combustible materials,
flammable or combustible waste or rubbish and shall securely lock or otherwise
secure doors, windows and other openings to prevent entry by unauthorized
persons. All locks and methods to secure windows, doors and other openings
shall be approved by the Fire Code Official prior to installation and shall be
continually maintained by the persons owning or in charge or control of the
building. On site security shall be required as deemed necessary by the Fire
Code Official. The premises shall be maintained clear of waste, vegetation, or
hazardous materials. All fire hydrants located on the premises shall be
operational and maintained.
Add Section 311.7 Compliance
The fire code official may notify the person(s) owning, or in charge or control
of, a vacant building, structure, premises or portion thereof (collectively
“premises”) of failure to comply with any of the requirements of Sections 311.2
to 311.6 and may require compliance by such person(s) within the time set forth
in the notice. If compliance does not occur within the time set forth in the
notice, the fire chief or his or her designee may seek available remedies,
including but not limited to abatement and assessment of costs pursuant to
title 4, chapter 4 of the city code, the International Property Maintenance
Code, or the International Building Code as applicable.
Add section 322 Existing Building Life Safety Requirements.
Add section 322.1 Minimum Life Safety Requirements. Each existing building/
tenant space shall have exit signs, emergency lighting, fire extinguishers, and
rated protection of the gas appliances, such as furnace and water heater rooms.
Specifications for the above noted items are listed in the latest West Des
Moines Fire Code Supplement.
FIRE SERVICE FEATURES
Add section 503.1.4 Outdoor Venue Access. A 10 ft. wide emergency access road
designed to support 36,000 lb. weight load shall be provided within 350-feet of
all portions of an outdoor venue (e.g.soccer complex, park, skate park, sports
fields) to facilitate emergency vehicle access.
   Exception: The Fire Code Official is authorized to increase the dimension of
350 feet where emergency access roads cannot be installed because of location
on property, topography, waterway, nonnegotiable grades, or other similar
conditions, and an approved alternative means of emergency access is provided.
Amend section 503.2.1 Dimensions. Fire apparatus access roads shall have a
minimum unobstructed width of not less than 20 feet exclusive of shoulders,
except for approved security gates in accordance with section 503.6, and an
unobstructed vertical clearance of not less than 14 feet. All drive under
canopies shall have their height posted on them in a location or locations
approved by the Fire Code Official.
Amend section 505.1 Premises Identification. New and existing buildings shall
have approved address numbers, building numbers or approved building
identification placed in a position that is plainly legible and visible from
the street or road fronting the property. These numbers or addresses shall be
black or white and shall contract with their background. Where required by the
Fire Code Official, address numbers shall be provided in greater dimension or
additional approved locations to facilitate emergency response. Where access is
by means of a private road and the building cannot be viewed from the public
way, a monument, pole or other sign or means shall be used to identify the
structure. Address numbers shall be maintained.
Address numbers shall be in Arabic numerals or alphabet letters a minimum of 4
inches in height with a minimum stroke width of 1/2 inch.
   Exceptions:
   1.   Color of numbers may deviate from black or white for just cause when
approved by the Fire Code Official.
   2.   All commercial buildings shall have address numbers in Arabic numerals
or alphabet letters a minimum of 5 inches in height with a minimum stroke width
of ½ inch. Monument signs shall have the address installed a minimum of 36
inches from the ground. Addresses located 100 to 199 feet from the street shall
have be a minimum of 6 inches in height with a minimum stroke width of ½ inch.
Addresses located 200 to 299 feet from the street shall have a minimum of 8
inches in height with a minimum stroke width of 1 inch. For each additional 100
feet from the street, the number shall increase by an additional 2 inches in
height with the stroke increased proportionally. Measurements to determine the
minimum number or letter size shall be measured from the approved address
location to the center line of the street for which the premise is addressed.
Minimum height and minimum stroke may be increased by the Fire Code Official.
   3.   Exterior suite numbers shall be a minimum of 4 inches in height with a
minimum stroke width of ½ inch.
   4.   Interior suite numbers shall be a minimum of 2 inches in height.
   5.   Exterior address location for commercial buildings shall be determined
by the Fire Code Official.
Add section 506.3 Location for Knox Box. The location of the key box, “Knox
Box”, is to be determined by the Fire Code Official. Height of the key box
shall be 6 feet from the ground to the top of the key box unless otherwise
approved by the Fire Code Official.
Delete Code section 507.5.1.1
Replace with the following language:
507.5.1.1 Hydrant for fire department connections.
Buildings equipped with a fire department connection installed in accordance
with Section 912 shall have a fire hydrant located on a fire access road within
100 feet (30 m) of the fire department connection as measured by an approved
route around the exterior of the building.
   Exception: The distance shall be permitted to exceed 100 feet (30 m) where
approved by the Fire Code Official.
Amend Code section 507.5.5
Clear Space Around Fire Hydrants:
A 5-foot (1524 mm) horizontal clear space shall be maintained around the
circumference of fire hydrants, as measured from the center-point of the
hydrant, except as otherwise required or approved.
Add section 507.5.7 Fire Hydrant Markers and Identification Color. When
required by the Fire Code Official, hydrant locations shall be identified by
the installation of an approved reflective marker. Both public and private
hydrants shall be painted to West Des Moines Water Works specifications.
Add section 507.5.8 Fire Hydrant Installation. Fire hydrants installed with the
grade mark on the fire hydrant at the level of finished grade. The large
diameter connection shall be installed such that the connection is oriented
facing the fire department access road for fire apparatus hook up.
Add section 507.5.9 Fire Hydrant Maintenance Schedule. Private fire hydrants
shall be inspected, tested, and lubricated on a five-year basis or sooner by
the West Des Moines Water Works in conjunction with their regular fire hydrant
inspection program per rules established by the West Des Moines Water Works.
Amend Code section 508.1 Replace with the following language:
508.1 General. Where required by other sections of this code, Table 508.1 and
in all buildings classified as high-rise buildings by the International
Building Code, a fire command center for fire department operations shall be
provided and shall comply with sections 508.1.1 through 508.1.6.
Add Table 508.1 Fire Command Center Thresholds.
Group A            1,000 occupants
Group E            100,000 gross square feet
Group F            200,000 gross square feet
Group H            100,000 gross square feet
Group I-2 or I-3         100,000 gross square feet
Group M            100,000 gross square feet
Group R-1            Greater than 200 dwelling units or sleeping rooms
Group S            200,000 gross square feet
Add section 511 Fire and Emergency Vehicle Lanes.
511.1 General. Fire Department fire lanes shall be provided and maintained in
accordance with section 511.
511.2 Purpose. The requirement that Fire Lanes be established in certain
parking areas and the enforcement of restrictions on parking in such Fire Lanes
established in this Chapter are designed to ensure adequate access to
commercial, office, multi-family, and other high density use facilities by
fire-fighting and other emergency vehicles.
511.3 Designation. The Fire Code Official may designate fire lanes on private
and public property as deemed necessary for the protection of life and
property.
511.4 Obstruction. No person shall stop, stand, park a vehicle, place, or keep
any obstruction or thing in a designated fire lane that would prevent such fire
lane from being immediately accessible to the Fire Department, or in any other
manner to deter or hinder the Fire Department from gaining immediate access to
the fire lane. A written request to the Fire Code Official for temporary
obstruction of a fire lane shall be submitted for approval.
511.5 Signs and Markings. Wherever a fire lane has been designated, the Fire
Code Official shall cause appropriate signs and markings to be placed
identifying such fire lanes. Fire lanes may be painted traffic red in addition
to fire lane signage. Fire lane signs shall be permanently mounted and the
front of the sign set at 90 degrees to the street facing the direction of
travel, or as otherwise approved by the Fire Code Official. Fire lane signs
shall be placed 2 - 4 feet from the edge of the street. The top of fire lane
signs shall be approximately 6 feet from the ground. Intermediate fire lane
signs shall be set every 100 feet in a continuous fire lane. The BEGINS sign
shall mark the beginning of a fire lane and shall be mounted below the first
fire lane sign. The ENDS sign shall mark the ending of a fire lane and shall be
mounted below the last fire lane sign. The BEGINS and ENDS signage may be
omitted due to the location of the fire lane by the Fire Code Official. Signs
shall be 18 inches tall x 12 inches wide with red letters on a white reflective
background to read “Fire Lane No Parking Except for Emergency Vehicles, Fine
$50", unless otherwise directed and approved by the Fire Code Official,
conforming to State law.
511.6 Maintenance. The owner, manager, tenant or person in charge of any
property upon which designated fire lanes have been established, shall provide
markings as required above and shall maintain fire lanes at their expense as
often as needed to clearly identify the designated area as being a fire lane.
BUILDING SERVICES AND SYSTEMS
Delete sections 605.8, 605.8.1, 605.8.2, 605.8.3, 605.8.4, and 605.8.5.
Amend section 705.2.4 Door Operation.
Swinging fire doors shall close from the fully open position and latch
automatically. The door closer shall:
   1.   Exert enough force to close and latch the door from any partially open
position.
   2.   Be UL fire listed and of hydraulic type, spring type shall not be
allowed.
INTERIOR FINISH
Delete section 806.1.1 Restricted Occupancies: Exception 2. “Trees shall be
allowed within dwelling units in Group R-2 occupancies.”
FIRE PROTECTION SYSTEMS
Add section 901.4.7.1.1 Fire Sprinkler Riser Room.
A fire sprinkler riser room shall be separated from the electrical room. The
riser room shall have no electrical panels, devices, or apparatus inside the
room other than the outlets or support equipment (lighting, air compressor, and
heater) required for the use of the fire sprinkler system and/or the fire alarm
panel. The sprinkler riser room shall not be exclusively accessed from the
electrical room, but the electrical room may be accessed from the riser room.
Add section 901.4.7.1.2 Fire Sprinkler Riser Signage. Signage as determined by
the Fire Code Official shall be placed on the main sprinkler riser denoting a
shunt trip has been installed
Amend section 903.2
Pursuant to the approved recommendations of the Central Iowa Code Consortium,
the following exception is being utilized in this code:
   Prior to July 1, 2016, any jurisdiction calculating fire areas by other
methods not defined by the International Fire Code or International Building
Code, may continue to utilize those methods in calculating fire sprinkler
square footage requirements as previously established by local jurisdiction.
Where required to read as follows. An approved automatic fire extinguishing
system is required if the gross square footage of a building is equal to or
greater than the following:
For the purposes of section 903.2, “fire separations” shall not be permitted to
reduce the total gross square footage of a building or area for the purpose of
calculating the fire sprinkler square footage requirements.
For the purposes of section 903.2, “story” shall be defined as any level of a
structure, whether above or below grade capable of occupancy.
Fire Sprinkler Exemption for Buildings or Structures. To be exempt from meeting
the requirements to have fire sprinklers systems installed, the buildings or
structures per legal lot or contiguous lots under common ownership, must be
separated by twenty feet (20') and have 1-hour rated exterior walls on both
buildings or structures so as not to have the combined total of their gross
square footage applied to this section of the Code. Note: The square footage
used for calculating total “gross square footage” of a building or structure
shall be measured using the outside dimensions of the total building or
structure to include attached or detached buildings or structures/canopies
meeting the above requirements.
Open Corridors/Hallways shall be required to have fire sprinklers installed in
them when the building they are constructed in is required by this code to have
a fire sprinkler system.
“An approved automatic fire extinguishing system” includes, but is not limited
to, a complete automatic fire sprinkler system. The following sections
requiring complete automatic fire sprinkler systems shall install the fire
sprinkler system following NFPA 13 standards unless otherwise noted.
Alternative automatic extinguishing systems may be used if in the opinion of
the Fire Code Official the same life safety and property conservation measures
are equivalent to the NFPA standard listed in this Code.
Delete sections 903.2.1, 903.2.1.1, 903.2.1.2, 903.2.1.3, 903.2.1.4, 903.2.1.5,
903.2.1.5.1, 903.2.1.6, 903.2.1.7, 903.2.2, 903.2.3, 903.2.4, 903.2.4.1,
903.2.4.2, 903.2.4.3, 903.2.5, 903.2.5.1, 903.2.5.2, 903.2.5.3, 903.2.6,
903.2.7, 903.2.7.1, 903.2.8, 903.2.8.1, 903.2.8.2, 903.2.8.3, 903.2.8.4,
903.2.8.4, 903.2.9, 903.2.9.1, 903.2.9.2, 903.2.9.3, 903.2.9.4, 903.2.10,
903.2.10.1, 903.2.10.2
Add section 903.2.1 Group A to read as follows: An automatic sprinkler system
shall be provided throughout all buildings used as Group A occupancies as
provided in this section.
(suppression type)                                  (min. gross square footage)
Group A:
                   A-1. Building or structures or
                   portions thereof, having an
                   assembly use, usually with fixed
                   seating, intended for the
NFPA 13            production and viewing of the
                   performing arts or motion
                   pictures including, but not
                   limited to: See IFC occupancy
                   classification definition A-1. *
                   1. Occupant load of 299 or less. 6,000 s.f.
                   2. Occupant load of 300 or more. 0 s.f.
                   A-2. Building or structures or
                   portions thereof, having an
                   assembly use intended for food
NFPA 13            and /or drink consumption
                   including but not limited to:
                   See IFC occupancy classification
                   definition A-2. *
                   1. Occupant load of 50 or more.  0 s.f.
                   2. Occupant load of 49 or less.  1,500 s.f.
                   A 3. Building or structures or
                   portions thereof, having an
                   assembly use intended for
                   worship, recreation, or
NFPA 13            amusement and other assembly
                   uses not classified elsewhere in
                   Group A, including, but not
                   limited to: See IFC occupancy
                   classification definition A-3. *
                   1. Occupant load of 299 or less. 6,000 s.f.
                   2. Occupant load of 300 or more. 4,500 s.f.
                   A 4. Building or structures or
                   portions thereof, having an
                   assembly use intended for
                   viewing of indoor sporting
NFPA 13            events and activities with
                   spectator seating, including but
                   not limited to: See IFC
                   occupancy classification
                   definition A-4 *
                   1. Occupant load of 299 or less. 6,000 s.f.
                   2. Occupant load of 300 or more. 4,500 s.f.
 
 
(suppression type)                                 (min. gross square footage)
                   A 5. An automatic sprinkler
                   system shall be provided for
                   Group A-5 occupancies in the
NFPA 13            following areas: concession     1,000 s.f.
                   stands, retail areas, press
                   boxes and other accessory areas
                   in excess of 1,000 square feet.
 
Add section 903.2.2 Group B to read as follows: An automatic sprinkler system
shall be provided throughout all buildings containing a Group B occupancy as
provided in this section.
Group B:
 
        B. Building or structures or portions thereof, used for
        office, professional, or service type transactions,
NFPA 13 including storage of records and accounts. Business       6,000 s.f.
        occupancies shall include, but not be limited to: See IFC
        occupancy classification definition B._
 
Add section 903.2.3 Group E to read as follows: An automatic sprinkler system
shall be provided throughout all buildings containing a Group E occupancy as
provided in this section.
 
Group
E:
NFPA  E. Building or structures or portions thereof, used by six or more        1,500
13    persons at any one time for educational purposes.                         s.f.
      A licensed day care is any buildings or structures, or portions thereof,
NFPA  used for educational, supervision, or personal care services for more     0
13    than five children older than 2 ½ years of age shall be classified as an s.f.
      E occupancy.
 
Add section 903.2.4 Group F to read as follows: An automatic sprinkler system
shall be provided throughout all buildings containing a Group F occupancy as
provided in this section.
Group F:
(suppression type)                                  (min. gross square footage)
                   F-1. Moderate hazard factory and
                   industrial occupancies including
                   factory and industrial uses not
NFPA 13            classified as group F, division  6,000 s.f.
                   2 occupancies shall include, but
                   not be limited to: See IFC
                   occupancy classification
                   definition F-1.
                   F-1.1. Woodworking operations
NFPA 13            which generates finely divided   2,500 s.f.
                   combustible waste or uses finely
                   divided combustible materials.
                   F-1.2. Distilled spirits. An
                   automatic sprinkler system shall
NFPA 13            be provided throughout a Group   0 s.f.
                   F-1 occupancy used for the
                   manufacture of distilled
                   spirits.
                   F-1.3. Buildings or structures
NFPA 13            or portions thereof, used for    2,500 s.f.
                   the manufacture of upholstered
                   furniture or mattresses.
                   F-2. Low hazard factory and
                   industrial occupancies uses that
                   involve the fabrication or
                   manufacturing of non-combustible
                   materials which during
NFPA 13            finishing, packing, or           15,000 s.f.
                   processing do not involve a
                   significant fire hazard shall
                   include, but not be limited to:
                   See IFC occupancy classification
                   definition F-2.
 
Add section 903.2.5 Group H to read as follows: An automatic sprinkler system
shall be provided throughout all buildings containing a Group H occupancy as
provided in this section.
 
Group H:
         H-1. Building or structures or portions thereof, that pose a
NFPA 13  detonation hazard in excess of those listed in table 307.7(1)  0 s.f.
         (see 2015 IBC) shall include, but not limited to: See IFC
         occupancy classification definition H-1.
 
(suppression type)                                  (min. gross square footage)
                   H-2. Building or structures or
                   portions thereof, which contain
                   materials that pose a
                   deflagration hazard or a hazard
NFPA 13            from accelerated burning in      0 s.f.
                   excess of those listed in table
                   5003.1.1(1) (see IFC 2018) shall
                   include, but not limited to: See
                   IFC occupancy classification
                   definition H-2.
                   H-3. Building or structures or
                   portions thereof, which contain
                   materials that readily support
                   combustion or pose physical
NFPA 13            hazard in excess of those listed 0 s.f.
                   in table 5003.1.1 (1) (see IFC
                   2018 ) shall include, but not
                   limited to: See IFC occupancy
                   classification definition H-3.
                   H-4. Building or structures or
                   portions thereof, which contain
                   materials that are health
NFPA 13            hazards in excess of those       0 s.f.
                   listed in table 5003.1.1(1) (see
                   IFC 2018) shall include, but not
                   limited to: See IFC occupancy
                   classification definition H-4.
                   H-5. Semiconductors fabrication
                   facilities and comparable
                   research and development areas
                   in which hazardous production
                   materials (HPM) are used, and
                   the aggregate quantity of
                   material is in excess of those
NFPA 13            listed in table 5003.1.1(1) and  0 s.f.
                   table 5003.1.1 (2) (see IFC
                   2018). Such facilities and areas
                   shall be designed and
                   constructed in accordance with
                   section 415 of the IBC 2018.
                   Design of the sprinkler system
                   shall not be less than table
                   903.2.5.2. (IFC 2018)
                   Pyroxylin plastics. Buildings or
                   structures where cellulose
NFPA 13            nitrate film or pyroxylin        0 s.f.
                   plastics are manufactured,
                   stored, or handled in quantities
                   exceeding 100 pounds.
 
Add section 903.2.6 Group I to read as follows: An automatic sprinkler system
shall be provided throughout all buildings containing a Group I occupancy as
provided in this section.
Group I:
                                                                                           (min.
(suppression                                                                               gross
type)                                                                                      square
                                                                                           footage)
             I-1. Building or structures or portions thereof, housing or more than 16
             persons, on a 24-hour basis, who because of age, mental disability, or other
             reasons, live in a supervised residential environment but which provides
NFPA 13D or  personal care services. The occupants are capable of responding to an         0 s.f.
NFPA 13      emergency situation without physical assistance from staff. A facility such
             as the above with five or fewer persons shall classified as group R-3. A
             facility such as the above with at least six and not more than 16 persons
             shall be classified as Group R-4.
             I-2. Building or structures or portions thereof, used for medical, surgical,
             psychiatric, nursing, or custodial care on a 24-hour basis of more than four
             persons who are not capable of self-preservation. A facility such as the
NFPA 13      above with four or fewer persons shall be classified as Group R-3. Child care 0 s.f.
             facility is any buildings or structures, or a portion thereof, which provides
             care on a 24-hour basis to more than five children 2 ½ years of age or less
             shall be classified as Group I-2.
             I-3. Building or structures or portions thereof, which are inhabited by more
NFPA 13      than five persons who are under restraint or security. See IFC occupancy      0 s.f.
             classification definition I-3 for type of condition.
 
 
                                                                                      (min.
(suppression                                                                          gross
type)                                                                                 square
                                                                                      footage)
             I-4. Building or structures or portions thereof, which are occupied by
             persons of any age who receive custodial care for less than 24 hours by
             individuals other than parents or guardians, relatives by blood,
NFPA 13      marriage, or adoption and in a place other than the home of the person   0 s.f.
             receiving care. A facility such as the above with five or fewer persons
             shall be classified as group R-3. Place of worship during religious
             functions is not included.
             Adult care facilities provide accommodations for less than 24 hours for
             more than five unrelated adults and provides supervision and personal
NFPA 13      care services. Child care facilities provide supervision and personal    0 s.f.
             care on less than a 24 hour basis for more than five children 2 ½ years
             of age or less.
 
Add section 903.2.7 Group M to read as follows: An automatic sprinkler system
shall be provided throughout all buildings containing a Group M occupancy as
provided in this section
 
Group M:
         Building or structures or portions thereof, for the display
         and sale of merchandise, and involving stocks of goods,
NFPA 13  wares, or merchandise, incidental to such purposes and      6,000 s.f.
         accessible to the public shall include, but not be limited
         to: See IFC occupancy classification definition group M.
         For high-piled storage requirements, refer to chapter 32 of
         the IFC 2018 and the WDM Fire Code.
         Buildings or structures or portions thereof used for the    5,000 s.f.
         display And sale of upholstered furniture or mattresses.
 
Add section 903.2.8 Group R to read as follows: An automatic sprinkler system
shall be provided throughout all buildings containing a Group R occupancy as
provided in this section
Group R:
(suppression type)                                  (min. gross square footage)
                         R-1. Hotels, motels,
NFPA 13 to include attic boarding houses            0 s.f.
space                    (transient). (Occupy less
                         than 30 days)
                         R-2. Apartment houses,
                         condominiums, boarding
NFPA 13 to include attic houses (non-transient),    0 s.f.
space                    convents, dormitories,
                         fraternities and
                         sororities, monasteries
                         Convents
NFPA 13 to include attic dormitories
space                    fraternities and           0 s.f.
                         sororities
                         monasteries
NFPA 13D                 R-3. Dwellings             8,000 s.f.
                         Garage area included in
                         total gross square footage
                         calculation.
NFPA 13D                 R-3. Townhouse
Townhouses that are not open on at least two sides, are required to install
fire sprinkler systems and maintain fire separation requirements as set forth
in the IBC 2018.
Townhouses that are side by side where the entire row measures 12,000 square
feet or greater are required to install fire sprinkler systems and maintain
fire separation requirements as set forth in the IRC 2018.
                         R-4. Residential care/
NFPA 13D                 assisted living facilities
or                       for more than five but not 0 s.f.
NFPA 13                  more than 16 occupants,
                         excluding staff.
 
Add section 903.2.9 Group S to read as follows: An automatic sprinkler system
shall be provided throughout all buildings containing a Group S occupancy as
provided in this section
Group S:
(suppression type)                                  (min. gross square footage)
                   S-1. Moderate hazard storage
                   occupancies including building
                   or portions of buildings used
                   for storage of combustible
NFPA 13            materials not classified as      6,000 s.f.
                   Group S, Division 2, or group H
                   occupancies but not be limited
                   to: See IFC occupancy
                   classification definition Group
                   S-1.
                   A group S-1 occupancy used for
NFPA 13            the storage of commercial trucks 5,000 s.f.
                   or buses.
                   A group S-1 occupancy used for
NFPA 13            the storage of Upholstered       2,500 s.f.
                   furniture or mattresses.
                   A group S-1 occupancy used for
NFPA 13            the bulk storage of distilled    0 s.f.
                   spirits or wine.
NFPA 13            Repair garages/service stations  3,500 s.f.
                   Buildings with repair garages
                   servicing vehicles parked in     0 s.f.
                   basements.
                   Buildings used for the repair of 5,000 s.f.
                   commercial trucks or buses.
NFPA 13            Bulk storage of tires            20,000 cubic feet
 
 
(suppression type)                                  (min. gross square footage)
                   S-2. Low hazard storage
                   occupancies, including buildings
                   or portions of buildings used
NFPA 13            for storage of noncombustible    15,000 s.f.
                   materials, but not be limited
                   to: See IFC occupancy
                   classification Definition Group
                   S-2.
                   Buildings or portions of
                   buildings classified as enclosed
                   parking garages in accordance    0 s.f.
                   with section 406.6 of the IBC
                   2018 or where located beneath
                   other groups.
                   Exceptions: (1) Enclosed parking
                   garages located beneath group R-
                   3 occupancies; (2) Parking
                   garages defined in section 406.6
                   of the IBC 2018 as open parking
                   garages.
 
Amend section 903.2.11 Group U to read as follows:
 
Group U: Private garages, carports, sheds, and agricultural buildings. n/a
 
Amend section 903.2.11.1.3 Basements. Where any portion of a basement is
located more than 75 feet from openings required by section 903.2.11.1, the
basement shall be equipped throughout with an approved automatic sprinkler
system.
Amend section 903.3.1.2.1 Group R Balconies and Decks. Sprinkler protection
shall be provided for all exterior balconies, decks, and ground floor patios of
dwelling units where the building is required to have a fire sprinkler system
installed. Sidewall sprinklers that are used to protect such areas shall be
permitted to be located such that their deflectors are within 1 inch to 6
inches below the structural members and a maximum distance of 14 inches below
the deck of the exterior balconies and decks.
Add section 903.3.1.2.4 Fire Sprinklers for Canopies. A canopy covering a door
that is required to be marked as an exit shall be required to have fire
sprinklers installed outside that door if the canopy extends more than 4 feet
out from the door and is 12 feet or less in height from the ground regardless
of whether the canopy is combustible or non-combustible. Canopies that have
vehicle access under them with door openings shall be required to have fire
sprinklers installed under the total canopy regardless of whether the canopy is
combustible or non-combustible.
   Exception: If the Code does not require a building to have a fire sprinkler
system,
   section 903.3.1.2.3 does not apply.
Amend section 903.3.1.3 NFPA 13D sprinkler systems. Automatic sprinkler systems
installed in one and two family dwellings, Group R-3 and R-4 congregate living
facilities and townhouses shall be permitted to be installed throughout in
accordance with NFPA 13D, unless the system demands cannot be met.
Amend section 903.3.7 Fire Department Connections. The location of fire
department connections shall be approved by the Fire Code Official.
Amend section 903.4.2 Alarms. A minimum of 110 candela weather proof strobe
light suitable for cold weather use with a minimum of 75 candelas at -30
degrees shall be tied into the building fire alarm system and mounted directly
above the fire department connection between 7 feet and 10 feet in height from
the ground or as approved by the Fire Code Official. This strobe shall flash on
all fire alarm and fire sprinkler activations with the exception of trouble and
supervisory alarms.
ALTERNATIVE AUTOMATIC FIRE-EXTINGUISHING SYSTEMS
Add section 904.13.2.1 Ventilation Operation. The ventilation system shall shut
down the make up air to the hood and continue to exhaust upon activation of the
hood fire extinguishing system. Supply air openings other than part of the hood
system shall be a minimum of 6 feet from any part of a Type 1 Hood. Supply air
openings closer than 6 feet must shut down upon activation of the extinguishing
system.
STANDPIPE SYSTEMS
Amend section 905.3.9 Building Footprint and Access. Additional standpipe
systems for new buildings or structures may be required to be added as deemed
necessary by the Fire Code Official. When standpipes are located in stairwells,
the hose valve connections shall be on the floor landings not intermediate
landings.
PORTABLE FIRE EXTINGUISHERS
Delete section 906.1 Exceptions.
Amend table 906.3 (1) Fire Extinguishers for Class A Fire Hazards to read as
follows: Portable fire extinguishers for fire protection in low and moderate
hazard occupancies shall be a 5lb. ABC in buildings that are covered throughout
with a fire sprinkler system. If there is no fire sprinkler system in a low or
moderate hazard occupancy, a 10lb. ABC fire extinguisher shall be installed.
Spacing is based on a 75-foot travel distance to the fire extinguisher.
Portable fire extinguishers for fire protection in high hazard occupancies
shall be 10lb. ABC in buildings that are covered throughout with a fire
sprinkler system. If there is no fire sprinkler system in a high hazard
occupancy, a 20lb. ABC fire extinguisher shall be installed. Spacing is based
on a 50-foot travel distance to the fire extinguisher.
FIRE ALARM AND DETECTION SYSTEMS
Add section 907.1.4 Fire Alarm Control Panels. Each building shall have no more
than 1 Fire Alarm Control Panel (FACP).
Installation of the fire alarm panel shall not exceed six (6) feet in height
measured from the floor to the top of the panel.
   Exception 1: Panel height may be altered by the Fire Code Official.
   Exception 2: Suppression system releasing panels are not required to meet
the limitation in the number of panels.
Amend section 907.2. Pursuant to the approved recommendations of the Central
Iowa Code Consortium, the following exception is being utilized in this code:
Prior to July 1, 2016, any jurisdiction calculating fire areas by other methods
not defined by the International Fire Code or International Building Code, may
continue to utilize those methods in calculating fire sprinkler square footage
requirements as previously established by local jurisdiction.
Where Required General to read as follows: An approved addressable fire alarm
system complying with the provisions of this Code and NFPA 72 shall be
installed when the gross square footage of a building is equal to or greater
than the area as specified in sections 903.2.1 through 903.2.11 inclusive,
subject to the authority having jurisdiction or by section 907.2, whichever
shall be more restrictive.
   Exception:
   1.   Buildings with 8 or less initiating devices may use zoned systems
provided only one device is used per zone. Each device shall have a plain
English LCD (liquid crystal display). This alpha/numeric descriptor location is
required to be reported to the WestCom dispatch center upon activation of the
fire alarm system.
   2.   R-3 dwellings are not required to meet section 907.2 of this Code.
   3.   Townhouses are required to be monitored only if a single fire sprinkler
system is used for multiple units.
Add section 907.2 (a). Manual Fire Alarm Pull Boxes. Manual fire alarm pull
boxes (“pull stations”) shall be required where deemed necessary by the Fire
Code Official.
Add section 907.2 (b). Monitoring. All fire alarm systems shall be monitored by
a UL listed monitoring station.
Add section 907.2 (c). Location. Each address point identification shall have
an alpha/numeric descriptor location for the fire alarm system. This alpha/
numeric descriptor location is required to be reported to the West Des Moines
Fire Department dispatch center upon activation of the fire alarm system.
Add section 907.2 (d). Where required: Where corridors and/or hallways are
designed as the path of egress, and at the top of stairwells that serve more
than two floors and are protected by fire sprinkler systems, they shall also be
protected by smoke detection. Smoke detection shall be of the photo electric
type or as approved by the Fire Code Official.
Delete sections 907.2.8, 907.2.8.1 (Exceptions), 907.2.9, 907.2.9.1
(Exceptions), 907.2.9.3 (Exceptions)
Add section 907.2.8 Group R General. Group R 1; Group R-2 apartment houses,
condominiums and boarding houses (non-transient) convents, dormitories,
fraternities, sororities, and monasteries; and Group R 4 shall have a monitored
addressable fire alarm system. Upon adoption of this Fire Code, Group R 1;
Group R-2 apartment houses, condominiums and boarding houses (non-transient)
convents, dormitories, fraternities, sororities, and monasteries that have
existing automatic fire alarm systems shall comply when their existing fire
alarm system needs replacement to have that fire alarm system monitored.
Amend section 907.2.11 Single and Multi-station Smoke Alarms. Listed single and
multiple-station smoke alarms complying with UL 217 shall be installed in
accordance with provisions of this Code and the household fire warning
equipment provision of NFPA 72. Smoke alarms in dwelling units shall be
addressable with sounder bases and monitored by the building fire alarm system
as a supervisory signal only. Mini horns in dwelling units are not required if
notification from a building fire alarm system is through the smoke alarms with
sounder bases.
   Note: Section 907.2.11 only applies to R-1, R-2, R-4 and I-1.
   Delete the exceptions for 907.6.3
Amend section 907.6.4. Zones. Each floor shall be zoned separately and zone
shall not exceed 22,500 square feet. The length of any zone shall not exceed
300 feet in any direction. Fire alarm panels shall have all zones and address
points plainly and permanently labeled as to their location on the outside of
the panel or on an easily readable map of the building, if no display screen is
present. A zoning indicator panel and the associated controls shall be provided
in an approved location. The visual indication shall lock in until the system
is reset.
Delete section 907.6.4.1
Amend section 907.6.6 Monitoring to read as follows: When required by this
chapter, the International Building Code, or the Fire Code Official, an
approved UL 827 listed remote central station ,in accordance with NFPA 72,
shall monitor fire alarm systems to provide for the immediate and automatic
notification of the Fire Department.   
   Exception: Automatic sprinkler and fire alarm systems in 1 and 2-family
dwellings.
Amend section 910.2.1 Group F-1 or S-1. Smoke and heat vents installed in
accordance with section 910.3 or a mechanical smoke removal system installed in
accordance with section 910.4 shall be installed in buildings and portions
thereof used as a Group F-1 or S-1 occupancy having more than 30,000 square
feet of undivided area. In occupied portions of a building equipped throughout
with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with 903.3.1.1, where the
upper surface of the story is not a roof assembly, a mechanical smoke removal
system in accordance with section 910.4 shall be installed. Exception: Group S-
1 aircraft repair hangars.
FIRE DEPARTMENT CONNECTIONS
Add section 912.1.1 Fire Department Connection Height. The fire department
connection shall be located not less than 18 inches from the bottom of the cap
(s) and not more than 3 feet from the top of the cap(s) above the level of the
adjacent grade or access level. Deviation from this height may be granted by
the Fire Code Official for just cause.
Amend section 912.4 Access. Immediate access to the fire department connection
shall be maintained at all times and without obstruction by fences, bushes,
trees, walls, or any other objects within a minimum distance of 5-feet on each
side of the connection to include in front of the connection and above the
connection.
Delete section 912.4.2
MEANS OF EGRESS ILLUMINATION
Amend section 1008.3.1 General
In the event of the power supply failure in rooms and spaces that require two
or more means of egress or are 400 square feet or greater, an emergency
electrical system shall automatically illuminate all of the following areas as
approved by the Fire Code Official:
   1.   Aisles
   2.   Corridors
   3.   Exit access stairways and ramps.
Amend section 1008.3.2 Buildings
In the event of the power supply failure in rooms and spaces that require two
or more means of egress or are 400 square feet or greater, an emergency
electrical system shall automatically illuminate all of the following areas:
   1.   Interior exit access stairways and ramps
   2.   Interior and exterior exit stairways and ramps
   3.   Exit passageways
   4.   Vestibules and areas of the level of exit discharge used for exit
discharge in accordance with section 1028.1.
   5.   Exterior landings as required by section 1010.1.6 for exit doorways
that lead directly to the exit discharge.
Amend section 1008.3.3 Rooms and Spaces.
In the event of a power supply failure, an emergency electrical system shall
automatically illuminate all of the following areas:
   1.   Electrical equipment rooms
   2.   Fire command centers
   3.   Fire pump rooms
   4.   Generator rooms
   5.   Public restrooms that contain more than one water closet/urinal or that
are accessible
   6.   Meeting/conference rooms with an area 400 square feet or greater
   7.   Classrooms in an E occupancy with an area 400 square feet or greater
Add to section 1009.2 Continuity and Components item #11
#11. Components of exterior walking surfaces shall be concrete, asphalt, or
other approved hard surface.
Add section 1010.1.5.1 Landings at Doors
For landings required by section 1010.1.4 to be at the same elevation on each
side of the door, exterior landings at doors shall be provided with frost
protection per section 1809.5.1.
Add the following language to section 1010.2.2 Hardware
Door handles, pulls, latches, locks and other operating devices on doors
required to be accessible by Chapter 11 of the International Building Code,
shall not require tight grasping, tight pinching or twisting of the wrist to
operate. This includes thumb turn locks.
Add section 1010.2.2.1 Door Closers.
Where rated doors are required for the protection of fire and/or smoke
corridors or compartments, the following shall apply:
   1.   Doors shall be installed with automatic door closers
   2.   Door closers shall be UL listed for fire doors and of hydraulic type
   3.   Spring type hinged door closers are not allowed
   4.   Commercial grade ball bearing hinges are allowed
Add section 1013.1.1 Additional Exit Signs.
Exit signs may be required at the discretion of the Fire Code Official to
clarify an exit or exit access.
Amend section 1013.3 Exit Sign Illumination.
Exit signs shall use an LED lighting system and be illuminated internally. Exit
signs are required to have battery backup unless an onsite generator is used.
Luminance on the face of an exit sign shall have an intensity of not less than
5.0 foot candles (53.82 lux).
Add section 1013.3.1 Combination Lights.
Combination exit sign/emergency light devices shall not be allowed.
Add section 1013.3.2 Separation of Emergency Lighting.
Emergency lighting shall be separated from the exit sign by a minimum of 6
feet. This distance may be reduced by the Fire Code Official for just cause.
Add section 1013.3.3 Self- luminous Exit Signs.
Self-luminous exit signs installed after July 1, 2004, are not allowed
throughout the entire City of West Des Moines.
   Exceptions:
   1.   Approved self-luminous exit signs may be allowed in tents by the Fire
Code Official.
   2.   Tactile Exit signs required by section 1013.4 need not be provided with
illumination.
Delete sections 1013.5, 1013.6, 1013.6.1, 1013.6.2 and 1013.6.3
Add section 1031.5.3 Window Well Drainage
All window wells shall be provided with approved drainage.
EMERGENCY AND STANDBY POWER SYSTEMS
Amend section 1203.1.6 Uninterruptable power source. An uninterrupted source of
power shall be provided for equipment where required by the manufacturer’s
instructions, the listing, this code or applicable referenced standards. Motion
sensors, or similar devices, shall not be allowed to be installed on or control
lights, light fixtures or lighting systems that are designated as emergency
power.
Add section 1203.1.10 Shutdown of Emergency and Standby Power Systems. In
addition to the requirements of NFPA 110 for a remote manual stop, an approved
keyed switch to shut down the generator shall be located at the remote
annunciator panel or fire panel. The Fire Code Official shall determine its
location. If there is no annunciator or fire alarm panel or the location of
these panels is determined to be inadequate for this shut down button, the Fire
Code Official shall determine its location.
Add section 1203.1.11 Emergency Generator Signs. Main electrical disconnects
and main breaker panels supplied by the generator shall be provided with
approved signs. Additionally, doors accessing emergency and standby power
systems shall be provided with approved signs. When approved switches for
emergency power shutdown are located remote from the fire alarm annunciator, an
approved sign shall be provided at the fire alarm annunciator. Approved signs
shall contain the word CAUTION in black letters at least 2 inches (50 mm) high
on a yellow background. Such warning signs shall be placed so as to be readily
discernible.
Chapter 32 High Piled Combustible Storage
Amend and add the following into this chapter.
SECTION 3202 DEFINITIONS
3202.1 Definitions.
The following term is defined in Chapter 2:
SPECULATIVE BUILDING. A Group S, F or M occupancy having an interior clear
height greater than 12 feet (3657 mm) where high-piled storage may accrue and
the client leasing or the occupant owner does not know the commodity that will
be stored or the method of storage.
3206.2.1 Speculative building. Group S, F and M speculative buildings that have
an interior clear height greater than 12 feet where high piled storage may
accrue shall comply with this chapter.
3206.4.2 Sprinkler design.
3206.4.2.1 General.
The design of automatic sprinkler systems for the protection of Group M and S
occupancies containing high-piled storage or high-challenge commodities over an
area equal to or greater than 2,500 ft.² (232 m2) and designed for the
protection of hazardous materials stored more than one pallet high in Group M,
S or H occupancies, shall be in accordance with this section. This section does
not apply to miscellaneous storage within the scope of NFPA 13.
3206.4.2.2 Requirements for all plan submittals.
See section 903.1.9. and 3201.3 for plan submittal requirements.
3206.4.2.3 Minimum design requirements for speculative warehouses.
The design of the automatic sprinkler system for speculative warehouses shall
be based on storage of a cartoned Class A nonexpanded plastic to the available
storage height. The storage height shall be determined by subtracting 48 inches
(from the highest point of the roof above each system for ESFR and 30 inches
for area density applications.
3206.4.2.4 Minimum requirements for client leased or occupant-owned warehouses.
The design of an automatic sprinkler system for client leased or occupant owned
buildings containing high piled storage shall be based on the requirements of
NFPA 13. The responsible Fire Protection Contractor shall perform a survey of
the building to determine commodity classification, storage configuration,
building height and other information related to the development of an
appropriate sprinkler system design. The Contractor shall also make reasonable
efforts to meet with the building owner or operator to understand seasonal or
customer related fluctuations to the stored commodities, storage height, and
configuration.
The sprinkler design shall be based on the most demanding requirements
determined through the on-site survey and discussions with the building owner
or operator. Technical Report shall clearly define the basis for determining
the commodity and sprinkler design selection, along with how the commodities
will be isolated or separated, and the referenced design document(s), including
NFPA 13 or the current applicable Factory Mutual Data Sheets. If a specific
fire test is used as the basis of design, a copy of the fire test report shall
be provided at the time of plan review.
3206.4.2.5 Required information at plan submittal.
All plans, hydraulic calculations and technical reports shall be submitted with
the plan submittal form. The individual submitting the design package shall
ensure that all of the required information requested on the plan submittal
form is included.
3206.4.2.6 Minimum plan information requirements.
In addition to the requirements of NFPA 13, the following information shall be
included in the plans or technical report.
3206.4.2.6.1 Class I-IV and Group A plastic commodities.
   1.   An owner’s certificate in accordance with NFPA 13. The design criteria,
e.g., NFPA 13, Factory Mutual Data Sheet, or a specific fire test report.
   2.   A Water Supply Flow & Pressure Test Report performed within 90 days of
the plan submittal
   3.   The type of design, e.g., Control Mode Density/Design Area Method;
Specific Application Control Mode Method; Suppression Mode Method, including
appropriate code references.
   4.   A description of the stored commodities and how the commodity
classification was determined.
   5.   A layout of the proposed storage arrangement. If the storage is in
racks, a plan and elevation detail illustrating rack heights, flue dimensions
and arrangement. This detail is not required for speculation warehouses.
   6.   The aisle dimensions between each storage array.
   7.   If a high challenge commodity is separated using fire-resistive
construction, the boundary of the fire-resistive construction shall be
illustrated.
   8.   A data sheet for the backflow preventer. If a data sheet is not
available, the design professional shall include a statement addressing the
minimum required pressure loss.
   9.   A data sheet for each installed automatic sprinkler.
   10.   A data sheet for each pipe hanger used to hang or support the
sprinkler piping.
   11.   If a fire pump will be installed or used, the manufacturer’s factory
test curve shall be included in the submittal.
   12.   A cross-section view illustrating obstructions to the ceiling
sprinklers, e.g., lights, structural members, cable trays, electrical bus ducts
and HVAC ductwork.
3206.4.2.6.2 Hazardous materials.
In addition to the requirements of this section, the following information
shall be included in a hazardous materials technical report.
   1.   A hazardous materials inventory statement
   2.   For flammable & combustible liquids, an analysis of the miscibility of
Class I liquids, the size and type of the packaging, the packaging materials of
construction, and if the containers have a pressure relieving mechanism.
   3.   For Level 2 or 3 aerosols, a statement indicating that the aerosols are
cartoned or uncartoned.
3206.4.2.7 Identification of sprinkler system capabilities and limitations.
A label shall be permanently installed at or adjacent to each sprinkler riser.
When a building contains more than four risers, the sign shall be located at an
approved location inside the building. The minimum sign dimension is 6-inches
(152 mm) high by 4-inches (101 mm) wide. The sign shall specify the
capabilities and limitations of the automatic sprinkler system. The sign shall
include the following information:
   1.   The design base or basis, including the edition used
   2.   A statement indicating if the sprinkler design is control mode density
area method, control mode specific application, suppression mode, or any
combination thereof.
   3.   When used, all of the storage conditions stipulated NFPA 13 for Special
Designs.
   4.   The maximum storage height
   5.   The minimum required aisle width
   6.   If storage is in racks, the maximum rack width and minimum transverse
and longitudinal flue widths.
   7.   Storage Capabilities: Commodities designed to be protected by the
automatic sprinkler system
   8.   Limits on storage heights of idle wood and plastic storage
   9.   Limits on storage heights of miscellaneous Group A plastic, tire and
rolled paper storage
   10.   Locations where in-rack sprinklers are required
   11.   Locations where horizontal and/or vertical barriers are required
   12.   Information explaining the manufacturer, sprinkler identification
number, k-factor, and operating temperature of the overhead sprinklers
protecting the high-piled storage.
   13.   Fire Protection Contractor contact information
The following example illustrates a suggested label or sign:
Automatic
Sprinkler
System
Capabilities Class I water miscible flammable liquids in 1 & 5 gallon polyethylene
&            containers in fiberboard cartons
Limitations
Stored
Commodity
Design       NFPA 13, 2013 edition & NFPA 30
Documents
Design Type  Control Mode, Density/Area Method
Max. Storage 25 feet
Height
Min. Aisle   8 feet
Width
Max. Rack    9 feet
Width
Flue         Longitudinal: Min. 6 inches
Dimensions
             Transverse: Min. 3 inches
System       Class I-IV commodities, stored commodity, solid pile or palletized Group A
Capabilities plastics to 12 feet; rack storage of Group A plastics to 25 feet.
Idle Pallets 6 feet maximum storage height
Tire Storage 5 feet maximum storage height
Rolled Paper 5 feet maximum storage height
Storage
In-rack      In-rack sprinklers are required at each of 3 rack tiers containing the stored
sprinklers   commodity. In-rack sprinklers are Tyco/Central FS-B, 17/32" orifice, QR 155°F
             element, SIN TY0041
Horizontal   Required at each rack tier containing the stored commodity.
Barriers
Ceiling      Tyco ELO-231B, ¾” orifice, SR 286°F element, upright, SIN TY0030
Sprinkler
FP           ABC Sprinkler Co. Designer: John Smith
Contractor
 
FIRE SAFETY DURING CONSTRUCTION AND DEMOLITION
Amend section 3301.2 Purpose. This chapter prescribes minimum safeguards for
construction, alteration, and demolition operations to provide reasonable
safety to life and property from fire and emergencies during such operations.
Add section 3310.1.1 Construction Site Access. Approved fire apparatus access
roads shall be provided for every facility, building or portion of a building
as soon as construction commences. The fire apparatus access road shall comply
with the requirements of section 503.2 and this section and shall extend to
within 100 feet of all portions of the facility and all portions of the
exterior walls of the first story of the building as measured by an approved
route around the exterior of the building or facility.
   Exception: The Fire Code Official is authorized to increase the dimension of
100 feet where:
   1.   The building is equipped throughout with an approved automatic
sprinkler system that is fully functional and installed in accordance with
section 903.1.1, 903.3.1.2 or 903.3.1.3.
   2.   Fire apparatus access roads cannot be installed because of location on
property, topography, waterways, nonnegotiable grades or other similar
conditions, and an approved alternative means of fire protection is provided.
Amend 3312.1 Stairways required. Where building construction exceeds 30 feet in
height above the lowest level of fire department vehicle access, two temporary
or permanent stairways shall be provided. As construction progresses, such
stairways shall be extended to within one floor of the highest point of
construction having secured decking or flooring.
Amend 3314.1 Where required. In buildings required to have standpipes by
section 905.3.1, not less than one standpipe shall be provided for use during
construction. Such Standpipe shall be installed prior to construction exceeding
30-feet in height above the lowest level of fire department vehicle access.
Such standpipe shall be provided with fire department hose connections at
approved locations complying with section 3312.1. As construction progresses,
such standpipes shall be extended to within one floor of the highest of
construction having secured decking or flooring.
Add Chapter 41 Special Events
SECTION 4101
GENERAL
4101.1 Scope. Special events including trade shows and exhibitions, outdoor
assembly events, outdoors mazes, special amusement buildings, and special
scaffolding structures shall comply with this chapter and section 1028.
Temporary indoor vehicle displays and vehicle competition or demonstrations
shall comply with this chapter and section 314.
4101.2 Site plans. A detailed site plan shall be submitted to the Fire Code
Official with each permit application for approval.
1.   Outdoor events: The permit application and site plan shall be submitted a
minimum of 30 business days prior to the event. Site plans shall include, but
not be limited to:
   1.   The means of egress.
   2.   Location and width of exits and aisles.
   3.   Location of exit signs.
   4.   Location of fencing or means used to confine attendees.
   5.   Total square footage of enclosed space.
   6.   Location and arrangement of all tents, booths or cooking equipment.
   7.   Locations of fire apparatus access roads.
   8.   Location of fire protection equipment.
   9.   Type and location of heating and electrical equipment where applicable.
   10.   Location of temporary staffed water stations and permanent water
fountains.
2.   Trade shows and exhibitions: The permit application and site plan shall be
submitted a minimum of 30 business days prior to the event. Site plans shall
include, but not be limited to:
   1.   The means of egress.
   2.   Location and width of exits and aisles.
   3.   Location of exit signs.
   4.   Total square footage of space.
   5.   Location and arrangement of all booths and cooking equipment.
   6.   Location of all fire protection equipment.
   7.   Type and location of heating and electrical equipment where applicable.
   8.   Location of covered or multi-level exhibits or booths.
3.   Mazes. The permit application and site plan shall be submitted a minimum
of 30 business days prior to the event. Site plans shall include, but not be
limited to:
   1.   Means of egress.
   2.   Location and width of exits and aisles.
   3.   Location of exit signs.
   4.   Total square footage of space.
   5.   Location and arrangement of all booths and cooking equipment.
   6.   Location of all fire protection equipment.
   7.   Location of means to confine attendees.
   8.   Locations of fire apparatus access roads.
   9.   Type and location of heating and electrical equipment where applicable.
   10.   Locations of structures.
At time of permit application, the event coordinator shall submit a letter from
the property owner authorizing the use of the site, the address of the site,
dates and hours of operation and names and 24-hour phone numbers of at least
two principals.
4.   Temporary indoor vehicle displays: The permit application and site plan
shall be submitted a minimum of 10 business days prior to the display of
electric, liquid- or gas-fueled vehicles, boats or other motor craft. Floor
plans shall include, but not be limited to:
   1.   The means of egress.
   2.   Location and width of exits and aisles.
   3.   Location of exit signs.
   4.   Total square footage of space.
   5.   Location and arrangement of all booths and cooking equipment.
   6.   Location of all fire protection equipment.
   7.   Type and location of heating and electrical equipment where applicable.
   8.   Location and size of exhibits and booths.
   9.   Location of structures.
Exception: Auto dealerships.
5.   Vehicle competition or demonstration. The permit application and site plan
shall be submitted a minimum of 10 business days prior to the competition or
demonstration of electric, liquid- or gas-fueled vehicles, boats or other motor
craft. A floor plan shall include, but not be limited to:
   1.   The means of egress.
   2.   Location and width of exits and aisles.
   3.   Location of exit signs.
   4.   Total square footage of space.
   5.   Location and arrangement of all booths and cooking equipment.
   6.   Location of all fire protection equipment.
   7.   Type and location of heating and electrical equipment where applicable.
   8.   Location and size of exhibits and booths.
   9.   Location of structures.
   10.   Location of fire apparatus access roads where applicable.
SECTION 4102
DEFINITIONS
4102.1 Definitions. The following words and terms are defined in Chapter 2.
   CROSS AISLES.
   EXHIBITS.
   FLAME EFFECT.
   MAIN AISLE.
   MAZE.
   OUTDOOR ASSEMBLY EVENT.
   TEMPORARY STRUCTURES.
   TRADE SHOWS OR EXHIBITIONS.
4103 General Requirements
4103.1 Access for firefighting and medical services. Approved vehicle access
for fire fighting and medical services shall be provided in accordance with
sections 503 and 512.
4103.2 Combustible storage. Combustible materials stored at special events
shall be stored in approved locations and containers.
4103.3 Crowd managers. Crowd managers shall be provided where the Fire Code
Official determines that an indoor or outdoor gathering warrants crowd control.
Crowd managers shall be in accordance with section 403.3.
4103.4 Decorative materials and furnishings. Curtains, drapes and decorations
including, but is not limited to drapes, signs, banners, acoustical materials,
cotton, hay, fabric, paper, straw, moss, split bamboo, and wood chips shall be
flame resistant as demonstrated by testing in accordance with NFPA 701, or
provide documentation of flame retardancy. Field flame test shall be in
accordance with section 320. Materials that cannot be treated for flame
retardancy shall not be used unless approved by the Fire Code Official. This
includes but is not limited to oilcloth, tarpaper, nylon, plastic cloth, and
other plastic materials.
4103.5 Fire protection equipment clearance. Clearance around all fire
protection equipment shall be in accordance with section 901.4.6.
4103.6 Fire extinguishers. Fire extinguishers shall be in accordance with
section 906 and NFPA 10
4103.7 Fire watch. Fire watch shall be in accordance with section 403.12.1.
4103.8 Fireworks, pyrotechnics. Fireworks and pyrotechnics shall comply with
Chapter 56.
4103.9 Housekeeping. The special event area and related areas shall be kept
free from combustible debris at all times.
4103.10 LP-gas heaters. Fuel supplies for liquefied-petroleum gas-fired heaters
shall comply with Chapter 61 of the International Fire Code.
4103.11 Open flame devices. Open flame devices shall comply with section 308.
4103.12 Waste disposal. Combustible debris shall not be accumulated at special
events. Combustible debris, rubbish and waste material shall be removed from
special events at the end of each shift of work. Combustible debris, rubbish
and waste material shall not be disposed of by burning on the site unless
approved.
SECTION 4104
TRADE SHOWS AND EXHIBITIONS
4104.1 General. Trade shows and exhibitions conducted within any occupancy
shall comply with Chapter 38.
4104.2 Vehicles. Liquid- and gas-fueled and electric vehicles, boats or other
motor-craft and equipment used for display, competition or demonstration within
a building shall be in accordance with section 314.
4104.3 Means of egress. Means of egress shall comply with this section and the
requirements of Chapter 10.
4104.3.1 Travel distance. The maximum travel distance from any point in an
exhibit to an exit access aisle shall not exceed 50 feet (15240mm).
4104.3.2 Aisles.
4104.3.2.1 Aisle width. Minimum aisle width inside a trade show or exhibition
shall comply with the following:
Square Footage of Trade Show or Exhibition Minimum Aisle Width 
Greater than 15,000 square feet (1393m2) 10 feet (3048mm)
5,000 square feet (465 square meters) to 15,000 square feet (1393m2) 8 feet
(2438mm)
Less than 5,000 square feet (465 m2) 6 feet (1829mm)
4104.3.3 Obstructions. Aisles shall be kept clear of all obstructions,
including but not limited to, fixtures and displays of goods for sale, chairs,
tables, product, displays, vehicles, and trailer tongues.
4104.3.4 Exit signs. Exit signs shall be visible from all locations in the
occupancy.
4104.4 Exhibit construction and materials. The materials used for an exhibit
shall comply with section 3804.4 and Chapter 8
4104.4.1 Materials. Shall be one of the following:
   1.   Noncombustible or limited-combustible materials.
   2.   Wood that is greater than ¼-inch (6mm) nominal thickness
   3.   Wood ¼-inch (6mm) nominal thickness or less that is pressure-treated
fire-retardant wood meeting the requirements of NFPA 703, Standard for Fire
Retardant Impregnated Wood and Fire Retardant Coatings for Building Materials.
The product shall be marked or labeled by the manufacturer. The product shall
not be painted or similarly modified until the material has been inspected and
the marking or labeling verified, or provide documentation acceptable to the
Fire Code Official.
4104.4.1.1 Flame retardant materials. Materials shall comply with Chapter 8.
4104.4.1.2 Wall and ceiling coverings. Textile wall coverings, such as
carpeting and similar products used as wall or ceiling finishes shall comply
with Chapter 8.
4104.4.1.3 Plastics. Plastics shall be limited to those that comply with
Chapter 8. Plastics used in trade shows and exhibitions with an occupant load
of 300 or more shall be Class A or Class B. Plastics used in trade shows and
exhibitions with an occupant load of less than 300, shall be Class A, Class B
or Class C.
4104.5 Combustible materials storage.
4104.5.1 Quantity. Combustible materials shall be limited to a one-day supply
4104.5.2 Location. Storage of combustible materials behind exhibits, booths, or
tents is prohibited. Combustible materials, including but not limited to wood
crates, paper and cardboard boxes, shall be stored outside the building in an
approved area or in a storeroom having a fire-resistance rating of at least one
hour and protected by an approved automatic fire-extinguishing system
4104.6 Covered exhibits and booths.
4104.6.1 Fire Protection.
4104.6.1.1 Automatic sprinkler systems. An approved sprinkler system shall be
provided in covered exhibits and booths exceeding 300 square feet (2787 m2).
Each level of multi-level exhibit booths shall be protected throughout,
including the uppermost level where the uppermost level is covered with a
ceiling.
4104.7 Multi-level booths. Construction documents for all multi-level exhibits
shall be approved and stamped by a licensed structural engineer or architect
and shall be submitted with the permit application. This includes any exhibit
where a live load is proposed above the exhibit area floor level, regardless of
the accessibility of the area to the public. Upper levels of multi-level booths
with an occupant load greater than 10 persons shall have at least 2 remote
exits.
4104.8 Hazardous Materials. Hazardous materials shall comply with this section
and Chapters 50 through 67.
4104.8.1 Specific prohibitions. The following hazardous materials shall not be
stored, handled or used in trade shows and exhibitions:
   1.   Division 1.1, 1.2, 1.3, and 1.5 explosives as classified by the U.S.
Department of Transportation.
   2.   Detonable, Class I and Class II organic peroxides.
   3.   Class I-A flammable liquids.
   4.   Class 4 and Class 3 oxidizers.
   5.   Class 4 and Class 3 (unstable) reactive materials.
   6.   Class 3 water-reactive materials.
   7.   Pyrophoric materials.
   8.   Highly toxic materials
   9.   Toxic gases.
   10.   Fueling or defueling of flammable or combustible that are stored or
used as liquids, cryogenics or compressed gases.
4104.9 Demonstration cooking and warming equipment or devices.
4104.9.1 General. Cooking and warming devices for demonstration purposes only
shall be in accordance with section 3804.9.
4104.9.2 Public Isolation. Equipment and devices shall be isolated from the
public by not less than 4 feet (1219 mm) or by a noncombustible 3-sided barrier
between the equipment and devices and the public.
4104.9.3 Protection. Single-well cooking equipment using combustible oils or
solids shall meet the following:
   1.   A noncombustible lid shall be immediately available. The lid shall be
of sufficient size to cover the cooking well completely.
   2.   The cooking surface shall not exceed 288 square inches (1858 cm2).
   3.   The equipment shall be placed on a noncombustible surface.
   4.   The equipment shall be separated from each other by a horizontal
distance of not less than 2 feet (609mm).
4104.9.4 Cooking equipment shall be separated from combustible materials by a
horizontal distance of at least 2 feet (609mm).
4104.9.5 Butane. Butane for cooking equipment shall be limited to one 10 oz
cylinder and one spare in storage, of the same size, per appliance. Storage
location shall be approved by the Fire Code Official.
4104.9.5.1 Portable butane-fueled appliances. Portable butane-fueled appliances
are allowed in restaurants and in attended commercial food catering operations
where fueled by not more than two 10 oz (284gL) LP-gas capacity, nonrefillable
butane containers that have a water capacity not exceeding 1.08 lb (0.5 kg) per
container. The containers shall be directly connected to the appliance, and
manifolding of containers is not permitted. Storage of cylinders is limited to
24 containers, with an additional 24 permitted where protected by a 2-hour
fire-resistance-rated barrier.
SECTION 4105
OUTDOOR ASSEMBLY EVENTS
4105.1 General. Outdoor assembly events shall be in accordance with this
section 3805 and Chapter 10.
4105.2 Occupant load. The Fire Code Official shall establish an occupant load
for the event site.
4105.3 Exits. Exits shall comply with Chapter 10 and be as remote from each
other as practical and shall be provided as follows:
Occupant Load Minimum Number of Exits
 
1 to 500                    2 exits
501 to 1,000                3 exits
1,001 or 1,500              4 exits
each additional 500 persons 36 additional inches of exit width
 
4105.3.1 Width. The aggregate clear width of exits shall be a minimum of 36
inches wide (914mm) for each 500 persons to be accommodated.
4105.3.2 Signs. Exits shall be identified with signs that read “EXIT”. The
signs shall be weather-resistant with lettering on a contrasting background.
The lettering shall be of sufficient height and brush stroke to be immediately
visible from 75 feet (22,860mm). Placement of the exit signs shall be approved
by the Fire Code Official.
4105.4 Concession stands, food booths, and retail booths.
4105.4.1 General. Concession stands, food booths and retail booths shall be in
accordance with section 3805.4.
4105.4.1.1 Distances. A minimum of 20 feet (6096mm) shall be provided between
every 150 linear feet (45,720mm) of booth space. A minimum of 30 feet (9144mm)
shall be provided between booths used for cooking and the vehicles, generators,
or any other internal combustion engines. A minimum of 30 feet (9144 mm) shall
be provided between booths used for cooking and amusement rides or devices.
4105.4.2 Cooking appliances or devices.
4105.4.2.1 Public isolation. Cooking appliances or devices shall be isolated
from the public by not less than 4 feet (1219 mm) or by a non-combustible 3-
sided barrier between the equipment and devices and the public.
4105.4.2.2 Protection. Single-well cooking equipment using combustible oils or
solids shall meet the following:
   1.   A noncombustible lid shall be immediately available. The lid shall be
of sufficient size to cover the cooking well completely.
   2.   The cooking surface shall not exceed 288 square inches (18,580mm).
   3.   The equipment shall be placed on a noncombustible surface.
   4.   The equipment shall be separated from each other by a horizontal
distance of not less than 2 feet (609mm).
4105.4.2.3 Liquefied petroleum gas (LP-gas). LP-gas shall be in accordance with
Chapter 61 and NFPA 58.
4105.4.2.3.1 Maximum number and quantity. A maximum of a total aggregate water
capacity of 50 gallons (95L) of LP-gas is permitted at one concession stand or
booth used for cooking.
4105.4.2.3.2 LP-gas high-pressure cylinder hoses. Hoses shall be designed for a
working pressure of 350 PSIG (2413 kPa) with a safety factor of 5 to 1 and
shall be continuously marked with LP-GAS, PROPANE, 350 PSI(2413 kPa) WORKING
PRESSURE, and the manufacturer’s name or trademark. Hose assemblies, after the
application of couplings, shall have a design capability of 700 PSIG (4826
kPa). Hose shall not exceed 12 feet (3638 mm) unless approved by the Fire Code
Official.
4105.4.2.3.3 LP-gas low-pressure cylinder hoses. Hoses with a working pressure
of 5 psig shall be allowed when a fix regulator is set a 5 psi and is connected
directly to the LP GAS cylinder. The hose shall not exceed 12 feet (3658 mm)
unless approved by the Fire Code Official.
4105.4.4 Generators / electrical. The generators shall be installed at least 10
feet (3048mm) from combustible materials, and shall be isolated from the public
by physical guard, fence, or enclosure installed at least 3 feet (914mm) away
from the internal combustion power source, and be provided with a compliant
portable fire extinguisher per section 906 and NFPA 10.
4105.4.5 Temporary water stations. When outdoor temperatures are expected to
exceed 90oF (35oC), the event sponsor shall provide and maintain a minimum of
one staffed water station for each 1,000-projected attendance. The water
station shall include adequate water supply, cups, and a means for rapid
replenishing of exhausted water. Each water station shall be located as far
apart as practicable to allow ease of access for event attendees.
SECTION 4106
MOBILE FOOD VEHICLES
4106.1 General. Mobile food vehicles which are temporarily or permanently
stored on a property where food items are processed or prepared and sold to the
public shall comply with this section.
Exception: Food peddlers operating a retail food establishment from a vehicle
designated to be readily movable in which food is; sold or given away but not
composed, compounded, thawed, reheated, cut, cooked, processed or prepared.
4106.2 A Type I hood shall be installed at or above all commercial cooking
appliances and domestic cooking appliances used for commercial purposes that
produce grease vapors. Commercial kitchen exhaust hoods shall comply with the
requirements of the International Mechanical Code.
4106.2.1 Maintenance. Hoods shall be inspected, tested, and maintained in
accordance with this code and the International Mechanical Code.
4106.2.2 Inspections and tests. Kitchen hood extinguishing systems shall be
inspected and tested every six months by a state of Iowa licensed fire
protection contractor.
4106.3 Fire extinguishers. Portable fire extinguishers shall be provided within
a 30-foot (9144 mm) travel distance of commercial-type cooking equipment. An
approved 2A:20B:C rated dry chemical fire extinguisher shall be provided within
30 feet (9144 mm) of any commercial cooking equipment. Additionally, cooking
equipment involving solid fuels or vegetable or animal oils and fats shall be
protected by a Class K rated portable extinguisher in accordance with section
904.12.5.1 or 904.12.5.2, as applicable.
4106.4 Liquefied petroleum gas (LP-gas). LP-gas shall be in accordance with
Chapter 61 and NFPA 58.
4106.4.1 Maximum number and quantity. A maximum of two LP-gas containers with a
total aggregate water capacity of 50 gallons (190 L) is permitted at one mobile
food vehicle.
4106.4.2 LP-gas cylinder hoses. Hoses shall be designed for a working pressure
of 350 psig (2413 kPa) with a safety factor of 5 to 1 and shall be continuously
marked with LP-GAS, PROPANE, 350 PSI WORKING PRESSURE, and the manufacturer’s
name or trademark. Hose assemblies, after the application of couplings, shall
have a design capability of 700 psig (4826 kPa). Hose assemblies shall be leak
tested at the time of installation at not less the operating pressure of the
system in which they are installed.
4106.5 Location. Mobile food vehicles shall not be located within 20 feet (6096
mm) of buildings, tents, canopies or membrane structures.
SECTION 4107
SPECIAL AMUSEMENT BUILDINGS
4107.1 General. [B] Special amusement buildings shall be in accordance with
this section and section 411 of the International Building Code.
   Exception: Amusement buildings or portions thereof, which are without walls
or a roof and are constructed to prevent the accumulation of smoke.
4107.2 Use of combustible decorative materials. Use of combustible decorative
materials shall be in accordance with Chapter 8.
4107.3 Assistance. Adult monitors with flashlights shall be available to
provide assistance in the event someone becomes lost or disoriented. One adult
monitor shall be provided for every 60 persons.
4107.4 Automatic sprinkler system. Special amusement buildings shall be
equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with
Chapter 9.
4107.4.1 Temporary special amusement buildings. Where the special amusement
building is temporary, the sprinkler water supply shall be of an approved
temporary means. The sprinkler piping shall be connected to a temporary water
supply having sufficient capacity (flow and pressure) to supply residential or
standard quick spray response sprinkler heads at a minimum design density of
0.15 gpm (.57 LPM) per square foot of protected floor area. The design shall be
based on flowing the six most hydraulically remote sprinkler heads. Should the
temporary amusement building contain less than six heads, the design shall
assume that all heads are flowing simultaneously.
The temporary water supply may be connected to a domestic water line, a fire
line, or temporary on-site storage tank as long as the minimum design densities
are met. An indicating type control valve shall be installed in an accessible
location between the sprinkler system and the connection to the water supply.
SECTION 4108
MAZES
4108.1 General. Mazes including, but not limited to corn stalk or hedge mazes,
shall be in accordance with section 3808.
4108.1.2 Safe refuge areas. Safe refuge areas shall be established outside of
the maze or building and structure, and shall not be closer than 50 feet
(15240mm).
4108.1.3 Paths. Paths throughout the maze shall be a minimum of 36 inches
(914mm) in width and shall be clear and unobstructed width.
4108.1.4 Separation. A minimum of 20 feet (6096mm) shall be provided between
mazes and buildings and structures. The 20-foot (6096mm) clearance shall be
free from vegetation and obstructions.
4108.1.5 Means of egress. Each exit shall be a minimum of 6 feet (1828mm) wide.
4108.1.5.1 Travel distance. The maximum travel distance to reach an exit access
shall not exceed 75 feet (22,860mm). The travel distance shall be determined by
using the maze path.
4108.1.5.2 Number. The travel distance required to reach an exit access shall
determine the number of exits required. Locking devices shall remain unlocked
on exits when the maze is occupied.
4108.1.5.3 Exit signs. Exit signs shall be provided next to or above each exit.
The lettering shall be a minimum of 12 inches (305mm) high with 2-inch (51mm)
brushstroke. The signs shall read EXIT with lettering in a color contrasting to
the sign’s background.
4108.2 Event plans. The following plans shall be submitted to the Fire Code
Official.
4108.2.1 General fire safety plan. The plan shall include, but not be limited
to procedures that shall be used to prevent over-drying of vegetation
throughout the site, documentation of decorative materials flame-retardancy,
the maximum number of attendees.
4108.2.2 Security plan. The plan shall document who shall provide security
(e.g., off-duty police officers, sheriff’s posse, employees). All security
personnel shall be provided with a 2-way radio and flashlight.
4108.2.3 Evacuation plans. The plan shall document the responsibilities of all
on-site employees. The plan shall also document how attendees will be
evacuated, and where they will be evacuated.
4108.2.4 Maze rules. Maze rules shall be posted at maze entrance.
4108.3 Employee responsibilities. Each employee shall be familiar with the
evacuation plan and with fire extinguisher locations. Documentation of training
shall be provided to the Fire Code Official.
4108.3.1 Guides. An employee shall be responsible for guiding a group of not
more than 14 attendees through the maze. Each employee shall be provided with a
minimum of one flashlight and two-way radio. The employees shall be responsible
for detecting and reporting fire or smoke to a competent person posted at the
maze main entrance and begin evacuation procedures.
4108.3.2 Main entrance employee. Each maze shall be manned by an employee at
the entrance. The employee shall be capable of communicating with the employees
and shall be provided with a cellular telephone. When the main entrance
employee receives a report of smoke, fire or injury, the employee shall
immediately call 9-1-1.
4108.4 Watering. Corn stalk and hedge mazes shall be provided with sufficient
water and at a frequency that prevents the vegetation from becoming dry or
brittle. Failure to comply with this provision is an imminent hazard and the
Fire Code Official shall issue a stop order.
4108.5 Buildings and structures. When buildings and structures are intended to
be occupied by attendees, the building and structure shall comply with section
3807.
SECTION 4109
COVERED MALL BUILDINGS
4109.1 General. Temporary use of the common pedestrian area within a covered
mall building for promotional, Group A, Group E, Group M or similar activities
shall be in accordance with section 3809.
4109.2 General requirements.
4109.2.1 Main aisle width. Main aisles shall be a minimum of 10 feet (3048mm)
in width or the minimum required means of egress width, whichever is greater,
and shall be maintained in accordance with Chapter 10. Main aisles shall not be
obstructed.
4109.2.2 Cross aisle width. Cross aisles shall be a minimum of 15 feet (4572mm)
in width or the required means of egress width, whichever is greater, and shall
be maintained in accordance with Chapter 10.
4109.2.3 Fueled equipment. Liquid- or gas-fueled, or electric appliances,
tools, apparatus, craft or vehicles shall be displayed in a mall in accordance
with section 314. LP-gas powered floor maintenance machines may be used when in
accordance with Chapter 61.
4109.3 Combustible decorative materials. Combustible decorative materials shall
be in accordance with Chapter 8.
Insert Code section: IFC 5601.4 Exception 1
Language:
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS - GENERAL PROVISIONS
Add section 5003.13 Hazardous Substances, Notification and Cleanup.
A.   Scope. This section shall apply to the release of hazardous substances and
the notification, cleanup, and recovery of costs associated with the mitigation
of hazardous conditions.
B.   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, these words have the
following meaning:
   1.   “Cleanup” means the removal of the hazardous substances to a place
where the waste will not cause any danger to persons or the environment, in
accordance with applicable statutes, rules, and regulations, or the treatment
of the material as defined herein to eliminate the hazardous condition,
including the restoration of the area to a general good appearance without
noticeable odor as much as practicable. “Cleanup” includes all actions
necessary to contain, collect, identify, analyze, treat, disperse, remove, or
dispose of a hazardous substance and to restore the sites from which such
hazardous substance was cleaned up.
   2.   “Hazardous condition” means any situation involving the actual,
imminent, or probable spillage, leakage, or release of a hazardous substance.
      a.   Within the City or onto City property located outside the City
which, because of the quantity, strength, and toxicity of the hazardous
substance, its mobility in the environment and its persistence, creates an
immediate potential danger to the public health or safety; or
      b.   Onto land, into the waters within the State of Iowa or into the
atmosphere, but outside the City, which, because of the quantity, strength, and
toxicity of the hazardous substance, its mobility in the environment and its
persistence, creates an immediate potential danger to the public health or
safety of persons or property within the City.
      Hazardous conditions include any accident involving hazardous materials
required to be reported under section 321.266(4) of the Code of Iowa.
   3.   “Hazardous substance” means any substance or mixture of substances that
presents a danger to the public health or safety or environment and includes,
but is not limited to, a substance that is toxic, corrosive, or flammable, or
that is an irritant or that, in confinement, generates pressure through
decomposition, heat, or other means. The following are examples of substances
which, in sufficient quantity, may be hazardous: acids; alkalis; explosives;
fertilizers; heavy metals such as chromium, arsenic, mercury, lead, and
cadmium; industrial chemicals; paint thinners; paints; pesticides; petroleum
products; poisons; radioactive materials; sludges; and organic solvents.
“Hazardous substance” includes any hazardous waste identified or listed by the
administrator of the United States Environmental Protection Agency under the
Solid Waste Disposal Act as amended by the Resource Conservation and Recovery
Act of 1976, or any toxic pollutant listed under section 307 of the Federal
Water Pollution Control Act of 1976, as amended to January 1, 1977, or any
hazardous material designated under section 311 of the Federal Water Pollution
Control Act as amended to January 1, 1977, or any hazardous materials
designated by the Secretary of Transportation under the Hazardous Materials
Transportation Act, or any hazardous substance listed under the Comprehensive
Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act of 1980.
   4.   “Person” is a natural person, his heirs, executors, administrators, or
assigns, and also includes a firm, partnership, or corporation, its or their
successors or assigns, or any other similar legal entity or the agent of any of
the aforesaid.
   5.    “Responsible person” means the person, whether the owner, agent,
lessor, or tenant, in charge of the hazardous substance being stored,
processed, or handled, or the owner or company transporting hazardous wastes or
substances whether on public ways or grounds or on private property where the
spill would cause danger to the public or to any persons or to the environment.
   6.   “Treatment” means a method, technique, or process, including
neutralization, designed to change the physical, chemical, or biological
character or composition of a hazardous substance so as to neutralize it or to
render the substance non-hazardous, safer for transport, amenable for recovery,
amenable for storage, or to reduce it in volume.
   Treatment includes any activity or processing designed to change the
physical form or chemical composition of hazardous substance to render it non-
hazardous.
C.   Notifications. When a hazardous condition is created, the responsible
person shall notify WestCom and the West Des Moines Fire Department immediately
upon discovery of the condition, but in no instance later than thirty (30)
minutes after the discovery of the hazardous condition.
D.   Cleanup Required. Whenever a hazardous condition is created by the
deposit, injection, dumping, spilling, leaking, or placing of a hazardous
substance, so that the hazardous substance, or a constituent of the hazardous
substance, may enter the environment or be emitted into the air or discharged
into any waters, including ground waters, the Fire Chief or the Chief’s
designee may remove or provide for removal and the disposal of the hazardous
substance at any time, unless the Fire Chief or the Chief’s designee determines
such removal will be properly and promptly accomplished by the responsible
person. If the responsible party does not initiate and complete cleanup within
the time designated by the Fire Department, the City may proceed to remedy the
hazardous condition by performing the necessary cleanup services.
E.   Loss, Burden or Costs. A responsible person shall be liable to the City
for all mitigation costs incurred by the City or other contract agencies,
including but not limited to, chemical damage, contamination of equipment, and
the use of consumable materials. If charges for such cleanup costs are not paid
within thirty (30) days after invoice, the City shall proceed to obtain payment
by all legal means.
EXPLOSIVES AND FIREWORKS
Amend section 5601.1 Scope. It shall be unlawful without a permit for any
person to use or explode any explosives, explosive materials, and fireworks
within the corporate limits of the City of West Des Moines.
   Exceptions:
1The Armed Forces of the United States, Coast Guard, or National Guard.
2Explosives in forms prescribed by the official United States Pharmacopoeia.
3The possession, storage, and use of small ammunition when packaged in
accordance with DOT packaging requirements.
4The possession, storage, and use of not more than 1 pound (0.454 kg) of
commercially manufactured sporting black powder, 20 pounds (9 kg) of smokeless
powder and 10,000 small arms primers for hand loading of small arms ammunition
for personal consumption.
5The use of explosive materials by federal, state, and local regulatory, law
enforcement and fire agencies acting in their official capacities.
6Special industrial explosive devices which in the aggregate contain less than
50 pounds (23 kg) of explosive materials.
7The possession, storage, and use of blank industrial power load cartridges
when packaged in accordance with DOT packaging regulations.
8Transportation in accordance with DOT 49 CFR Parts 100-178.
9Items preempted by federal regulations.
Amend section 5601.2.4 Financial Responsibility to read as follows. The
applicant shall, at the time he or she makes his or her application for a
permit, attach thereto a bond or certificate of insurance naming the applicant
and the City as insured, in the sum of not less than $1,000,000.00, provided
that the Fire Code Official or the City Council may at their discretion require
a greater amount. Said bond and insurance shall inure to the use and benefit of
the City and/or any person who suffers damage either to person or property by
reason of said display of fireworks.
Amend section 5601.4 Qualifications. Persons in charge of magazines, blasting,
fireworks display, or pyrotechnic special effect operations shall not be under
the influence of alcohol or drugs which impair sensory or motor skills, shall
be at least 21 years of age, and shall demonstrate knowledge of all safety
precautions related to the storage, handling, or use of explosives, explosive
materials, or fireworks.
   Exception: Persons in charge of firework displays, or pyrotechnic special
effect operations, shall possess a valid PGI Display Fireworks Operator
Certification or equivalent certification approved by the Fire Code Official.
Amend section 5605.1 Manufacture, Assembly, and Testing of Explosives,
Explosive Materials, and Fireworks
General: It shall be unlawful to manufacture, assemble, and test explosives,
explosive materials, and fireworks within the corporate limits of the City of
West Des Moines.
   Exceptions:
1The hand loading of small arms ammunition prepared for personal use and not
offered for sale.
2The mixing and loading of blasting agents at blasting sites in accordance with
NFPA 495.
3The use of binary explosives or plosophoric materials in blasting or
pyrotechnic special effects applications in accordance with NFPA 495 or NFPA
1126.
FLAMMABLE AND COMBUSTIBLE LIQUIDS
Add section 5704.2.9.7.10 Alternative Containment and Protection. All tanks
that have a secondary tank of steel, concrete, or approved materials shall be
capable of holding 110% of the product stored. A non-combustible roof and roof
framework shall cover all open top secondary tanks exposed to weather.
LIQUEFIED PETROLEUM GASES
Amend section 6104.2 Maximum Capacity within established limits. Within the
limits established by law in the adopting ordinance restricting the storage of
liquefied petroleum gas for the protection of heavily populated or congested
areas, the aggregate capacity of any one installation shall not exceed a water
capacity of 1,000 gallons. Within the limits established by law in the adopting
ordinance restricting the storage of liquefied petroleum gas for the protection
of L1 light industrial districts and G1 general industrial districts, the
aggregate capacity of any one installation shall not exceed a water capacity of
5,000 gallons.
Add section 6104.3.3
LP Gas shall not be stored or used inside of a building.
REFERENCED STANDARDS
NFPA 10   2018
   NFPA 13   2019
   NFPA 13D   2019
   NFPA 13R   2019
   NFPA 20   2019
   NFPA 30   2021
   NFPA 30A   2021
   NFPA 70   2020
   NFPA 72   2019
   NFPA 96   2021
   NFPA 101   2021
   NFPA 2001   2018
APPENDIX D
FIRE APPARATUS ACCESS ROADS
Amend D101.1 Scope. Fire apparatus access roads shall be in accordance with
this appendix and all other applicable requirements of the International Fire
Code. Public streets are regulated using the State Wide Urban Design and
Specifications for public improvements as amended by the City of West Des
Moines. Private streets are also regulated using the State Wide Urban Design
and Specifications for public improvements as amended by the City of West Des
Moines.
Amend D103.2 Grade. Fire apparatus access roads shall not exceed State Wide
Urban Design and Specifications for public improvements or as approved by City
Engineer.
Amend D103.3 Turning Radius. The minimum turning radii shall be determined by
the Fire Code Official.
Amend D103.4 Dead Ends. For residential properties, the maximum dead-end length
for a public or private street is 750 feet constructed with a 37.5 foot radius
cul-de-sac bulb, or a temporary turnaround for temporary construction or
phasing approved by the City of West Des Moines Fire Marshal. The maximum dead-
end length for a public or private street may be extended to 1,500 feet if each
residential property located beyond 750 feet includes an approved fire
sprinkler system and there is an approved turnaround every 750 feet. (The City
Engineering Department and Fire Marshal can provide examples of approved turn a
round requirements). For commercial and industrial properties, the maximum
dead-end length is 750 feet constructed with a 50 foot radius cul-de-sac bulb,
or a temporary turnaround for temporary construction or phasing approved by the
City of West Des Moines Fire Marshal.
Amend D103.5 Fire Apparatus Access Road Gates. Gates securing fire apparatus
access roads shall comply with all of the following criteria:
   1.   The minimum gate width shall accommodate a 14-foot clear drive lane
width.
   2.   Gates shall be of the swinging or sliding type.
   3.   Construction of the gate shall be of materials that allow for manual
operation by one person.
   4.   Gate components shall be maintained in an operative condition at all
times and replaced or repaired when defective.
   5.   Electric gates shall be equipped with a means of opening the gate by
fire department personnel for emergency access. Emergency opening devices shall
be approved by the Fire Code Official.
   6.   Manual opening gates shall not be locked with a padlock or chain unless
they are capable of being opened by means of forcible entry tools.
   7.   Locking device specifications shall be submitted for approval by the
Fire Code Official prior to installation.
Amend D103.6 Signs. Where required by the Fire Code Official, fire apparatus
access roads shall conform to section 511.4. Signs shall be posted on one or
both sides of the fire apparatus road as required by section D 103.6.1 or D
103.6.2.
Amend D103.6.1 Roads 20 to 26 feet in Width. Fire apparatus access roads 20 to
26 feet wide shall be posted on both sides as a fire lane when required by the
Fire Code Official.
Amend D103.6.2 Roads more than 26 feet in Width. Fire apparatus access roads
more than 26 feet wide shall be posted on one side of the road as a fire lane
when required by the Fire Code Official.
Section D104 Commercial and Industrial Developments.
Delete sections D104.1 and D104.2 and Replace with the following wording.
D104.1 Access. All buildings, to include commercial, industrial developments,
multiple family residential developments and one or two family residential
developments, shall have a minimum of two fire apparatus accesses/access roads
as approved by the Fire Code Official. Based on the building occupancy hazard,
the Fire Code Official may require more than two fire apparatus accesses. The
Fire Code Official may reduce this requirement for just cause as long as safety
to the buildings/occupants is not jeopardized. All accesses/access roads shall
have a minimum clear width of 20 feet and shall support an imposed load of
75,000 lbs.
Amend D104.3 Remoteness. Where two accesses/access roads are required, they
shall be placed a distance apart equal to not less than one-half the length of
the maximum overall diagonal dimension of the property or area to be served,
measured in a straight line between accesses. The Fire Code Official may reduce
the separation distance between accesses for just cause as long as safety to
the buildings/occupants is not jeopardized.
Delete section D106, D106.1, and D106.2
Amend section D107.1 One or two-family dwelling residential developments.
This section only applies during construction if the maximum dead-end lengths
outlined in section D103.4 are not exceeded.
Delete D107.1 Exception 1 (Ord. 2594, 12-18-2023)
4-3-5: APPEALS:
A.   Appeals Process: Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Fire Code
Official may appeal the decision to the Municipal Code Hearing Officer as set
out in Title 4, Chapter 4,
Section 10 of the Municipal Code. The appeal shall be completed by filing a
written notice of appeal with the City Clerk within fourteen (14) days from the
date of issue of the written decision by the Fire Code Official. For appeal
purposes, the date of issue shall be the date the Fire Code Official signs,
dates, and mails the written decision. Failure to file a timely notice of
appeal as required herein shall constitute a waiver of the right to appeal and
the decision of the Fire Code Official shall be final.
B.   The notice of appeal shall clearly set forth with specificity each and
every ground that serves as the basis for the appeal, and it shall be
accompanied by copies of plans, specifications, or any pertinent information,
which may be required to adequately evaluate the appeal. Any matter not
specifically raised in the notice of appeal shall be deemed to be final and
shall not be reviewed by the Municipal Code Hearing Officer.
C.   The notice of appeal shall also be accompanied by a one hundred dollar
($100.00) filing fee for administrative and publication costs.
D.   Upon receipt of a timely filed notice of appeal, the City shall schedule
the appeal for hearing before the Municipal Code Hearing Officer.
E.   The hearing shall be scheduled no later than twenty (20) working days
after the date on which the written petition was filed and may be extended for
a reasonable period at the Municipal Code Hearing Officer’s discretion, or upon
written request from the petitioner or the Fire Code Official, for good cause
shown.
F.   In the event that an ambiguity arises as to an interpretation of the Code,
the Municipal Code Hearing Officer may interpret the Code as applied to the
specific instance presented. Such decisions shall be on a case-by-case basis
and shall not be binding in future cases.
G.   The Municipal Code Hearing Officer shall not waive any requirements of the
Code unless the Municipal Code Hearing Officer concludes that the provision(s)
is unduly burdensome or impracticable under the circumstances. Such decisions
will also be as a case-by-case basis and shall not be binding in future cases.
H.   Hearing Procedure: The procedures provided in Title 4, Chapter 4, Section
10(E) of the Municipal Code shall apply to hearings held under this chapter.
(Ord. 2594, 12-18-2023)
4-3-6: NEW MATERIALS, PROCESSES, OR OCCUPANCIES WHICH MAY REQUIRE PERMITS:
The Building Official and the Fire Code Official of the Fire Department shall
act as a committee to determine and specify, after giving affected persons an
opportunity to be heard, any new materials, processes, or occupancies for which
permits are required in addition to those now enumerated in said Code. The Fire
Code Official shall post such list in a conspicuous place at the administrative
offices of the Fire Department and distribute copies thereof to interested
persons. (Ord. 2594, 12-18-2023)
4-3-7: LIABILITY FOR DAMAGES:
A.   This Code is enacted only for the purpose of securing to individuals the
enjoyment of rights and privileges to which they are entitled as members of the
public, rather than for the purpose of protecting any individual from harm.
B.   The City, its officers, employees, or agents make no representations or
warranties of any kind whatsoever, expressed or implied, with respect to the
completeness or thoroughness of the inspections and examinations performed
under this Code, but said inspections are made solely to assist the owner of
the building, structure, equipment, and premises to meet certain minimum
requirements of this Code and to compel, if necessary, the owner to meet the
minimum requirements for the protection of the health, welfare, and safety of
persons and property. Nothing herein contained in this Code shall alleviate the
owner of any building, structure, equipment, and premises from making an
independent inspection in order to fulfill the requirements of this Code, nor
shall this Code be construed to relieve or lessen the responsibility of any
person owning, operating, or controlling any building, structure, equipment, or
premises regulated herein from any damages to any person or property caused by
defects or Code violations. The City, its officers, employees, or agents shall
not be held as assuming any liability for damages to any person or property by
reason of any inspections authorized by this Code or investigations, or any
approvals issued herein, or for any act or failure to act in the enforcement of
this Code. (Ord. 2594, 12-18-2023)
4-3-8: VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES:
A violation of this chapter is a simple misdemeanor and is punishable by a fine
not to exceed eight hundred and fifty dollars ($850.00) and/or a term of
imprisonment not to exceed thirty (30) days. A violation of this Chapter may
also be declared a municipal infraction and be punishable as provided in Title
1, Chapter 4,
Section 1 of this Code. Pursuant to Iowa Code section 100.41, the officials of
the Fire Prevention Bureau shall have the authority to issue citations for
violations of this chapter. Officials of the Fire Prevention Bureau shall have
the discretion to enforce this Chapter either as a municipal infraction or a
simple misdemeanor. (Ord. 2594, 12-18-2023)
4-3-9: REPEALER:
In any case where the provisions of this chapter, or the Fire Code hereby
adopted, are found to be in conflict with any provision of Iowa Code or
regulations of the State Fire Marshal, or any provision of any zoning,
building, fire, electrical, plumbing, mechanical, safety, or health ordinance
or Code of the City, the provision which establishes the higher standard for
the promotion and protection of the safety of persons and property shall
prevail. (Ord. 2594, 12-18-2023)
4-3-10: SAVING CLAUSE:
The City hereby declares that should any section, paragraph, sentence, or word
of this chapter or of the Code hereby adopted be declared for any reason to be
invalid, it is the intent of the City Council that it would have passed all
other portions of this chapter independent of the elimination here from of any
such portion as may be declared invalid. (Ord. 2594, 12-18-2023)
4-3-11: EFFECTIVE DATE:
This chapter shall be in full force and effect on January 1, 2024. (Ord. 2594,
12-18-2023)
CHAPTER 4
NUISANCES
SECTION:
4-4-1: Definitions
4-4-2: Nuisances Declared
4-4-3: Habitual Violator
4-4-4: Nuisances Prohibited; Authority To Abate
4-4-5: Notice To Abate; Service
4-4-6: Abatement By Administrative Proceedings
4-4-7: Abatement By Municipal Infraction Proceedings
4-4-8: Abatement Remedies; Penalties
4-4-9: Emergency Abatement Procedure
4-4-10: Municipal Code Hearing Officer
4-4-11: Specified Crime Property; Declaration And Abatement
4-4-12: Disorderly And Nuisance Properties
4-4-1: DEFINITIONS:
ABANDONED BUILDING: Any building or portion of a building which has stood with
an incomplete exterior shell for longer than one year or any building or
portion thereof which has stood unoccupied for longer than six (6) months and
which meets one or more of the following criteria:
Unsecured.
Having Housing Code or Building Code violations.
COMMUNITY COMPLIANCE SPECIALIST: The City Manager or any employee designated by
the City Manager of the City of West Des Moines to enforce this chapter.
INOPERABLE/OBSOLETE VEHICLE: Any device in, upon or by which a person or
property is or may be transported or drawn upon a highway or street, excepting
devices moved by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or
tracks, and shall include, without limitation, motor vehicle, automobile,
truck, trailer, motorcycle, tractor, buggy, wagon or any combination thereof,
and which is not licensed for the current year as required by law and/or which
exhibits any one of the following characteristics:
A.   Broken Glass: Any vehicle or part of a vehicle with a broken windshield,
or any other broken glass.
B.   Broken Or Loose Parts: Any vehicle or part of a vehicle with a broken or
loose fender, door, bumper, hood, wheel, steering wheel, trunk top or tailpipe.
C.   Missing Engine Or Wheels: Any vehicle which is lacking an engine or one or
more wheels or other structural parts which renders such vehicle totally
inoperable.
D.   Habitat For Animals Or Insects: Any vehicle or part of a vehicle which has
become a habitat for rats, mice or snakes or any other vermin or insects.
E.   Defective Or Obsolete Condition: Any vehicle or part of a vehicle which,
because of its defective or obsolete condition, constitutes a threat to the
public health and safety.
F.   Inoperable Condition: Any vehicle that is not capable of moving in both
forward and reverse gears.
JUNK OR SALVAGE MATERIAL: Any discarded or salvaged building material or
fixture; any obsolete or inoperable machinery or parts thereof; scrap or iron
or steel.
OVERLAND FLOWAGE EASEMENT OR STORMWATER FLOWAGE EASEMENTS: Those easements as
shown on an official plat of record intended to convey stormwater and surface
water or by separate recorded easement document approved by the City in
conjunction with the development of a parcel of land within the City.
OWNER: The person or persons who are the record owners of real property
according to the records of the County Recorder's Office.
REFUSE: Any putrescible and nonputrescible and combustible and noncombustible
waste, including paper, garbage, material resulting from the handling,
processing, storage, preparation, serving and consumption of food, vegetable or
animal matter, offal, rubbish, plant waste such as tree trimmings or grass
cuttings, ashes, incinerator residue, street cleanings, construction debris,
and solid industrial and market wastes.
RESPONSIBLE PARTY: Any person having possession or control of real or personal
property including, without limitation, any one or more of the following:
Agent.
Assignee or collector of rents.
Holder of a contract or deed.
Lessee.
Mortgagee or vendee in possession.
Owner.
Receiver or executor or trustee.
Other person, firm or corporation exercising apparent control over a property.
VEGETATION: Any plant life upon private property that is not a part of a
conservation easement or that was planted for erosion control purposes and is
not an agricultural crop such as gardens and typical cropland production.
WEATHER RESISTANT SURFACE: Existing gravel or rock surfaces, concrete and
asphalt. (Ord. 1009, 6-22-1992; amd. Ord. 2405, 2-17-2020)
4-4-2: NUISANCES DECLARED:
Whatever is injurious to the senses, or an obstruction to the free use of
property, so as essentially to interfere with the comfortable enjoyment of life
or property, is a nuisance. Nuisances shall include, but not be limited to,
those activities and items hereafter set forth in this section:
A.   Weeds: Weeds or vegetation allowed to grow to a height greater than ten
inches (10"), or any accumulation of dead weeds, grass, brush, or trees on any
occupied or unoccupied lot or land. Exceptions include:
1.   Trees And Shrubs: The use of trees and shrubs for landscaping purposes;
2.   Erosion Control: Areas planted to offset and control any soil loss
problems, both occurring or predicted, including areas along waterways and
edges of lakes, ponds, and stormwater retention/detention facilities;
3.   Wooded Areas: All areas that are predominately wooded and over one acre in
size;
4.   Educational Programs: Any areas designated for educational studies;
5.   Gardens: Areas dedicated to growing fruits or vegetables for personal
consumption or to growing flowers, native plants, ornamental grasses, ground
covers, shrubs, and similar plants which are cultivated and/or mulched to
remain free of weeds, grassy weeds, or volunteer plants. Vegetation in gardens
shall not be allowed to grow onto adjacent property. Fruit and vegetable
gardens are prohibited within the public right of way. Landscaping with
flowers, plants, and grasses may be allowed within the public right of way, but
shall be limited to the immediate area surrounding a mailbox, shall not exceed
eight (8) square feet in size, and shall not interfere with the vision triangle
as provided in this code. There shall be no compensation by the city to the
property owner for any damage to or removal of such items placed within the
public right of way;
6.   Streetscapes: Plantings within the public right of way that are part of a
planned city streetscape or a landscape plan submitted and approved as part of
a development permit;
7.   Parks And Open Space: Any and all public parks and open space lands
whether under the jurisdiction of federal, state, county, or local agencies,
including private conservation/preservation organizations; and
8.   Native Planting Areas: Areas of native plant species on any parcel, with
the exception of individual single-family lots, that are part of a landscape
plan submitted and approved as part of a development permit.
All vegetation, other than trees and shrubs, must be cut at least once annually
to a height no greater than ten inches (10"). As an alternative to cutting,
native planting areas (see exceptions at subsections A7 and A8 of this section)
on both private and public property may be maintained by controlled burning
with an approved permit from the city's fire department. Natural areas in
public parks and greenways shall be exempt from annual maintenance
requirements.
No exceptions will be granted that violate the Iowa noxious weeds and the Iowa
weed law chapter 317, code of Iowa, 2009.
B.   Rubbish, Trash: Accumulation of rubbish, trash, refuse, junk, and other
salvage materials, such as metals and lumber, that are allowed to accumulate to
the prejudice of others or any material having lost its value for the original
purpose for which it was created or manufactured.
C.   Debris On Right Of Way: Mud, dirt, gravel, snow, leaves, or other debris,
substances, or objects deposited upon the public right of way, including, but
not limited to, debris, substances, or objects that unnecessarily restrict the
movement of vehicular or pedestrian traffic along the public streets and
sidewalks.
D.   Dilapidated Buildings: Any building or other structure which is in such a
dilapidated condition that it is unfit for human habitation, or kept in such an
unsanitary condition that it is a menace to the health of people residing in
the vicinity thereof, or any building or structure defined as a dangerous
building in the uniform code for the abatement of dangerous buildings, 1988
edition, as adopted by the city.
E.   Abandoned Buildings: Abandoned buildings or other structures.
F.   Inoperable/Obsolete Vehicles: The storage, parking, leaving, or permitting
the storage, parking, or leaving of an inoperable/obsolete vehicle upon private
property within the city. This subsection shall not apply to any vehicle
enclosed within a building on private property or to any vehicle held in
connection with a junkyard, or auto and truck oriented use operated in the
appropriate zone, pursuant to the zoning laws.
G.   Vehicles Parked On Unpaved Surfaces: Vehicles parked on private property
with residential zoning on an unpaved surface or a surface that does not comply
with subsections
9-15-4B and
9-15-6G of this code.
H.   Fences: Fences that are not in a structurally sound condition.
I.   Vermin Harborage: Conditions which are conducive to the harborage or
breeding of vermin.
J.   Sanitary Sewer Facilities: Facilities for the storage or processing of
sewage, such as privies, vaults, sewers, private drains, septic tanks,
cesspools and drainfields, which have failed or do not function properly or
which are overflowing, leaking or emanating odors. Septic tanks, cisterns, and
cesspools which are abandoned or no longer in use unless they are emptied and
filled with clean fill. Any vault, cesspool, or septic tank which does not
comply with the Polk County or Dallas County department of health regulations.
K.   Overland Flowage Easements And Stormwater Flowage Easements: No alteration
or modification shall be made nor any obstructions placed in the overland
flowage easement or storm flowage easement which prevents, obstructs, or
impedes the overland water flow or surface water flow from adjacent lands
entering or draining into and through the easement without first obtaining the
expressed written consent of the city.
L.   Other Nuisances: Any nuisance described as such by chapter 657 of the Iowa
Code.
M.   Waste Disposal: The placing in a compost pile, yard, or garden, the
burying or the burning of rubbish, trash, refuse, junk, used construction
materials, or unprocessed animal waste, or any other inappropriate items which
are generally offensive to the senses of the general public.
N.   Discharge Of Waters: Any discharge of waters which collect upon private
real estate from subsurface or surface drainage to a point upon or adjacent to
a public sidewalk, street, or property line as to permit the waters discharged
to drain upon a public sidewalk, street, or onto adjoining real estate. The
Public Works Director or designee may require that any such discharge be
connected to the public storm sewer system, if available, or be directed to a
discharge point which eliminates or lessens the nuisance.
O.   Dilapidated/Inoperable Mechanical Equipment: The storage, leaving, or
permitting the storage or leaving, of dilapidated/inoperable mechanical
equipment upon private property within the City including, but not limited to:
heating, ventilating and cooling equipment, pumps, generators and solar or wind
generated energy systems.
P.   Building Exteriors: Any exterior surface to any building or other
structure which has not been maintained in good condition, is not of standard
quality and appearance, or does not have an acceptable permanent finish.
Exterior surfaces include, but are not limited to, doors, door and window
frames, cornices, porches, trim, balconies, decks, siding, masonry joints, and
roofing. Substantial peeling, flaking, and chipped paint on any exterior
surface shall also constitute a nuisance. Any construction or renovation
project undertaken to correct any such deficiencies shall be completed within
six (6) months of commencement of the project, unless the City has approved of
a construction or renovation schedule of specific longer duration in writing
prior to the expiration of this time period. All construction or renovation
project materials and equipment shall be placed within an enclosed structure or
removed from the property when not in active use. (Ord. 2143, 5-2-2016; amd.
Ord. 2280, 2-20-2018; Ord. 2504, 3-7-2022)
4-4-3: HABITUAL VIOLATOR:
Any person who is found to have violated this Chapter three or more times
within a 12-month period, at any address in the City, shall be deemed to be a
habitual violator. (Ord. 2405, 2-17-2020)
4-4-4: NUISANCES PROHIBITED; AUTHORITY TO ABATE:
A.   The creation or maintenance of a nuisance is unlawful and prohibited and
shall constitute a Municipal infraction except as set forth under subsection
4-4-2L of this chapter.
B.   The Community Compliance Specialist is authorized to abate nuisances in
accordance with the procedures set forth in this chapter. Nuisances may be
abated by either the administrative abatement process or the Municipal
infraction process, as hereinafter provided.
C.   The creation, maintenance or keeping of a "nuisance" as defined in this
chapter by a responsible party or any other violation of this chapter is
punishable as a simple misdemeanor as provided in section 903.1 of the code of
Iowa (2019), or as a municipal infraction pursuant to title1, chapter 4 of this
Code, or otherwise specified by this Chapter. Police officers, Community
Compliance Specialists, and the Police Chief's designees shall have the
authority to issue criminal citations for violations of this chapter, and shall
have the discretion to enforce this chapter as a simple misdemeanor, a
Municipal infraction, or as an administrative abatement. Each day a nuisance
continues constitutes a separate offense and is subject to a separate criminal
offense and penalty. A "responsible party" as defined in this chapter may be
shown to be maintaining or keeping a nuisance on a property for the purpose of
this section if the responsible party knows or a reasonable person in the
responsible party's position would reasonably know that the condition
constituting a nuisance exists on the property. Failure of a responsible party
to correct a nuisance within twenty four (24) hours after receipt of a verbal
or written notice of the existence of a nuisance by a peace officer or
Community Compliance Specialist shall be deemed as knowledge of the existence
of the nuisance, but is not required to show knowledge. (Ord. 1822, 12-1-2008;
amd. Ord. 2405, 2-17-2020)
4-4-5: NOTICE TO ABATE; SERVICE:
A.   The City Manager, or any Community Compliance Specialist, is hereby
authorized to serve upon the owner or responsible party of the property upon
which the nuisance is being maintained, or upon the person or persons causing
or maintaining the nuisance, a written notice to abate as prescribed below.
B.   When service of a notice to abate is required, the following methods of
service shall be deemed adequate:
1   Personal service upon the owner and/or responsible party of the property
upon which the nuisance exists.
2   In lieu of personal service, any two (2) of the following three (3) methods
of service shall be considered adequate:
a   Sending the notice by certified mail, return receipt requested, and by
regular mail to the last known address of the owner and/or responsible party of
the property. If the owner and/or responsible party of the property does not
claim the certified mail notice, but the notice sent by regular mail has not
been returned to the sender as undeliverable, then the notice sent by regular
mail shall be deemed one of the two (2) acceptable methods of service for
purposes of this section.
b   Publishing the notice once a week for three (3) consecutive weeks in a
newspaper of general circulation in the City.
c   Posting the notice in a conspicuous place on the property or building upon
which the nuisance exists.
3   Personal service, notice by certified mail, and notice by publication are
not required for violations of subsection 4-4-2A, "Weeds", of this chapter.
Service of a notice to abate for violations of subsection 4-4-2A of this
chapter shall be accomplished by posting the notice in a conspicuous place on
the property or building where the violation has occurred and sending the
notice by regular mail to the owner and/or responsible party of the property.
If there is no building on the property, a sign shall be posted on the property
providing notice. The owner and/or responsible party must comply with the
notice and abate the violation within seventy two (72) hours from the date of
posting and mailing. (Ord. 1977, 3-4-2013; amd. Ord. 2405, 2-17-2020)
4-4-6: ABATEMENT BY ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEEDINGS:
A.   Content Of Notice: In the event the Compliance Specialist decides to abate
a nuisance administratively, the notice to abate shall include the following
information:
1   Description of what constitutes a nuisance, citing the appropriate Code
section.
2   Description of the action necessary to abate the nuisance.
3   The order to abate within a specified time period.
4   The notice shall advise that, upon failure to comply with the order to
abate, the City shall undertake such abatement and that the cost of abatement
may be assessed against the property for collection in the same manner as
Property Taxes.
5   The notice shall also advise as to the opportunity for an administrative
hearing and that failure to request such a hearing within the time specified in
the notice shall constitute a waiver of the right to a hearing and that said
notice shall thereafter become a final determination and order to abate.
6   Fees for the administrative hearing shall be in the amount set forth in the
scheduled of fees the city council has adopted by resolution. The fee for the
administrative hearing shall be paid at the time the request is made.
B.   Administrative Hearing: The hearing shall be held before the Municipal
code hearing officer, and shall be in accordance with the procedures of section
4-4-10 of this chapter, except as herein otherwise provided. The determination
and order shall be appealable to the city council or the county district court
by writ of certiorari. The order shall not be carried out until the time for
filing the writ of certiorari has expired. (Ord. 1009, 6-22-1992; amd. Ord.
1542, 9-2-2003; Ord. 2405, 2-17-2020; Ord. 2545, 10-3-2022)
4-4-7: ABATEMENT BY MUNICIPAL INFRACTION PROCEEDINGS:
A.   Content Of Notice: In the event the compliance specialist decides to abate
a nuisance through the municipal infraction process, the notice to abate shall
include the following information:
1   Description of what constitutes a nuisance, citing the appropriate code
section.
2   Description of the action necessary to abate the nuisance.
3   The order to abate within a specified time period.
4   Explanation that failure to abate the nuisance within the time specified
will result in the issuance of a civil citation charging the owner or
responsible party with a municipal infraction.
5   Explanation that each day that a nuisance is permitted to continue
constitutes a separate offense.
6   Explanation that upon being found guilty of a municipal infraction, the
court is authorized to order abatement, assess the costs of abatement against
the property and/or enter them as a judgment against the defendant, and assess
a civil penalty against the defendant.
B.   Issuance Of Civil Citation: In the event that the nuisance is not abated
as ordered and within the time specified in the notice to abate, the compliance
specialist may issue a civil citation to the property owner or responsible
party, charging that person with a municipal infraction. The compliance
specialist may, but shall not be required to, give notice to abate prior to
issuance of a civil citation for a repeat offense involving the same property
and occurring within one year of a prior violation. (Ord. 1009, 6-22-1992; amd.
Ord. 2405, 2-17-2020)
4-4-8: ABATEMENT REMEDIES; PENALTIES:
A.   Abatement may include, but shall not be limited to, repair, removal,
cleaning, extermination, cutting, mowing, grading, sewer repairs, draining,
securing, repairing a building or structure, boarding unoccupied buildings,
barricading or fencing, removing dangerous portions of buildings or structures
and demolition of dangerous structures or abandoned buildings.
B.   The cost of abatement may be assessed against the property for collection
in the same manner as property taxes. Abatement costs shall include the cost of
removing or eliminating the nuisance, the cost of investigation, such as title
searches, inspection and testing; the cost of notification; filing costs; and
other related administrative costs. Inoperable and/or obsolete vehicles which
have been impounded may be sold in accordance with state law. If an inoperable
and/or obsolete vehicle is not sold or if the proceeds of such sale or
redemption are not sufficient for payment of the cost of abatement, storage and
sale of said inoperable and/or obsolete vehicle, such cost or the balance of
such cost may be assessed against the property for collection in the same
manner as a property tax.
C.   In a municipal infraction proceeding for the abatement of a nuisance, the
court may order any one or more of the following:
1   Place a judgment against the person and/or property of the defendant for
the costs of abatement.
2   Levy a civil penalty (fine) against the defendant as provided in title 1,
chapter 4 of this code.
3   Order abatement of the nuisance in any manner as provided in this chapter.
4   Assess costs of abatement against the property for collection in the same
manner as property taxes. (Ord. 1734, 3-12-2007; amd. Ord. 2405, 2-17-2020)
4-4-9: EMERGENCY ABATEMENT PROCEDURE:
When the compliance specialist determines that a nuisance exists on a property
and the nuisance constitutes an imminent clear and compelling danger to health,
safety or welfare of persons or property, the compliance specialist is
authorized to abate or have abated the nuisance without prior notice and
opportunity of hearing. The costs of such action may be assessed against the
property for collection in the same manner as property tax. However, prior to
such assessment, the city shall give a property owner notice by certified mail
and the opportunity for an administrative hearing in accordance with the
procedures of section
4-4-6 of this chapter. (Ord. 1009, 6-22-1992; amd. Ord. 2405, 2-17-2020)
4-4-10: MUNICIPAL CODE HEARING OFFICER:
A.   Purpose: A hearing officer, designated by the mayor and subject to city
council approval, shall hold administrative hearings concerning abatement of
nuisances in the administrative process.
B.   Procedures: All proceedings shall be in accordance with the requirements
of this section.
C.   Hearing On Actions, Interpretations, Notices And Orders:
1   Any person affected by any action, interpretation, notice or order which
has been issued by a compliance specialist in connection with the enforcement
of this chapter, through the administrative abatement process, may request, and
shall be granted, a hearing on the matter before the municipal code hearing
officer; provided, that, such a request for a hearing must be in a form of a
written petition and must be filed with the city clerk within the following
time periods: a) where a notice or order was served or mailed pursuant to this
chapter, written petition must be filed with the city clerk within seven (7)
calendar days; b) where notice or order was published as provided in this
chapter, written petition must be filed with the city clerk within seven (7)
calendar days after date of last publication; c) where a notice or order was
served by posting in a conspicuous place on the property or building deemed a
nuisance, a written petition must be filed with the clerk within seven (7)
calendar days of the posting of the notice. Any petition so filed shall state
the particular section of the ordinance involved and a brief statement of
grounds upon which such appeal is taken. Failure to request a hearing and
filing a timely petition as prescribed herein shall constitute a waiver of the
right to a hearing, and the notice or order shall become a final determination
and order.
2   Upon receipt of a timely filed petition, the hearing officer shall set a
time and place for such hearing and shall give written notification thereof.
Notification shall be given either through personal service or by certified
mail, return receipt requested. The notice shall include a statement of the
time, place and nature of the hearing.
3   If the petitioner fails to appear at such hearing, the hearing officer may
proceed with the hearing and make a decision in the absence of the party.
D.   Time For Commencement Of Hearing: The hearing shall be commenced not later
than twenty (20) days after the date on which the petition was filed; however,
this time may be extended for a reasonable period by the presiding officer.
E.   Hearing Procedure:
1   The hearing shall be open to the public and shall be recorded either by
mechanical means or by manual means. Opportunity shall be afforded all parties
to respond and present evidence and argument on all issues involved. Parties
may represent themselves or may be represented by legal counsel.
2   Irrelevant, immaterial or unduly repetitious evidence shall be excluded. A
finding shall be based upon the kind of evidence on which reasonably prudent
persons are accustomed to rely for the conduct of their serious affairs, and
may be based upon such evidence even if it would be inadmissible in a court of
law. The hearing officer shall give effect to the rules of privilege recognized
by law. Objections to evidentiary offers may be made and shall be noted in the
record. Subject to these requirements, when a hearing will be expedited and the
interests of the parties will not be prejudiced substantially, any part of the
evidence may be required to be submitted in verified written form.
3   Documentary evidence may be received in the form of copies or excerpts, if
the original is not readily available. Upon request, parties shall be given an
opportunity to compare the copy with the original, if available.
4   Witnesses at the hearing, or available persons whose testimony has been
submitted in written form, shall be subject to cross examination by any party
as necessary for a full and true disclosure of the facts.
5   The hearing officer's experience, technical competence, and specialized
knowledge may be utilized in the evaluation of the evidence.
6   The hearing officer shall conduct the hearing and have power to administer
oaths. The hearing officer may cause subpoenas to be issued for such a
witnesses and the production of such books and papers as either party may
designate. The subpoenas may be signed by the hearing officer.
7   An appeal pursuant to this chapter shall not stay the effect of a notice or
order under the emergency provisions of this chapter unless so ordered by the
hearing officer.
F.   Decision Of Hearing Officer After Hearing: Upon submission of all evidence
and at the conclusion of the hearing, the hearing officer shall render a
decision based upon the record. This decision may be made immediately after the
conclusion of the hearing or within a reasonable time thereafter. The hearing
officer may affirm, modify or reverse any action, interpretation, notice or
order which has been issued in connection with the enforcement of an ordinance.
A decision shall include findings of fact and conclusions of law separately
stated. Following the decision of the hearing officer, all parties shall be
notified of the decision by personal service or by certified mail, return
receipt requested. Any party to the hearing, including the city, may seek
judicial review by filing a petition in the county district court within twenty
(20) days after the issuance of the decision by the hearing officer. Before
filing a petition for judicial review in the district court, the affected party
may appeal the decision of the hearing officer to the city council. This appeal
shall be filed within forty eight (48) hours of the decision being rendered and
notice of such appeal shall be filed with the city clerk. The city council
shall review the proceedings based upon the record made before the hearing
officer and may, with city council's consent, grant to each affected party an
opportunity to appear and present arguments to the city council on the relief
sought. The city council may affirm, modify or reverse the hearing officer's
decision. Judicial review by the county district court shall be filed within
twenty (20) days from the date of the city council decision.
G.   Emergency Orders: Notwithstanding any provision stated in this chapter,
whenever in the judgment of the municipal officer, agent or employee, an
emergency exists creating a dangerous and imminent health or safety hazard to
persons, property or the general public which requires immediate action, he/she
shall order such action as may be necessary to meet the emergency. Any orders
issued pursuant to this section shall be effective immediately or in the time
and manner prescribed in the order itself.
H.   Authority Of City To Perform Work Upon Failure Of Property Owner: Should
any property owner affected by any notice or order issued pursuant to this
chapter fail to perform an action required by said notice or order, the city,
where otherwise allowed by law, may perform the required action and assess the
costs against the property involved.
I.   Cost of Administrative Hearing. The cost of the administrative hearing
shall be the responsibility of the losing party, including, but not limited to,
the cost of the administrative hearing officer. (Ord. 1542, 9-2-2003; amd. Ord.
2405, 2-17-2020; Ord. 2545, 10-3-2022)
4-4-11: SPECIFIED CRIME PROPERTY; DECLARATION AND ABATEMENT:
A.   The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning:
BOOTLEGGING: The illegal sale or service of alcoholic liquor, wine, or beer in
violation of Iowa Code (2005), chapter 123.
CHIEF OF POLICE: The person who has the responsibility to supervise and direct
the police department or his or her designee.
CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE: A drug, substance or immediate precursor as defined by
Iowa Code (2005) chapter 124.
DISORDERLY CONDUCT: Two (2) or more separate incidents on separate dates within
a twelve (12) month period which involved an act defined as disorderly conduct
under Iowa Code (2005) section 723.4(1), (2) or (3).
GAMBLING: Games of skill or chance as defined by Iowa Code (2005) chapter 99B
and prohibited by Iowa Code (2005) section 725.
GOOD NEIGHBOR AGREEMENT: Agreement between the owner and the City requiring the
owner to implement or continue to manage items to improve the property to
foster a safe business and good relationship with the community.
OWNER: Any person, agent, firm, corporation, association, or a partnership,
including a mortgagee in possession, in whom is vested all or part of the legal
title to property or all or part of the beneficial ownership and the right to
present use and enjoyment of the premises.
PERSON: Any natural person, association, partnership, corporation, or other
legal entity capable of owning or using property.
PROSTITUTION, PIMPING, AND PANDERING: Those acts or activities as defined by
Iowa Code (2005) chapter 725.
SPECIFIED CRIME PROPERTY: Any structure, including the real property upon which
it is situated, in which activity involving the unauthorized delivery,
possession or manufacture of a controlled substance, illegal gambling,
bootlegging, prostitution, pimping or pandering; two or more disorderly and
nuisance property violations in a twelve (12) month period; or disorderly
conduct is occurring.
STRUCTURE: Any building or structure, including, but not limited to, edifice,
units, or any portion thereof, and the real property upon which such building
or structure is situated.
B.   No person shall use or allow to be used any structure as specified crime
property. When the structure and the property upon which it is situated are
owned by different persons, each person shall not use or allow to be used such
structure and property as specified crime property.
C.   Any person who fails to perform an act required by this section or who
commits an act prohibited by this section shall be guilty of a municipal
infraction punishable by a civil penalty as provided by section 1-4-1 of this
code.
D.   When the chief of police or his or her designee has a reasonable belief
that a structure is being used or maintained in violation of this section, the
chief of police may notify the owner of record in writing that the structure
has been declared to be a specified crime property.
A reasonable belief that a structure is being used as specified crime property
may be found from, but is not limited to, evidence of drug paraphernalia in or
around the structure; an increase in vehicular or pedestrian traffic in or
around the structure; observations of the exchange of money; unauthorized
delivery or manufacture of a controlled substance; illegal gambling,
bootlegging, prostitution, pimping or pandering, disorderly conduct; two or
more disorderly and nuisance properties violations; and any other activity
which leads a police officer to reasonably believe violations exist.
E.   The notice required in subsection D of this section shall notify the owner
of record in writing that a structure owned by him or her has been declared to
be a specified crime property, and such notice shall contain the following
information:
1   The street address and a description sufficient for identification of the
premises on which the structure is located; and
2   A statement that the chief of police has found the structure to be in
violation of this section, with an explanation as to why the structure has been
declared a specified crime property.
F.   A copy of the notice given pursuant to this section shall be served on the
owner or an agent at least twenty (20) days prior to the commencement of any
judicial action by the city. Service shall be made either personally or by
mailing a copy of the notice to the owner or owner's registered agent of the
notice by registered or certified mail. In the event that notice is impossible
to be served as set out above, a copy of the notice may be posted at the
property if ten (10) days have elapsed from the service or mailing of the
notice to the owner and no response or reply has been received by the city from
the owner during that period of time.
The failure of any owner to receive actual notice of the determination of the
chief of police shall not preclude future proceedings under this section.
G.   Upon receipt of a notice of specified crime property as set out herein the
owner of record may challenge such notice by filing a request for an
administrative hearing. Such request shall be in writing and filed with the
city clerk or his or her designee within ten (10) days of the service of the
notice of specified crime property.
1   Failure to request a hearing within such time period or to attend a
scheduled hearing shall be deemed a waiver of the right to such a hearing.
2   Upon filing of a request for an administrative hearing, further judicial
action pursuant to this section shall be stayed pending the outcome of the
administrative hearing.
H.   The hearing held pursuant to this section shall be conducted before the
municipal code hearing officer as provided in section
4-4-10 of this chapter within a reasonable period of time. Such hearing may be
continued for good cause. A notice of hearing, including the time, date and
location of the hearing, shall be made by mailing a copy of the notice by first
class mail, postage prepaid, to the owner of record or his or her registered
agent.
I.   The sole issue before the hearing officer shall be whether there exists a
reasonable belief that the structure was being used as specified crime property
when the declaration of specified crime property was made pursuant to this
section. The hearing officer shall decide only that either: 1) there is a
reasonable belief that the structure was used as specified crime property and
that the provisions of this section shall apply, or 2) there is not a
sufficient reasonable belief that the structure was being used as specified
crime property and that the procedures of this section shall be permanently
stayed. A finding of no reasonable belief however shall not preclude a future
independent complaint, investigation and notice of specified crime property.
The hearing officer shall issue a written finding which shall be mailed to the
owner or his or her registered agent.
J.   Subsequent to the declaration and notice that there exists a specified
crime property, an owner shall have the opportunity to abate the illegal
activity within by complying with a good neighbor agreement within the time
specified in the agreement. If a landlord/tenant relationship exists on the
specified crime property, the owner/landlord may be deemed to have abated the
activity upon demonstration that he or she has taken legal action as allowed by
Iowa Code chapter 562A to terminate the rental agreement and continues in good
faith to follow abatement procedures and provides the chief of police with
copies of all notices served in accordance with Iowa Code chapter 562A.copies
of all notices served in accordance with Iowa Code chapter 562A.
K.   If the chief of police determines that a specified crime property has not
been abated by complying with the good neighbor agreement as specified, the
City may seek judicial action pursuant to this section.
In addition, the chief of police may cause a placard to be posted in clear view
declaring the structure a "Specified Crime Property." It shall be unlawful to
remove the posting until the chief of police determines that the specified
crime property has been abated. Removal of the posting, or failure of the owner
to notify the chief of police the placard has been removed, is punishable as a
municipal infraction pursuant to this section.
L.   In addition to the provisions of subsection K of this section, the chief
building official may revoke, refuse to renew or deny a pending application for
a rental certificate for a specified crime property that has not been abated as
specified in this section by written notice to the owner or owner's agent by
regular mail sent to the owner's or owner's agent's address as provided on the
rental certificate application. Said revocation shall take effect twenty (20)
days after the date the notice is mailed. The owner may appeal the revocation
to the municipal code hearing officer as provided by subsections
4-4-10E, F and G of this chapter by filing a written request for hearing with
the city clerk prior to the date the revocation takes effect. The burden to
prove that abatement has occurred shall be on the property owner by a
preponderance of the evidence. If no such appeal is taken, or if the municipal
hearing officer finds during said appeal that the specified crime property has
not been abated, then the rental permit shall be revoked and reapplication
shall not be considered until such property is abated. The hearing officer may
provide in the appeal corrective action that must occur before the property
shall be abated. (Ord. 1634, 5-23-2005; amd. Ord. 2416, 5-18-2020)
4-4-12: DISORDERLY AND NUISANCE PROPERTIES:
A.   Disorderly and nuisance property defined. For the purpose of this section,
the term "disorderly and nuisance property" shall mean and include any
building, house, enclosure or place upon which occurs any of the following:
1   Disorderly conduct as defined in Section 723.4 of the Iowa Code;
2   Any noise in violation of the provisions set forth in Title 4, Chapter 7 of
this Code;
3   Dispensing, selling, or consumption of an alcoholic beverage in violation
of Chapter 123 of the Iowa Code or in violation of the provisions set forth in
Title 3, Chapter 2 of this Code;
4   The open storage, use or consumption of a controlled substance as defined
in Chapter 124 of the Iowa Code, under which possession of such substance would
be an offense;
5   The outdoor urination or defecation in a public place or other place open
to the public view or public use in violation of Title 5, Chapter 2, Section 19
of this Code;
6   Gambling in violation of Chapter 99B of the Iowa Code;
7   The unlawful deposit of litter or refuse;
8   The damage or destruction of property without the consent of the property
owner or person in control of the premises;
9   Unlawful pedestrian or vehicular traffic; standing or parking of vehicles
that obstructs the free flow of traffic on the public streets and sidewalks or
that impedes the ability to render emergency services;
10   Acts of prostitution, pimping, or pandering as defined in Chapter 725 of
the Iowa Code;
11   Or any other conduct or condition that is injurious to the senses, or an
obstruction to the free use of property, so as essentially to interfere with
the comfortable enjoyment of life or property; or threatens injury to persons
or damage to property.
B.   Duty to Control Premises. Any person who is an owner, occupant, tenant,
renter, proprietor, lessee, or otherwise having any possessory control,
individually or jointly with others, of any premises who either sponsors,
conducts, hosts, invites, maintains, operates, or permits a disorderly house as
defined in subsection (A) above will be deemed to be in violation of this
section.
C.   Authority to Restore Order and Disperse; Failure to Disperse. Upon
issuance of a citation for a violation of this section, any peace officer of
the city shall have the authority to restore order upon the subject premises,
up to and including ordering the dispersal of person(s) from the subject
premises. Any person who fails or refuses to obey and abide by such an order
shall be guilty of a violation of this section.
D.   Penalty. Commission of any act declared unlawful and in violation of the
provisions of this chapter shall constitute a simple misdemeanor punishable as
provided in Iowa Code section 903.1. Failure to comply with the provisions of
this chapter shall also constitute a municipal infraction, punishable pursuant
to
Title 1, Chapter 4, Section 1 of this code. (Ord. 2417, 5-18-2020)
CHAPTER 5
SOLID WASTE CONTROL
SECTION:
4-5-1: Purpose
4-5-2: Enforcement
4-5-3: Definitions
4-5-4: Collection Of Solid Waste
4-5-5: License To Haul Solid Waste (Rep. by Ord. 2289, 4-2-2018)
4-5-6: Disposal Site Requirements
4-5-7: Treatment Pending Collection
4-5-8: Accumulations Of Solid Waste
4-5-9: Container Specifications
4-5-10: Collection And Hauling Of Waste
4-5-11: Littering
4-5-12: Disposition Of Waste To Controlled Site; Nonliability Of City (Rep. by
Ord. 2289, 4-2-2018)
4-5-13: Materials Excluded From Agency Deposit Sites
4-5-14: Banned Substances
4-5-15: Agency Disposition
4-5-16: Disposition Of Inert Materials
4-5-17: Conditions Subject To Abatement
4-5-18: Failure To Abate Nuisance
4-5-19: Violation; Penalty
4-5-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to provide a sanitary method for the collection
and disposal of all solid waste and to safeguard the citizens from hazards to
their health, safety and welfare, that result from the uncontrolled collection
and disposal of solid waste. (Ord. 940, 12-10-1990, eff. 1-1-1991)
4-5-2: ENFORCEMENT:
The City Manager, or his delegated representative, shall enforce the provisions
of this chapter. (Ord. 940, 12-10-1990, eff. 1-1-1991)
4-5-3: DEFINITIONS:
For use in this chapter, unless otherwise expressly stated or the context
clearly indicates a different intention, the following terms are defined:
AGENCY: The Metro Waste Authority.
BANNED SUBSTANCE OR HAZARDOUS WASTE: Any waste prohibited by the Iowa Code,
Metro Waste Authority and/or applicable Federal regulations from being disposed
in sanitary landfills, including yard waste, lead acid batteries, waste oil,
explosive material, medical waste, drugs, poisons, soil dressings, highly
combustible material and hazardous substance.
BULKY ITEM: Any solid waste item that does not fit in a City approved cart.
CITY APPROVED CART: A container approved by the City for the collection of
solid waste.
CITY APPROVED YARD WASTE BAG: A "yard waste bag", as defined herein, which is
approved by the City for the purpose of a yard waste collection program.
CITY APPROVED YARD WASTE STICKER: A self-adhesive sticker cost controlled by
the City for the purpose of affixing to an approved yard waste bag, and
affixing to bundles of tree or brush debris for regular collection and
disposal.
COMPOSTING: A controlled microbiologic degradation of organic waste to produce
a relatively nuisance free product of potential value as a soil conditioner.
DISPOSAL SITE: A sanitary landfill, transfer station, compost site or other
facility for receiving or disposing of solid waste, yard waste or tree debris
of any size.
LAWN REFUSE: Grass clippings, leaves, garden wastes, prunings and weeds.
LEAD ACID BATTERIES: Those batteries falling within the definition of
"hazardous substance" as defined by the Iowa Code.
MEDICAL WASTE: That waste defined as "medical waste" by the Iowa Department of
Natural Resources.
METRO WASTE AUTHORITY YARD WASTE BAG: A "yard waste bag", as defined herein,
which is manufactured for, distributed for, and cost controlled by the Metro
Waste Authority for the purpose of a regional yard waste collection program.
METRO WASTE AUTHORITY YARD WASTE STICKER: A self-adhesive sticker manufactured
for, distributed for, and cost controlled by the Metro Waste Authority for the
purpose of affixing to an approved yard waste bag, other than the Metro Waste
Authority yard waste bag, and affixing to bundles of tree or brush debris for
regular collection and disposal.
OWNER: Whenever used in this chapter, the word "owner" shall, in addition to
the record titleholder, include any person residing in, renting, leasing or
occupying residential premises or operating or transacting business in any
premises, and as between such parties with duties, responsibilities,
liabilities and obligations hereinafter imposed shall be joint and several.
PERSON: Means and includes an individual or group or association of
individuals; a firm or any member thereof; a corporation, or any executive
officer, manager, person in charge, or employee thereof; and the use of a
pronoun specifying the masculine gender shall include the feminine and neuter
gender.
REGULAR COLLECTION: Regular collection is conducted once weekly on the same day
as regular solid waste collection day.
RESIDENTIAL PREMISES: Means and includes detached single-family dwellings and
any multiple-family attached dwellings up to and including four (4) separate
family quarters.
RUBBLE: Dirt, stone, brick or similar inorganic material or street sweepings.
SOLID WASTE: The waste generated by normal residential activity, excluding yard
waste, bulky waste and all specialized collections. Solid waste does not
include dirt, sod, stone, brick, construction materials, or hazardous waste as
defined in section 455B.411 of the Code of Iowa, or source, special nuclear, or
byproduct material as defined in the Atomic Energy Act of 1954, as amended to
January 1, 1979.
SPECIAL COLLECTION: Special collection is offered by special arrangement with
the City approved contractor.
TREE DEBRIS: Organic debris such as tree branches, limbs and trunks of six
inches (6") or less in diameter. Tree debris shall not include tree branches,
limbs or trunks greater than six inches (6") in diameter nor tree stumps of any
size.
WASTE OIL: Any petroleum based or synthetic oil which, through its use, storage
or handling, has become unsuitable for its original purpose due to the presence
of chemical or physical impurities.
YARD WASTE: Organic debris such as grass clippings, leaves, garden wastes,
prunings, weeds, brush and tree branches produced as a part of the yard and
garden development and maintenance. "Yard waste" does not include tree stumps
or branches greater than ten inches (10") in diameter.
YARD WASTE BAG: 2-ply, fifty (50) pound wet strength kraft type paper bags
which are degradable or biodegradable, with a maximum capacity of thirty (30)
gallons, manufactured for the purpose of containing yard waste for regular
collection and disposal and which display a printed statement designating that
the bag is intended to hold yard waste.
YARD WASTE COLLECTION HAULER: Any person who comes into the possession or
control of yard waste by reason of the operation of a disposition service of
collection, hauling and/or disposal. (Ord. 1369, 6-14-1999, eff. 7-5-1999; amd.
Ord. 1428, 11-27-2000; Ord. 1973, 1-21-2013)
4-5-4: COLLECTION OF SOLID WASTE:
The owner or occupant of each premises in the City shall regularly remove or
arrange for the regular removal of solid waste from premises under their direct
or indirect control for safe disposal in a manner consistent with the
provisions of this chapter. Any yard waste to be removed from the site on which
it has developed for disposal on another site shall be separated by the owner
or occupant from all other solid waste accumulated on the premises. Any banned
substances shall be separated by the owner or occupant from all other solid
waste accumulated on the premises. No person shall deposit in a solid waste
container or otherwise offer any banned substances for collection with other
solid waste in any manner which may result in improper disposal of a banned
substance.
The City will provide to each residential premises solid waste collection
service as defined in this chapter for the removal and disposal of yard waste
and other solid waste; provided, however, that the owner or occupant of each
such premises shall separately remove or arrange for the removal and proper
disposal of banned substances and of vehicles and any other solid waste limited
or excluded from the service provided by the City. The residential premises
collection service of the City is subject to the following conditions:
A.   Frequency: Such collections shall be made on a weekly basis except at
times during emergency periods or during a specific holiday in accordance with
schedules to be developed by the City Manager.
B.   Schedule Adjusted: The City Manager is authorized and empowered to change
or amend such schedules from time to time as he, in his discretion, shall deem
necessary. (Ord. 940, 12-10-1990, eff. 1-1-1991)
C.   Street Collection: Collection of solid waste shall only be made from a
public street; alley collection is prohibited. An exception may be granted by
the City Council to permit collection on a private street or private drive if
the owner(s) of the private street(s) and/or private drive(s) provide an
agreement to indemnify and hold harmless the City, the Metro Waste Authority,
and the waste hauler(s) for any and all liability, damages, claims, costs,
expenses, interest, and reasonable attorney fees for any damage that may occur
to their private streets and drives relating to or arising out of the
collection of solid waste. The City Council may further grant an exception to
collect solid waste for any horizontally attached multiple-family dwellings
comprising more than four (4) separate family quarters provided that each
dwelling have a separate driveway to each unit and each unit is either on its
own separate lot or is part of a residential horizontal property regime. This
exception does not include stacked multi-family dwellings. (Ord. 1973, 1-21-
2013)
D.   Placement Of Carts:
1.   Streets: Whenever solid waste is collected adjoining the street curb or
street right-of-way, residents desiring to have solid waste collected by the
City in accordance with this chapter shall place their carts upon the driveway,
parking or right-of- way in front of their premises, adjacent to, and within
eighteen inches (18") of the near edge of the roadway curb or adjacent to and
within eighteen inches (18") from the edge of the traveled portion of the
right-of-way. Placement of carts shall not obstruct sidewalks, and shall not be
placed closer than six feet (6') of any fixed structure. Exceptions to cart
placement may be granted by the City Contract Administrator based upon rules
adopted by the City. The City approved contractor may calculate regular fees
and any special fee required for other than curbside collection, subject to the
approval of the City Contract Administrator. (Ord. 1428, 11-27-2000)
2.   Obstruction To Trafficways: No solid waste or solid waste carts shall be
deposited by any person upon any sidewalk, crosswalk, roadway or upon any alley
right-of-way, so as to obstruct or block pedestrian movement or vehicular
traffic. (Ord. 940, 12-10-1990, eff. 1-1-1991; amd. Ord. 1428, 11-27-2000)
E.   Number Of Carts And Type At Curb: The total number of carts excluding lawn
refuse bags to be collected by the City from residential premises per week
shall not exceed the number of City approved carts made available by the City
to each residence. Solid waste shall be placed in the City approved cart in
disposable bags, boxes or tied or taped together so individual items will not
blow or scatter when the cart is emptied. Bulky items and/or additional solid
waste bags shall be placed outside the City approved cart and shall require a
City approved sticker for collection.
F.   Carts, Bundles, Recycling Bins, Pieces Of Yard Waste And Other Items
Offered For Collection: Carts, bundles, recycling bins, pieces of tree debris
and yard waste and other items offered for residential collection shall be
placed at the curb or back of the traveled portion of the right-of-way and
shall be separated by a distance of three feet (3'), but not more than six feet
(6'). (Ord. 1428, 11-27-2000)
G.   Residential Yard Waste And Tree Debris:
1.   The amount of residential yard waste in approved yard waste bags and
bundles of tree debris placed for regular residential collection by the City or
a contracted hauler shall not be limited.
2.   Tree debris, branches, trunks and stumps resulting from the removal of
trees by a tree service contractor shall not be placed for collection by the
City, but shall be removed by a licensed hauler at the expense of the owner or
tree service.
3.   All yard waste and tree debris shall be separated by the owner or occupant
from all other solid waste at the time of regular collection and disposal.
(Ord. 1369, 6-14-1999, eff. 7-5-1999)
4.   All yard waste must be in an approved yard waste bag with a City approved
yard waste sticker affixed to the yard waste bag.
5.   Tree debris and brush under six inches (6") in diameter, prepared for
regular collection and disposal by the City approved contractor, shall be
securely tied in bundles not larger than forty eight inches (48") long and
eighteen inches (18") in diameter, and the bundle shall have a City approved
waste sticker affixed to it. If there is insufficient quantity to securely
bundle, all tree debris and brush shall be cut down and placed in an approved
yard waste bag with an affixed City approved yard waste sticker. No loose tree
debris will be picked up. Pieces of tree branches greater than six inches (6")
in diameter shall not be included in a bundle but shall be disposed by special
collection arrangements with a private hauler.
6.   No bag of yard waste, bundle of tree debris or piece of tree branch
greater than six inches (6") in diameter offered for regular or yard waste
collection shall weigh more than fifty (50) pounds.
H.   Time Of Placing Carts, Bundles, Recycling Bins, Pieces Of Yard Waste, Lawn
Refuse Bags And Other Items At Curb: On street pick- up routes no solid waste
in any form or in any type of container or any other item offered for
collection shall be placed at the curb or behind the traveled portion of the
right-of-way for collection before five o'clock (5:00) P.M. of the day
preceding the day such waste is scheduled by the City to be collected, and all
carts and items not collected shall be removed from the curb or from behind the
traveled portion of the right-of-way within twenty four (24) hours of
collection. (Ord. 1428, 11-27-2000)
I.   Failure To Comply: Any failure to comply with the provisions of this
chapter shall relieve the City of obligation to collect such solid waste
therefrom which is not in compliance therewith as to type, preparation, volume
or place of storage, but in all cases such solid waste from such premises as
meets the requirements of such sections shall be collected as herein provided.
J.   Prohibition Of The Collection Of Banned Materials:
1.   All Municipal waste picked up within the corporate limits of the City
shall not contain banned substances. All banned substances shall be separated
by the owner or occupant from all other Municipal solid waste accumulated on
the premises.
2.   Any individual, corporation or licensed hauler for the transport of waste
to the landfill shall not haul banned substances to the landfill. All banned
substances must be separated by the hauler from all other normal solid waste
before transportation of waste to the landfill. (Ord. 940, 12-10-1990, eff. 1-
1-1991)
4-5-5: LICENSE TO HAUL SOLID WASTE:
(Rep. by Ord. 2289, 4-2-2018)
4-5-6: DISPOSAL SITE REQUIREMENTS:
A.   Permitted Disposal Sites: No person shall haul or cause to be hauled any
solid waste material, other than those resulting from construction or
demolition activities, to any disposal place or site or area other than the
following:
1.   Agency Site: A sanitary disposal site operated by or under contract to the
Des Moines Metropolitan Area Solid Waste Agency; or
2.   Transfer Station: A solid waste transfer station licensed and operating
pursuant to the provisions of article B of this chapter.
B.   Solid Waste Disposal Sites: No person shall operate or permit the
operation on his property, of a disposal site in the City for the disposal of
solid waste of any kind, and rubble from any source other than construction or
demolition activities. (Ord. 2289, 4-2-2018)
4-5-7: TREATMENT PENDING COLLECTION:
All solid waste consisting of dry animal waste and vegetable matter, which may
attract flies, dogs, rodents, or other animals or insects, shall be drained of
all excess liquid, wrapped in paper or disposable containers and placed or
stored, until collected, in covered suitable containers as described in section
4-5-9 of this chapter. (Ord. 940, 12-10-1990, eff. 1-1-1991; amd. Ord. 1428,
11-27-2000)
4-5-8: ACCUMULATIONS OF SOLID WASTE:
A.   Accumulations Hazardous To Health: No person shall permit accumulations on
any premises, improved or vacant, or in any public place, quantities of solid
waste, either in containers or not, that shall constitute a health or
sanitation hazard.
B.   Accumulations Hazardous To Property: No person shall permit to accumulate
quantities of solid waste, within or close to any building, unless the same is
stored in containers in such a manner as not to create a health or fire hazard.
(Ord. 940, 12-10-1990, eff. 1-1-1991)
4-5-9: CONTAINER SPECIFICATIONS:
A.   Carts: Unless otherwise noted, disposal of solid waste for collection by
the City approved contractor shall only be made in City approved carts.
B.   Disposal Bags: Disposable bags manufactured for solid waste disposal shall
be acceptable for bulky items. Disposable bags and contents shall not exceed
fifty (50) pounds. (Ord. 1428, 11-27-2000)
C.   Composting Lawn Refuse:
1.   The owner or occupant is encouraged to compost lawn refuse on the premises
where it is developed; provided, that the material accumulated for such purpose
is restricted to the rear yard of the property and is properly contained and
processed without creating offensive odors, litter, fire or vector problems.
Such composting shall be deemed to be an acceptable alternative disposal of
lawn refuse which satisfies requirements in this chapter to separate lawn
refuse for collection and disposal. Material accumulated or used for composting
on such premises shall not include any kitchen or food wastes.
2.   Nothing in this chapter is intended to prevent the owner from transporting
yard waste accumulating on premises of the owner, provided such yard waste is
disposed of at City approved composting stations in accordance with policies
established by the composting station. (Ord. 940, 12-10-1990, eff. 1-1-1991;
amd. Ord. 1428, 11-27-2000)
D.   Nonconforming Containers: Baskets, boxes and noncomplying solid waste
containers shall be considered disposable refuse and shall be removed by the
collection crews if they are the proper size and otherwise acceptable for
collection with a City approved sticker; or shall be left uncollected if they
are larger than the allowable size or unacceptable for collection. (Ord. 1428,
11-27-2000)
4-5-10: COLLECTION AND HAULING OF WASTE:
A.   Protection Of Hauling Vehicles: No person shall haul any solid waste or
yard waste or banned substances upon the streets, alleys or public places of
the City in any manner except in a vehicle or container so equipped as to
prevent the blowing or leakage or dropping off of any of the contents on the
public streets or ways of the City or private property therein.
B.   Loading Collection Vehicles Or Containers: Vehicles or containers used for
the collection and transportation of any solid waste shall be loaded and moved
in such a manner that the contents will not fall, leak or spill therefrom, and
shall be covered to prevent blowing or loss of material. Where spillage does
occur, the material shall be picked up immediately by the collector or
transporter and returned to the vehicle or container and the area properly
cleaned. (Ord. 940, 12-10-1990, eff. 1-1-1991)
4-5-11: LITTERING:
Resident owner shall be responsible for complying with all provisions herein to
prevent littering. (Ord. 1428, 11-27-2000)
4-5-12: DISPOSITION OF WASTE TO CONTROLLED SITE; NONLIABILITY OF CITY:
(Rep. by Ord. 2289, 4-2-2018)
4-5-13: MATERIALS EXCLUDED FROM AGENCY DEPOSIT SITES:
At the discretion of the agency, certain materials may be excluded from those
solid wastes which may be deposited at an agency landfill site. These excluded
materials may include junk automobile bodies and similar bulky objects, which
may require special processing prior to disposal, trees and tree limbs, unless
they have been cut into pieces not exceeding four feet (4') in length, burning
materials or materials containing hot or live coals, hazardous materials,
banned materials, and other materials which the agency deems necessary to
exclude. However, hazardous materials or banned materials may be deposited upon
the receipt of written permission of a responsible official or attendant of the
agency and subject to any special instructions issued with said permission.
(Ord. 940, 12-10-1990, eff. 1-1-1991; amd. Ord. 1428, 11-27-2000)
4-5-14: BANNED SUBSTANCES:
No person shall deposit in a solid waste container or otherwise offer for City
collection any banned substance. Banned substance shall be transported by the
owner, responsible person or his agent, to a place of safe deposit or disposal
as prescribed by the City Manager or his authorized representative, which place
of deposit or disposal may in exceptional cases be a place other than an agency
operated site or may be otherwise subjected to special conditions or
limitations. (Ord. 940, 12-10-1990, eff. 1-1-1991)
4-5-15: AGENCY DISPOSITION:
Pursuant to the terms of an agreement to be entered into between the City and
the agency, the disposal sites now and hereafter operated by the agency will be
made available as public disposal sites for all solid wastes collected within
the corporate limits of the City upon the conditions specified in the
agreement. (Ord. 940, 12-10-1990, eff. 1-1-1991)
4-5-16: DISPOSITION OF INERT MATERIALS:
The prohibitions contained in this chapter shall not apply to the placing of
inert wastes, not potentially injurious to health or the public welfare, where
permission to place such materials has been obtained from the owner or
responsible agent; nor to the filling in or grading of property with earth,
mud, ashes or similar materials; providing such actions are in compliance with
all other applicable local and State laws. (Ord. 940, 12-10-1990, eff. 1-1-
1991)
4-5-17: CONDITIONS SUBJECT TO ABATEMENT:
If any private disposal operation within the corporate limits of the City is
found to be conducted in a way detrimental to the health and welfare of the
public, or contrary to provisions of this chapter, the City shall notify the
owner of the land upon which such operation is being carried on and the
operator thereof, in writing, of the objectionable conditions and give them a
reasonable time, not less than ten (10) days, to correct said condition. (Ord.
940, 12-10-1990, eff. 1-1-1991)
4-5-18: FAILURE TO ABATE NUISANCE:
In the event of the failure of such owner or operator or both to correct such
conditions within such time, the City Manager is authorized to seek abatement
of such conditions as a public nuisance and to abate such nuisance in such
manner as any court of competent jurisdiction may direct. The same shall be
considered of benefit to the owner of the land and the cost of such corrective
action shall be chargeable to the owner, and if not paid, shall constitute a
lien upon the premises and shall be assessed in the manner of a special
assessment and collected in the same manner as general taxes as is provided by
law. (Ord. 940, 12-10-1990, eff. 1-1-1991)
4-5-19: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
A.   It is prohibited and will be deemed a violation hereof for any owner,
lessee or occupant of any residential, commercial or institutional property in
the City, or any hauler providing service within the City, to put into or cause
to be put into the solid waste collection system any yard waste or tree debris
of any size except as separated yard waste or tree debris of any size as
provided herein or any banned substances. If any person violates any provisions
of this chapter, such person shall, upon conviction, be punished as set forth
in section
1-4-1 of this Code.
B.   In addition to the provisions set out in this chapter, the City may
proceed in law or equity against any person for violation of any section or
subsection of this chapter. (Ord. 2289, 4-2-2018)
ARTICLE A. CONSTRUCTION AND DEMOLITION ACTIVITIES
SECTION:
4-5A-1: Purpose
4-5A-2: License Required
4-5A-3: Location of Site
4-5A-4: Zoning and Land Use
4-5A-5: Site Plan
4-5A-6: Vicinity Map
4-5A-7: Traffic
4-5A-8: Soils and Geology
4-5A-9: Operating Site
4-5A-10: Summary of Environmental Controls
4-5A-11: Insurance
4-5A-12: License Fee
4-5A-13: Renewal Requirements
4-5A-14: Site Accessibility
4-5A-15: Signing
4-5A-16: Public Agencies
4-5A-17: Plan Content Mandatory
4-5A-18: Revocation or Denial of License Renewal
4-5A-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this Article is to provide regulations pertaining to the
disposal of construction or demolition material. (1985 Code §3-4.0201)
4-5A-2: LICENSE REQUIRED:
No person shall, after September 1, 1976, operate or permit the operation on
his property of a disposal site in the City for the disposal of solid waste
from construction or demolition activities unless such person shall have first
applied for and received a license to do so from the City. Such a license may
be issued by the City Council upon application by such person filed with the
Building Inspector of the City; must be accompanied by a special use permit
issued by the City Board of Adjustment, and a State permit issued by the
appropriate State agency to conduct a construction or demolition materials
disposal operation on the site in question; must demonstrate full present and
contemplated compliance with the specific provisions of this Section and the
operational details and physical site proposals contained in plans accompanying
the application, as well as the ability to do so; and shall be subject to
annual renewal by the City Council as hereinafter set forth. In reviewing the
demolition landfill site application, the City Council must weigh the need for
such landfills to economically dispose of demolition and construction rubble
against the inherent hazard, evaluated on the aforesaid information and
criteria and with professional advice as required. Such need must likewise be
weighed against the potential for site pollution or danger to persons or
property who might predictably have direct or indirect contact with the site.
To merit approval for licensing, such proposed operation must be demonstrated
by the application to be operationally feasible and to be substantially free of
negative environmental effect as it is proposed to be operated upon the site
proposed. The application for a license to operate a disposal site for the
disposal of solid waste from construction or demolition activities shall be
accompanied by the documentation described hereinafter. Plans for construction
and demolition landfills shall be prepared under the direct supervision of a
registered engineer in conformity with chapter 114 of the Code of Iowa. Such
requirement shall not preclude the inclusion in the application of reports of
geologists, architects, landscape architects, or such other disciplines as may
be necessary or desirable to substantiate proposals contained in the
application. The plans shall show conformance to the following requirements.
(1985 Code §3-4.0202)
4-5A-3: LOCATION OF SITE:
Sites for the disposal of demolition and construction materials shall be
located in conformity with the following:
A.   Flood Plain: The site shall be located outside of flood plain or
riverfront land unless such requirement is waived by the appropriate State
agency or agencies.
B.   Street or Highway: If the site is within one thousand feet (1,000') of a
Federal or State highway or major City thoroughfare, the site must be
satisfactorily screened by natural objects, planting, fences or other.
C.   Water Supply: The site shall be at least one thousand feet (1,000') from
any existing well that draws water for human or livestock consumption unless
hydrologic conditions are shown to be such that a greater or lesser distance is
proper. (1985 Code §3-4.0203)
4-5A-4: ZONING AND LAND USE:
The application will be accompanied by a copy of the special use permit issued
for such operation on the site by the City Board of Adjustment.
A.   Present and Proposed Zoning: The plan submitted with the application shall
be accompanied by a map showing all zoning within one thousand feet (1,000')
surrounding the site. The plan shall also indicate the land use proposed for
the site after the filling is completed, although such indication shall not be
binding upon the City.
B.   Comprehensive Plan Land Use: The plan submitted with the application shall
indicate the land use shown for the site area in the future in the
comprehensive plan for the City. (1985 Code §3-4.0204)
4-5A-5: SITE PLAN:
The following particulars shall be included in maps of the site plan, as herein
set forth, and shall accompany the application:
A.   Scale: A map of the disposal site and immediate surroundings, on which a
north arrow and scale of drawing are indicated. Generally, a scale of less than
one inch to one hundred feet (1" = 100') will not be approved.
B.   Boundaries and Markers: The boundaries of the disposal site shall be shown
thereon with sufficient data, including legal description, that a land surveyor
can easily locate the boundary. Natural and manmade monuments indicating the
boundary shall be noted. Where the site is located in an undeveloped area, four
inch (4") boundary markers at least six feet (6') high and painted a bright
color shall be used to identify the boundary so that field inspection teams can
easily identify the site.
C.   Present Contour: Two foot (2') contours of the existing terrain shall be
shown thereon.
D.   Utilities: All existing utilities, including storm and sanitary sewers,
which lead up to or cross the site shall be shown thereon.
E.   Drainage: Existing and future drainage shall be shown thereon along with
any proposed storm sewers.
F.   Drill Holes: The location of the drill holes required by subsection
4-5A-8A shall be shown thereon.
G.   Final Contours: Two foot (2') contours of the final proposed terrain shall
be shown on a separate drawing. (1985 Code §3-4.0205)
4-5A-6: VICINITY MAP:
A map showing the area in the vicinity of the site, which shall be known as the
vicinity map, shall be submitted, of a scale of one inch to six hundred feet
(1"= 600') or less; the area covered by the vicinity map shall be sufficient to
contain the following:
A.   Test Holes: Location of test holes for the monitoring of water quality and
the findings from each.
B.   Streets: Streets and street names, as well as all existing public right of
way on and adjacent to the site.
C.   Fire Hydrants: The nearest fire hydrants. Generally, if there is not a
fire hydrant adjacent to the entrance drive and within three hundred feet
(300') of the active portion of the landfill site, a fire hydrant shall be so
installed and connected with an appropriate extension of the water main. If
covering and compacting is performed daily, or if other equivalent means of
providing fire protection are available, this requirement may be waived by the
Council. (See subsection
4-5A-9D.)
D.   Haul Routes: The haul routes from the nearest City truck route.
E.   Screening: Proposed screening of the site from highways, streets, parks,
and residences and other amenities, as well as the schedule of installation of
such; such screening shall meet the requirements of the Zoning Ordinance and
shall have been demonstrated to and approved by the Board of Adjustment.
F.   Private Wells: All private wells within one thousand feet (1,000') of the
site shall be located and identified thereon.
G.   Occupied Structures: All occupied homes and buildings on the site or
within one thousand feet (1,000') of the boundaries thereof shall be shown,
with their addresses and uses indicated, by color coding or otherwise. (1985
Code §3-4.0206)
4-5A-7: TRAFFIC:
The haul routes shown in the plan shall be reviewed by the Department of Public
Works and City Engineer, or his representative, who shall make recommendations
thereon to the Council. Such haul routes shall be chosen to avoid undue
hardships to residents living adjacent to them and to minimize the likelihood
of premature deterioration of City streets so chosen. (1985 Code §3-4.0207)
4-5A-8: SOILS AND GEOLOGY:
Information as to soil and geological conditions shall be provided as follows:
A.   Geological Cross-Section: The plans shall contain a description of the
drill holes shown on the site plan, which shall be sufficient in number to
prepare geological cross sections of the site, to facilitate a determination of
the acceptability of the site location.
B.   Water Table and Bed Rock: The water table depth and bed rock depth shall
be indicated. If bed rock is excessively deep, it may be estimated.
C.   Soil Report: A soil report shall be provided which indicates the
acceptability of the soil on the site for cover material and the stability of
the slopes after the fill is complete. The vulnerability of the soil
classification to erosion shall also be indicated. (1985 Code §3-4.0208)
4-5A-9: OPERATING SITE:
Plans for site operation, including the following, shall be provided.
A.   Estimated Active Life and Volume: The estimated active life of the site
and the total cubic dimensions of the area to be filled shall be indicated.
B.   Annual and Peak Volume: The volume of construction and demolition material
expected annually and on the peak days shall be indicated.
C.   Cells: The number, size and shape of cells of demolition material shall be
indicated.
D.   Cover: The approximate depth and type of cover material shall be
indicated. The volume of cover material needed for the entire site shall be
indicated as well as the source and soil classification of the cover material
and frequency of covering. Once a week compacting of demolition material and
covering with dirt will be acceptable, provided a bulldozer with a blade,
operator on call, and a stockpile of cover materials are available at all times
on the site in the event of fire. More frequent covering and compacting may be
required by the city if it is deemed necessary to abate a nuisance and shall be
mandatory if the requirements of subsection
4-5A-6C, "Fire Hydrants", of this article are not met.
E.   Gates And Fencing: The times at which the gates will be open as well as
provisions for maintaining the fence at locations required herein shall be
indicated.
F.   Vector Control: The intended continuing vector control, principally rat
abatement and mosquito abatement, shall be indicated.
G.   Personnel And Equipment: The personnel and equipment planned to operate
the site, and the hours and days of the week when they will be on the site,
shall be indicated. (1985 Code §3-4.0209)
4-5A-10: SUMMARY OF ENVIRONMENTAL CONTROLS:
Expected environmental impact problems, with specific treatment or controls
intended to eliminate or mitigate negative effects of each, shall be listed.
(1985 Code §3-4.0210)
4-5A-11: INSURANCE:
The applicant shall file a certificate of insurance evidencing the issuance to
the applicant of liability insurance which shall protect the public and any and
all persons from injury which may be sustained by reason of the operation or
condition of the landfill, and that the applicant carries insurance which meets
the requirements of the Iowa workmen's compensation law. Proof of such
insurance shall show a minimum cancellation time of ten (10) days and shall
embody a requirement that the city shall have a right to such notice before
such cancellation can become effective. The proof shall specify evidence of the
following forms of insurance protection.
A.   Operation Liability: Liability insurance covering all operations performed
by the licensed applicant and all persons in the licensed applicant's direct
employment.
B.   Subcontractor: Public liability insurance covering all operations
performed by any subcontractor or independent contractor to whom a portion of
the operations may have been assigned or which in the future may be assigned,
or by any person or legal entity action for or on behalf of the licensed
applicant at or on the site.
C.   Vehicles: Motor vehicle bodily injury insurance and property damage
liability insurance on motor vehicles employed on the site, whether or not
owned by the licensed applicant or by either the subcontractors or independent
contractors under contract to the licensee, or by any other person or legal
entity acting for or on behalf of the licensed applicant at or on the site.
D.   Amount: The main protection shall be insurance coverage with a minimum
liability of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) for the injury or death of any
one person and subject to the same limit per person, a minimum liability of one
million dollars ($1,000,000.00) for the injury or death of any number of
persons in one accident, and a minimum liability of one million dollars
($1,000,000.00) for damage to property of others, but excluding property of the
insured. The insurance certificate shall provide that notice shall be given to
the city clerk thirty (30) days prior to any cancellation or termination of
insurance. The cancellation or termination of the insurance shall automatically
revoke the permit.
E.   Additional Insured: The city shall be named as an additional insured under
all liability policies without expense to it. (1985 Code §3-4.0211; amd. 1993
Code)
4-5A-12: LICENSE FEE:
An annual license fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) payable to the finance
director of the city shall accompany the initial application for license and
each application for renewal of the license. (1985 Code §3-4.0212; amd. 1993
Code; Ord. 1878, 8-23-2010, eff. 9-17-2010)
4-5A-13: RENEWAL REQUIREMENTS:
Applications for renewal need comply with the documentation requirements of
sections
4-5A-2 through
4-5A-11 of this article only in the event there has been a substantial change
in the conditions or circumstances on or off the site which significantly
affect the proposed operation or its effects during the proposed renewal
period, except that a showing must be made in such application that required
insurance is in force and has continued in force during the current license
year. The application for such renewal must specifically negate or affirm the
existence of any such circumstances or conditions and be documented
accordingly. The application for renewal must also be accompanied by a showing
of a current permit, issued by the appropriate state agency, for the operation
of the construction or demolition materials landfill site. The building
inspector, upon receipt of such application for renewal, shall process the same
as though it were an initial application for license, and shall report his
findings and recommendations thereon, which shall be reviewed by the council
before issuance of the renewal. (1985 Code §3-4.0213)
4-5A-14: SITE ACCESSIBILITY:
The location of the fence and gates, which shall be provided to exclude people
from the active fill site, shall be shown. They shall be located to prevent
illegal dumping, children from playing on the site, and debris from being blown
off the site. The fence shall be at least six feet (6') high and composed of a
metal fabric and it shall comply with all street intersection setback
requirements. The fence shall be constructed before landfill operations begin.
For purposes of this requirement, "active fill site" shall mean that portion of
the land covered by the license which is in fact regularly receiving waste
whether or not at the instance of the applicant. The applicant shall maintain
any unfenced area free of solid waste, and in the event of accumulation of
waste upon or abutting the site, the Building Inspector may require the
applicant to install such further fencing as can assure that the then-active
remainder of the site shall remain free of unauthorized or improper
accumulation of solid waste. (1985 Code §3-4.0214)
4-5A-15: SIGNING:
A prominent legible sign shall be provided at all site entrances indicating the
name of the site owner and operator and emergency telephone numbers. (1985 Code
§3-4.0215)
4-5A-16: PUBLIC AGENCIES:
Neither the City or any other public agency shall be required to obtain the
license required by this Article, but each such public body shall file with the
Council, before beginning operation and annually thereafter, evidence of
substantial compliance with all provisions of this Article except the
requirements of Section
4-5A-4 of this Article. It is, however, specifically provided that such
exemption from licensing shall not operate to exempt the City or other public
agencies from any other specific requirements of law relating to or regulating
such operation to which such operation would otherwise be subject. (1985 Code
§3-4.0216)
4-5A-17: PLAN CONTENT MANDATORY:
The operational details and physical site proposals contained in the plans
filed with an application which has been approved by the City Council shall be
obligatory and binding upon the licensee, who shall conform to each such detail
and proposal unless specifically relieved of such conformance by the Council.
(1985 Code §3-4.0217)
4-5A-18: REVOCATION OR DENIAL OF LICENSE RENEWAL:
In the event a licensee violates any section of this Article, as well as those
made obligatory and binding upon the licensee by reason of their inclusion in
the application and approval by the Council, or other City ordinances, then the
City Manager shall report the same to the Council, which shall set a public
hearing thereon and direct that the notice of the time, date and place of said
public hearing and of the City Manager's report be given to the licensee. Such
hearing shall occur not less than ten (10) days after such notice has been
mailed to the licensee at the address shown in the application or such other
address as has been provided by the licensee during the period of license. If,
upon said hearing, the Council determines noncompliance by the licensee, the
Council may revoke or suspend the license or, if such determination be made
while an application for renewal is pending, may deny renewal of the license.
Notice of such revocation or denial following such hearing may be either by
formal notice to the licensee at the appropriate address or by so advising
representatives of the licensee personally present at such hearing, or by any
other means reasonably calculated to apprise the licensee of such revocation or
such denial. No person or other legal entity whose license shall have been
revoked, or the renewal thereof denied, pursuant to this Section, and no
successors or assigns or other legal entities in which such person or other
legal entity shall have a substantial interest may obtain a license pursuant to
this Article within the City for a period of two (2) years from date of
cessation of activities at such landfill site pursuant to such revocation or
denial. The operation of a disposal site without having a presently valid
license to do so shall be and is hereby prohibited. (1985 Code §3-4.0218)
ARTICLE B. TRANSFER STATIONS
SECTION:
4-5B-1: Purpose
4-5B-2: License Required
4-5B-3: Application
4-5B-4: Insurance
4-5B-5: Licensing
4-5B-6: Disposal of Solid Waste
4-5B-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this Article is to regulate the location and operation of solid
waste transfer stations. (1985 Code §3-4.0301)
4-5B-2: LICENSE REQUIRED:
No person shall operate or permit the operation on its property, of a transfer
station in the City unless such person shall have first applied for and
received a license to do so from the City. A license to operate a transfer
station shall be issued by the Council upon application filed with the Building
Inspector of the City and accompanied by a special use permit issued by the
City Board of Adjustment, and a State permit issued by the appropriate State
agency, to conduct a transfer station operation on the site in question. The
applicant must show proof that he can demonstrate full present and contemplated
compliance with the specific provisions of this Article and the operational
details and physical site proposals contained in plans accompanying the
application, as well as the ability to do so; and shall be subject to annual
renewal by the Council as hereinafter set forth. In reviewing such application,
the Council must weigh the need for the transfer station against the potential
for site pollution, danger to persons or property likely to have direct or
indirect contact with the site, the feasibility of the operation, the
likelihood of freedom from negative environmental effect of such operation, and
such other factors as shall reflect the public interest in balance against the
interests of the applicant to operate such a facility on the site in question.
(1985 Code §3-4.0302)
4-5B-3: APPLICATION:
The application for a license to operate a transfer station shall be
accompanied by plans prepared under the direct supervision of a registered
engineer in conformity with chapter 114 of the Code of Iowa. The site as shown
on the plans shall physically conform to the following requirements, and the
application shall contain either sufficient written information to show such
conformity or it shall be shown by depiction of physical detail on the plan, as
applicable. (1985 Code §3-4.0303)
A.   Site: The site shall be located outside flood plain or riverfront land
unless such requirement is waived by the appropriate governmental agency or
agencies. The boundaries of the site shall be shown on the plan with sufficient
data, including legal description, that a land surveyor can easily locate the
boundaries. Two foot (2') contours of the existing terrain shall likewise be
shown on the plan. Proposed screening of the site from highways, streets,
parks, residences and other amenities, as well as the schedule of installation
of such, shall be shown; such screening shall meet the requirements of the
zoning ordinance and shall have been demonstrated to and approved by the City
Board of Adjustment. The site shall be enclosed with a chain link fence not
less than six feet (6') in height, which fence shall completely surround all
portions of the site intended to be used in connection with the operation of
the transfer station. The location of such fence shall be shown on the plan.
B.   Permits: The application will be accompanied by a copy of the special use
permit issued for such operation by the City Board of Adjustment and by a copy
of the permit issued by the applicable State agency, each approving the
operation of a transfer station on the site.
C.   Vehicular Travel: The plan shall show the areas on the site over which
haul vehicles and transfer equipment will travel. Such areas shall be
hardsurfaced, and the thickness and composition of such surfaces shall be shown
on the plans. Barricades of a semi-permanent nature, affixed to the ground,
shall be placed to prevent vehicular travel on unsurfaced areas on the site;
the location of such barricades shall be shown on the plan. The haul road
routes from the nearest City truck route shall be shown and identified on the
plan. Such routes shall be reviewed by the Engineering Department, who shall
make recommendations thereon to the Council. Such haul roads shall be chosen to
avoid undue hardship to residents living adjacent to them and to minimize the
likelihood of premature deterioration of City streets so chosen.
D.   Unloading Area: All unloading, compacting and transfer activities shall be
conducted within a fully enclosed structure or structures. Each such structure
shall be clearly depicted on the plan, with dimensions, in such fashion as to
clearly show the type and location of equipment, the proposed routing of
unloading and transfer vehicles, all vehicle entrance and exit facilities to
and from such structure or structures, and the waiting area for unloading
vehicles, which shall be sufficient to accommodate expected traffic. Such
structures and waiting area shall be of sufficient size and appropriate design
as will assure that the volume of vehicles expected on site at any one time can
be accommodated without spill-over on surrounding streets.
E.   Drainage and Sewers: Floor surfaces in each unloading, compacting and
transfer structure shall be so constructed that they can be cleaned by
flushing, and that they will permit the drainage of liquids without ponding;
all such floor surfaces shall be equipped with floor drains or sump pump and
with a trap or other mechanical device which shall prevent the passage of
solids, which system shall be connected to a sanitary sewer. A storm drainage
system for the site shall provide adequate storm drainage with minimum ponding
and shall connect to a storm sewer. All interior drainage lines from the
unloading, compacting and transfer areas as well as other drainage lines within
the site shall be adequate to handle the volumes of water and liquids which may
be expected. All drainage and sewerage systems, floor drains, floor surfaces
construction and locations of connections to sewers shall be clearly identified
in the plan, showing dimensions and composition where appropriate.
F.   Sanitation and Environmental Control: All solid waste shall be confined to
unloading, compacting and transfer structures, and all solid waste remaining at
the transfer station at the end of each day shall be stored in leakproof,
flyproof, and rodentproof containers. Vector control, principally rat abatement
and mosquito abatement, shall be the responsibility of the operator. The
transfer station site shall be kept in a suitable clean and sanitary condition
at all times. The application shall list the provisions at the site and the
schedule for cleaning vehicles, structures and grounds, as well as the intended
continuing vector control.
G.   Fire Prevention: Burning of solid waste, either open or controlled, is
prohibited at the transfer station site. If a fire hydrant is not located
adjacent to the property and within three hundred feet (300') of the unloading,
compacting and transfer structure or structures, then a fire hydrant shall be
so installed and connected to an appropriate extension of the water main. The
location of the nearest fire hydrants to the transfer station shall be shown on
the plan, as shall such installations and extensions, where applicable.
H.   Equipment: The transfer station shall be so designed and maintained that
the operational failure of one component part will not result in a total
shutdown of the operation. An inventory of the equipment to be used in
connection with the unloading, compacting and transfer operation shall be
contained in the application, as well as a list of backup equipment available
or, failing direct availability, the sources from which such equipment shall be
obtained in the event of need.
I.   Prohibited Materials: Sewage solids or liquids and hazardous wastes shall
not be unloaded or accepted at the transfer station. Solid waste material of
such bulk as cannot be accommodated by direct transfer shall likewise be
excluded from the transfer station.
J.   Recycling: If the operation of the transfer station includes isolation,
segregation and gathering of materials of a like or similar kind for salvage
and reutilization by recycling, the equipment, methods, and proposed operation
in connection therewith shall be fully depicted and described in the
application. Solid waste which is received at the transfer station site and
which is not thereat separated for recycling may only be disposed of by hauling
to a sanitary disposal project which has been approved by the appropriate
governmental agency or agencies and is legally operating. Scavenging at the
transfer station site shall be prohibited, and all materials so separated and
gathered for salvage and reutilization by recycling shall be retained in
suitable containers as heretofore described until removed by appropriate
vehicles to off-site destinations,
K.   Personnel and Hours: The personnel planned to operate the site, the times
during which the gates will be open, and the hours and days of the week during
which the site will be open to receive solid waste shall be indicated in the
application. Appropriate signs meeting the requirements of the Zoning Ordinance
for the district in which located shall be located at all entrance gates, shall
be lighted if appropriate, shall identify such hours, shall list prohibited
materials, and shall contain such further information as will assure
conformance of visitors to the site to the requirements of this Article. An
attendant shall be on duty at the site at all times when it is open for public
use. (1985 Code §3-4.0303)
4-5B-4: INSURANCE:
The applicant shall file a certificate of insurance evidencing the issuance to
the applicant of liability insurance which shall protect the public and any and
all persons from injury which may be sustained by reason of the operation or
condition of the transfer station, and that the applicant carries insurance
which meets the requirements of the Iowa workmen's compensation law. Proof of
such insurance shall show a minimum cancellation time of ten (10) days and
shall embody a requirement that the City shall have a right to such notice
before such cancellation can become effective. The proof shall specify evidence
of the following forms of insurance protection:
A.   Operations Liability: Liability insurance covering all operations
performed by the licensed applicant and all persons in the licensed applicant's
direct employment.
B.   Subcontractor Liability: Public liability insurance covering all
operations performed by any subcontractor or independent contractor to whom a
portion of the operations may have been assigned or which in the future may be
assigned, or by any person or legal entity acting for or on behalf of the
licensed applicant at or on the site.
C.   Vehicle: Motor vehicle bodily injury insurance and property damage
liability insurance on motor vehicles employed on the site, whether or not
owned by the licensed applicant or by either the subcontractors or independent
contractors under contract to the licensee, or by any other person or legal
entity acting for or on behalf of the licensed applicant at or on the site.
D.   Amounts: The main protection shall be insurance coverage with a minimum
liability of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) for the injury or death of any
one person and subject to the same limit per person, a minimum liability of one
million dollars ($1,000,000.00) for the injury or death of any number of
persons in one accident, and a minimum liability of one million dollars
($1,000,000.00) for damage to property of others, but excluding property of the
insured. The insurance certificate shall provide that notice shall be given to
the city clerk thirty (30) days prior to any cancellation or termination of
insurance. The cancellation or termination of the insurance shall automatically
revoke the permit.
E.   Additional Insured: The city shall be named as an additional insured under
all liability policies without expense to it. (1985 Code §3-4.0304; amd. 1993
Code)
4-5B-5: LICENSING:
A.   License Fee; Renewal: An annual license fee of one hundred dollars
($100.00) payable to the finance director shall accompany the initial
application for license and each application for renewal of the license. The
provisions of article A of this chapter for renewal of license for construction
or demolition materials disposal sites shall likewise apply to the annual
renewal of a transfer station license. (1985 Code §3-4.0305; amd. 1993 Code;
Ord. 1878, 8-23-2010, eff. 9-17-2010)
B.   Public Agencies: Neither the city nor any other public agency shall be
required to obtain the license required by this article, but each such public
body shall file with the council, before beginning operation and annually
thereafter, evidence of substantial compliance with all provisions of this
article except the requirements of sections
4-5B-2 and
4-5B-4 of this article and subsections A and C of this section. It is, however,
specifically provided that such exemption from licensing shall not operate to
exempt the city or other public agencies from any other specific requirements
of law relating to or regulating such operation to which such operation would
be otherwise subject. (1985 Code §3-4.0307)
C.   Revocation Or Denial: The provisions of article A of this chapter for
revocation or denial of renewal of a license for construction or demolition
materials disposal sites shall apply to the license of a transfer station.
(1985 Code §3-4.0307)
4-5B-6: DISPOSAL OF SOLID WASTE:
All persons operating a transfer station licensed under the provisions of this
article shall deliver or cause to be delivered all solid waste coming within
its control to the Des Moines metropolitan area solid waste agency disposal
site or sites. (1985 Code §3-4.0308)
ARTICLE C. FEES AND CHARGES
SECTION:
4-5C-1: Fees Established
4-5C-2: When Fees Imposed
4-5C-3: Monthly Charges
4-5C-4: Proration Of Charges
4-5C-5: Exemption From Fees; Special Conditions
4-5C-6: Periodic Review Of Charges; Annual Report
4-5C-7: Administrative Fees; Transmittal Of Receipts
4-5C-8: Lien For Nonpayment
4-5C-1: FEES ESTABLISHED:
The member municipality will fix, establish and maintain and revise the same
from time to time whenever necessary such rates, fees, rentals or other charges
for the use and services of the disposal facilities operated by the agency, as
more fully described in the solid waste disposal service contract, as will
always provide in each year revenues sufficient to pay the proportionate share
of such member municipality for: a) operation and maintenance expenses for said
disposal facilities; b) collection, recycling, billing and spring cleanup fees;
c) administrative fees; d) the principal and interest on the solid waste
disposal revenue bonds; and e) all reserves, renewal and replacement funds and
other funds provided for in the resolution authorizing the issuance of such
solid waste disposal revenue bonds. (Ord. 1425, 10-30-2000, eff. 12-4-2000)
4-5C-2: WHEN FEES IMPOSED:
An initial schedule of such rates, fees, tolls and other charges to be levied
and collected from the residents of the member municipality for the use and
services of said disposal facilities shall be established and put into effect
whenever necessary in order for said member municipality to comply with the
provisions of its solid waste disposal service contract; provided, however, the
member municipality may in its discretion apply such other lawfully available
monies it has on hand for such purpose. (1985 Code §3-4.0403)
4-5C-3: MONTHLY CHARGES:
There is herewith imposed a solid waste collection and disposal fee as follows
applicable to each residential unit for solid waste collected by the city
approved contractor:
 
48 gallon cart - $16.00 per month
96 gallon cart - 16.66 per month
 
Charges for collection of additional carts shall be as follows:
 
48 gallon cart - $8.50 per month
96 gallon cart - 9.05 per month
 
These charges shall be made on all bills mailed by West Des Moines Water Works
on and after the effective date hereof. Additional charges may also be imposed
for changing cart size. The collection agent for the city shall be the West Des
Moines Water Works which shall provide for solid waste charges to be listed
upon its regular billing statement and collected in the same manner as water
and sanitary sewer fees. Billing for the change in container size shall be made
in the billing cycle following the change. All charges imposed herein shall be
due and payable upon receipt of the billing. (Ord. 2373, 7-1-2019; amd. Ord.
2481, 7-6-2021; Ord. 2574, 7-17-2023; Ord. 2611, 5-20-2024; Ord. 2657, 4-7-
2025)
4-5C-4: PRORATION OF CHARGES:
The service availability charge shall be prorated according to the ratio of the
number of days for which solid waste collection service was available to a
customer at a premises and the total number of days in the month. (Ord. 2373,
7-1-2019; Ord. 2574, 7-17-2023)
4-5C-5: EXEMPTION FROM FEES; SPECIAL CONDITIONS:
In special conditions including, but not limited to, the instances noted below,
the City Manager may, upon a written request for an exemption of fees filed
with West Des Moines Water Works, grant fee payment and collection variances
after determining that granting the variance would be in the City's best
interest, will improve efficiency, safety and is practical. Upon the granting
of any variance, the City Manager shall file notice with the City Council
giving reason(s) for the variance.
A.   If an individual receives water service from West Des Moines Water Works
and, for whatever reason which results in the building being vacant or
unoccupied, desires and pays West Des Moines Water Works for shutting off said
service for a period of not less than two (2) weeks.
B.   If a building serves a mixed use (i.e., residential and commercial), the
City will classify the entire building commercial with the property owner then
required to contract with a private solid waste hauler who shall guarantee
collection on a frequency at least equal to collections by the City.
C.   Unoccupied unit(s) within a building which is either uninhabitable and/or
if no certificate of occupancy or rental has been granted by the City;
provided, that the unit(s) is vacant for a period of not less than two (2)
weeks.
D.   Housing units of a condominium or townhouse nature, where private drives,
streets or common areas exist making it impractical for all residents of a
development to place solid waste at the public street curb, and where the City,
pursuant to other sections of this article, would normally be responsible for
collection and disposal of waste may contract for private solid waste service;
provided, that the private solid waste hauler guarantees collection from all
housing units within that development on a frequency at least equal to
collections by the City. (Ord. 966, 8-19-1991)
E.   The City Manager, in his sole discretion, may authorize solid waste
service charge credits in unique situations, on a case by case basis. (Ord.
1525, 4-28-2003, eff. 7-1-2003)
4-5C-6: PERIODIC REVIEW OF CHARGES; ANNUAL REPORT:
On an annual basis the City Manager shall submit to the City Council a report
summarizing all solid waste activities occurring during the previous period,
and listing all revenues and costs associated therewith. The City Council shall
then review said report with respect to service charges imposed herein, and
goals and objectives to be accomplished as part of the general City operations.
(1985 Code §3-4.0407)
4-5C-7: ADMINISTRATIVE FEES; TRANSMITTAL OF RECEIPTS:
The West Des Moines Water Works may, before transmitting to the City Finance
Director receipts from solid waste collections, subtract an administrative and
accounting fee not to exceed thirty cents ($0.30) per customer billing
applicable to charges for solid waste collection. All funds received pursuant
to this article, minus administrative charges shall be paid by the Water Works
to the Finance Director not later than seventy five (75) days following the
applicable billing due date. (1985 Code §3-4.0408; amd. 1993 Code; Ord. 1425,
10-30-2000, eff. 12-4-2000; Ord. 1878, 8-23-2010, eff. 9-17-2010)
4-5C-8: LIEN FOR NONPAYMENT:
Each delinquent account which is transmitted to the Finance Department by the
West Des Moines Water Works shall thereafter be processed for imposition of a
lien upon the contributor's property as provided by section 384.84 of the Iowa
Code, in the amount of the delinquent account, plus a County administrative fee
for each lien certified as provided in section 384.84 of the Iowa Code, plus a
City delinquency fee in the amount of ten dollars ($10.00) to recoup the City's
administrative processing costs and lost investment on the unpaid amount. The
lien here provided shall apply only to that property or those properties for
which the contributor's account is delinquent. (Ord. 1084, 3-28-1994, eff. 7-1-
1994; amd. Ord. 1425, 10-30-2000, eff. 12-4-2000; Ord. 1878, 8-23-2010, eff. 9-
17-2010)
CHAPTER 6
MUNICIPAL RECYCLING
SECTION:
4-6-1: Purpose
4-6-2: Definitions
4-6-3: Establishment Of Recycling Program
4-6-4: Reporting Requirements
4-6-5: Authorization Of Collectors
4-6-6: License Application, Term, Revocation (Rep. by Ord. 2324, 8-6-2018)
4-6-7: Applicability Of Regulations
4-6-8: Collection And Transportation Of Designated Recyclable Materials
4-6-9: Storage Of Designated Recyclable Materials
4-6-10: Preparation Of Designated Recyclable Materials And Placement For
Collection
4-6-11: Collection By Unauthorized Persons
4-6-12: Enforcement
4-6-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to promote recycling by requiring property
owners to provide facilities for the source separation of recyclable materials
at certain locations. (Ord. 1128, 4-24-1995)
4-6-2: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have, unless
the context clearly indicates otherwise, the meanings given to them in this
section:
CITY: The City of West Des Moines.
COLLECTION: The transportation of the Municipal waste from the place it is
generated and includes all activities up to the time the waste is delivered to
a recycling facility or solid waste disposal site.
COLLECTOR: A person authorized by the City to collect, transport and dispose of
Municipal waste or recyclable materials.
COMMINGLED: Source separated, nonputrescible recyclable materials that have
been mixed at the source of generation (i.e., placed in the same container).
CONDOMINIUM: An apartment building or housing area in which the dwelling units
are owned individually.
DESIGNATED RECYCLABLE MATERIAL: Newspapers, corrugated containers, magazines,
catalogs, junk mail, kraft bags, bi- metal and ferrous cans, aluminum cans,
clear glass containers, high density polyethylene (HDPE) (excluding motor oil
bottles), and polyethylene terephthalate (PETE), whether alone or in
combination.
DWELLING UNIT: A group of rooms located within a structure and forming a single
habitable unit with facilities which are used or intended to be used for
living, sleeping, cooking and eating for the exclusive use of the occupants
thereof.
MULTI-FAMILY DWELLING: Any building under one roof which contains two (2) or
more complete dwelling units.
MUNICIPAL WASTE: Any garbage, refuse, industrial lunchroom or office waste, and
other material, including solid, liquid, semi-solid or contained gaseous
material resulting from the operation of multi-family dwellings.
NEARBY: Adjoining, adjacent, or contiguous.
NONRECYCLABLE MATERIAL: Any material not defined as recyclable material.
PERSON: Any individual, partnership, corporation, association, institution,
cooperative enterprises, or any other legal entity whatsoever which is
recognized by law as being subject to such rights and duties.
PREMISES: Real property on which any multi-family dwelling unit or combination
of units sharing common driveways are located.
RECYCLING: The separation, collection, processing, recovering and sale or reuse
of materials which would otherwise be disposed of as Municipal waste.
RECYCLING FACILITY: Any facility employing a technology that is a process that
separates or recovers reusable materials that can be sold or reused by a
manufacturer as substitute for or a supplement to virgin raw materials.
SOURCE SEPARATION: The separation of recyclable materials from the Municipal
waste stream at the point of waste generation. (Ord. 1128, 4-24-1995)
4-6-3: ESTABLISHMENT OF RECYCLING PROGRAM:
A.   There is hereby established a recycling program for the source separation,
separate collection and recycling of designated recyclable materials generated
within the City from all multi-family dwellings and dwelling units not
presently served by existing residential recycling collection programs.
B.   Collection of designated recyclable materials pursuant to this section
shall be made at least twice per month, or more often as necessary, as
determined by the Director of Public Works or other designee of the City
Manager, and the storage of said designated recyclable materials shall not
result in the creation of a public nuisance.
C.   All multi-family dwellings which are not presently part of existing
residential recycling collection programs shall be required to provide the
facilities for the source separation of all designated recyclable materials
generated on the premises and shall arrange for the collection of said
materials to be transported to a recycling facility.
D.   Program development, implementation and operation shall be the
responsibility of the same entity which contracts for the private collection
and disposal of solid waste on the premises.
E.   The specific "designated recyclable materials" are those materials set out
in section
4-6-2 of this chapter.
F.   The City reserves the right to amend the list of "designated recyclable
materials" as defined in section
4-6-2 of this chapter at any time. (Ord. 1128, 4-24-1995)
4-6-4: REPORTING REQUIREMENTS:
It shall be the responsibility of all commercial waste haulers collecting solid
waste or designated recyclable materials generated in the City to submit a
recycling report to the City on an annual basis. Said report shall identify
individual establishments being served and the total weight of recyclable
materials collected as well as identification of the processor of each
recovered recyclable material. All such reports of the previous year shall be
submitted, on forms provided by the City, to the Director of Public Works or
other designee of the City Manager by January 31. The City reserves the right
to require any additional information deemed necessary by the Director of
Public Works or other designee of the City Manager. (Ord. 1128, 4-24-1995)
4-6-5: AUTHORIZATION OF COLLECTORS:
All commercial solid waste haulers or haulers of designated recyclable
materials who as a commercial enterprise provide the service of collection of
said designated recyclable materials or waste to owners/operators of multi-
family dwelling units shall be duly authorized by the Department of Public
Works through the issuance of a license. (Ord. 1128, 4-24-1995)
4-6-6: LICENSE APPLICATION, TERM, REVOCATION:
(Rep. by Ord. 2324, 8-6-2018)
4-6-7: APPLICABILITY OF REGULATIONS:
Any person or persons engaged in the collection, processing and marketing of
designated recyclable materials within the City or who collects solid waste
within the City, and all householders, firms, corporations, co-partnerships and
any and all persons who may or do produce solid waste and/or designated
recyclable materials shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter. (Ord.
1128, 4-24-1995)
4-6-8: COLLECTION AND TRANSPORTATION OF DESIGNATED RECYCLABLE MATERIALS:
A.   Transportation: Any person transporting designated recyclable materials
within the City shall prevent or remedy any spillage from vehicles or
containers used in the transport of such designated recyclable materials. Such
vehicles or containers shall not be overfilled and shall be cleansed at
sufficiently frequent intervals to prevent obnoxious odors or unhealthful
conditions. Such vehicles shall also be so constructed, loaded and driven so as
to prevent any portion of the load from falling out upon the streets or
highways.
B.   Removal By Collectors: Collectors shall return the recycling receptacles
to the premises from which they have been removed in a manner so as not to
create a public nuisance. Collectors shall also collect and remove all
recyclable materials for which they are responsible to collect from the
premises. (Ord. 1128, 4-24-1995)
4-6-9: STORAGE OF DESIGNATED RECYCLABLE MATERIALS:
A.   General: It shall be the duty of every owner or entity which contracts for
the private collection and disposal of solid waste from the premises to provide
and keep at all times, a sufficient number of containers to hold all designated
recyclable materials which may accumulate during the intervals between
collection of such materials by the authorized collector. Containers may be
located on-site or on nearby premises with the permission of the affected
property owner or otherwise in accordance with the provision of this section.
Owners of multi-family dwelling units shall insure that each dwelling unit has
access to the containers and that said containers are sufficient to hold all
designated recyclable materials accumulated by the occupants of the dwelling
unit during the intervals between collections.
B.   Storage: All designated recyclable materials accumulated by owners and/or
occupants of multi-family dwelling units shall be placed in containers which
are durable, watertight and made of metal or plastic and marked with the
recycling symbol or other acceptable markings. The containers shall remain on
the premises at all times and shall be kept in a clean condition. The type of
bulk container to be furnished by the collector shall be acceptable to the
Director of Public Works or other designee of the City Manager. Containers
shall have lids if necessary to avert a public nuisance or protect the
marketing quality of designated recyclable materials. Such lids must remain
closed except when designated recyclable materials are being placed in or
removed from the container. The container shall be clearly marked with both the
recycling symbol and with the type of material(s) to be deposited in the
container. The container shall be kept clean and in good repair. The number of
such containers shall be sufficient to handle the volume of recyclables which
accumulate between collection intervals.
C.   Location Of Containers: Bulk storage containers for collection at multi-
family dwellings using private collection shall be located on such premises at
a place agreed upon by such owner or occupant of the property and the
authorized collector. Such location shall not interfere with private or public
sidewalks, walkways, driveways, roads, streets, highways or entrances and exits
of private or public buildings and shall be in compliance with all applicable
laws. Bulk storage containers which are on wheels to facilitate their movement
shall remain blocked at all times while unattended to prevent unintentional
movement. (Ord. 1128, 4-24-1995)
4-6-10: PREPARATION OF DESIGNATED RECYCLABLE MATERIALS AND PLACEMENT FOR
COLLECTION:
Designated recyclable materials shall be separated and prepared in a manner
consistent with recycling market requirements and placed at a designated area
separate from Municipal waste for collection at such time and dates as may be
agreed upon between the collector and the establishment. (Ord. 1128, 4-24-1995)
A.   No person shall place, drop, commingle or deposit in recyclable material
any solid waste or banned substance, as defined in section
4-5-3 of this title, into any designated recyclable material container, bin or
dumpster located on any premises.
Any person who violates the provisions of this subsection shall, upon
conviction, be subject to a fine of not to exceed one hundred dollars ($100.00)
or imprisonment not to exceed thirty (30) days. (Ord. 1158, 11-8-1995)
4-6-11: COLLECTION BY UNAUTHORIZED PERSONS:
A.   It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person(s) unauthorized by
the City to collect or pick up, or cause to be collected or picked up, any
recyclable materials or solid waste. Each such collection in violation hereof
shall constitute a separate and distinct offense and shall be subject to the
following civil penalties:
1.   One hundred dollars ($100.00) for the first offense;
2.   Five hundred dollars ($500.00) for the second offense; and
3.   One thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each subsequent offense.
B.   Notwithstanding any provision of this chapter, any person having ownership
of the same may sell or donate recyclable materials for the purpose of
recycling to any person, partnership or corporation, whether operating for
profit or not for profit. (Ord. 1128, 4-24-1995)
4-6-12: ENFORCEMENT:
A.   Administration: The City's Department of Community Development is hereby
authorized and directed to administer and enforce this chapter. At apartment
complexes, Community Development Department personnel will tie recycling
compliance into their biannual multi-family inspections and include it on the
inspector's checklist. Enforcement relative to multi- family recycling may also
be handled by more frequent inspections or on a complaint basis. (Ord. 1128, 4-
24-1995)
B.   Violation And Penalty: Except as set forth in subsection
4-6-10A of this chapter, any person who shall fail, neglect or refuse to comply
with any terms or provisions of this chapter or any regulation or requirement
pursuant thereto and authorized thereby, shall be subject to a civil penalty of
one dollar ($1.00) per month for each dwelling unit on the premises in
violation of this chapter. (Ord. 1158, 11-8-1995)
CHAPTER 7
NOISE CONTROL
SECTION:
4-7-1: Title
4-7-2: Policy
4-7-3: Purpose
4-7-4: Definitions
4-7-5: Measurement Of Noise And Sound
4-7-6: Test Measurement And Requirements For Determination And Classification
Of Sound
4-7-7: Maximum Permissible Sound Levels By Receiving Land Use
4-7-8: Exceptions To This Chapter
4-7-9: Vehicle Noise Limits
4-7-10: General Prohibition
4-7-11: Regulation Of Sound Equipment And Sound Amplifying Equipment
4-7-12: Conditions Of Sound Permit Approval
4-7-13: Prior Determination For Sound Permit Approval
4-7-14: Appeals
4-7-15: Enforcement
4-7-16: Penalties
4-7-1: TITLE:
A.   These regulations shall be officially known, cited, and referred to as the
NOISE CONTROL REGULATIONS OF THE CITY OF WEST DES MOINES, IOWA (hereinafter
"these regulations"). (Ord. 1892, 11-29-2010)
4-7-2: POLICY:
A.   Excessive noise is a serious hazard to the public health and welfare and
the quality of life in a close urban society.
B.   A substantial body of science and technology exists by which excessive
noise can be substantially abated without serious inconvenience to the public.
C.   Certain noise producing equipment in this community is essential to the
quality of life herein and should be allowed to continue at reasonable levels
with moderate regulation.
D.   Each person has the right to an environment reasonably free from noise
which jeopardizes health, welfare, or which unduly interferes with a property
owner's right to the use or enjoyment of their property.
E.   It is recognized that residential land uses are more noise sensitive than
commercial and industrial land uses, and that commercial land uses are more
noise sensitive than industrial land uses.
F.   It is the declared policy of this city to promote an environment free from
excessive noise, otherwise properly called "noise pollution", which
unreasonably jeopardizes the health and welfare and degrades the quality of the
lives of the residents of this community, without unduly prohibiting, limiting,
or otherwise regulating the function of certain noise producing equipment and
events which is not amenable to such controls and yet is essential to the
economy and quality of life of the community. (Ord. 1892, 11-29-2010)
4-7-3: PURPOSE:
A.   These regulations are adopted for the following purposes:
1.   To address concerns expressed by citizens and businesses of this
community.
2.   To establish standards for the control of noise pollution in the city by
setting maximum permissible sound levels for various land uses.
3.   To protect and provide for the public health, safety, and general welfare
of the city.
4.   This chapter shall apply to the control of noise originating within the
limits of the city. (Ord. 1892, 11-29-2010)
4-7-4: DEFINITIONS:
A.   For the purpose of this chapter, certain terms or words used herein shall
be interpreted as follows:
A-WEIGHTED SOUND LEVEL: The sound pressure level in decibels as measured on a
sound level meter using the A-weighted filter network.
ADVERSE IMPACT: A state of facts as would lead a reasonable person of normal
sensitivity acting prudently to conclude that the economic, entertainment, and
philanthropic benefits to the community do not reasonably outweigh the quiet
use and enjoyment of the affected property.
AMBIENT LEVEL: All encompassing sound at a given place, usually a composite of
sounds from many sources near and far.
AMPLIFIED SOUND: The production or reproduction of sound from amplification
equipment.
BACKGROUND LEVEL: Ambient level sound less the noise disturbance.
C-WEIGHTED SOUND LEVEL: The sound pressure level in decibels as measured on a
sound level meter using the C-weighted filter network.
CONSTRUCTION: Any site preparation, assembly, erection, substantial repair,
alteration, or similar action, for or of public or private rights of way,
structures, utilities, or similar property.
dBA: Decibels measured using an A-weighted sound level.
dBC: Decibels measured using a C-weighted sound level.
DECIBEL (dB): A unit for measuring the amplitude of a sound, equal to twenty
(20) times the logarithm to the base 10 of the ratio of the pressure of the
sound measured to the reference pressure, which is twenty (20) micropascals.
DEMOLITION: Any dismantling, intentional destruction or removal of structures,
utilities, public or private right of way surfaces, or similar property.
EMERGENCY: Any occurrence or set of circumstances involving actual or imminent
physical or psychological trauma or property damage which demands immediate
action.
EMERGENCY WORK: Any work performed for the purpose of alleviating or resolving
an emergency.
L5A: The A-weighted sound level exceeded five percent (5%) of the ten (10)
minute sound meter reading, or more than thirty (30) seconds in total.
L5C: The C-weighted sound level exceeded five percent (5%) of the ten (10)
minute sound meter reading, or more than thirty (30) seconds in total.
NOISE: Any sound which disturbs humans or which causes or tends to cause an
adverse psychological or physiological effect on humans.
NOISE DISTURBANCE: Any sound which endangers or injures the welfare, safety, or
health of a human being, or disturbs a reasonable person of normal
sensitivities, or devalues or injures personal or real property.
NOISE SENSITIVE LAND USE: Those specific land uses which have associated indoor
and/or outdoor human activities that may be subject to stress and/or
significant interference from noise produced by community sound sources. Such
human activity typically occurs daily for continuous periods of twenty four
(24) hours or is in such a nature that noise is significantly disruptive to
activities that occur for short periods. Specifically, noise sensitive land
uses include: hospitals, rest homes, convalescent care facilities, places of
worship, and schools.
PERSON: A natural person, heirs, executors, administrators or assigns, and also
includes a firm, partnership, or corporation, its or their successors or
assigns, or the agent of any of the aforesaid.
PLAINLY AUDIBLE: Any noise or sound for which the information content of the
noise or sound is transferred to the listener such as, but not limited to,
understanding of spoken speech, comprehension of whether a voice is raised or
lowered, or comprehension of musical rhythms.
PUBLIC RIGHT OF WAY: Any street, avenue, boulevard, highway, sidewalk, alley,
or similar place which is owned or controlled by a governmental entity.
PUBLIC SPACE: Any real property, including any structure thereon, which is
owned or controlled by a governmental entity.
RECEIVING LAND USE: The use or occupancy of the property which receives the
transmission of "sound" as hereinafter defined.
SOUND: An oscillation in pressure, particle displacement, particle velocity, or
other physical parameter, in a medium with internal forces that cause
compression and rarefaction of that medium. The description of sound may
include any characteristic of such sound, including duration, intensity, and
frequency.
SOUND AMPLIFYING EQUIPMENT: Any machine or device for the amplification of the
human voice, music, or any other sound.
SOUND EQUIPMENT: Any radio, record player, stereo, television, compact disc
player, tape deck or player, loudspeakers, amplifier, sound truck, or other
device for producing, reproducing, or amplifying sounds.
SOUND LEVEL (NOISE LEVEL): The weighted sound pressure level obtained by use of
a sound level meter having a standard frequency filter for attenuating part of
the sound spectrum.
SOUND LEVEL METER: An instrument, including a microphone, an amplifier, an
output meter, and frequency weighting networks for the measurement and
determination of noise and sound levels. (Ord. 1892, 11-29-2010)
4-7-5: MEASUREMENT OF NOISE AND SOUND:
The measurement of noise or sound shall be made with a sound level meter
meeting the standards prescribed by the American National Standards Institute.
(Ord. 1892, 11-29-2010)
4-7-6: TEST MEASUREMENT AND REQUIREMENTS FOR DETERMINATION AND CLASSIFICATION
OF SOUND:
A.   For the purposes of determining and classifying any sound as excessive or
unusually loud, the following test measurement and requirements are to be
applied:
1.   The sound must be measured at or within the property boundary of the
receiving land use.
2.   Unamplified sound shall be measured on a sound level meter of standard
design and quality operated in "A" slow response weighing scale.
3.   Amplified sound shall be measured on a sound level meter of standard
design and quality operated in "C" slow response weighing scale.
4.   A sound measured or registered in excess of the maximum permitted levels
is prohibited.
5.   A ten (10) minute L5A or L5C ambient level measurement must be taken to
determine whether the sound disturbance exceeds the maximum permissible level
allowed for a receiving land use. A one minute L5A or L5C background level
measurement should also be taken when the sound disturbance is inactive. The
ambient level measurement must be a minimum of ten (10) dB above the background
level measurement to attribute the noise to the sound disturbance. The one
minute L5A or L5C background level measurement shall be deemed to be the
background level measurement that existed at the time of the ambient level
measurement. The person responsible for the sound disturbance must render the
noise inactive for the purposes of a one minute background level measurement
within thirty (30) minutes of a request to do so by a police officer or other
city official authorized to enforce the provisions of this chapter. If the
person responsible fails to timely render the noise inactive for the one minute
background level measurement, that person thereby waives the ten (10) dB
difference requirement and the result of the ten (10) minute ambient level
measurement shall be deemed to be the noise attributed to the sound
disturbance. (Ord. 1892, 11-29-2010)
4-7-7: MAXIMUM PERMISSIBLE SOUND LEVELS BY RECEIVING LAND USE:
A.   With the exception of sound levels elsewhere specifically authorized or
allowed in this chapter, the following are maximum permissible sound levels
allowed at or within the property boundary of a receiving land use for
unamplified sound:
 
Receiving Land Use Maximum L5A Level Permitted
                   7 A.M. - 7 P.M. 7 P.M. - 10 P.M. 10 P.M. - 7 A.M.
Residential        65 dBA          60 dBA           55 dBA
Commercial         65 dBA          65 dBA           65 dBA
Industrial         80 dBA          80 dBA           80 dBA
Noise sensitive    65 dBA          60 dBA           55 dBA
 
B.   With the exception of sound levels elsewhere specifically authorized or
allowed in this chapter, the following are maximum permissible sound levels
allowed at or within the property boundary of a receiving land use for
amplified sound:
 
Receiving Land Use Maximum L5C Level Permitted
                   7 A.M. - 7 P.M. 7 P.M. - 10 P.M. 10 P.M. - 7 A.M.
Residential        76 dBC          74 dBC           72 dBC
Commercial         82 dBC          80 dBC           78 dBC
Industrial         85 dBC          85 dBC           85 dBC
Noise sensitive    76 dBC          74 dBC           72 dBC
 
C.   If the volume of sound exceeds the maximum permissible sound level by a
measurement of L5A or L5C, at any time during a ten (10) minute meter reading,
the sound is prohibited and is in violation of this chapter. (Ord. 1892, 11-29-
2010)
4-7-8: EXCEPTIONS TO THIS CHAPTER:
A.   The maximum permissible sound levels of this chapter shall not apply to:
1.   The emission of sound made by safety signals, warning devices, and sound
resulting from any authorized emergency vehicle when responding to an emergency
call or acting in time of an emergency. An authorized emergency vehicle shall
include local, state, and federal law enforcement vehicles, emergency medical
vehicles, and fire department vehicles.
2.   Noncommercial public speaking and public assembly activities conducted on
any public space, or public right of way, during the hours of seven o'clock (7:
00) A.M. to ten o'clock (10:00) P.M.
3.   The emission of sound through the unamplified human voice.
4.   Agricultural activities associated with the raising and harvesting of
crops, exclusive of those involving the ownership or possession of animals or
birds.
5.   Rail and air transportation and public mass transportation vehicles.
6.   The emission of sound in the performance of military operations, exclusive
of travel by individuals to or from military duty.
7.   The emission of sound from activities in the discharge of weapons,
fireworks, displays, parades, concerts, or other events expressly permitted or
authorized by the city council. This exception includes outdoor Historic Valley
Junction Foundation events as long as such events conclude by eight thirty
o'clock (8:30) P.M. The outdoor Historic Valley Junction Foundation events may
be permitted to extend past eight thirty o'clock (8:30) P.M., but are subject
to city approval and the maximum permissible sound levels prescribed within
this chapter.
8.   The emission of sound from activities where a state or federal agency has
adopted a different standard or rules than that prescribed within this chapter.
9.   The emission of sound during nonprofessional athletic and school events or
practices.
10.   The emission of sound during demolition work, construction work for which
a building permit, grading permit, or demolition permit is required, or a
development plan approved. In cases where the sound originates within three
hundred feet (300') of a residential land use or noise sensitive land use, the
exemption shall only apply between the hours of seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. to
ten o'clock (10:00) P.M.
11.   The emission of sound from the use of lawn and garden equipment and chain
saws. In cases where the sound originates within three hundred feet (300') of a
residential land use or noise sensitive land use, the exemption shall only
apply between the hours of seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. to ten o'clock (10:00)
P.M.
12.   The emission of sound from the use of snow removal equipment.
13.   The emission of sound from on site stationary trash compactors. In cases
where the sound originates within three hundred feet (300') of a residential
land use or noise sensitive land use, the exemption shall only apply between
the hours of seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. to ten o'clock (10:00) P.M.
14.   The emission of sound from municipal or municipally contracted compactor
trucks loading or unloading of yard waste, recyclable material, trash, and
garbage.
15.   The operation of private compactor trucks in the loading and unloading of
yard waste, recyclable material, trash, and garbage on private property. In
cases where the sound originates within three hundred feet (300') of a
residential land use or noise sensitive land use, the exemption shall only
apply between the hours of seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. to ten o'clock (10:00)
P.M.
16.   The emission of sound during the operation, maintenance, repair, and
cleaning of public streets and facilities.
17.   The emission of sound during public and private parking lot maintenance
and repair. In cases where the sound originates within three hundred feet
(300') of a residential land use or noise sensitive land use, the exemption
shall only apply between the hours of seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. to ten o'clock
(10:00) P.M.
18.   Work performed by or for public utilities.
19.   Live radio broadcasts as long as such broadcasts utilize fifty (50) watts
or less of electrical power as provided in subsection
 4-7-11J of this chapter.
B.   Although exempt from the maximum permissible sound levels of this chapter,
a sound equipment permit is required in all cases where sound equipment and
sound amplifying equipment will be used unless explicitly exempted within this
chapter. (Ord. 2053, 9-8-2014, eff. 1-1-2015)
4-7-9: VEHICLE NOISE LIMITS:
No person shall operate or control a motor vehicle, which is moving or
stationary, standing or parked, whether or not persons are seated in the motor
vehicle, from which any amplified sound is plainly audible at a distance of
fifty feet (50') from the vehicle between the hours of seven o'clock (7:00)
A.M. and ten o'clock (10:00) P.M., or is plainly audible at a distance of
twenty five feet (25') from the vehicle between the hours of ten o'clock (10:
00) P.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. (Ord. 1892, 11-29-2010)
4-7-10: GENERAL PROHIBITION:
A.   No person shall engage or participate in activities which result in noise
levels which exceed the maximum permitted noise levels outlined in section
4-7-7 of this chapter.
B.   It shall be the duty of the owner to prevent such premises or vehicles
from being the site of such activities producing sound levels in excess of what
is permitted under this chapter. Failure or refusal to perform such duty shall
constitute a violation of this section. The owner may include one or more of
the following: fee title owner, lessee, and other persons granted a legal right
to exercise use of the property.
C.   It shall be the duty of persons in positions of leadership or
responsibility with respect to unincorporated associations, groups, gatherings,
or assemblages of people to prevent such from causing or making sound levels in
excess of what is permitted under this chapter. (Ord. 1892, 11-29-2010)
4-7-11: REGULATION OF SOUND EQUIPMENT AND SOUND AMPLIFYING EQUIPMENT:
A.   No person shall use or cause to be used any loudspeaker, loudspeaker
system, sound amplifier, or any other machine or device which produces,
reproduces, or amplifies sound outside of buildings or other enclosed
structures for the purpose of amplifying a live performance or prerecorded
music without first obtaining a permit to do so.
B.   A permit may be obtained by making application to the city clerk or
designee.
C.   Application requests shall be filed with the city clerk. No application
request shall be accepted for filing and processing unless it conforms to the
requirements of this chapter, contains in a full, true, and correct form the
required materials and information prescribed by the forms supplied by the city
clerk and is accompanied by the appropriate fees.
D.   All permits are subject to approval by the city clerk or designee. The
city clerk shall have the discretion to refer any sound permit request to the
city council for their review and action. The city council must approve any
sound permit request that extends past ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. Before the city
decides to approve a sound permit request, the city may require the applicant
to provide notice, in a form and manner approved by the city clerk, of the
proposed event to all neighboring residential property owners located within
three hundred seventy feet (370') of the subject property.
E.   The permit requires separate payment for each type of activity and permits
shall be nontransferable. A permit for a single event or a series of events at
the same location may be issued. The city council, the city clerk, or designee
retains the ability to revoke or modify any issued permits for any alleged
violations of this chapter, including those based upon sound meter readings
taken by the city. The chief of police or designee may also terminate the
permit activity if the activity continues to exceed the maximum permitted sound
level after the permit holder or the holder's employee or agent has been
advised that the activity has exceeded the maximum permitted sound level.
F.   The permit shall be displayed on or immediately adjacent to the sound
equipment.
G.   Each application request shall be accompanied by the fee specified by city
council resolution before it is accepted for filing and processing.
H.   If the property is a rental property, the applicant needs to have written
permission from the landlord. If the property is under common ownership, the
applicant needs to have written permission from the landlord or association.
I.   The use of any loudspeaker, loudspeaker system, sound amplifier, or any
other similar machine or device which is permitted pursuant to this section is
subject to the following regulations:
1.   The only sound permitted shall be either music or human speech, or both.
2.   The volume of the sound amplified pursuant to this section shall not
exceed the maximum permissive sound levels measured from the receiving land
use, as outlined in this chapter.
J.   Any radio, record player, stereo, television, compact disc player, tape
deck or player, including any associated speakers, that is rated for fifty (50)
watts or less of electrical power does not require a sound permit application.
(Ord. 2053, 9-8-2014, eff. 1-1-2015)
4-7-12: CONDITIONS OF SOUND PERMIT APPROVAL:
A.   The city clerk or designee may regulate the issuance of a sound permit as
is necessary to meet the purposes of this chapter and protect the public
health, safety, and welfare of adjacent uses. Conditions which may be regulated
may include, but are not limited to:
1.   Setbacks.
2.   Fences, walls, or other screening necessary to mitigate noise.
3.   Control of noise, vibration, or other nuisances.
4.   Hours of operation. (Ord. 2053, 9-8-2014, eff. 1-1-2015)
4-7-13: PRIOR DETERMINATION FOR SOUND PERMIT APPROVAL:
A.   The following shall be considered in determination for approval of an
application for a sound permit:
1.   Adverse impact on the health, safety, and welfare of person or property in
the surrounding area.
2.   Prior violations of this chapter by the applicant requesting a sound
permit. (Ord. 1892, 11-29-2010)
4-7-14: APPEALS:
Wherein the applicant, the adjacent property owner, or any officer, department,
board, or bureau of the city is affected by any decision or order made by the
city clerk or designee regarding the approval or denial of a sound permit, such
appeal shall be taken within ten (10) calendar days from the decision or order
made by the city clerk or designee, by filing a written petition with the city
clerk requesting a hearing on the matter and specifying the grounds thereof. A
hearing before the municipal code hearing officer will be held as provided by
subsections
4-4-9E, F, and G of this title. An appeal pursuant to this chapter shall not
stay the effect of the decision or order made by the city clerk or designee
unless so ordered by the municipal code hearing officer. (Ord. 2053, 9-8-2014,
eff. 1-1-2015)
4-7-15: ENFORCEMENT:
The city clerk, the chief of police, or their designees are hereby designated
and ordered to enforce this chapter. The city clerk, the chief of police, or
their designees shall have primary but not exclusive enforcement responsibility
for this chapter. (Ord. 2053, 9-8-2014, eff. 1-1-2015)
4-7-16: PENALTIES:
Violations of this chapter are simple misdemeanors and are punishable by a fine
and/or a term of imprisonment as provided in section 903.1 of the code of Iowa
(2009). Violations of this chapter may also be punishable as municipal
infractions pursuant to title 1, chapter 4 of this code. Violations of section
4-7-7 of this chapter shall only be punishable as municipal infractions. The
chief of police or designees may issue criminal citations for violations. Any
individual(s) responsible for such violations, including property owners,
lessees, or any other person(s) occupying, maintaining, or managing the
property, may receive a criminal citation or be subject to a municipal
infraction. Each day that a violation occurs shall constitute a separate
offense. A two hundred fifty dollar ($250.00) civil penalty shall be imposed
for a first municipal infraction on the property at issue. A seven hundred
fifty dollar ($750.00) civil penalty shall be imposed for a second municipal
infraction within a twelve (12) month period on the property at issue. A one
thousand dollar ($1,000.00) civil penalty shall be imposed for a third or
subsequent municipal infraction within a twelve (12) month period on the
property at issue. Multiple violations of this chapter occurring on the
property at issue may be considered by the city for purposes of approving
licenses or for any other requirements that are subject to approval by the
city. The city may also seek to suspend or prohibit any sound related events or
activities on the property at issue once there have been three (3) or more
violations within a twelve (12) month period. (Ord. 1892, 11-29-2010)
CHAPTER 8
STORM WATER MANAGEMENT
ARTICLE A. SYSTEMS AND FACILITIES
SECTION:
4-8A-1: Purpose
4-8A-2: Definitions
4-8A-3: Scope And Responsibility For The Storm Water Utility
4-8A-4: Director Of Public Works
4-8A-5: Prohibited Acts
4-8A-6: Right Of Entry
4-8A-7: Penalties
4-8A-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this article is to establish a storm water utility which shall
be responsible for storm water management within the corporate boundaries of
the city of West Des Moines and shall provide for the management, protection,
control, regulation, use and enhancement of storm water management systems and
facilities. (Ord. 1683, 5-8-2006)
4-8A-2: DEFINITIONS:
The following terms are defined for use in this article, unless the context
specifically indicates otherwise:
COMMERCIAL/INDUSTRIAL: Any developed land whereon multiple-family dwellings,
commercial retail and office, industrial and manufacturing buildings, storage
buildings and storage areas covered with impervious surfaces, parking lots,
public and private school buildings, churches, hospitals and convalescent
centers have been constructed.
CUSTOMERS OF THE STORM WATER UTILITY: Include all persons, properties and
entities served by and/or benefiting from the utility's acquisition,
management, maintenance, extension and improvement of the public storm water
management systems and facilities.
DEVELOPED LAND: Land that has been altered from its natural state by
construction or installation of more than five hundred (500) square feet of
"impervious surface area" as defined herein.
DUPLEX DWELLING: A building containing only two (2) dwelling units and designed
for and occupied exclusively by not more than two (2) families with separate
housekeeping and cooking facilities for each. In the application of storm water
management fees, duplex dwelling properties shall be treated as two (2) single-
family dwellings.
EQUIVALENT RESIDENTIAL UNIT (ERU): The ERU shall be used as the basis for
determining storm water management fees. Less than or equal to four thousand
(4,000) square feet of impervious surface area shall be one ERU. Every
additional increment of one square foot to two thousand (2,000) square feet of
impervious surface area shall be one-half (0.5) ERU.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE AREA: Those areas which prevent or impede the infiltration
of storm water into the soil as it enters in natural conditions prior to
development. Common impervious surface areas include, but are not limited to,
rooftops, sidewalks, driveways, patios, parking lots, storage areas, compacted
gravel surfaces and other surfaces which prevent or impede the natural
infiltration of storm water runoff which existed prior to development.
MULTIPLE-FAMILY DWELLING: A building or portion thereof containing more than
three (3) dwelling units designed for or occupied by more than three (3)
families with separate housekeeping and cooking facilities for each. In the
application of storm water management fees, multiple-family dwelling properties
shall be treated as commercial/industrial.
POLLUTANT: Anything that causes or contributes to pollution. Pollutants may
include, but are not limited to, paints, varnishes and solvents; oil and other
automotive fluids; nonhazardous liquid and solid wastes and yard wastes;
refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter or other discarded or abandoned objects, so
that the same may cause or contribute to pollution; pesticides, herbicides and
fertilizers; hazardous substances and wastes; sewage, fecal coliform bacteria
and pathogens; dissolved and particulate metals; animal wastes; waste and
residues that result from constructing a building or structure; and noxious or
offensive matter of any kind.
SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLING: A building containing only one dwelling unit and
designed for and occupied exclusively for residence purposes by only one
family.
STORM WATER MANAGEMENT FEES: The periodic rate, fee or charge applicable to a
parcel of developed land, which charge shall be reflective of the service
provided by the city of West Des Moines storm water utility. Storm water
management fees are based on measurable parameters which influence the storm
water utility's cost of providing services and facilities, with the most
important factor being the amount of impervious surface area on each parcel of
developed property. The storm water management fees shall be determined by
ordinance of the city council.
STORM WATER MANAGEMENT SYSTEMS AND FACILITIES: Storm water management systems
and facilities address the issue of drainage management (flooding) and
environmental quality (pollution, erosion and sedimentation) of receiving
rivers, streams, creeks, lakes and ponds through improvements, maintenance,
regulation and funding of plants, structures and property used in the
collection, retention, detention and treatment of storm water or surface water
drainage.
SUBSTANTIAL COMPLETION: The construction has been completed and the city of
West Des Moines has acknowledged that the construction has been completed in
accordance with the approved plans and specifications through the issuance of a
temporary certificate of occupancy or permanent certificate of occupancy.
TOWNHOME DWELLING: A dwelling unit which is detached or attached horizontally,
and not vertically, to one or more other dwelling units, wherein the land or
lot beneath each dwelling may be individually owned in common by a townhome
association. In the application of storm water management fees, each townhome
dwelling shall be treated as one single-family dwelling.
UNDEVELOPED LAND: Land in its unaltered natural state or which has been
modified to such minimal degree as to have a hydrologic response comparable to
land in an unaltered state shall be deemed undeveloped. Undeveloped land shall
have less than five hundred (500) square feet of pavement, asphalt or compacted
gravel surfaces or structures which create an impervious surface area that
would prevent infiltration of storm water or cause storm water to collect,
concentrate or flow in a manner materially different than that which would
occur when the land was in an unaltered natural state. (Ord. 1683, 5-8-2006)
4-8A-3: SCOPE AND RESPONSIBILITY FOR THE STORM WATER UTILITY:
A.   The city of West Des Moines storm water utility consists of all rivers,
streams, creeks, branches, lakes, ponds, drainageways, channels, ditches,
swales, storm sewers, culverts, inlets, catch basins, pipes, dams, head walls
and other structures, natural or manmade, within the corporate boundaries of
the city of West Des Moines which control and/or convey storm water through
which the city intentionally diverts surface waters from its public streets and
properties. The city of West Des Moines owns or has legal access for purposes
of operation, maintenance and improvement to those segments of this system
which: 1) are located within public streets, rights of way and easements; 2)
are subject to easement or other permanent provisions for adequate access for
operation, maintenance and improvement of systems or facilities; or 3) are
located on public lands to which the city of West Des Moines has adequate
access for operation, maintenance and improvement of systems or facilities.
Operation, maintenance and improvement of storm water systems and facilities
which are located on private property or public property not owned by the city
of West Des Moines and for which there has been no public dedication of such
systems and facilities shall be and remain the legal responsibility of the
property owner, or its occupant. (Ord. 1683, 5-8-2006)
4-8A-4: DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS:
The director or public works has the following powers and duties related to the
city of West Des Moines storm water utility:
A.   Operations And Maintenance: Operation and maintenance of the storm water
management systems and facilities.
B.   Inspection And Tests: Conduct necessary inspections and tests to assure
compliance with the provisions of this article.
C.   Records: Maintain a complete and accurate record of all storm water
management systems and facilities.
D.   Policies: Recommend to the city council policies to be adopted and
enforced to implement the provisions of this article. (Ord. 1683, 5-8-2006)
4-8A-5: PROHIBITED ACTS:
No person shall do, or allow, any of the following:
A.   Damage Storm Water Management Systems And Facilities: Maliciously,
wilfully or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with
any structure, pipe, appurtenance or equipment which is part of the storm water
management systems or facilities.
B.   Illicit Discharges: No person shall throw, drain or otherwise discharge or
cause to throw, drain, run or allow to seep or otherwise be discharged into the
city of West Des Moines storm water management systems and facilities,
including, but not limited to, pollutants or waters containing any pollutants,
other than storm water.
C.   Manholes: Open or enter any manhole, structure or intake of the storm
water system, except by authority of the director of public works.
D.   Connection: Connection of any private storm water system to the city's
storm water management systems and facilities, except by authority of the
director of public works. (Ord. 1683, 5-8-2006)
4-8A-6: RIGHT OF ENTRY:
The director of public works and other authorized employees of the city of West
Des Moines bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to
enter all private properties for the purpose of inspection, observation,
measurement, sampling and testing all private storm water discharges directly
or indirectly entering into any public storm water management system or
facility in accordance with the provisions of this article. (Ord. 1683, 5-8-
2006)
4-8A-7: PENALTIES:
The following penalty provisions shall apply to violations of this chapter.
A.   Notice Of Violation: Any person found to be violating any provisions of
this chapter shall be served by the city of West Des Moines with written notice
stating the nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for
the satisfactory correction thereof. The offender shall, within the period of
time stated in such notice, permanently remedy all violations.
B.   Continuing Violations: Any person who shall continue any violation beyond
the time limit provided for in subsection A of this section, shall be subject
to a civil penalty as set forth in section
1-4-1 of this code. Each day which said violation shall continue shall be
deemed a separate offense.
C.   Liability Imposed: Any person violating any of the provisions of this
chapter shall become liable to the city of West Des Moines for any expense,
loss or damage occasioned the city of West Des Moines by reason of such
violation. (Ord. 1683, 5-8-2006)
ARTICLE B. FEES
SECTION:
4-8B-1: Required
4-8B-2: Effective Date Of Fees
4-8B-3: Enumerated
4-8B-4: Calculations
4-8B-5: Appeals
4-8B-6: Exemption From Fees; Special Conditions
4-8B-7: Billings
4-8B-8: Periodic Review
4-8B-9: Administrative Fees; Transmittal Of Receipts
4-8B-10: Lien For Nonpayment
4-8B-1: REQUIRED:
Every customer whose premises is served by a connection with the stormwater
management systems and facilities of the City of West Des Moines, either
directly or indirectly, shall pay to the City of West Des Moines stormwater
management fees hereinafter established and specified for the purpose of
contributing towards the costs of construction, maintenance and operation of
the stormwater management systems and facilities. (Ord. 1684, 5-8-2006)
4-8B-2: EFFECTIVE DATE OF FEES:
Stormwater management fees shall accrue beginning June 1, 2006, and shall be
billed monthly thereafter to all customers. (Ord. 1684, 5-8-2006)
4-8B-3: ENUMERATED:
Except as hereinafter noted, each customer whose property lies within the
corporate limits of the city of West Des Moines shall pay to the city of West
Des Moines, through its collection agent, the West Des Moines Water Works, the
following storm water management fees based on equivalent residential unit
(ERU) associated with the customer’s property:
A.   Undeveloped: A flat fee at the rate of $0.00 per month.
B.   Residential: A monthly fee based on the following schedule:
 
Current Rate           $8.90/ERU
Effective July 1, 2027 $10.40/ERU
Effective July 1, 2028 $10.90/ERU
Effective July 1, 2029 $11.40/ERU
 
C.   Commercial: A monthly fee based on the following schedule:
 
Current Rate           $8.90/ERU
Effective July 1, 2025 $9.40/ERU
Effective July 1, 2026 $9.90/ERU
Effective July 1, 2027 $10.40/ERU
Effective July 1, 2028 $10.90/ERU
Effective July 1, 2029 $11.40/ERU
 
(Ord. 2272, 1-22-2018; amd. Ord. 2525, 6-20-2022; Ord. 2557, 3-6-2023; Ord.
2629, 9-3-2024)
4-8B-4: CALCULATIONS:
Stormwater management fee calculations shall be in accordance with the
following:
A.   The number of equivalent residential units (ERUs) of each property shall
be calculated using the most recent aerial photography available to the City of
West Des Moines and/or impervious surface data from an approved site plan for
the property.
B.   Any occupancy occurring before the fifteenth of any month shall be treated
as an entire month for the purpose of fees levied herein. Any occupancy
occurring on or after the fifteenth of any month, up to and including the last
day of any calendar month, shall be prorated and charged as one-half (1/2)
month for purposes of this article. Any termination of service occurring before
the fifteenth of any month shall be prorated and charged as one-half (1/2)
month for purposes of this article. Any termination of service occurring on or
after the fifteenth of any calendar month shall be treated as an entire month
for the purpose of fees levied herein. No fees shall be prorated in any
increment of less than one-half (1/2) month. (Ord. 1684, 5-8-2006)
4-8B-5: APPEALS:
Any customer who believes the provisions of this article have been applied in
error may appeal in the following manner:
A.   An appeal must be filed in writing with the City Manager of the City of
West Des Moines. In the case of fee appeals, the appeal shall include a survey
prepared by a registered Iowa land surveyor or professional engineer containing
information on the total property area, the impervious surface area and any
other features or conditions which influence the hydrologic response of the
property to rainfall events.
B.   Using the information provided by the appellant, the City Manager shall
conduct a technical review of the conditions on the property and respond to the
appeal in writing within thirty (30) days. All decisions of the City Manager
are final.
C.   In response to an appeal, the City Manager may adjust the stormwater fees
applicable to a property in conformance with the general purpose and intent of
this article. (Ord. 1684, 5-8-2006)
4-8B-6: EXEMPTION FROM FEES; SPECIAL CONDITIONS:
In special conditions including, but not limited to, the instances noted below,
the City Manager of the City of West Des Moines may, upon a written request for
an exemption of fees filed with West Des Moines Water Works, grant fee payment
and collection variances after determining that granting the variance would be
in the City's best interest, will improve efficiency, safety and is practical.
Upon the granting of any variance, the City Manager shall file notice with the
City Council giving reason(s) for the variance.
A.   If an individual receives water service from West Des Moines Water Works
and, for whatever reason that results in the building being vacant or
unoccupied, desires and pays West Des Moines Water Works for shutting off said
service for a period of not less than two (2) weeks.
B.   The City Manager of the City of West Des Moines may authorize stormwater
management fee credits in unique situations, on a case by case basis. (Ord.
1684, 5-8-2006)
4-8B-7: BILLINGS:
Billing and payment for stormwater management fees shall be in accordance with
the following:
A.   Stormwater management fees shall be included on all bills calculated by
West Des Moines Water Works on or after the effective date hereof.
B.   All stormwater management fees shall be due and payable under the same
terms and conditions provided for payment of water service from the West Des
Moines Water Works, except the provision of section
4-8B-10 of this article shall be used to enforce collection of delinquent
stormwater management fees.
C.   Questions concerning stormwater management fees shall, to the extent
possible, be handled administratively by staff members of West Des Moines Water
Works and the City who have oversight responsibility for such charges. (Ord.
1684, 5-8-2006)
4-8B-8: PERIODIC REVIEW:
The City will review the stormwater management fees at least yearly and revise
the stormwater management fees as necessary to ensure that such charges as
herein established and specified generate adequate revenues to pay the costs of
maintenance and operation (including replacement and debt service) of
stormwater management systems and facilities and that the stormwater management
fees continue to provide for the proportional distribution of maintenance and
operation costs (including replacement costs and debt service) for stormwater
management systems and facilities among the users and user classes. The
liability of a stormwater service user to pay for charges as provided in this
article shall not be contingent, however, upon any such review or revision.
(Ord. 1684, 5-8-2006)
4-8B-9: ADMINISTRATIVE FEES; TRANSMITTAL OF RECEIPTS:
The West Des Moines Water Works may, before transmitting to the City Finance
Director receipts from stormwater management fees, subtract an administrative
and accounting fee not to exceed thirty cents ($0.30) per customer billing
applicable to charges for stormwater management fees. All funds received
pursuant to this article, minus administrative charges shall be paid by the
West Des Moines Water Works to the City Finance Director not later than seventy
five (75) days following the applicable billing due date. (Ord. 1684, 5-8-2006;
amd. Ord. 1878, 8-23-2010, eff. 9-17-2010)
4-8B-10: LIEN FOR NONPAYMENT:
Each delinquent account which is transmitted to the Finance Department by the
West Des Moines Water Works shall thereafter be processed for imposition of a
lien upon the contributor's property as provided by section 384.84 of the Iowa
Code, in the amount of the delinquent account, plus a County administrative fee
for each lien certified as provided in section 384.84 of the Iowa Code, plus a
City delinquency fee in the amount of ten dollars ($10.00) to recoup the City's
administrative processing costs and lost investment on the unpaid amount. The
lien herein provided shall apply only to that property or those properties for
which the contributor's account is delinquent. (Ord. 1684, 5-8-2006; amd. Ord.
1878, 8-23-2010, eff. 9-17-2010)
CHAPTER 9
SOCIAL HOST
SECTION:
4-9-1: Purpose; Findings
4-9-2: Definitions
4-9-3: Prohibited Acts
4-9-4: Exceptions
4-9-5: Enforcement
4-9-6: Violations
4-9-1: PURPOSE; FINDINGS:
The purpose of this chapter is to protect the public interest, welfare, health,
and safety within the city of West Des Moines by prohibiting the services to
and consumption of alcoholic beverages by persons under the age of twenty one
(21) at premises located in the city. The city council finds that the
occurrence of social gatherings at premises where alcoholic beverages are
served to or consumed by persons under the age of twenty one (21) is harmful to
such persons themselves and a threat to public welfare, health, and safety. The
city council further finds that persons under the age of twenty one (21) often
obtain alcoholic beverages at such gatherings and that persons who are in
control of such premises know or have reason to know of such service and/or
consumption and will be more likely to ensure that alcoholic beverages are
neither served or consumed by persons under the age of twenty one (21) at these
gatherings. Based on these findings, the city council has deemed it necessary
to enact the following regulations in the city of West Des Moines. (Ord. 1788,
12-3-2007)
4-9-2: DEFINITIONS:
The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have
the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly
indicates a different meaning:
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE: Any beverage containing more than one-half of one percent
of alcohol by volume including alcoholic liquor, wine, and beer.
EMERGENCY RESPONDERS: Firefighters, law enforcement officers, emergency medical
service personnel, and other personnel having emergency response duties.
ENFORCEMENT SERVICES: The salaries and benefits of emergency responders for the
amount of time actually spent responding to or remaining at an event,
gathering, or party and administrative costs attributable to the incident; the
actual costs for medical treatment for any injured emergency responder, and the
costs of repairing any damage to equipment or vehicles.
EVENT, GATHERING, OR PARTY: Any group of three (3) or more persons who have
assembled or gathered together for a social occasion or other activity where an
underage person has consumed or possessed an alcoholic beverage.
PARENT: Any person having legal custody of a juvenile: a) as natural parent,
adoptive parent, or stepparent; b) as a legal guardian; or c) as a person to
whom legal custody has been given by order of the court.
PERSON: Any individual, partnership, corporation, or any association of one or
more individuals.
PREMISES: Any home, yard, farm, field, land, apartment, condominium, hotel or
motel room, or other dwelling unit, or a hall or meeting room, park, or any
other place of assembly, public or private, whether occupied on a temporary or
permanent basis, whether occupied as a dwelling or specifically for a party or
other social function, and whether owned, leased, rented, or used with or
without permission or compensation.
SOCIAL HOST: Any person who aids, conducts, allows, entertains, organizes,
supervises, controls, or permits an event, gathering, or party. This includes,
but is not limited to: a) The person(s) who owns, rents, leases, or otherwise
has control of the premises where the event, gathering, or party takes place;
b) the person(s) in charge of the premises; or c) the person(s) who organized
the event. If the social host is a juvenile, then the parent(s) of that
juvenile will be jointly and severally liable for any violation of this
chapter.
UNDERAGE PERSON: Any individual under the age of twenty one (21). (Ord. 1788,
12-3-2007)
4-9-3: PROHIBITED ACTS:
It is unlawful for any social host to host an event, gathering, or party on
premises when the person knows or reasonably should know that an underage
person has consumed an alcoholic beverage, or possessed an alcoholic beverage
with the intent to consume it, and the person fails to take reasonable steps to
prevent the possession or consumption by the underage person. A social host who
hosts such an event, gathering, or party does not have to be present at the
time the prohibited act occurs. (Ord. 1788, 12-3-2007)
4-9-4: EXCEPTIONS:
This chapter does not apply to conduct solely between an underage person and
his or her parents while present in the parents' household, to legally
protected religious observances, and to situations where underage persons are
lawfully in possession of alcoholic beverages during the course and scope of
employment. (Ord. 1788, 12-3-2007)
4-9-5: ENFORCEMENT:
The provisions of this chapter shall be enforced by officers of the police
department. The police department shall have primary but not exclusive
enforcement responsibility for this chapter. (Ord. 1788, 12-3-2007)
4-9-6: VIOLATIONS:
Violations of this chapter are declared to be municipal infractions pursuant to
title 1, chapter 4 of this code. A five hundred dollar ($500.00) civil penalty
shall be imposed for a social host's first offense. A seven hundred fifty
dollar ($750.00) civil penalty shall be imposed for a social host's second
offense. A one thousand dollar ($1,000.00) civil penalty shall be imposed for a
social host's third or subsequent offense. In addition, the city may seek
reimbursement for enforcement services provided by emergency responders related
to the event, gathering, or party. Multiple violations of this chapter may be
considered by the city for purposes of approving licenses applied for by the
social host, or for any other requirements that are subject to approval by the
city. (Ord. 1788, 12-3-2007)
CHAPTER 10
MAINTENANCE OF FORECLOSING PROPERTIES
SECTION:
4-10-1: Purpose; Findings
4-10-2: Definitions
4-10-3: Registration Requirements
4-10-4: Security Requirements
4-10-5: Maintenance Requirements
4-10-6: Enforcement
4-10-7: Violations
4-10-1: PURPOSE; FINDINGS:
The purpose of this chapter is to protect and preserve the public health,
safety, security, and enjoyment of the use of property located within the city
of West Des Moines by residents, visitors, and businesses by: a) requiring all
residential and commercial property owners or titleholders, including lenders
and trustees, to have their vacant, foreclosed properties registered with the
city of West Des Moines, if the property registration information has not
already been made available to the city of West Des Moines through other means;
and b) regulating the security and maintenance of residential and commercial
vacant, foreclosed properties to prevent blighted and unsecure residences and
buildings. The city council finds that the occurrence of foreclosures may lead
to buildings and structures becoming targets for criminal activity. The city
council also finds that foreclosed buildings and structures that remain
unoccupied for months or even years are more likely to experience multiple
violations of the building, fire, housing, and nuisance municipal codes. The
city council further finds that vacant and foreclosed properties are likely to
negatively impact surrounding neighborhoods and business districts. Based on
these findings, the city council has deemed it necessary to enact the following
regulations in the city of West Des Moines. (Ord. 1843, 9-21-2009)
4-10-2: DEFINITIONS:
The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have
the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly
indicates a different meaning:
ACCESSIBLE PROPERTY: A property that is accessible through a compromised,
breached, or broken gate, fence, or other entry point.
ACCESSIBLE STRUCTURE: A structure that is unsecured or breached in such a way
as to allow access to the interior space by unauthorized persons.
BENEFICIARY: A lender, lender's designee, nominee, or servicer under a note
secured by a deed of trust or mortgage.
COMMERCIAL BUILDING: A building used for the barter, exchange, sale, service,
or trade of goods, materials, or services, either tangible or intangible for
financial, material, or monetary gain.
DAYS: Consecutive calendar days.
DEED IN LIEU OF FORECLOSURE OR SALE: A recorded document that transfers
ownership of a property from the trustor to the holder of a deed of trust upon
consent of the beneficiary of the deed of trust.
DEED OF TRUST: An instrument by which title to real estate is transferred to a
third party trustee as security for a real estate loan. This definition
includes any subsequent deeds of trust.
DEFAULT: The failure to fulfill a contractual obligation, monetary or
conditional.
ENFORCEMENT OFFICIAL: The city manager, the building official, the fire chief,
the chief of police, and/or any of the city department officials, including
code enforcement officers, who are responsible for enforcing the provisions of
this chapter.
EVIDENCE OF VACANCY: Any condition that on its own, or combined with other
conditions present, would lead a reasonable person to believe that the property
is vacant. Such conditions include, but are not limited to, overgrown or dead
vegetation, accumulation of newspapers, circulars, flyers or mail, past due
utility notices or disconnected utilities, accumulation of trash, junk, or
debris, the absence of window coverings such as curtains, blinds, or shutters,
the absence of furnishings or personal items consistent with residential
habitation, statements by neighbors, passersby, delivery agents, and government
employees that the property is vacant.
FORECLOSURE: Procedure whereby property pledged as security for a debt is sold
to pay the debt in the event of default in payments or terms.
LOCAL: Located within sixty (60) road or driving miles distance of the subject
property.
MORTGAGE: An instrument by which a borrower pledges certain real property or
collateral as guarantee for the repayment of a loan.
MORTGAGEE: The lender in a mortgage loan transaction.
MORTGAGOR: The borrower in a mortgage loan transaction.
NOTICE OF DEFAULT: A notice issued pursuant to the applicable real estate
security document or required by law that a default has occurred under a deed
of trust or mortgage.
OUT OF STATE BENEFICIARY: A beneficiary who does not have a physical presence
in the state of Iowa.
OWNER: Any person, partnership, association, corporation, fiduciary, or other
legal entity having a legal or equitable title or any interest in real
property.
OWNER OF RECORD: The person holding recorded title to the property at any point
in time when official records are produced by the county recorder's office.
PROPERTY: Any unimproved or improved real property, or portion thereof,
situated in the city and includes the buildings or structures located on the
property regardless of condition.
REGISTERED REPRESENTATIVE: The person designated by a beneficiary as the
beneficiary's representative for purposes of accepting notice, service, and
summons on behalf of the beneficiary and for otherwise ensuring compliance with
the requirements of this code.
RESIDENTIAL BUILDING: Any improved real property, or portion thereof, situated
in the city, designed or permitted to be used for dwelling purposes, and shall
include the buildings and structures located on such improved real property.
This includes any real property being offered for sale, trade, transfer, or
exchange as "residential" whether or not it is legally permitted or zoned for
such use.
SECURING: Such measures as may be directed by an enforcement official that
assist in rendering the real property inaccessible to unauthorized persons,
including, but not limited to, repairing fences and walls, chaining or
padlocking of gates, and the repairing or boarding of doors, windows, or other
openings.
TRUSTEE: Any person, partnership, association, corporation, fiduciary, or other
legal entity holding a deed of trust or mortgage securing an interest in real
property.
TRUSTOR: Any borrower under a deed of trust or mortgage who deeds property to a
trustee as security for the payment of a debt.
VACANT: Any building, structure, or real property that is unoccupied or
occupied by a person without a legal right of occupancy. (Ord. 1843, 9-21-2009)
4-10-3: REGISTRATION REQUIREMENTS:
The following provisions shall apply to commercial and residential properties
located in the city that have been subject to a foreclosure action.
Beneficiaries who have voluntarily registered their properties with the city at
any time following the issuance of a notice of default by the mortgagee or
trustee to the mortgagor or trustor, but prior to obtaining title to the
property through a foreclosure action, or who have registered their properties
on the MERS system allowing the city to access current property preservation
contact information, shall be considered exempt from complying with the
following registration requirements:
A.   Any beneficiary under a deed of trust or mortgage covering a property
located within the city shall be responsible for having an inspection performed
of the property that is the security for the deed of trust or mortgage within
twenty (20) days of obtaining title to the property through a foreclosure
action. If, at the time of the inspection, the property is found to be vacant
or shows evidence of vacancy, the beneficiary shall, within ten (10) days of
the inspection, register the property with the city’s Public Services
Department on forms provided by the city. There is no fee associated with the
property registration if the beneficiary complies with these time deadlines.
B.   The registration shall contain the full legal name of the beneficiary and
the registered representative, the direct street or office mailing address of
the beneficiary and the registered representative (no post office boxes), a
direct contact name and telephone number for the beneficiary and registered
representative, and, if applicable, the local property management company
responsible for the security, maintenance, and marketing of the property for an
out of state beneficiary. A company e-mail address may be used for the
beneficiary and registered representative in lieu of a direct contact name and
telephone number.
C.   The registration shall be valid as long as the subject property remains
vacant and shall be amended as needed.
D.   This section shall also apply to properties that have been the subject of
a foreclosure sale where title to the property was transferred to the
beneficiary of a deed of trust or mortgage involved in the foreclosure and any
properties transferred under a deed in lieu of foreclosure or sale.
E.   Properties subject to this chapter shall remain under the security and
maintenance standards of this chapter as long as they remain vacant.
F.   Any person or entity that has registered a property under this chapter
must report any change of information contained in the registration within ten
(10) days of the change. (Ord. 1843, 9-21-2009; amd. Ord. 2549, 12-5-2022)
4-10-4: SECURITY REQUIREMENTS:
A.   All registered properties shall be maintained in a secure manner so as not
to be accessible to unauthorized persons. This includes, without limitation,
the closure and locking of windows, doors (walk-through, sliding, and garage),
gates, and any other opening of such size that it may allow a child to access
the interior of the property and or structure(s). In the case of broken
windows, "securing" means the reglazing or boarding of the window.
B.   If the beneficiary is an out of state beneficiary, a local property
management company shall be contracted by the beneficiary to perform
appropriate and timely inspections to verify that the requirements of this
chapter, and any other applicable laws, have been satisfied.
C.   The beneficiary shall cause the property to be inspected on an appropriate
and timely basis to determine if the property is in compliance with the
requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 1843, 9-21-2009)
4-10-5: MAINTENANCE REQUIREMENTS:
All registered properties shall comply with all of the requirements of this
code. Adherence to this chapter does not relieve the beneficiary or property
owner of any obligations set forth in any covenants, conditions and
restrictions or homeowners' association rules and regulations which may apply
to the property. The duties and obligations specified in this chapter shall be
joint and several among and between all trustees and beneficiaries and their
respective agents. (Ord. 1843, 9-21-2009)
4-10-6: ENFORCEMENT:
This chapter is intended to be cumulative to, and not in place of, other rights
and remedies available to the city pursuant to this code. The city attorney's
office and the city's enforcement officials have the authority to enforce this
chapter, including the pursuit of any right or remedy permitted by this code,
including, but not limited to, commencement of any civil action or
administrative action to abate any nuisances. (Ord. 1843, 9-21-2009)
4-10-7: VIOLATIONS:
Violations of this chapter are declared to be municipal infractions pursuant to
title 1, chapter 4 of this code. Any civil penalties imposed shall be in
addition to any alternative relief sought by the city, such as seeking
reimbursement for the city's costs for abatement or correction of the violation
(s). (Ord. 1843, 9-21-2009)
TITLE 5
POLICE REGULATIONS
Police Department   1
Criminal Code   2
Animal Control   3
Dogs And Cats   3A
Parades   4
CHAPTER 1
POLICE DEPARTMENT
SECTION:
5-1-1: Department Established
5-1-2: Definitions
5-1-3: Organization
5-1-4: Required Training
5-1-5: Oath
5-1-6: Compensation
5-1-7: Peace Officers Appointed
5-1-8: Police Chief Powers And Duties
5-1-9: Departmental Rules
5-1-10: Summoning Aid
5-1-11: Taking Weapons
5-1-12: Emergencies
5-1-13: Special Reserve Auxiliary Officers
5-1-14: Adoption Of Job Classification
5-1-1: DEPARTMENT ESTABLISHED:
The police department of the city is established to provide for the
preservation of peace and enforcement of law and ordinances within the
corporate limits of the city. (1985 Code §2.1-4.0101)
5-1-2: DEFINITIONS:
For use in this chapter, the following terms are defined:
DEPARTMENT: The police department of the city of West Des Moines, Iowa.
POLICE CHIEF: The individual appointed as chief of police for the supervision,
direction and control of the city of the West Des Moines police department.
(1985 Code §5.1-4.0102)
5-1-3: ORGANIZATION:
The department shall consist of the police chief and such other law enforcement
officers and personnel, whether full or part time, as may be authorized by the
council. (1985 Code §2.1-4.0103)
5-1-4: REQUIRED TRAINING:
All police officers shall have received the minimum training required by law at
an approved law enforcement training school within one year of employment.
(1985 Code §2.1-4.0104)
5-1-5: OATH:
Every police officer, before entering upon the duties of his office, shall
qualify for office by taking the oath prescribed by section
1-7-1 of this code. (1985 Code §2.1-4.0105)
5-1-6: COMPENSATION:
Members of the department shall be designated by rank and receive such
compensation as shall be determined by resolution of the council. (1985 Code
§2.1-4.0106; amd. 1992 Code)
5-1-7: PEACE OFFICERS APPOINTED:
The police chief shall be appointed by the city manager, as provided by chapter
400.13, code of Iowa, or as amended thereto. Other members of the department
shall be appointed or promoted by the police chief, subject to civil service
procedures and chapter 35C, code of Iowa. (Ord. 1703, 7-31-2006)
5-1-8: POLICE CHIEF POWERS AND DUTIES:
The police chief shall have the following powers and duties, subject to the
approval of the city manager:
A.   General: The police chief is the executive head of the police department
and shall cause the public peace to be preserved. He shall supervise and direct
the police department and shall perform all duties required of the police chief
or marshal by law or ordinance.
B.   Enforce Laws: Enforce all laws, ordinances and regulations and bring all
persons committing any offense before the proper court.
C.   Writs: Execute and return all writs and other processes directed to him.
D.   Accident Reports: Report all motor vehicle accidents investigated by the
department to the state department of public safety or to the appropriate
agency1. IC §321.266.1.
E.   Prisoners: Be responsible for the custody of prisoners, including
conveyance to detention facilities as may be required.
F.   Assist Officials: When requested, provide aid to other city officers,
boards and commissions in the execution of their official duties.
G.   Investigations: Provide for such investigation as may be necessary for the
prosecution of any person alleged to have violated any law or ordinance.
H.   Record Of Arrests: Keep a record of all arrests made in the city by
members of the department showing whether said arrests were made under
provisions of state law or city ordinance, the offense charged, who made the
arrest and the disposition of the charge.
I.   Reports: Compile and submit to the mayor and council an annual report of
the status and activities of the department as well as such other reports as
may be requested by the mayor or council.
J.   Command: Be in command of all officers appointed for police work and be
responsible for the care, maintenance and use of all vehicles, equipment and
materials of the department. (Ord. 913, 7-9-1990)
5-1-9: DEPARTMENTAL RULES:
The police chief shall establish from time to time such rules, regulations and
orders not in conflict with the city code as needed for the detail operation,
conduct and guidance of the department, and subject to the approval of the city
manager, including rules governing the following:
A.   Rules Of Conduct: The conduct and activity of members of the department
during off duty and on duty hours.
B.   Uniform: The wear and care of uniforms.
C.   Weapons: The care, use and practice of sidearms and other police weapons.
D.   Communication: The procedures, use and care of the police radio and other
communication systems.
E.   Training: The nature, time and attendance requirements for in service
training of members of the department.
F.   Emergencies: Temporary rules for the protection and functioning of the
department as may be necessary in the event of an emergency until such rules
may be considered by the council.
G.   Other: Such other rules as may be deemed necessary and advisable in
assuring efficient and proper performance of the duties of the department.
H.   Penalties: The penalties which may be imposed for violation of established
departmental rules by members.
I.   Notice: The police chief shall give written notice to any member charged
with a violation of departmental rules, regulations or orders specifying the
violation and the nature thereof and the penalty to be imposed.
J.   Appeal: A member of the department charged with the violation of a rule,
regulation or order may request a hearing before the civil service commission
in accordance with the civil service laws of the city and the state. (Ord. 913,
7-9-1990)
5-1-10: SUMMONING AID:
Any peace officer making a legal arrest may orally summon as many persons as
the officer reasonably finds necessary to aid him or her in making the arrest.
(1985 Code §2.1-4.0110)
5-1-11: TAKING WEAPONS:
Any person who makes an arrest may take from the person arrested all items
which are capable of causing bodily harm which the arrested person may have
within his or her control, to be disposed of according to law. (1985 Code §2.1-
4.0111)
5-1-12: EMERGENCIES:
The mayor shall have the following powers and duties during a time of emergency
or public danger exists in which the peace and order of the city is endangered
by reason of fire, flood, storm or mob violence wherein additional protection
of life and property is necessary:
A.   The mayor may take command of the police and govern the city by
proclamation when a time of emergency or public danger exists. Within the city
limits, he has all the powers conferred upon the sheriff to suppress disorders.
B.   The mayor, with the approval of the council, may deputize additional
persons to act as peace officers during any periods of emergency. Such periods
of emergency when such officers may act shall be declared by the police chief
or his authorized representative and shall last during the duration determined
by the police chief or his authorized representative. During such period of
emergency only, all such emergency officers shall have all the powers of a
police officer. All appointments made during the period of emergency shall
continue until the termination of the emergency. (Ord. 913, 7-9-1990)
5-1-13: SPECIAL RESERVE AUXILIARY OFFICERS:
The city manager, after receiving the recommendation of the police chief, may
appoint such reserve officers as deemed necessary to act as special officers to
perform duties auxiliary to and in general support of the police department.
Such reserve officers once approved shall give such assistance to the police
department as shall be determined by the city manager, after receiving the
recommendation of the police chief, and as permitted by the code of Iowa. (Ord.
913, 7-9-1990)
5-1-14: ADOPTION OF JOB CLASSIFICATION:
The council may, from time to time, establish, by resolution, a job
classification plan, rank, composition and use of the plan for members of the
police department. (1985 Code §2.1-4.0114; amd. 1993 Code)
CHAPTER 2
CRIMINAL CODE
SECTION:
5-2-1: Penalty
5-2-2: Definitions
5-2-3: Unlawful Use Of City Property
5-2-4: Criminal Mischief
5-2-5: Trespass
5-2-6: Theft
5-2-7: Blocking A Highway Crossing
5-2-8: Tampering With A Motor Vehicle
5-2-9: Public Exposure
5-2-10: Drug Paraphernalia
5-2-11: Obstruction Of Emergency Communications
5-2-12: Tainted Food
5-2-13: Distributing Dangerous Substances
5-2-14: Fireworks
5-2-15: Abandoned Or Unattended Refrigerators
5-2-16: Antenna And Radio Wires
5-2-17: Barbed Wire
5-2-18: Disorderly Conduct
5-2-19: Public Defecation And Urination
5-2-20: Unlawful Assembly
5-2-21: Failure To Disperse
5-2-22: Vandalism And Disorderly Conduct On Common Carriers
5-2-23: Interference With Official Acts
5-2-24: Refusing To Assist Officer
5-2-25: Harassment Of Public Officers And Employees
5-2-26: False Reports To Or Communications With Public Safety Entities
5-2-27: Discharging Weapons
5-2-28: Throwing Or Shooting
5-2-29: Trapping; Exceptions
5-2-30: Hunting
5-2-31: Target Shooting On A Firing Range
5-2-32: Animal Neglect
5-2-33: Livestock Neglect
5-2-34: Abandonment Of Cats And Dogs
5-2-35: Public Intoxication
5-2-36: Sale Or Possession Of Alcohol Under Legal Age
5-2-37: Fraudulent Practice
5-2-38: Sex Offender Residency Restrictions
5-2-38-1: Purpose
5-2-38-2: Definitions
5-2-38-3: Restrictions
5-2-38-4: Exceptions
5-2-38-5: Violations
5-2-1: PENALTY:
A violation of any of the provisions of this chapter is a simple misdemeanor
and shall be punished as provided in Iowa Code (2003) section 903.1(a), maximum
sentence for misdemeanants, which is adopted by reference. (Ord. 1577, 3-29-
2004)
5-2-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitional sections provided
in Iowa Code (2003) chapter 702 are adopted and shall govern the meaning of
language in this chapter unless such term is specially defined elsewhere:
ACT: Iowa Code (2003) section 702.2.
ANIMAL: Iowa Code (2003) section 702.3.
BROTHEL: Iowa Code (2003) section 702.4.
CHILD: Iowa Code (2003) section 702.5.
COMPUTER TERMINOLOGY DEFINITIONS: Iowa Code (2003) section 702.1A.
CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE: Iowa Code (2003) section 702.6.
DANGEROUS WEAPON: Iowa Code (2003) section 702.7.
DECEPTION: Iowa Code (2003) section 702.9.
DWELLING: Iowa Code (2003) section 702.10.
INCENDIARY DEVICE: Iowa Code (2003) section 702.21.
LIBRARY MATERIALS AND EQUIPMENT: Iowa Code (2003) section 702.22.
OCCUPIED STRUCTURE: Iowa Code (2003) section 702.12.
PARTICIPATING IN A PUBLIC OFFENSE: Iowa Code (2003) section 702.13.
PROPERTY: Iowa Code (2003) section 702.14.
PROSTITUTE: Iowa Code (2003) section 702.15.
RECKLESS: Iowa Code (2003) section 702.16.
SERIOUS INJURY: Iowa Code (2003) section 702.18.
SEX ACT: Iowa Code (2003) section 702.17.
STEAL: Iowa Code (2003) section 702.19.
VIDEO RENTAL PROPERTY: Iowa Code (2003) section 702.20A. (Ord. 1577, 3-29-2004)
5-2-3: UNLAWFUL USE OF CITY PROPERTY:
No person shall use or permit any other person to use the property owned by the
city for any private purpose and for personal gain, to the detriment of the
city. (Ord. 1577, 3-29-2004)
5-2-4: CRIMINAL MISCHIEF:
It shall be a simple misdemeanor punishable as provided in section
5-2-1 of this chapter to commit an act of criminal mischief as defined in Iowa
Code (2003) section 716.1, which is adopted by reference, in which the cost of
repairing, replacing or restoring the property damaged, defaced or destroyed
does not exceed two hundred dollars ($200.00). (Ord. 1577, 3-29-2004)
5-2-5: TRESPASS:
It shall be a simple misdemeanor punishable as provided in section
5-2-1 of this chapter to commit a trespass as defined by Iowa Code (2003)
section 716.7 which is adopted by reference. (Ord. 1577, 3-29-2004)
5-2-6: THEFT:
It shall be a simple misdemeanor punishable as provided in section
 5-2-1 of this chapter to commit a theft as defined in Iowa Code (2003) section
714.1, which is adopted by reference, involving the theft of property or
services the value of which does not exceed two hundred dollars ($200.00) in
value. (Ord. 1577, 3-29-2004)
5-2-7: BLOCKING A HIGHWAY CROSSING:
Iowa Code (2003) section 327G.32, blocking a highway crossing, is adopted by
reference. (Ord. 1577, 3-29-2004)
5-2-8: TAMPERING WITH A MOTOR VEHICLE:
Iowa Code (2003) section 321.78, injuring or tampering with vehicle, is adopted
by reference. (Ord. 1577, 3-29-2004)
5-2-9: PUBLIC EXPOSURE:
A.   Except as hereinafter provided, no person shall expose those parts of his
or her body hereinafter listed to another in any public place, or in any place
where such exposure is seen by another person or person located in any public
place:
1.   A woman's nipple, the areola thereof, or full breast, except as necessary
in the breast feeding of a baby.
2.   The pubic hair, pubes, perineum, or anus of a male or female, the penis or
scrotum of a male, or the vagina of a female, except such body parts of
prepubescent infants of either sex.
B.   This section shall not apply to limited or minimal exposures incident to
the use of public restrooms or locker rooms or such other places where such
exposures occur incident to the prescribed use of those facilities.
C.   This section shall not apply to exposures occurring in live stage plays,
live theatrical performances, or live dance performances conducted in a
theater, concert hall or similar establishment, which is primarily devoted to
theatrical performances. (Ord. 1577, 3-29-2004)
5-2-10: DRUG PARAPHERNALIA:
Iowa Code (2003) section 124.414, drug paraphernalia, is adopted by reference.
(Ord. 1577, 3-29-2004)
5-2-11: OBSTRUCTION OF EMERGENCY COMMUNICATIONS:
Iowa Code (2003) section 727.5, obstruction of emergency communications, is
adopted by reference. (Ord. 1577, 3-29-2004)
5-2-12: TAINTED FOOD:
It shall be unlawful for a person to sell or offer for sale any tainted,
unsound or rotten meat, fish, fowl, fruit, vegetables, eggs, butter, canned
goods, packaged goods or other articles of food, or to sell or offer for sale
the flesh of any animal that was diseased. (Ord. 1577, 3-29-2004)
5-2-13: DISTRIBUTING DANGEROUS SUBSTANCES:
Iowa Code (2003) section 727.1, distributing dangerous substance, is adopted by
reference. (Ord. 1577, 3-29-2004)
5-2-14: FIREWORKS:
A.   Consumer Fireworks: As authorized by Iowa Code section 364.2(6) (2017), it
shall be a simple misdemeanor punishable by a fine of two hundred fifty dollars
($250.00) for any person to use or explode consumer fireworks as defined in
Iowa Code section 727.2 within the corporate limits of the City on any day
other than July 3, July 4, and December 31 in accordance with Iowa Code Section
727.2, Subsection 4.
B.   Display Fireworks: Unless approved upon written application to the City, a
person, firm, partnership or corporation who uses or explodes display fireworks
as defined in Iowa Code section 727.2 within the corporate limits of the City
commits a simple misdemeanor punishable by a fine of two hundred fifty dollars
($250.00) on any day other than July 3, July 4, and December 31 in accordance
with Iowa Code Section 727.2, Subsection 4.
(Ord. 2256, 10-16-2017; amd. Ord. 2660, 6-16-2025)
5-2-15: ABANDONED OR UNATTENDED REFRIGERATORS:
Iowa Code (2003) section 727.3, abandoned or unattended refrigerators, is
adopted by reference. (Ord. 1577, 3-29-2004)
5-2-16: ANTENNA AND RADIO WIRES:
It shall be unlawful for a person to allow antenna wires, antenna supports,
radio wires or television wires to exist over any street, alley, highway,
sidewalk or public property, except as allowed by franchise ordinances. (Ord.
1577, 3-29-2004)
5-2-17: BARBED WIRE:
It shall be unlawful for a person to use barbed wire within any residential
zone of the City without the consent of the City Council unless such land
consists of ten (10) acres or more and is used for an agricultural purpose. The
term "barbed wire" as used herein shall mean any wire or strands of wire with
any sharp projections or any sharp projections with points oblique. (Ord. 1577,
3-29-2004)
5-2-18: DISORDERLY CONDUCT:
Iowa Code (2003) section 723.4, disorderly conduct, is adopted by reference.
(Ord. 1577, 3-29-2004)
5-2-19: PUBLIC DEFECATION AND URINATION:
It shall be unlawful for any person to urinate or defecate in or upon any
street, alley, sidewalk, or other place open to the public view or public use,
provided that this shall not apply to private restrooms or public facilities
designated for such purpose. (Ord. 1577, 3-29-2004)
5-2-20: UNLAWFUL ASSEMBLY:
Iowa Code (2003) section 723.2, unlawful assembly, is adopted by reference.
(Ord. 1577, 3-29-2004)
5-2-21: FAILURE TO DISPERSE:
Iowa Code (2003) section 723.3, failure to disperse, is adopted by reference.
(Ord. 1577, 3-29-2004)
5-2-22: VANDALISM AND DISORDERLY CONDUCT ON COMMON CARRIERS:
No person shall, while a passenger on any vehicle used as a common carrier
which transports members of the public at large from place to place for a fare,
do any of the following acts:
A.   Intentionally injure, deface, break, or destroy any portion of the
interior or exterior of such carrier.
B.   Consume any beverage or food, or throw, deposit, or place any paper,
bottles, cans, or any garbage or solid waste in or upon such vehicle.
C.   Throw any object of any kind within such vehicle or out of any door or
window of such vehicle.
D.   Spit, urinate or defecate in or upon any part of such vehicle.
E.   Play any radio, cassette, tape player, record player or similar electronic
sound amplification device unless it is played through an earphone so that it
is totally inaudible to all other passengers.
F.   Bring any pet or animal onto such vehicle other than a seeing eye dog
accompanying a blind person or an animal in a cage or held exclusively on the
lap of the rider.
G.   Stand or remain in front of any white line marked on the forward end of
the floor of such vehicle after being asked to step back by the driver.
H.   Act in any other manner which unreasonably disturbs the peace and quiet of
another person or disrupts or impedes the safe operation of that public
vehicle.
The driver of any vehicle or common carrier may refuse to transport and/or at
his discretion may order off of the carrier any person violating the provisions
of this section and, upon refusal of any person to remove himself after being
so directed, may report such conduct for further action appropriate under this
chapter or other ordinances of the city or statutes or laws of the state. (Ord.
1577, 3-29-2004)
5-2-23: INTERFERENCE WITH OFFICIAL ACTS:
It shall be a simple misdemeanor punishable as provided in section
5-2-1 of this chapter, to commit an act in violation of Iowa Code (2003)
section 719.1(1), interference with official acts, which is adopted by
reference, if said act does not cause injury nor if the person who so violates
this section is armed with a firearm or displays a dangerous weapon. (Ord.
1577, 3-29-2004)
5-2-24: REFUSING TO ASSIST OFFICER:
Iowa Code (2003) section 719.2, refusing to assist officer, is adopted by
reference. (Ord. 1577, 3-29-2004)
5-2-25: HARASSMENT OF PUBLIC OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES:
Iowa Code (2003) section 718.4, harassment of public officers and employees, is
adopted by reference. (Ord. 1577, 3-29-2004)
5-2-26: FALSE REPORTS TO OR COMMUNICATIONS WITH PUBLIC SAFETY ENTITIES:
It shall be a simple misdemeanor, punishable as provided in section
5-2-1 of this chapter to violate the provisions of Iowa Code (2003) section
718.6, false reports to or communications with public safety entities, which is
adopted by reference, except when the false information or false report of a
criminal act involves serious, aggravated or felony offenses as provided in
Iowa Code (2003) section 718.6(1) and (3). (Ord. 1577, 3-29-2004)
5-2-27: DISCHARGING WEAPONS:
It shall be unlawful for a person to discharge rifles, shotguns, revolvers,
pistols, guns, or firearms of any kind within the city limits except by
authorization of the council or as excepted by sections
5-2-30 and
5-2-31 of this chapter. (Ord. 1577, 3-29-2004)
5-2-28: THROWING OR SHOOTING:
It shall be unlawful for a person to throw stones or missiles of any kind or to
shoot arrows, rubber guns, slingshots, air rifles or other dangerous
instruments or toys on or into any street, highway, alley, sidewalk or public
place, except when under proper supervision of persons authorized by the city
council. Shooting of arrows is allowed in the Raccoon River Park Archery
Facility with a city issued permit. (Ord. 2021, 2-24-2014)
5-2-29: TRAPPING; EXCEPTIONS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to place, locate, set, use or attempt to
use within the city limits, any trap of a claw, spring or metal nature, either
on public or private property, on land or in the water, or to set, use or
maintain any snare, pitfall, deadfall, spring gun, set gun or device of a
similar character or purpose; except, any owner, or any tenant of any private
property may use the following:
A.   Cage trap or box trap for removal of small animals in a humane manner; or
B.   Mousetrap, rattrap or similar small trap for the purpose of removing small
rodents from their property.
Exceptions: The city or its authorized agents are exempt from the above and may
control or manage animals, birds, or insects pursuant to established policies
that have been approved by the city council or park board. (Ord. 1577, 3-29-
2004)
5-2-30: HUNTING:
For the purposes of preserving ecological integrity by controlling animal
populations within the city corporate boundaries and adjacent communities,
providing recreational opportunities for residents, and the overall health,
safety and welfare of the general population, this section hereby declares that
it shall be unlawful for any person to engage in hunting activity within the
corporate city limits using a rifle, shotgun, bow and arrow or any other means
either on public or private property, on land or in the water, except as
follows:
A.   On private property which is zoned as agricultural land or open space and/
or classified by the county assessor of the county in which the land is located
as agriculture land or forest preserve and with the permission of the
landowner; and
1.   Which is a minimum of twenty (20) contiguous acres or more in size and the
hunting activity is for deer or turkey and is done in accordance with the code
of Iowa and the administrative rules adopted by the Iowa department of natural
resources; and/or
2.   Which is a minimum of twenty (20) contiguous acres or more in size and the
hunting activity is for all other small game animals other than deer, turkey,
or migratory waterfowl and is done using a shotgun with shot ammunition or a
.22 caliber rim firearm and in accordance with the code of Iowa and the
administrative rules adopted by the Iowa department of natural resources; and/
or
3.   Which is a minimum of twenty (20) contiguous acres or more in size and the
hunting activity is for migratory waterfowl and is done using a shotgun with
shot ammunition and in accordance with the code of Iowa and the administrative
rules adopted by the Iowa department of natural resources; and
4.   Which follows all rules and regulations imposed by the code of Iowa and
the Iowa department of natural resources, including, but not limited to, all
licensing provisions of the Iowa department of natural resources; and
5.   Which follows all rules and regulations imposed by the code of Iowa and
the Iowa department of natural resources regarding the use of a firearm, bow
and arrow or other legal instrument of hunting which relates to the use of such
legal instruments of hunting at or near an occupied or unoccupied structure;
and
6.   Which follows all rules and regulations imposed by the code of Iowa and
the Iowa department of natural resources regarding the use of a firearm, bow
and arrow, or other legal instrument of hunting which relate to the use of such
legal instruments in respect to discharging of a weapon on or over any public
waters, highways or railroad rights of way or from a road right of way; or
B.   On public property which has been declared by special provision by the
Iowa department of natural resources and approved by the city council of the
city of West Des Moines, or by direct approval of the city council of the city
of West Des Moines designating a special animal management zone and/or
otherwise mentioned herein; and
1.   Which lies in a special hunting zone as declared by the Iowa department of
natural resources and approved by the city council of the city of West Des
Moines and whose boundaries are described elsewhere herein and/or delineated on
a map on file in the office of the city clerk; and
2.   Which follows all rules and regulations imposed by the city council, the
code of Iowa, and the Iowa department of natural resources including, but not
limited to, all licensing provisions of the department of natural resources;
and
3.   Which follows all rules and regulations imposed by the city council, the
code of Iowa and the Iowa department of natural resources regarding the types
of weapons and ammunition allowed for use in the declared special hunting zone;
and
4.   Which follows all rules and regulations imposed by the code of Iowa and
the Iowa department of natural resources regarding the use of a firearm, bow
and arrow or other legal instrument of hunting which relate to the use of such
instruments of hunting at or near an occupied or unoccupied structure; and
5.   Which follows all rules and regulations imposed by the code of Iowa and
the Iowa department of natural resources regarding the use of a firearm, bow
and arrow or other legal instrument of hunting which relate to the use of such
legal instruments of hunting in respect to discharging of a weapon on or over
any public waters, highways, or railroad rights of way or from a road right of
way; or
C.   Within an area designated by the Iowa department of natural resources
(DNR) as a special deer management zone and which has been designated as a West
Des Moines deer management zone (WDMDMZ) by a resolution of the city council
and subject to the following provisions:
1.   Hunting in a WDMDMZ shall be limited to the harvesting of antlerless deer.
The city manager or designee may authorize an issuance of licenses for the
harvesting of antlered deer under an incentive program authorized by the DNR.
2.   Hunting shall be limited to bow and arrow and shall be restricted to dates
and hours established by the DNR. The city manager or designee may issue
regulations to shorten the dates and hours for hunting within a WDMDMZ.
3.   The number of permits issued for each WDMDMZ shall be fixed by the city
manager or designee.
4.   All hunters participating in this program must apply for and receive a
West Des Moines deer management zone permit. The city of West Des Moines
reserves the right to refuse to issue the permit due to any criminal
convictions or permit denials, suspensions, or revocations by another
government entity. In order to receive the permit, a hunter must present a
valid state of Iowa special urban deer license and show proof of the following:
a.   Successful completion of a one time bowhunter safety education course
approved by the International Bowhunter Education Foundation (IBEF).
b.   Successful completion of an authorized archery proficiency test using the
bow which the hunter will use to hunt. Testing must be taken at a National
Field Archery Association approved indoor lane and administered by a certified
IBEF instructor. Testing must be performed under rules approved by the Polk
County deer management task force. The proficiency test must be successfully
completed each hunting season.
5.   All individuals hunting under a West Des Moines deer management zone
permit shall follow all procedures and regulations established by the DNR
applicable to deer hunting and special deer management zones. In addition,
hunters shall abide by the following requirements:
a.   Hunters must meet with the city's hunter coordinator to review the rules
and boundaries of the WDMDMZ prior to hunting.
b.   All hunters must check in with the city prior to entering the WDMDMZ to
hunt.
c.   All shots must be made from an elevated stand and shall not be made in
excess of twenty five (25) yards from the hunter's location.
d.   Elevated stands on public land shall be portable with no screw in steps
allowed.
e.   Elevated stands shall be located not less than two hundred feet (200')
from a residence or building and shall be located not less than seventy five
feet (75') from a trail, road, or highway.
f.   A hunter shall carry a bow in a case while traveling to and from the
elevated stand site.
g.   A hunter shall not dispose of deer entrails in a conspicuous place on
public property.
h.   All deer taken shall be processed for meat or the meat given to charity.
i.   If a hunter wounds a deer and is unable to locate the deer, the hunter
shall report this to a West Des Moines animal control officer within twelve
(12) hours of the wounding.
j.   While engaged in hunting, the hunter shall carry all necessary state,
county and city hunting licenses and permits.
k.   Hunters shall report the harvesting of a deer under a WDMDMZ permit to the
city of West Des Moines under regulations promulgated by the city manager or
designee.
l.   A hunter shall not harvest more than three (3) deer in a single day under
a WDMDMZ permit. A state license shall be required for each deer.
m.   If necessary to cross private property to access a WDMDMZ, permission must
be received by the hunter from a property owner who has agreed to allow access.
n.   Hunters must remove themselves from any harassment situation and
immediately report the incident to the city.
o.   The city manager or designee may promulgate additional regulations, not
inconsistent with this section, to administer this program and/or ensure the
safety of the public.
p.   Failure to abide by the requirements of this section or any additional
regulations promulgated by the city manager or designee may result in the
suspension or revocation of the permit issued by the city of West Des Moines.
6.   Designation of a WDMDMZ within city park lands shall be first referred to
the West Des Moines park board for approval and then may be established by
resolution of the city council. Designation of a WDMDMZ on other city owned
lands shall be by resolution of the city council.
7.   Designation of a special deer management zone on private property shall be
considered if an application to create such a zone is approved by and complies
with the regulations and standards promulgated by the DNR and PCCB. Upon such
an approval, a WDMDMZ may be established by a resolution of the city council,
subject to the regulations and ordinances provided herein and such additional
conditions as the city council provides by said resolution; or
D.   Within the Brown's Woods forest preserve as designated by the Iowa
department of natural resources (hereinafter "DNR") and approved by the city
council as a special deer management zone (the "zone"). This zone is comprised
of the northern and eastern portions of Brown's Woods, commencing one hundred
(100) yards north and east of the back loop of the walking trail, as generally
delineated on the map of Brown's Woods on file in the office of the city clerk.
1.   Harvesting of deer shall be allowed within this zone solely by bow and
arrow during restricted time periods and under permitted conditions as
established by the Polk County conservation board (PCCB) and in accordance with
the code of Iowa and the administrative rules adopted by the Iowa department of
natural resources, and pursuant to the guidelines set out in this subsection D:
a.   The harvest periods and hours shall be fixed by the PCCB;
b.   Signs shall be posted at the entrance and in strategic locations around
the perimeter of Brown's Woods adequately informing the general public of the
deer management program being conducted within Brown's Woods; and
c.   All individuals participating in this special deer harvest period shall
follow all procedures and regulations established by the DNR and PCCB
applicable to this designated special deer management zone.
2.   The number of permits shall be fixed by the PCCB for deer control
harvesting by bow and arrow within this designated zone.
3.   No special events shall be authorized by the PCCB for hunting within this
designated zone except as set forth in this section.
4.   All deer meat harvested under this deer management program shall be
processed for private consumption or shall be donated to a charitable
organization.
5.   The director of the Polk County conservation board shall provide the city
council, on or before March 31 of each year, a report summarizing the
harvesting activity within this designated special deer management zone.
6.   The PCCB may authorize an issuance of licenses for the harvesting of
antlered deer under an incentive program authorized by the DNR. (Ord. 1773, 8-
13-2007)
5-2-31: TARGET SHOOTING ON A FIRING RANGE:
It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge a weapon within the corporate
city limits either on public or private property, on land or in the water,
except:
A.   As provided in sections
5-2-27 and
5-2-30 of this chapter, and
B.   For the purpose of target practice on a firing range specifically designed
for the weapon being discharged according to the design standards set forth in
section II of the "NRA Range Source Book, A Guide To Planning And
Construction", National Rifle Association of America, November 1999, or
hereafter amended. (Ord. 1577, 3-29-2004)
5-2-32: ANIMAL NEGLECT:
It shall be a simple misdemeanor punishable as provided in section
 5-2-1 of this chapter to commit an act of animal neglect as defined in Iowa
Code (2003) section 717B.3, animal neglect, which is adopted by reference,
except for such an act of neglect intentionally committed by a person which
results in serious injury to or death of an animal. (Ord. 1577, 3-29-2004)
5-2-33: LIVESTOCK NEGLECT:
It shall be a simple misdemeanor punishable as provided in section
5-2-1 of this chapter to commit an act of livestock neglect as defined in Iowa
Code (2003) section 717.2, livestock neglect, which is adopted by reference,
except for such an act of neglect intentionally committed by a person which
results in serious injury to or death of livestock. (Ord. 1577, 3-29-2004)
5-2-34: ABANDONMENT OF CATS AND DOGS:
A person who has ownership or custody of a cat or dog shall not abandon the cat
or dog, except the person may deliver the cat or dog to another person who will
accept ownership and custody or the person may deliver the cat or dog to an
animal shelter or pound as defined in Iowa Code (2003), section 162.2. A person
who violates this section is guilty of a simple misdemeanor. (Ord. 1577, 3-29-
2004)
5-2-35: PUBLIC INTOXICATION:
Iowa Code (2003) section 123.46, consumption or intoxication in public places –
notifications – chemical tests – exoneration, is adopted by reference. (Ord.
1577, 3-29-2004)
5-2-36: SALE OR POSSESSION OF ALCOHOL UNDER LEGAL AGE:
Iowa Code (2003) section 123.47(1), (2), and (3), persons under legal age –
penalty, is adopted by reference, except that section 123.47(1) shall not apply
to persons who are of legal age as provided in Iowa Code (2003) section 123.47
(4). (Ord. 1577, 3-29-2004)
5-2-37: FRAUDULENT PRACTICE:
It shall be a simple misdemeanor punishable as provided in section
5-2-1 of this chapter to commit fraudulent practice as defined in Iowa Code
(2003) section 714.8, fraudulent practices defined, which is adopted by
reference, when the amount of money or the value of the property involved does
not exceed two hundred dollars ($200.00). (Ord. 1577, 3-29-2004)
5-2-38: SEX OFFENDER RESIDENCY RESTRICTIONS:
5-2-38-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this section
5-2-38 is to protect the health and safety of children from the risk that
convicted sex offenders may reoffend in areas in which children congregate and/
or play and that are in close proximity to the sex offender's residence. As
recognized by the eighth circuit United States court of appeals in Doe v.
Miller, 405 F.3d 700 (Iowa 2005) and the Iowa supreme court in State v.
Seering, 701 N.W.2d 655 (Iowa 2005) that the risk of recidivism posed by sex
offenders is "frightening and high", the city finds and declares that sex
offenders are a serious threat to public safety. Given the high rate of
recidivism of sex offenders, reducing the opportunity and the temptation is
important in minimizing the risk of reoffending. In addition to the protections
afforded by state law that prohibit sex offenders from residing near schools
and childcare facilities, the city seeks to provide further protection to
children by prohibiting sex offenders from residing near other public areas
where children congregate or play, as identified in section 5-2-38-3 of this
chapter. (Ord. 1665, 11-21-2005)
5-2-38-2: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this section
 5-2-38 and unless the context otherwise requires:
AGGRAVATED OFFENSE: A conviction for any of the following offenses:
A.   Sexual abuse in the first degree in violation of Iowa Code section 709.2.
B.   Sexual abuse in the second degree in violation of Iowa Code section 709.3.
C.   Sexual abuse in the third degree in violation of Iowa Code section 709.4,
subsection 1.
D.   Lascivious acts with a child in violation of Iowa Code section 709.8,
subsection 1.
E.   Assault with intent to commit sexual abuse in violation of Iowa Code
section 709.11.
F.   Burglary in the first degree in violation of Iowa Code section 713.3,
subsection 1, paragraph d.
G.   Kidnapping, if sexual abuse as defined in Iowa Code section 709.1 is
committed during the offense.
H.   Murder, if sexual abuse as defined in Iowa code section 709.1 is committed
during the offense.
I.   Criminal transmission of human immunodeficiency virus in violation of Iowa
Code section 709C.1, subsection 1, paragraph a.
CRIMINAL OFFENSE AGAINST A MINOR: Any of the following criminal offenses or
conduct:
A.   Kidnapping of a minor, except for the kidnapping of a minor in the third
degree committed by a parent.
B.   False imprisonment of a minor, except if committed by a parent.
C.   Any indictable offense involving sexual conduct directed toward a minor.
D.   Solicitation of a minor to engage in an illegal sex act.
E.   Use of a minor in a sexual performance.
F.   Solicitation of a minor to practice prostitution.
G.   Any indictable offense against a minor involving sexual contact with the
minor.
H.   An attempt to commit an offense enumerated in this definition.
I.   Incest committed against a minor.
J.   Dissemination and exhibition of obscene material to minors in violation of
Iowa Code section 728.2.
K.   Admitting minors to premises where obscene material is exhibited in
violation of Iowa Code section 728.3.
L.   Stalking in violation of Iowa Code section 708.11, subsection 3, paragraph
b, subparagraph (3), if the fact finder determines by clear and convincing
evidence that the offense was sexually motivated.
M.   Sexual exploitation of a minor in violation of Iowa Code section 728.12.
N.   Enticing away a minor in violation of Iowa Code section 710.10, subsection
1.
O.   An indictable offense committed in another jurisdiction which would
constitute an indictable offense under subsections A through N of this
definition.
MINOR: A person under the age of eighteen (18), unless otherwise specified.
OTHER RELEVANT OFFENSE: Any of the following offenses:
A.   Telephone dissemination of obscene materials in violation of Iowa Code
section 728.15.
B.   Rental or sale of hardcore pornography in violation of Iowa Code section
728.4.
C.   Indecent exposure in violation of Iowa Code section 709.9.
D.   Incest committed against a dependent adult as defined in Iowa Code section
235B.2 in violation of Iowa Code section 726.2.
E.   A criminal offense committed in another jurisdiction which would
constitute an indictable offense under subsections A through D of this
definition if committed in this state.
PERSON: A person who has committed a criminal offense against a minor, an
aggravated offense, a sexually violent offense, or other relevant offense that
involved a minor.
RESIDENCE: The place where a person sleeps, which may include more than one
location, and may be mobile or transitory.
SEXUALLY VIOLENT OFFENSE: Any of the following indictable offenses:
A.   Sexual abuse as defined under Iowa Code section 709.1.
B.   Assault with intent to commit sexual abuse in violation of Iowa Code
section 709.11.
C.   Sexual misconduct with offenders in violation of Iowa Code section 709.16.
D.   Any of the following offenses, if the offense involves sexual abuse or
attempted sexual abuse: murder, attempted murder, kidnapping, burglary, or
manslaughter.
E.   A criminal offense committed in another jurisdiction which would
constitute an indictable offense under subsections A through D of this
definition if committed in this state. (Ord. 1665, 11-21-2005)
5-2-38-3: RESTRICTIONS:
A.   A person shall not reside within two thousand feet (2,000') of the real
property comprising any of the following child oriented facilities:
1.   A public park;
2.   A public swimming pool;
3.   A public library; or
4.   A multiuse recreational trail.
B.   The distance shall be measured from the closest boundary line of the
residence to the closest boundary line of the child oriented facilities
identified in subsection A of this section. (Ord. 1665, 11-21-2005)
5-2-38-4: EXCEPTIONS:
A person residing within two thousand feet (2,000') of the real property
comprising a child oriented facility identified in section
5-2-38-3 of this chapter does not commit a violation of this section
5-2-38 if any of the following apply:
A.   The person is required to serve a sentence at a jail, prison, juvenile
facility, or other correctional institution or facility.
B.   The person is subject to an order of commitment under chapter 229A of the
Iowa Code.
C.   The person has established a residence prior to the effective date hereof,
or a child oriented facility as identified in section
5-2-38-3 of this chapter is newly located on or after the effective date hereof
and the person has established a residence prior to the date of the start of
construction of such newly located child oriented facility.
D.   The person is a minor or a ward under a guardianship. (Ord. 1665, 11-21-
2005)
5-2-38-5: VIOLATIONS:
Any person who resides within two thousand feet (2,000') of the real property
comprising a child oriented facility identified in section
5-2-38-3 of this chapter in violation of this section
5-2-38 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by fine or imprisonment as
provided by section
5-2-1 of this chapter or shall be guilty of a municipal infraction punishable
by a civil penalty as provided by section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 1665, 11-21-2005)
CHAPTER 3
ANIMAL CONTROL
SECTION:
5-3-1: Purpose
5-3-2: Definitions
5-3-3: Keeping Of Dangerous Animals Prohibited
5-3-4: Dangerous Animal Exceptions
5-3-5: Seizure, Impoundment, And Disposition Of Dangerous Animals
5-3-6: Keeping Of Vicious Animals Prohibited
5-3-7: Vicious Animal Exceptions
5-3-8: Seizure, Confinement, Impoundment, And Disposition Of Vicious Animals
5-3-9: Running At Large Prohibited
5-3-10: Unlawful To Cause Harm Or Injury
5-3-11: Reporting Of Bite Cases
5-3-12: Responsibilities Of Veterinarians
5-3-13: Quarantine For A Minimum Period Of Ten Days
5-3-14: Apprehension And Impoundment
5-3-15: Impoundment, Pick Up, And Disposal Fees
5-3-16: Owner Or Person In Charge Of Animal To Clean Up Droppings
5-3-17: Owner Or Person In Charge Of Animals To Keep Place In Sanitary
Condition
5-3-18: Keeping Of Certain Animals Prohibited
5-3-19: City May Establish And Maintain Animal Pound; Duties Of Pound
Supervisor
5-3-20: Community Cats
5-3-21: Proclamation
5-3-22: Violations
5-3-23: Penalties
5-3-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to regulate and control dogs, cats and other
animals within the corporate limits of the City and to safeguard and protect
property and the general public. It is further the purpose of this chapter to
provide regulations to prevent cruelty to all animals and to establish
regulations relating to kennels, pet shops, riding schools and horse stables.
(1985 Code §3-2.01)
5-3-2: DEFINITIONS:
Words used in the singular include the plural, and the plural the singular, the
masculine gender includes the feminine and the feminine the masculine. For use
within this chapter the following definitions shall apply:
AGRICULTURAL PRODUCTION ANIMALS, COMMERCIAL: Any livestock animal as defined by
Code of Iowa, Sec. 717.1 or included under Standard Industrial Classification
(SIC) 02: Agricultural Production - Livestock and Animal Specialties which is
raised to provide a service such as labor, breeding purposes with offspring
sold or provided to another individual or business, or production of
commodities such as, but not limited to meat, eggs, milk, fur, leather and wool
primarily for sale to individuals or businesses not located within the property
upon which the livestock animal(s) is raised, with little to no personal
consumption or use. Roosters shall be considered agricultural production
animals, commercial.
AGRICULTURAL PRODUCTION ANIMALS, PERSONAL: Any livestock animal as defined by
Code of Iowa, Sec. 717.1 or included under Standard Industrial Classification
(SIC) 02: Agricultural Production - Livestock and Animal Specialties which is
housed or primarily live outside of the residence and raised for or can be
raised for production of commodities such as, but not limited to meat, eggs,
fur, milk, leather, and wool for personal consumption or use. Roosters are
considered agricultural production animals, commercial. See Homesteader Farm as
defined in Title 9.
ANIMAL: Every wild, tame or domestic member of the animal kingdom other than
the genus and species Homo sapiens.
ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER: A person designated by the City to perform such duties
involving animal control and having police authority for the enforcement of
this chapter.
ANIMAL POUND OR SHELTER: Any premises, either designated, or contracted for, by
the Council for the proper care of impounded animals held under the authority
of this chapter.
AT LARGE: An animal off the premises of the owner. An animal properly licensed
as required by this chapter shall not be deemed at large if such animal:
A.   Is on the premises of the owner, or
B.   Is under the control of a person competent to restrain and control the
animal, either by leash, cord, chain, or other similar restraint not more than
ten feet (10') in length, or properly restrained within a motor vehicle, or
C.   Is properly housed in a veterinary hospital or licensed kennel, pet shop,
or City designated animal pound, or
D.   Is accompanied by or “at heel” beside and obedient to the commands of the
owner or a competent responsible person.
CAT: All members of the Felis domestica species, male or female, altered or
unaltered.
COMMUNITY CAT: A member of the domestic species Felis Catus and shall mean a
free-roaming cat who may be cared for by one or more residents of the immediate
area which may be known or unknown. A community cat does not present as
socialized to humans.
COMMUNITY CAT CAREGIVER: A person who, in accordance with a good faith effort
to conduct Trap-Neuter-Return, provides care. This care includes providing
food, shelter, or medical care to a community cat. However, community cat
caregivers are not the owner, harborer, shelterer, controller, or keeper of a
community cat.
DANGEROUS ANIMAL:
A.   Any animal which is not naturally tame or gentle, and which is of a wild
nature or disposition, and which is capable of killing, inflicting serious
injury upon, or causing disease among, human beings or domestic animals and
having known tendencies as a species to do so;
B.   Any animals declared to be dangerous by the Board of Health or the City
Council or its designee;
C.   The following animals which shall be deemed to be dangerous animals per
se:
1.   Wolves and coyotes;
2.   Badgers, wolverines, weasels, mink, and other mustelids (except ferrets);
3.   Bears;
4.   All apes (including chimpanzees), baboons, and macaques;
5.   Monkeys, except the squirrel monkey;
6.   Elephants;
7.   Wild boar;
8.   Black widow spiders and scorpions;
9.   Snakes which are naturally venomous or poisonous;
10.   All cats, except domestic cats (Carnivora of the family Felidae
including, but not limited to, lions, cougars, tigers, jaguars, leopards, lynx,
bobcats, etc.);
11.   Raccoons, opossums, and skunks;
12.   Alligators and crocodiles.
DOG: Members of the canine species, male or female, whether neutered or not.
HABITUAL: Two or more separate incidents within the previous twelve (12) month
period.
HEALTH DEPARTMENT: The Health Department of the City of West Des Moines or the
County having jurisdiction.
HORSE: A large solid hoofed herbivorous mammal (Equus caballus).
KENNEL: Any premises on which five (5) or more dogs, or five (5) or more cats,
or a combination thereof, six (6) months old or older, are kept or raised
solely for the bona fide purpose of sale and which are kept under constant
restraint.
LEASHED: A vicious animal under the control of a responsible person and
restrained with a leash so that the distance between the responsible person and
the animal does not exceed six feet (6') in length.
MUZZLED: A vicious animal under the control of a responsible person and
restrained with a muzzle, which shall be made in a manner that will not cause
injury to the animal or obscure its vision or interfere with its respiration,
but shall prevent it from biting any human being or animal.
OWNER OR OWNERS OF AN ANIMAL: Any person or persons, firm, association or
corporation, owning, keeping, sheltering or harboring an animal.
PERSON: Any individual, association, partnership, or corporation, and includes
any officer, employee, or agency thereof.
PET SHOP: Any person, partnership or corporation engaged in the business of
breeding, buying, selling or boarding animals of any species, except the
operation of a kennel, agriculture or wildlife pursuits.
PROPER ENCLOSURE: A vicious animal that has been ordered to be confined within
a proper enclosure requires:
A.   The vicious animal is securely confined within an occupied house or
residence or in a securely enclosed and locked pen or kennel, except when
leashed and muzzled as provided in this section. Such pen, kennel, or structure
must have secure sides and a secure top attached to the sides or, in lieu of a
top, walls at least six feet (6') in height and at least six feet (6') taller
than any internal structure;
B.   All pens or other structures designed, constructed, or used to confine the
vicious animal must be locked with a key or combination lock when such animals
are within the structure. Such structure must have a secure bottom, floor, or
foundation attached to the sides of the pen, or the sides of the pen must be
embedded in the ground no less than two feet (2') so as to prevent digging
under the walls by the confined vicious animal; and
C.   The structure erected to house the vicious animal must comply with all
city zoning and building regulations. The structure must be adequately lighted
and ventilated and kept in a clean and sanitary condition. No vicious animal
may be kept on a porch, patio, or in any part of a house or structure that
would allow the vicious animal to exit such building on its own volition.
PROVOCATION: The threat, injury, or damage caused by the animal was sustained
by a person who, at the time, was committing a willful trespass or other tort
upon the premises occupied by the owner of the animal, or was tormenting,
abusing, or assaulting the animal, or was committing or attempting to commit a
crime, or sustained by an animal who, at the time, was tormenting, abusing, or
assaulting the animal, or was upon the premises occupied by the owner of the
animal without permission.
RESPONSIBLE PERSON: A person at least eighteen (18) years old who is able to
keep an animal under complete control at all times.
RIDING SCHOOL OR HORSE STABLE: Any person, partnership or corporation engaged
in the business of teaching persons to ride horses, or providing horses to ride
for a fee.
SERIOUS INJURY: For the purposes of this chapter means any physical injury to a
human being or a domestic animal as a result of an animal’s actions which
demonstrate an intent to harm resulting in a fracture, muscle tear, serious
bruising, or disfiguring lacerations, or lacerations which require multiple
sutures or corrective or cosmetic surgery.
TRAP-NEUTER-RETURN: The nonlethal process of humanely trapping, sterilizing,
vaccinating for rabies, ear notching for identification, and returning
community cats to their original location.
VICIOUS ANIMAL: Any animal, except for a dangerous animal per se, as listed
herein, which has engaged in one or more of the following actions, or has
exhibited one or more of the following characteristics: a) the animal has
bitten or attacked a human being or domestic animal one or more times and
caused a serious injury, without provocation; b) the animal possesses a
history, tendency, or disposition to attack, which is evidenced by its habitual
biting which has caused injury or to otherwise endanger the safety of human
beings or domestic animals; c) the animal has been trained for animal fighting
or animal baiting or has been owned or kept for such purposes; or d) the animal
has been trained to attack human beings, upon command or spontaneously in
response to human activities, unless owned by and under the control of the
police department, a law enforcement agency of the state of Iowa or the United
States, or a branch of the armed forces of the United States. (Ord. 1774, 8-13-
2007; amd. Ord. 2001, 9-3-2013; Ord. 2432, 8-17-2020; Ord. 2454, 12-7-2020;
Ord. 2532, 7-18-2022; Ord. 2621,8-5-2024)
5-3-3: KEEPING OF DANGEROUS ANIMALS PROHIBITED:
No person shall keep, shelter, or harbor any dangerous animal as a pet, or act
as a custodian temporary or otherwise for such animal, or keep such animal for
any other purpose or in any other capacity within the city except as provided
in section
5-3-4 of this chapter.
While the following animals are not declared by this chapter to be dangerous
per se: a) constricting snakes exceeding six feet (6') in length, and b)
lizards exceeding two feet (2') in length, the owners of such animals shall,
within two (2) hours of knowledge of the possibility of such an animal being
"at large" within the community, so notify the police department of the city.
(1985 Code §3-2.32)
5-3-4: DANGEROUS ANIMAL EXCEPTIONS:
The prohibition contained in section
5-3-3 of this chapter shall not apply to the keeping of dangerous animals in
the following circumstances:
A.   The keeping of dangerous animals in a public zoo, bona fide educational or
medical institution, humane society or museum where they are kept as live
specimens for the public to view, or for the purpose of instruction research or
study.
B.   The keeping of dangerous animals for exhibition to the public by a circus,
carnival, exhibit or show where such circus, carnival, exhibit or show is of a
traveling nature, is displayed before large assemblages of people, and
maintains any and all required federal or state licenses.
C.   The keeping of dangerous animals in a bona fide, licensed veterinary
hospital for treatment.
D.   The keeping of dangerous animals by a wildlife rescue organization with
appropriate permit from the Iowa conservation commission.
E.   Any dangerous animals under the jurisdiction of and in the possession of
the Iowa conservation commission, pursuant to chapters 109 and 109A of the Iowa
Code. (1985 Code §3-2.33)
5-3-5: SEIZURE, IMPOUNDMENT, AND DISPOSITION OF DANGEROUS ANIMALS:
A.   In the event that a dangerous animal is found at large and unattended upon
public property, park property, public right of way or the property of someone
other than its owner, thereby creating a hazard to person or property, such
animal may, in the discretion of the animal control officer or the chief of
police, be destroyed if it cannot be confined or captured. The city shall be
under no duty to attempt the confinement or capture of a dangerous animal found
at large, nor shall it have a duty to notify the owner of such animal prior to
its destruction.
B.   Upon the verified complaint of any individual that a person is keeping,
sheltering or harboring a dangerous animal on premises located in the city, the
animal control officer shall cause the matter to be investigated, and if after
investigation, the facts indicate that the person named in the complaint is
keeping, sheltering or harboring a dangerous animal in the city, the animal
control officer shall order the person named in the complaint to permanently
place the animal with an organization or group allowed under section
5-3-4 of this chapter to possess dangerous animals, or destroy the animal,
within three (3) full business days of the receipt of such order. Such order
shall be contained in a notice, which shall be given in writing to the person
keeping, sheltering or harboring the dangerous animal, and shall be served
personally or by certified mail. Such order and notice shall not be required
where such dangerous animal has previously caused serious physical harm or
death to any person, in which case the animal control officer shall cause the
animal to be immediately seized and impounded or destroyed if seizure and
impoundment are not possible without risk of serious physical harm or death to
any person.
C.   The order issued by the animal control officer may be appealed a municipal
hearing officer as designated by the mayor and subject to City Council
approval. In order to appeal such order, written notice of appeal must be filed
with the city clerk within three (3) full business days after receipt of the
order. Failure to file such written notice of appeal shall constitute a waiver
of right to appeal the order of the animal control officer.
D.   The notice of appeal shall state the grounds for such appeal and shall be
delivered personally or by certified mail to the city clerk. Upon receipt of a
timely notice of appeal, a hearing on the matter shall be scheduled and
conducted by the municipal hearing officer, as provided in section
4-4-10 of this Code, except that appeals shall be directly to district court as
provided by applicable Iowa Rules.
E.   If the municipal hearing officer affirms the action of the animal control
officer, the municipal hearing officer shall order in its written decision that
the individual or entity owning, sheltering, harboring, or keeping such
dangerous animal, permanently place such animal with an organization or group
allowed under section
5-3-4 of this chapter to possess dangerous animals, or destroy it. The decision
and order shall immediately be served upon the person or entity against whom
rendered in the same manner as the notice. If the original order of the animal
control officer is not appealed and is not complied with within three (3) full
business days, or the order of the municipal hearing officer after appeal is
not complied with within three (3) full business days of its issuance, the
animal control officer is authorized to seize and impound such dangerous
animal. An animal so seized shall be impounded for a period of seven (7) days.
If at the end of the impoundment period, the individual or entity against whom
the decision and order of the municipal hearing officer was issued has not
petitioned the district court for a review of said order, the city shall cause
the animal to be disposed of by sale, permanently place such animal with an
organization or group allowed under section
5-3-4 of this chapter to possess dangerous animals, or destroy such animal in a
humane manner. Failure to    comply with an order of the city issued pursuant
hereto shall constitute a simple misdemeanor and is also punishable pursuant to
section 1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 1774, 8-13-2007; amd. Ord. 2432, 8-17-2020)
5-3-6: KEEPING OF VICIOUS ANIMALS PROHIBITED:
No person shall keep, shelter, or harbor for any reason within the city a
"vicious animal" so defined herein, except as otherwise provided in this
chapter. Once an animal has been deemed a vicious animal, the animal shall not
be removed from the city and transferred to another city. (Ord. 1774, 8-13-
2007)
5-3-7: VICIOUS ANIMAL EXCEPTIONS:
The prohibition contained in section
5-3-6 of this chapter shall not apply to the keeping of vicious animals in the
following circumstances:
A.   Animals under the control of a law enforcement or military agency.
B.   The keeping of guard dogs. However, guard dogs must be kept within a
structure or fixed enclosure at all times, and any guard dog found at large may
be processed as a vicious animal pursuant to the provisions of section
 5-3-8 of this chapter. Any premises guarded by a guard dog shall be
prominently posted with a sign containing the wording "guard dog", "vicious
dog", or words of similar import, and the owner of such premises shall inform
the chief of police that a guard dog is on duty at such premises. (1985 Code
§3-2.36)
5-3-8: SEIZURE, CONFINEMENT, IMPOUNDMENT, AND DISPOSITION OF VICIOUS ANIMALS:
A.   The Chief of Police or designee, in his or her discretion or upon receipt
of a complaint alleging that a particular animal is a "vicious animal" as
defined herein, may investigate to determine whether the animal is vicious.
After the investigation, the Chief of Police or designee may declare such
animal a vicious animal or take such other action as provided in section
5-3-13 of this Code. If the animal is declared vicious, the animal shall not be
allowed to remain at the property of the owner. The declaration shall set forth
whether the vicious animal shall be destroyed or whether the animal is to be
placed with a shelter, rescue, or rehabilitation facility as approved by the
city. Once an animal has been declared vicious, the animal shall not be removed
from the city and transferred to another city unless and until it has been
ultimately determined that the animal is not vicious or upon approval of the
receiving city.
B.   Notice that the animal has been declared vicious shall be promptly served
upon the animal owner, if known, by personal service or certified mail. The
city shall take reasonable measures to attempt to ascertain the identity and
address of the animal owner. Serving notice upon a person at least eighteen
(18) residing at the premises where the animal is regularly kept, or posting
notice on those premises if no person at least eighteen (18) years old residing
at the premises is present to accept service, shall constitute proper notice.
The notice shall include a description of the animal in question, the basis for
the declaration that the animal is vicious, and set forth any requirements that
the animal owner shall fulfill regarding the animal, either as noted in the
declaration or as otherwise required by this chapter. The notice shall also
provide that the declaration that the animal is vicious may be appealed by
filing a written notice of appeal with the city clerk within three (3) full
business days of the date the notice has been served. Upon the city clerk's
receipt of a timely notice of appeal, a hearing on the matter shall be
scheduled and conducted by the municipal hearing officer, as provided in
section
4-4-10 of this Code, except that appeals shall be directly to district court as
provided by applicable Iowa Rules.
C.   After the hearing, the municipal hearing officer may affirm, modify, or
reverse the decision of the animal control officer or designee, in whole or in
part. The order of the municipal hearing officer shall immediately be served
upon the individual or entity against whom issued in the same manner as the
notice of hearing.
D.   The animal shall remain seized and impounded during the pendency of any
appeal(s). The animal owner shall be responsible for the cost of the
impoundment if the animal is ultimately found to be vicious. The city shall be
responsible for the cost of the impoundment if the animal is ultimately found
to not be vicious. Any seized and impounded animal determined to not be vicious
shall be immediately returned to the owner.
E.   The Chief of Police or designee is authorized to take necessary measures
to enforce his or her own decision absent a timely appeal by the animal owner.
The Chief of Police or designee is similarly authorized to take necessary
measures to enforce any order of the municipal hearing officer absent any
further timely appeals by the animal owner. Failure to timely appeal or
petition at any stage of the proceedings shall constitute a waiver of any and
all rights to contest any decisions or orders of the Chief of Police or
designee, municipal hearing officer.
F.   Any failure by the animal owner to comply with the provisions of this
chapter or the decision or order of the Chief of Police or designee, the
municipal hearing officer issued pursuant hereto shall constitute a simple
misdemeanor, and is also punishable pursuant to section
1-4-1 of this code.
G.   Any animal found at large which displays vicious tendencies may be
impounded and processed as a vicious animal pursuant to the foregoing, unless
the animal is so vicious that it cannot safely be apprehended, in which case
the animal control officer or designee may immediately destroy it. If an animal
is so impounded, the animal control officer shall try to ascertain and contact
the owner of the animal, but if unable to ascertain the owner within seventy
two (72) hours of the animal's seizure, the animal control officer may destroy
the seized animal in a humane manner.
H.   All vicious animals shall be prohibited from visiting or staying on the
property of any of the following locations: 1) residences utilized as in-home
daycares for children, including any outdoor play areas; 2) properties utilized
for children's education, including schools, preschools, and daycare
facilities, plus associated outdoor play areas; 3) city parks and greenways,
including, but not limited to, playgrounds, recreational trails, and dog parks.
(Ord. 2001, 9-3-2013; amd. Ord. 2432, 8-17-2020)
5-3-9: RUNNING AT LARGE PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any animal, including, but not limited to, cats, dogs,
cattle, horses, swine, sheep, fowl or any animal defined as dangerous or
vicious by this chapter to run at large within the corporate limits of the
City. The owner shall be held responsible and subject to penalty. Community
cats shall be exempt from the provisions of this chapter. (1985 Code §3-2.03;
amd. Ord. 2532, 7-18-2022)
5-3-10: UNLAWFUL TO CAUSE HARM OR INJURY:
It shall be unlawful for any dog, cat, or any animal to attack persons, birds,
fowl, other domestic animals, or to destroy property other than the property of
the owner of said animal. It shall be unlawful for the owner of a dog, cat or
any animal to permit such dog, cat or other animal to attack persons or
domestic animals, or to place any person in reasonable fear of attack or
injury. (1985 Code §3-2.04)
5-3-11: REPORTING OF BITE CASES:
It shall be the duty of every person having knowledge of a dog or cat bite case
to report such information to the Chief of Police. It shall also be the duty of
every physician or other practitioner to report to the Chief of Police or his
lawful agent, the names and addresses of persons treated for bites inflicted by
animals, together with such other information as will be helpful in rabies
control. (1985 Code §3-2.11)
5-3-12: RESPONSIBILITIES OF VETERINARIANS:
It shall be the duty of every licensed veterinarian to report to the Chief of
Police or his lawful agent, his diagnosis of any animal observed by him where
suspicion of rabies is evident. (1985 Code §3-2.12)
5-3-13: QUARANTINE FOR A MINIMUM PERIOD OF TEN DAYS:
A.   It shall be the duty of the Chief of Police or designee, to order the
owner of any animal which has bitten or scratched a person or another animal,
or any animal suspected of being infected with rabies, to confine such animal
for a period of ten (10) days at the Municipal animal pound, a veterinary
clinic or a registered kennel. The Chief of Police or designee may allow a dog
or cat which has bitten or scratched a person or another animal while on the
owner's property and which is either probably under six (6) months of age or is
properly licensed and has a current certificate of inoculation for rabies, to
remain in quarantine for that period on the property of the owner so long as
the dog or cat is there confined and out of contact with members of the public
or other animals during the quarantine period. Such home quarantine shall not
be allowed where there is a reasonable belief that the animal's condition
requires observation at a veterinary clinic or where the animal does not remain
in quarantine in the manner prescribed by the Chief of Police or designee.
B.   The owner of animals confined or quarantined as stated herein shall pay
all impoundment and confinement costs, together with veterinary charges and
tests involved. (Ord. 2199, 2-21-2017)
5-3-14: APPREHENSION AND IMPOUNDMENT:
A.   It shall be the duty of the Chief of Police or the duly appointed animal
control officer of the City, or their lawful agents, to cause to be taken up
and impounded any dog, cat or any other animal found to be at large within the
City contrary to the provisions of section
5-3-9 of this chapter.
B.   When a dog, cat or other animal has bitten a person or suspected to have
bitten a person and the owner of same refuses to comply with the required
confinement as provided by law, such dog, cat or other animal shall be
apprehended by police authorities or the animal control officer, and confined
as soon as possible under the care of a licensed veterinarian, and the owner
shall pay all costs involved with said confinement.
C.   Notice shall be given the owners, if known, of all animals apprehended and
impounded by the City. The police authorities or animal control officer shall
send notice in not less than forty eight (48) hours to the owner. All dogs and
cats impounded without a current license, collar or similar identification
shall be kept for not less than four (4) days after being impounded unless
redeemed by the owner in accordance with this chapter. Dogs and cats with
identification attached thereto shall be kept not less than seven (7) days
after being impounded unless sooner redeemed by the owner in accordance with
this chapter. All animals that have been impounded and not claimed within the
period herein stated may be humanely destroyed or otherwise disposed of in
accordance with law.
D.   An owner may redeem an animal by having it immediately vaccinated, if
deemed necessary by the City, and by paying the costs of impoundment and any
license fees and penalties due. The animal control officer has the authority to
release the animal to the owner temporarily for vaccination purposes provided
said owner returns immediately and shows evidence of immunization. (1985 Code
§3-2.14)
5-3-15: IMPOUNDMENT, PICK UP, AND DISPOSAL FEES:
The owner of any dog, cat or other animal shall pay impoundment, pick up, and
disposal fees to the City or designee. The amounts of the fees shall be
established by resolution approved by the City Council. (Ord. 2204, 3-6-2017)
5-3-16: OWNER OR PERSON IN CHARGE OF ANIMAL TO CLEAN UP DROPPINGS:
It shall be unlawful for any owner or person in charge of a dog, cat, horse or
other animal to fail to clean up and/or remove as soon as possible any
excrement or droppings deposited by said dog, cat, horse, or other animal on
any real estate whether privately or publicly owned. This shall apply equally
to the owner's property, however an exception shall be granted to farm property
or large tracts of land used as riding stables. (1985 Code §3-2.07)
5-3-17: OWNER OR PERSON IN CHARGE OF ANIMALS TO KEEP PLACE IN SANITARY
CONDITION:
It shall be unlawful for the owner or person in charge of any dog, cat, horse,
or other animal to fail to keep the premises where the animal is kept in a
clean and sanitary condition at all times. (1985 Code §3-2.08)
5-3-18: KEEPING OF CERTAIN ANIMALS PROHIBITED:
A.   Outside the Dwelling. It shall be unlawful for an owner to harbor, house
or confine an animal, except a cat, dog or aquatic animal, outside the owner’s
dwelling, including but not limited to allowing an animal to defecate, roam, or
exercise outside, unless otherwise allowed by this Code or except as otherwise
required by law.
B.   Agricultural Animals Prohibited. No person shall harbor, house or confine
any agricultural production animal, commercial, agricultural production animal,
personal, or any animal as defined by the Code of Iowa, Sec. 717.1, except as
otherwise allowed as a Homesteader Farm defined and regulated in Title 9 or
except as otherwise required by law. (Ord. 2454, 12-7-2020; amd. Ord. 2621,8-5-
2024)
5-3-19: CITY MAY ESTABLISH AND MAINTAIN ANIMAL POUND; DUTIES OF POUND
SUPERVISOR:
The City may establish and maintain a Municipal small animal pound or shelter
to be conducted and operated by the City.
A.   It shall be the duty of the animal control officer appointed by the City
to supervise and control such pound or shelter; to cause same to be kept in a
sanitary condition and free from offensive odors, and to provide for adequate
wholesome food for animals impounded therein, and to provide careful and humane
treatment toward such animals, and to isolate known diseased or dangerous
animals.
B.   The animal control officer shall provide for humane destruction of animals
when necessary or as provided by this chapter.
C.   The animal control officer may use reasonable effort in the placement of
unclaimed animals to the custody of responsible persons. The new owner must
have the animal vaccinated and secure a current license. The City takes no
responsibility nor makes any warranties or assumes any liability for the
condition of the animal adopted.
D.   The City may, in lieu of or in addition to the establishment and
maintenance of a Municipal small animal pound, contract with any other
governmental body, or an incorporated society or association for the prevention
of cruelty to animals, for service.
E.   Established animal pound or shelter facilities shall be allowed to exceed
the maximum fence height noted for the zoning district upon a showing it is
necessary to protect public safety. Fences for animal shelter enclosures may be
allowed up to a maximum height of nine feet (9') provided the fence or wall is
no less than 80% transparent above a height of six feet (6'). (1985 Code §3-
2.13; amd. Ord. 2484, 7-19-2021)
5-3-20: COMMUNITY CATS:
A community cat shall be returned to the area where it was captured unless said
cat is sick and/or injured or unless the property owner has requested that said
cat be removed from the property and the Public Services Director or their
designee has declared it a nuisance.
A.   Nuisance. Community cats that create a nuisance, as determined by the
Public Services Director or their designee, shall be captured and shall not be
eligible for continuation in the Trap-Neuter-Return program.
B.   Prohibition on Feeding. Feeding of community cats shall be prohibited
within two hundred (200) feet of City property or school district property.
C.   Liability. The City shall have no liability pertaining to a community cat
or its disposition. (Ord. 2532, 7-17-2022)
5-3-21: PROCLAMATION:
The Mayor or the Council, may cause to quarantine all domestic animals if
deemed urgent and necessary for the immediate preservation and the public
peace, health and safety of property or individuals, by resolution or
proclamation according to law. (1985 Code §3-2.17)
5-3-22: VIOLATIONS:
A.   The owner of a dog, cat or other animal, shall be subject to penalty
herein provided if the said animal:
1.   Runs at large contrary to the provisions of section 5-3-9 of this chapter.
2.   Causes annoyance or disturbances to any person by frequent and habitual
barking, howling, yelping, hissing, meowing or fighting.
3.   Defecates on property other than that of the owner.
4.   Defaces, scratches or mars any personal property other than that of the
owner of said animal.
5.   Trespasses upon any property where food or drink is sold, unless provided
for otherwise under statute.
6.   Violates any provision of this chapter or State law applicable.
B.   No person shall aid or cause any animal, whether owned by such person or
not, to escape confinement or impoundment, whether such confinement or
impoundment be upon such person’s property or that of another, by opening any
gate, door or window, by making an opening in any fence, enclosure or
structure, or by unleashing such animal.
C.   It shall be the duty of every person owning or having the custody or
control of an animal to physically restrain the animal within an enclosure or
upon a leash when such animal is left unattended outside or is not at heel. The
animal must be restrained so as to prevent the animal from leaving the premises
of its owner or from coming in contact with public right-of-way or the property
of another. Failure to restrain an animal pursuant to the foregoing shall
constitute a misdemeanor.
D.   It shall be prohibited for any person in any manner to interfere with any
employee or designated representative of the City, so as to hinder, delay or
prevent his executing his duties in relation to the matters and things
contained in this chapter.
E.   It is unlawful for any person owning, controlling or caring for any animal
to fail to keep in a clean and sanitary condition the premises and any pen,
kennel, shelter, house or person’s dwelling or other structure where the animal
is at any time kept. At least once every twenty four (24) hours or more often
if odors or health problems arise, such person shall pick up any and all feces
so as to prevent its accumulation and same shall be properly disposed of. Feces
shall be held in watertight and flytight containers pending disposal and shall
be disposed of at least once weekly. The animal and place where the animal is
maintained shall also be kept free of obnoxious odors and shall be maintained
so as not to attract or permit the harborage or breeding of flies and other
insects or rodents or other vermin. All animal food and water shall be stored
and placed for the animal’s consumption in such a manner so that it will not
become food for rodents and other vermin.
F.   It is unlawful for any owner or other person to abandon, turn loose or
leave any animal within the corporate limits of the City or so that the animal
may find its way into the corporate limits of the City, or to abandon or leave
any animal upon or in any premises unattended for a period in excess of three
(3) days. An individual returning a community cat to its original location
while conducting Trap-Neuter-Return is not deemed to have abandoned the cat.
(1985 Code §3-2.05; amd. Ord. 2532, 7-17-2022)
5-3-23: PENALTIES:
Violations of this chapter are simple misdemeanors and may also be punishable
as Municipal infractions pursuant to title 1, chapter 4 of this Code. Police
officers, animal control officers, and the Police Chief’s designees shall have
the authority to issue citations for violations of this chapter, and shall have
the discretion to enforce this chapter as either a simple misdemeanor or
municipal infraction. Multiple violations of this chapter may be considered by
the City for purposes of approving licenses or for any other requirements that
are subject to approval by the City. For violations of subsection
5-3-20A of this chapter (violations), police officers, animal control officers,
and designees shall be authorized to issue citation-complaints. A one hundred
dollar ($100.00) civil penalty shall be imposed for a first offense, a one
hundred fifty dollar ($150.00) civil penalty shall be imposed for a second
offense, and a three hundred dollar ($300.00) civil penalty shall be imposed
for a third or subsequent offense where a citation complaint has been issued.
(Ord. 1978, 3-4-2013; amd. Ord. 2653, 3-24-2025)
ARTICLE A. DOGS AND CATS
SECTION:
5-3A-1: Annual License Required
5-3A-2: Applications
5-3A-3: License Fee
5-3A-4: Delinquency; Late Fee Penalty
5-3A-5: Issuance Of License; Evidence Of Vaccination
5-3A-6: Submission Of Rabies Vaccination Certificates By Veterinarians
5-3A-7: Transfer Or Change Of Ownership
5-3A-8: Duration Of License
5-3A-9: Exceptions To License Requirements
5-3A-10: License Tag; Use Of Tag
5-3A-11: Tag Not Transferable
5-3A-12: Duplicate Tag
5-3A-13: Vaccination Of Dogs And Cats
5-3A-14: Confinement Of Female Dogs And Cats In Heat
5-3A-15: Limited Number Of Animals Allowed
5-3A-16: Penalties
5-3A-1: ANNUAL LICENSE REQUIRED:
The owner of all dogs and cats six (6) months of age or older, shall annually
obtain a license as hereinafter provided. It shall be unlawful for any owner to
have a dog or cat within the city without obtaining a license as required
herein. (Ord. 1943, 1-9-2012)
5-3A-2: APPLICATIONS:
The owner of a dog or cat, for which a license is required, shall on or before
April 30 of each year apply to the city clerk or designee for a license for
each dog or cat owned. Applications may be made at any time immediately
following the possession of the dog or cat, or at such time said dog or cat has
reached the age of six (6) months. Applications for licenses shall state the
breed, sex, age, color, markings, and name, if any, of the dog or cat, and the
name, address, and telephone number of the owner. A certificate from a licensed
veterinarian must accompany all applications claiming an animal has been spayed
or neutered.
Applications to license vicious animals must include, in addition to other
required information, presentation by the applicant to the city clerk or
designee of a certificate of insurance issued by an insurance company licensed
to do business in the state of Iowa, providing personal liability insurance
coverage as in a homeowner's policy, with a minimum liability amount of one
hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) for the injury or death of any person,
for damage to property of others, and for acts of negligence by the owner or
his or her agents, in the keeping or owning of such vicious animals. The
certificate of insurance shall require notice to the city if the underlying
policy of insurance is canceled for any reason. In lieu of such a certificate,
a copy of a current homeowner's policy designating these requirements shall be
sufficient proof of insurance for purposes of this section. If a certificate of
insurance or policy is not immediately available upon the date the animal has
been determined to be vicious, the applicant has thirty (30) calendar days to
obtain this insurance coverage. If after thirty (30) calendar days a
certificate of insurance or a policy has not been submitted by the applicant to
the city clerk or designee, the vicious animal shall be deemed unlicensed. The
animal control officer or designee may then seize and impound the unlicensed
vicious animal. Upon such a seizure and impoundment, the animal control officer
or designee shall have sole discretion to determine the disposition of the
unlicensed vicious animal. (Ord. 2002, 9-3-2013)
5-3A-3: LICENSE FEE:
The amount of the annual license fee for dogs and cats shall be established by
resolution approved by the city council, subject to the following provisions:
A.   The owner of a certified service animal who applies for a dog or cat
license may qualify for a waiver of the annual license fee.
B.   If the owner of a dog or cat acquires the animal less than six (6) months
prior to the expiration date of the license for that period, the license fee
shall be reduced fifty percent (50%) and the full regular license fee as herein
provided shall henceforth be in effect the following calendar year. (Ord. 2120,
10-19-2015)
5-3A-4: DELINQUENCY; LATE FEE PENALTY:
All license fees for dogs and cats become delinquent on May 1 of the year in
which they are due and payable, and a late fee penalty shall be added to each
unpaid license on and after said date. The late fee penalty schedule shall be
established by resolution approved by the city council. (Ord. 1943, 1-9-2012)
5-3A-5: ISSUANCE OF LICENSE; EVIDENCE OF VACCINATION:
The city clerk or designee shall issue dog and cat licenses when properly
applied for and shall require evidence of rabies vaccination as herein
provided. The rabies vaccination required shall be an injection of antirabies
vaccine approved by the state department of agriculture and land stewardship,
and the frequency of revaccination necessary for approved vaccinations shall be
established by that state department. The vaccine shall be administered by a
licensed veterinarian and shall be given as approved by the state department of
agriculture and land stewardship. The veterinarian shall issue a tag with the
certificate of vaccination, and the tag shall at all times be attached to the
collar of the dog or cat. (Ord. 2030, 5-5-2014)
5-3A-6: SUBMISSION OF RABIES VACCINATION CERTIFICATES BY VETERINARIANS:
Each veterinarian within the city limits shall forward to the city clerk or
designee by the tenth day of each month a copy of each certificate of rabies
vaccination issued by the veterinarian during the preceding month. Each
certificate of vaccination shall be typed or printed so as to be clearly
legible. (Ord. 1943, 1-9-2012)
5-3A-7: TRANSFER OR CHANGE OF OWNERSHIP:
When the permanent ownership of a dog or cat is transferred and the animal
remains within the city limits, the new owner shall be required to apply for a
new license as herein provided. The new owner shall have thirty (30) calendar
days in which to obtain the new license. (Ord. 1943, 1-9-2012)
5-3A-8: DURATION OF LICENSE:
All licenses shall expire on April 30 of the year following the date of
issuance. (Ord. 1943, 1-9-2012)
5-3A-9: EXCEPTIONS TO LICENSE REQUIREMENTS:
The requirements for licensing dogs and cats shall not apply in the following
circumstances:
A.   The animal is in transit through the city only.
B.   The first thirty (30) calendar days of residency in the city by the owner,
or the first thirty (30) calendar days the owner has owned the animal.
C.   The animal has been temporarily housed in a veterinary hospital, an animal
grooming shop, an established licensed kennel, or an accredited institution for
research. (Ord. 1943, 1-9-2012)
5-3A-10: LICENSE TAG; USE OF TAG:
The city clerk or designee shall, upon receipt of application, payment of
license fee, proof of rabies vaccination and other necessary required evidence,
deliver or mail to the applicant a license which shall be in the form of a
metal, permanent tag. The license tag shall be attached by the owner to the
dog's or cat's collar and shall be kept on the dog or cat for which the license
was issued at all times. (Ord. 1943, 1-9-2012)
5-3A-11: TAG NOT TRANSFERABLE:
A license tag issued for one animal shall not be transferable to another
animal. A license issued by another city partnering with this city in a
consolidated animal licensing agreement shall be honored when a resident moves
from that city to this city with the same dog or cat. (Ord. 1943, 1-9-2012)
5-3A-12: DUPLICATE TAG:
Upon the filing of a written statement that the license tag has been lost or
destroyed, the owner may obtain another tag upon payment of the required
license replacement fee, which shall be established by resolution approved by
the city council. (Ord. 1943, 1-9-2012)
5-3A-13: VACCINATION OF DOGS AND CATS:
Every owner of a dog or cat which is six (6) months of age or over shall obtain
a rabies vaccination for the animal. It is unlawful for any owner to have a dog
or cat within the city which is six (6) months of age or over, which has not
been vaccinated against rabies. (Ord. 1943, 1-9-2012)
5-3A-14: CONFINEMENT OF FEMALE DOGS AND CATS IN HEAT:
The owner of any female dog or cat in heat shall confine said female dog or cat
in a building which is completely enclosed, or housed in a veterinary hospital
or registered kennel, or within the owner's yard enclosed by a fence or other
structure having a height of at least forty two inches (42"). Nothing in this
provision, however, shall be construed as prohibiting any competent and
responsible person from walking said dog or cat with a leash, cord, chain, or
other similar restraint not more than ten feet (10') in length, or from
transporting such a dog or cat within a motor vehicle. (Ord. 1943, 1-9-2012)
5-3A-15: LIMITED NUMBER OF ANIMALS ALLOWED:
Except as otherwise allowed by Code, including but not limited to allowances as
provided in Title 9, it shall be unlawful for an owner to harbor, house or
confine more than four (4) cats or four (4) dogs, or a combination of four (4)
such animals, over the age of six (6) months. Additionally, no more than a
total of eight (8) animals, inclusive of the limitation on cats and dogs, shall
be allowed, unless such animal is otherwise prohibited by this Code. This
limitation shall not apply to limit the total number of aquatic or amphibious
animals. (Ord. 1943, 1-9-2012; amd. Ord. 2454, 12-7-2020; Ord. 2621, 8-5-2024)
5-3A-16: PENALTIES:
Violations of this article are simple misdemeanors and may also be punishable
as municipal infractions. Police officers, animal control officers, code
enforcement officers and the police chief's designees shall have the authority
to issue citations for violations of this article, and shall have the
discretion to enforce this article as either a simple misdemeanor or municipal
infraction. (Ord. 1943, 1-9-2012)
CHAPTER 4
PARADES
SECTION:
5-4-1: Parades Regulated
5-4-1: PARADES REGULATED:
No person shall conduct or cause any parade on any street except as provided
herein:
A.   Parade Defined: "Parade" shall mean any march or procession of persons or
vehicles organized for marching or moving on the streets in an organized
fashion or manner or any march or procession of persons or vehicles represented
or advertised generally to the public as a parade. (1985 Code §2.1-1.0110; amd.
1993 Code)
B.   Permit Required: No parade shall be conducted without first obtaining a
written permit from the city clerk. Such permit shall state the time and date
for the parade to be held and the streets or general route therefor. Such
written permit granted to the person organizing or sponsoring the parade shall
be permission for all participants therein to parade when such participants
have been invited by the permittee to participate therein. No fee shall be
required for such permit. (1985 Code §2.1-1.0110; amd. 1993 Code; Ord. 1878, 8-
23-2010, eff. 9-17-2010)
C.   Parade Not A Street Obstruction: Any parade for which a permit shall have
been issued as herein required and the persons lawfully participating therein
shall not be deemed an obstruction of the streets notwithstanding the
provisions of any other ordinance to the contrary.
D.   Control By Police And Firemen: Persons participating in any parade shall
at all times be subject to the lawful orders and directions in the performance
of their duties of the members of the police and fire departments. (1985 Code
§2.1-1.0110; amd. 1993 Code)
TITLE 6
MOTOR VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
Title And Definitions   1
Administration And Enforcement   2
General Provisions   3
Traffic Control Devices   4
Rules Of The Road   5
General Provisions   5A
Speed Regulations   5B
Driving On Right Side; Overtaking And Passing   5C
Turning And Starting; Signals   5D
Right Of Way   5E
Special Stops, Railroads And Highways   5F
Miscellaneous Rules   5G
Parking Regulations   6
Accidents   7
Pedestrians   8
Traffic Schedules   9
Snowmobiles And All-Terrain Vehicles   10
Bicycles   11
Equipment   12
Panhandling   13
CHAPTER 1
TITLE AND DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
6-1-1: Title
6-1-2: Definitions
6-1-1: TITLE:
This Title may be known and cited as the WEST DES MOINES TRAFFIC CODE. (1985
Code §2.1-2.0101)
6-1-2: DEFINITIONS:
Where words and phrases used in this Title are defined by State law, such
definitions shall apply to their use in this Title and are adopted by
reference. Those definitions so adopted that need further definition or are
reiterated, and other words and phrases used herein, shall have the following
meanings:
BUSINESS DISTRICT: The territory contiguous to and including a highway when
fifty percent (50%) or more of the frontage thereon for a distance of three
hundred feet (300') or more is occupied by buildings in use for business.
CONTROLLED-ACCESS FACILITY: The highways or streets designated by Section
7-1A-1 of the City Code.
PARK or PARKING: The standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, otherwise
than temporarily for the purpose of and while engaged in loading or unloading
merchandise
PEACE OFFICER: Every officer authorized to direct or regulate traffic or to
make arrests for violations of traffic regulations.
RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT: The territory contiguous to and including a highway not
comprising a business, suburban or school district, where forty percent (40%)
or more of the frontage on such a highway for a distance of three hundred feet
(300') or more is occupied by dwellings or by dwellings and buildings in use
for business.
SCHOOL DISTRICT: The territory contiguous to and including a highway for a
distance of two hundred feet (200') in either direction from a school house.
STAND or STANDING: The halting of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, otherwise
than for the purpose of and while actually engaged in receiving or discharging
passengers.
STOP: When required, the complete cessation of movement.
STOP or STOPPING: When prohibited, any halting of a vehicle, even momentarily,
whether occupied or not, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other
traffic or in compliance with the directions of a peace officer or traffic-
control sign or signal.
SUBURBAN DISTRICT: All other parts of the City not included in the business,
school or residence districts.
TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICE: All signs, signals, markings and devices not
inconsistent with this Title, lawfully placed or erected for the purpose of
regulating, warning or guiding traffic.
VEHICLE: Any vehicle in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be
transported or drawn upon a public highway, street or alley. (1985 Code §2.1-
2.0102; amd. Ord. 2379, 8-19-2019)
CHAPTER 2
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
SECTION:
6-2-1: Administration And Enforcement
6-2-2: Reports And Records
6-2-3: Violations; Enforcement Procedures
6-2-3-1: Violation Of Regulations
6-2-3-2: Arrest Or Citation
6-2-3-3: Parking Violations; Vehicle Unattended
6-2-3-4: Presumption In Reference To Illegal Parking
6-2-3-5: Simple Notice Of Fine
6-2-3-6: Impounding Vehicles
6-2-3-7: Notice To Appear; Promise To Appear
6-2-3-8: Required Appearance
6-2-3-9: Violation Of Promise To Appear
6-2-3-10: Procedure Not Exclusive
6-2-1: ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT:
Provisions of this title and the Iowa law relating to motor vehicles and law of
the road shall be enforced by officers of the police department. (1985 Code
§2.1-2.0103)
6-2-2: REPORTS AND RECORDS:
A.   Traffic Files Maintained: The police chief shall maintain a suitable
record of all traffic accidents, warnings, arrests, convictions and complaints
reported for each driver during the most recent three (3) year period. Such
reports shall be filed alphabetically under the name of the driver concerned.
(1985 Code §2.1-2.0108)
B.   Annual Traffic Report: The police chief shall annually prepare a traffic
report which shall be filed with the mayor and council. Such report shall
contain information on the number of traffic accidents, the number of persons
killed and injured, the number and nature of violations and other pertinent
traffic data including plans and recommendations for future traffic safety
activities. (1985 Code §2.1-2.0112)
6-2-3: VIOLATIONS; ENFORCEMENT PROCEDURES:
6-2-3-1: VIOLATION OF REGULATIONS:
Any person who shall wilfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order of
a peace officer or direction of a fire department officer during a fire, or who
shall fail to abide by the provisions of this title shall be cited accordingly.
(1985 Code §2.1-2.0301; amd. 1993 Code)
6-2-3-2: ARREST OR CITATION:
Whenever a police officer has reasonable cause to believe that a person has
violated any provision of this title, such officer may:
A.   Immediate Arrest: Immediately arrest such person and take him before a
local magistrate, or
B.   Issue Citation: Without arresting the person, prepare in quintuplicate a
uniformed traffic citation and complaint as adopted by the Iowa commissioner of
public safety and deliver the original and a copy to the court where the
defendant is to appear, two (2) copies to the defendant and retain the fifth
copy for the records of the city, or
C.   Notice To Appear; Promise To Appear: Proceed as provided in section
 6-2-3-7 of this chapter, or
D.   Simple Notice Of Fine:
1.   In the case of violations of chapter 6 of this title, without arresting
the person, prepare in triplicate a simple notice of fine as provided herein;
deliver one copy thereof to the person so charged, or attach it to the vehicle
parked in violation of this title as provided in section
6-2-3-3 of this chapter, as a notice of violation and promise to appear; the
original shall be sworn to by the person authorized to issue the citation on
behalf of the city as a complaint and filed in the office of the city's finance
department.
2.   The simple notice of fine shall contain the following statement:
Failure to pay parking fines owed by you can be grounds for refusing to renew
your motor vehicle's registration.
(Ord. 1984, 4-29-2013)
6-2-3-3: PARKING VIOLATIONS; VEHICLE UNATTENDED:
When a vehicle is parked in violation of this title and the driver is not
present, the simple notice of fine or citation as hereinbefore provided shall
be attached to the vehicle in a conspicuous place. (1985 Code §2.1-2.1102)
6-2-3-4: PRESUMPTION IN REFERENCE TO ILLEGAL PARKING:
In any proceeding charging a standing or parking violation, a prima facie
presumption that the registered owner was the person who parked or placed such
vehicle at the point where and for the time during which such violation
occurred, shall be raised by proof that:
A.   Described Vehicle: The particular vehicle described in the information was
parked in violation of this title, and
B.   Registered Owner: The defendant named in the information was the
registered owner at the time in question. (1985 Code §2.1-2.1103)
6-2-3-5: SIMPLE NOTICE OF FINE:
A.   The city's finance department shall assume the duties and responsibilities
connected with the collection of all fines for violations of chapter 6 of this
title which are charged pursuant to a simple notice of fine under subsection D
of this section and are admitted and collected pursuant to this section and for
the administration and processing of those violations which are so charged,
whether or not they are admitted and collected. Any arrest warrants issued
pursuant to a violation of standing and parking of a vehicle can be grounds for
refusing to renew the violator's motor vehicle registration.
B.   The city shall provide sets of triplicate simple notices of fines for
issuance pursuant to this chapter, each identified by separate serial numbers
on each copy of each notice.
C.   Any person notified or summoned by a simple notice of fine provided for in
this chapter who desires to enter a plea of guilty to any charge of violating
the parking regulations of this title as stated on the notice, may pay the
penalty provided on the notice to the city's finance department.
D.   In the event that any person notified or summoned by a simple notice of
fine wishes to admit the violation and pay the penalty provided on the notice
on or before the date designated for such payment pursuant to such notice, the
city's finance department is hereby authorized and directed to receive the
amount of such fine on behalf of the city.
E.   The city's finance department shall retain the copy of the notice until
collection of the fine for an admitted violation. In the event that such fine
is not paid prior to or on the date designated in the notice, the city may take
any measures deemed necessary to attempt to collect the outstanding debt. (Ord.
1984, 4-29-2013)
6-2-3-6: IMPOUNDING VEHICLES:
A police officer is hereby authorized to remove, or cause to be removed, a
vehicle from a street, public alley, public or private parking lot, or highway
to the nearest garage or other place of safety or to a garage designated or
maintained by the city under the circumstances hereinafter enumerated:
A.   Disabled Vehicle: When a vehicle is upon a roadway and is so disabled as
to constitute an obstruction to traffic and the person or persons in charge of
the vehicle, are by reason of physical injury incapacitated to such an extent
as to be unable to provide for its custody or removal.
B.   Illegally Parked Vehicle: When any vehicle is left unattended upon a
street and is so illegally parked as to constitute a definite hazard or
obstruction to the normal movement of traffic, or when any vehicle is left
parked continuously on a city lot beyond the twenty four (24) hour limit
imposed by section
6-9-6-3 of this title.
C.   Snow Removal: When any vehicle is left parked upon a street during a
snowstorm or immediately following a snowstorm, when it is deemed advisable
that snow removal apparatus must be used on said street.
D.   Arrest: When the driver or owner of any vehicle is placed under custody of
the police officials and it is determined by the arresting officer that the
vehicle should be impounded for safekeeping.
E.   Hazard: When any vehicle is parked upon a street and is so parked as to
constitute a definite hazard or obstruction to the movement of traffic or to
maintenance of the street in that area.
F.   Parked Over Forty Eight Hour Period: When any vehicle is left parked upon
a street for a continuous period of forty eight (48) hours or more. A written
notice shall first be posted upon the parked vehicle by the city's police
department. The notice shall provide the date and time it was posted upon the
vehicle, and shall notify the vehicle driver or owner that he or she has forty
eight (48) hours from the time the notice was posted to move the vehicle from
its location.
G.   Private Property: When any vehicle is illegally parked as defined in
sections
6-6-3 and
6-6-4 of this title and proper complaint has been made.
H.   Redemption Of Impounded Vehicle: After the impounding of any vehicle under
the provisions of this section, the owner thereof may appear and claim the same
upon payment of an impoundment fee of five dollars ($5.00) per day, if stored
in the city garage or designated city location, and the payment of the cost of
towing or upon payment of the towing and storage charges if stored in a
privately owned public garage or parking, whereupon such vehicle shall be
released to the owner or his authorized representative. Redemption of
impoundment vehicles by the owner or his authorized representative must be
accomplished through the police department of the city. If after a period of
ten (10) days from the impoundment of the vehicle, the same has not been
reclaimed, then the vehicle will be considered an abandoned vehicle and the
provisions as set forth in section 321.89 of the code of Iowa regarding
disposition of abandoned motor vehicles shall be followed. (Ord. 1881, 9-7-
2010)
6-2-3-7: NOTICE TO APPEAR; PROMISE TO APPEAR:
A.   Whenever a peace officer has reasonable cause to believe that a person has
violated any provision of this chapter, such officer may, without arresting the
person, prepare a written citation to appear in court containing the name and
address of such person, the nature of the offense, the operator or chauffeur
license number, if any, the registration number, if any, of his or her vehicle,
the time when and place where such person shall appear in court and the penalty
for nonappearance.
B.   If the officer prepares a citation as provided in this section, the
alleged offender shall be requested to sign it. If the person signs, the person
may be released without arrest. In case a citation is issued, the signing shall
constitute a written promise to appear as stated in the citation. A copy of the
citation shall be presented to the person named therein. The police officer
issuing the citation shall cause to be filed a complaint in the court in which
the cited person is required to appear, as soon as practicable, charging the
crime stated in the citation.
C.   For preparing the summons for a violation of chapter 321 of the code of
Iowa or a violation of this chapter, there shall be charged to the person named
in the summons, upon conviction, a fee of two dollars ($2.00). The fee shall be
assessed as part of the costs and shall be paid into the general fund of the
county or the city as the case may be.
D.   The number of copies and the form of the citations and memorandums for
violations of chapter 321 of the code of Iowa or this chapter shall be as
prescribed by the commissioner of public safety with the concurrence of the
director.
E.   This section shall not apply to a traffic offense which must be charged
upon a uniform citation and complaint as provided in code of Iowa, section
805.6, and chapter 805 of the code of Iowa shall control such procedures. This
section shall not apply to violations of parking regulations charged upon a
simple notice of fine as provided in this code and in code of Iowa, sections
805.8 and 321.236, and this code shall control such procedures. (1985 Code
§2.1-2.1106; amd. 1993 Code)
6-2-3-8: REQUIRED APPEARANCE:
Any person receiving a simple notice of fine herein provided for in subsection
6-2-3-5D of this chapter or a uniform citation and complaint, or knowing that
one such notice or citation and complaint has been attached to any vehicle
owned or controlled by him, shall appear before the district court at the place
not later than the time and date specified in the notice. (1985 Code §2.1-
2.1107; amd. 1993 Code)
6-2-3-9: VIOLATION OF PROMISE TO APPEAR:
Any person who wilfully fails to appear in court as specified in a citation, a
uniform citation and complaint or a simple notice of fine, given as provided in
this chapter, is guilty of a simple misdemeanor, punishable in accordance with
the standard penalty provided in section
1-4-1 of this code, regardless of the disposition of the charge upon which he
was cited. Venue shall be in the county where the defendant was to appear or in
the county where he resides. An appearance in response to a citation for a
violation of this section may be either in person or by counsel. (1985 Code
§2.1-2.1108)
6-2-3-10: PROCEDURE NOT EXCLUSIVE:
The foregoing provisions of this chapter shall govern all peace officers in
making arrests without a warrant for violations of this chapter for offenses
committed in their presence, but the procedure prescribed herein shall not be
exclusive of any other method prescribed by law for the arrest and prosecution
of a person. (1985 Code §2.1-2.1109)
CHAPTER 3
GENERAL PROVISIONS
SECTION:
6-3-1: Power to Direct Traffic
6-3-2: Powers of Local Authorities
6-3-3: Obedience to Peace Officers
6-3-4: Public Officers Not Exempt
6-3-1: POWER TO DIRECT TRAFFIC:
A peace officer and any officer of the Fire Department, when at the scene of a
fire, are authorized to direct all traffic by voice, hand or signal in
conformance with traffic laws. In the event of an emergency traffic may be
directed as conditions require notwithstanding the provisions of the traffic
laws. (1985 Code §2.1-2.0104)
6-3-2:POWERS OF LOCAL AUTHORITIES:1. I.C. §321.236.1
Local authorities shall have no power to enact, enforce or maintain any
ordinance, rule or regulation in any way in conflict with, contrary to or
inconsistent with the provisions of Iowa Code, chapter 321, and no such
ordinance, rule or regulation of said local authorities heretofore or hereafter
enacted shall have any force or effect, however the provisions of Iowa Code,
chapter 321, shall not be deemed to prevent local authorities with respect to
streets and highways under their jurisdiction and within the reasonable
exercise of the police power from:
A.   Regulating the standing or parking of vehicles: parking meter, snow route
and overtime parking violations which are denied shall be charged and proceed
before a court the same as other traffic violations. Filing fees and court
costs shall be assessed as provided in Iowa Code, section 602.8106, subsection
1 and section 805.6, subsection 1, paragraph "a" for parking violation cases.
Parking violations which are admitted:
B.   Regulating traffic by means of police officers or traffic-control signals.
C.   Regulating or prohibiting processions or assemblages on the highways.
D.   Designating particular highways as one-way highways and requiring that all
vehicles thereon be moved in one specific direction.
E.   Regulating the speed of vehicles in public parks.
F.   Designating any highway as a through highway and requiring that all
vehicles stop or yield the right of way before entering or crossing the same or
designating any intersection as a stop intersection and requiring all vehicles
to stop at one or more entrances to such intersections.
G.   Licensing and regulating the operation of vehicles offered to the public
for hire and used principally in intracity operation.
H.   Restricting the use of highways as truck routes as authorized in Iowa
Code.
I.   Regulating or prohibiting the turning of vehicles at and between
intersections.
J.   Regulating the operation of bicycles and requiring the registration and
licensing of the same, including the requirement of a registration fee.
However, the regulations shall not conflict with the provisions of Iowa Code,
section 321.234.
K.   Establishing speed limits in public alleys and providing the penalty for
violation thereof.
L.   Designating highways or portions of highways as snow routes. When
conditions of snow or ice exist on the traffic surface of a designated snow
route, it is unlawful for the driver of a vehicle to impede or block traffic if
the driving wheels of the vehicle are not equipped with snow tires, tire chains
or a nonslip differential. "Snow tires" as used in this subsection means tires
designed for use when there are conditions of snow or ice on the highways, and
meeting the standards which shall be promulgated by rule of the Director of
Transportation. The standards promulgated by the Director shall require that
snow tires be so designed to provide adequate traction to maintain reasonable
movement of the motor vehicle on highways under snow conditions.
Any person charged with impeding or blocking traffic for lack of snow tires,
chains or nonslip differential shall have said charge dismissed upon a showing
to the court that the person's motor vehicle was equipped with a nonslip
differential. (1993 Code)
6-3-3: OBEDIENCE TO PEACE OFFICERS:1. I.C. §321.229.1
No person shall wilfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order or
direction of any peace officer invested by law with authority to direct,
control or regulate traffic. (1993 Code)
6-3-4: PUBLIC OFFICERS NOT EXEMPT:1. I.C. §321.230.1
The provisions of this Title applicable to the drivers of vehicles upon the
highways shall apply to the drivers of all vehicles owned or operated by the
United States, this State or any county, city, district or any other political
subdivision of the State, subject to such specific exceptions as are set forth
in this Title with reference to authorized emergency vehicles. (1993 Code)
CHAPTER 4
TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES
SECTION:
6-4-1: Installation
6-4-2: Crosswalks
6-4-3: Traffic Lanes
6-4-4: Standards
6-4-5: Compliance
6-4-6: Official Traffic Control Signals
6-4-7: Arrangement Of Lights On Official Traffic Control Signals
6-4-8: Unauthorized Signs, Signals Or Markings
6-4-9: Interference With Devices, Signs, Or Signals; Unlawful Possession;
Traffic Signal Preemption Devices
6-4-1: INSTALLATION:
The department of public works shall cause to be placed and maintained traffic
control devices when and as required under this title to make effective its
provisions and place and maintain emergency or temporary traffic control
devices for the duration of an emergency or temporary condition as traffic
conditions may require to regulate traffic under the traffic code of this city
or under state law or to guide or warn traffic. The city manager shall keep or
cause to be kept a record of all such traffic control devices. (1985 Code §2.1-
2.0201; amd. 1993 Code)
6-4-2: CROSSWALKS:
The department of public works is hereby authorized, subject to approval of the
council by resolution and by section
6-9-1 of this title, to designate and maintain crosswalks by appropriate
traffic control devices at intersections where due to traffic conditions there
is particular danger to pedestrians crossing the street or roadway, and at such
other places as traffic conditions require. (1985 Code §2.1-2.0202; amd. 1993
Code)
6-4-3: TRAFFIC LANES:
The department of public works is hereby authorized to mark lanes for traffic
on street pavements at such places as traffic conditions require consistent
with this title. Where such traffic lanes have been marked, it shall be
unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to fail or refuse to keep such vehicle
within the boundaries of any such lane except when lawfully passing another
vehicle or preparatory to making a lawful turning movement. (1985 Code §2.1-
2.0203; amd. 1993 Code)
6-4-4: STANDARDS:
Traffic control devices shall comply with standards established by the "Manual
Of Uniform Traffic Control Devices For Streets And Highways". (1985 Code §2.1-
2.0204)
6-4-5: COMPLIANCE1. IC §321.256.1:
No driver of a vehicle shall disobey the instructions of any official traffic
control device placed in accordance with the provisions of this title, unless
at the time otherwise directed by a peace officer subject to the exceptions
granted the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle. (1993 Code)
6-4-6: OFFICIAL TRAFFIC CONTROL SIGNALS:
A.   For the purposes of this section "stop at the official traffic control
signal" means stopping at the first opportunity at either the clearly marked
stop line or before entering the crosswalk or before entering the intersection.
B.   Official traffic control signals consisting of colored lights or colored
lighted arrows shall regulate vehicle and pedestrian traffic in the following
manner:
1.   A "steady circular red" light means vehicular traffic shall stop.
Vehicular traffic shall remain standing until a signal to proceed is shown or
vehicular traffic, unless prohibited by a sign, may cautiously enter the
intersection to make a right turn from the right lane of traffic or a left turn
from a one-way street to a one-way street from the left lane of traffic on a
one-way street onto the left most lane of traffic on a one-way street. Turns
made under this subsection shall be made in a manner that does not interfere
with other vehicular or pedestrian traffic lawfully using the intersection.
Pedestrian traffic facing a steady circular red light shall not enter the
roadway unless the pedestrian can safely cross the roadway without interfering
with any vehicular traffic.
2.   A "steady circular yellow" or "steady yellow arrow" light means vehicular
traffic is warned that the related green movement is being terminated and
vehicular traffic shall no longer proceed into the intersection and shall stop.
If the stop cannot be made in safety, a vehicle may be driven cautiously
through the intersection. Pedestrian traffic is warned that there is
insufficient time to cross the intersection and any pedestrian starting to
cross the roadway shall yield the right of way to all vehicles.
3.   A "steady circular green" light means vehicular traffic may proceed
straight, turn right or turn left through the intersection unless otherwise
specifically prohibited. Vehicular traffic shall yield the right of way to
other vehicular and pedestrian traffic lawfully within the intersection.
4.   A "steady green arrow" light shown alone or with another official traffic
control signal means vehicular traffic may cautiously enter the intersection
and proceed in the direction indicated by the arrow. Vehicular traffic shall
yield the right of way to other vehicles and pedestrians lawfully within the
intersection.
5.   A "flashing circular red" light means vehicular traffic shall stop and
after stopping may proceed cautiously through the intersection yielding to all
vehicles not required to stop or yield which are within the intersection or
approaching so closely as to constitute a hazard, but then may proceed.
6.   A "flashing yellow" light means vehicular traffic shall proceed through
the intersection or past such signal with caution.
7.   A "flashing yellow arrow" light shown alone or with another official
traffic control signal means vehicular traffic may cautiously enter the
intersection and proceed only in the direction indicated by the arrow.
Vehicular traffic shall yield the right of way to other vehicles and
pedestrians lawfully within the intersection and any vehicle on the opposing
approach which is approaching so closely as to constitute an immediate hazard
during the time the driver is moving within the intersection.
8.   A "don't walk" or "steady upraised hand" light is a pedestrian signal
which means that pedestrian traffic facing the illuminated pedestrian signal
shall not start to cross the roadway in the direction of the pedestrian signal,
and pedestrian traffic in the crossing shall proceed to a safety zone.
9.   A "flashing upraised hand" or "upraised hand with countdown" light is a
pedestrian signal which means that pedestrian traffic facing the illuminated
pedestrian signal shall not start to cross the roadway in the direction of the
pedestrian signal, and pedestrian traffic in the crossing shall proceed to a
safety zone. The "upraised hand with countdown" light is a pedestrian signal
that also provides the time remaining for the pedestrian to complete the
crossing.
10.   A "walk" or "walking person" light is a pedestrian signal which means
that pedestrian traffic facing the illuminated pedestrian signal may proceed to
cross the roadway in the direction of the pedestrian signal and shall be given
the right of way by drivers of all vehicles. (Ord. 2100, 6-29-2015)
6-4-7: ARRANGEMENT OF LIGHTS ON OFFICIAL TRAFFIC CONTROL SIGNALS:
A.   Colored lights placed on a vertical official traffic control signal face
shall be arranged from the top to the bottom in the following order when used:
circular red, steady and/or flashing left turn red arrow, steady and/or
flashing right turn red arrow, circular yellow, circular green, straight
through green arrow, steady left turn yellow arrow, flashing left turn yellow
arrow, left turn green arrow, steady right turn yellow arrow, flashing right
turn yellow arrow, and right turn green arrow.
B.   Colored lights placed on a horizontal official traffic control signal face
shall be arranged from the left to the right in the following order when used:
circular red, steady and/or flashing left turn red arrow, steady and/or
flashing right turn red arrow, circular yellow, steady left turn yellow arrow,
flashing left turn yellow arrow, left turn green arrow, circular green,
straight through green arrow, steady right turn yellow arrow, flashing right
turn yellow arrow, and right turn green arrow. (Ord. 2100, 6-29-2015)
6-4-8: UNAUTHORIZED SIGNS, SIGNALS OR MARKINGS1. IC §321.259.1:
No person shall place, maintain or display upon or in view of any highway any
sign, signal, marking or device which purports to be or is an imitation of or
resembles an official parking sign, curb or other marking, traffic control
device or railroad sign or signal, or which attempts to direct the movement of
traffic, or which hides from view or interferes with the effectiveness of any
official traffic control device or any railroad sign or signal, if such sign,
signal, marking or device has not been authorized by the state and local
authorities with reference to streets and highways under their jurisdiction and
no person shall place or maintain nor shall any public authority permit upon
any highway any traffic sign or signal bearing thereon any commercial
advertising. This shall not be deemed to prohibit the erection upon private
property adjacent to highways of signs giving useful directional information of
a type that cannot be mistaken for official signs.
Every such prohibited sign, signal or marking is hereby declared to be a public
nuisance and the authority having jurisdiction over the highway is hereby
empowered to remove the same or cause it to be removed without notice. (1993
Code)
6-4-9: INTERFERENCE WITH DEVICES, SIGNS, OR SIGNALS; UNLAWFUL POSSESSION;
TRAFFIC SIGNAL PREEMPTION DEVICES:
Iowa Code (2015) section 321.260 is adopted by reference. (Ord. 2100, 6-29-
2015)
CHAPTER 5
RULES OF THE ROAD
ARTICLE A. GENERAL PROVISIONS
SECTION:
6-5A-1: Sidewalks Or Highways, Driving On Or Across
6-5A-2: Stop When Traffic Is Obstructed
6-5A-3: School Buses
6-5A-4: Funeral Processions
6-5A-5: Careless Driving
6-5A-6: Clinging To Vehicles
6-5A-7: Authorized Emergency Vehicles
6-5A-8: Bicycles, Animals Or Animal Drawn Vehicles
6-5A-9: All-Terrain Vehicles; Bicycle Safety Flag Required
6-5A-10: Golf Cart Operation On City Streets
6-5A-11: Reckless Driving
6-5A-12: Drag Racing
6-5A-1: SIDEWALKS OR HIGHWAYS, DRIVING ON OR ACROSS:
A.   Vehicles Prohibited On Sidewalks: The driver of a motor vehicle shall not
drive upon or within any sidewalk area except at a driveway, or in the process
of clearing accumulations of ice or snow. (1985 Code §2.1-2.0303; amd. 1993
Code)
B.   Stop Before Crossing Sidewalk Or Highway1. IC §321.353.1:
1.   The driver of a vehicle emerging from a private roadway, alley, driveway
or building shall stop such vehicle immediately prior to driving onto the
sidewalk area and thereafter the driver shall proceed into the sidewalk area
only when the driver can do so without danger to pedestrian traffic and the
driver shall yield the right of way to any vehicular traffic on the street into
which the driver's vehicle is entering.
2.   The driver of a vehicle about to enter or cross a highway from a private
road or driveway shall stop such vehicle immediately prior to driving on said
highway and shall yield the right of way to all vehicles approaching on said
highway. (1993 Code)
6-5A-2: STOP WHEN TRAFFIC IS OBSTRUCTED:
Notwithstanding any traffic control signal indication to proceed, no driver
shall enter an intersection or a marked crosswalk unless there is sufficient
space on the other side of the intersection or crosswalk to accommodate the
vehicle that he is operating. (1985 Code §2.1-2.0607)
6-5A-3: SCHOOL BUSES:
Iowa Code (2015) section 321.372 is adopted by reference. (Ord. 2100, 6-29-
2015)
6-5A-4: FUNERAL PROCESSIONS:
Iowa Code (2015) section 321.324A is adopted by reference. (Ord. 2100, 6-29-
2015)
6-5A-5: CARELESS DRIVING:
Iowa Code (2015) section 321.277A is adopted by reference. (Ord. 2100, 6-29-
2015)
6-5A-6: CLINGING TO VEHICLES:
No person shall drive a motor vehicle on the streets of the city unless all
passengers of said vehicle are inside the vehicle in the place intended for
their accommodation. No person shall ride on the running board of a motor
vehicle or in any other place not customarily used for carrying passengers. No
person riding upon any bicycle, coaster, roller skates, rollerblades, sled or
toy vehicle shall attach the same or himself to any vehicle upon a roadway.
(1985 Code §2.1-2.0304; amd. 1993 Code)
6-5A-7: AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLES:1. IC §321.231.1
A.   The driver of an authorized emergency vehicle, when responding to an
emergency call or when in the pursuit of an actual or suspected perpetrator of
a felony or in response to an incident dangerous to the public or when
responding to but not upon returning from a fire alarm, may exercise the
privileges set forth in this section.
B.   The driver of any authorized emergency vehicle, may:
1.   Park or stand an authorized emergency vehicle, irrespective of the
provisions of this title.
2.   Disregard laws or regulations governing direction of movement for the
minimum distance necessary before an alternative route that conforms to the
traffic laws and regulations is available.
C.   The driver of a fire department vehicle, police vehicle or ambulance may:
1.   Proceed past a red or stop signal or stop sign, but only after slowing
down as may be necessary for safe operation.
2.   Exceed the maximum speed limits so long as the driver does not endanger
life or property.
D.   The exemptions granted to an authorized emergency vehicle under subsection
B of this section and for a fire department vehicle, police vehicle or
ambulance as provided in subsection C of this section shall apply only when
such vehicle is making use of an audible signaling device meeting the
requirements of Iowa Code section 321.433, or a visual signaling device
approved by the state, except that use of an audible or visual signaling device
shall not be required when exercising the exemption granted under subsection C2
of this section when the vehicle is operated by a peace officer pursuing a
suspected violator of the speed restrictions imposed by or pursuant to this
title, for the purpose of determining the speed of travel of such suspected
violator.
E.   The foregoing provisions shall not relieve the driver of an authorized
emergency vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard for the safety of all
persons, nor shall such provisions protect the driver from the consequences of
the driver's reckless disregard for the safety of others. (1993 Code)
6-5A-8: BICYCLES, ANIMALS OR ANIMAL DRAWN VEHICLES:1. IC §321.234.1
A.   A person riding an animal or driving an animal drawing a vehicle upon a
roadway is subject to the provisions of this title applicable to the driver of
a vehicle, except those provisions of this title which by their nature can have
no application.
B.   A person riding a bicycle on the highway is subject to the provisions of
this title and has all the rights and duties under this title applicable to the
driver of a vehicle, except those provisions of this title which by their
nature can have no application.
C.   A person propelling a bicycle on the highway shall not ride other than
upon or astride a permanent and regular seat attached to the bicycle.
D.   A person shall not use a bicycle on the highway to carry more persons at
one time than the number of persons for which the bicycle is designed and
equipped.
E.   This section does not apply to the use of a bicycle in a parade authorized
by proper permit from local authorities. (1993 Code)
6-5A-9: ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLES; BICYCLE SAFETY FLAG REQUIRED:2. IC §321.234A.2
All-terrain vehicles shall be operated on a highway only between sunrise and
sunset and only when the operation on the highway is incidental to the
vehicle's use for agricultural purposes. A person operating an all-terrain
vehicle on a highway shall have a valid motor vehicle license and the vehicle
shall be operated at speeds of less than thirty (30) miles per hour. When
operated on a highway, an all-terrain vehicle shall have a bicycle safety flag
which extends not less than five feet (5') above the ground attached to the
rear of the vehicle. The bicycle safety flag shall be triangular in shape with
an area of not less than thirty (30) square inches, be day glow in color, and
shall be in lieu of the reflective equipment required by Iowa Code section
321.383. (1993 Code)
6-5A-10: GOLF CART OPERATION ON CITY STREETS:1. IC §321.247.1
The city council may allow the operation of golf carts on city streets by
person possessing a valid motor vehicle license. However, a golf cart shall not
be operated upon a city street which is a primary road extension through the
city but shall be allowed to cross a city street which is a primary road
extension through the city. The golf carts shall be equipped with a slow moving
vehicle sign and a bicycle safety flag and operate on the streets only from
sunrise to sunset. Golf carts operated on city streets shall be equipped with
adequate brakes and shall meet any other safety requirements imposed by the
city council. Golf carts are not subject to the registration provisions of this
title. (1993 Code)
6-5A-11: RECKLESS DRIVING:2. IC §321.277.2
Any person who drives any vehicle in such manner as to indicate either a wilful
or a wanton disregard for the safety of persons or property is guilty of
reckless driving. Every person convicted of reckless driving shall be guilty of
a simple misdemeanor. (1993 Code)
6-5A-12: DRAG RACING:3. IC §321.278.3
No person shall engage in any motor vehicle speed contest or exhibition of
speed on any street or highway in the city and no person shall aid or abet any
motor vehicle speed contest or speed exhibition on any street or highway in the
city, except that a passenger shall not be considered as aiding and abetting.
Motor vehicle speed contest or exhibition of speed are defined as one or more
persons competing in speed in excess of the applicable speed limit in vehicles
on the public streets or highways. Any person who violates the provisions of
this section shall be guilty of a simple misdemeanor. (1993 Code)
ARTICLE B. SPEED REGULATIONS
SECTION:
6-5B-1: General
6-5B-2: Specific Areas
6-5B-2-1: Business District
6-5B-2-2: Residence Or School District
6-5B-2-3: Suburban District
6-5B-2-4: Cemeteries And Parking Lots
6-5B-2-5: Parks
6-5B-3: Minimum Speed
6-5B-4: Emergency Vehicles
6-5B-5: Special Speed Restrictions
6-5B-6: Control Of Vehicle; Reduced Speed
6-5B-1: GENERAL:
Every driver of a motor vehicle on a street shall drive the same at a careful
and prudent speed not greater than nor less than is reasonable and proper,
having due regard to the traffic, surface and width of the street and of any
other conditions then existing, and no person shall drive a vehicle on any
street at a speed greater than will permit him to bring it to a stop within the
assured clear distance ahead, such driver having the right to assume, however,
that all persons using said street will observe the law. (1985 Code §2.1-
2.0401)
6-5B-2: SPECIFIC AREAS:
6-5B-2-1: BUSINESS DISTRICT:
A speed in excess of twenty (20) miles per hour in the business district,
unless specifically designated otherwise in this article, is unlawful. (1985
Code §2.1-2.0402)
6-5B-2-2: RESIDENCE OR SCHOOL DISTRICT:
A speed in excess of twenty five (25) miles per hour in any school or residence
district, unless specifically designated otherwise in this article, is
unlawful. (1985 Code §2.1-2.0403)
6-5B-2-3: SUBURBAN DISTRICT:
A speed in excess of forty five (45) miles per hour in any suburban district,
unless specifically designated otherwise in this article, is unlawful. (1985
Code §2.1-2.0403)
6-5B-2-4: CEMETERIES AND PARKING LOTS:
A speed in excess of ten (10) miles per hour in any cemetery or parking lot,
unless specifically designated otherwise in this article, is unlawful. (1985
Code §2.1-2.0405)
6-5B-2-5: PARKS:
A speed in excess of fifteen (15) miles per hour in any park, unless
specifically designated otherwise in this article, is unlawful1. See subsection
7-11-2B of this code.1. (1985 Code §2.1-2.0406)
6-5B-3: MINIMUM SPEED:
No person shall drive a motor vehicle at such a slow speed as to impede or
block the normal and reasonable movement of traffic, except when reduced speed
is necessary for safe operation, or in compliance with law. (1985 Code §2.1-
2.0407)
6-5B-4: EMERGENCY VEHICLES:
The speed limitations set forth in this article do not apply to authorized
emergency vehicles when responding to emergency calls and the drivers thereof
sound audible signal by bell, siren or whistle. This provision does not relieve
such driver from the duty to drive with due regard for the safety of others.
(1985 Code §2.1-2.0408)
6-5B-5: SPECIAL SPEED RESTRICTIONS:
In accordance with requirements of the Iowa state department of transportation,
or whenever the council shall determine upon the basis of an engineering and
traffic investigation that any speed limit hereinbefore set forth is greater or
less than is reasonable or safe under the conditions found to exist at any
intersection or other place or upon any part of the city street system, the
council shall determine and adopt by ordinance such higher or lower speed limit
as it deems reasonable and safe thereat. (1985 Code §2.1-2.0409)
6-5B-6: CONTROL OF VEHICLE; REDUCED SPEED:
Iowa Code (2013) section 321.288 is adopted by reference. (Ord. 2031, 5-5-2014)
ARTICLE C. DRIVING ON RIGHT SIDE; OVERTAKING AND PASSING
SECTION:
6-5C-1: Driving On Right Hand Side Of Roadway; Exceptions
6-5C-2: Meeting And Turning To Right
6-5C-3: Overtaking A Vehicle
6-5C-4: Failure To Recognize Signal
6-5C-5: Burden Of Proof
6-5C-6: Overtaking And Passing
6-5C-7: Limitations On Overtaking On The Left
6-5C-8: Prohibited Passing
6-5C-9: One-Way Roadways And Rotary Traffic Islands
6-5C-10: Roadways Laned For Traffic
6-5C-11: Following Too Closely
6-5C-1: DRIVING ON RIGHT HAND SIDE OF ROADWAY; EXCEPTIONS:1. IC §321.297.1
A.   A vehicle shall be driven upon the right half of the roadway upon all
roadways of sufficient width, except as follows:
1.   When overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the same
direction under the rules governing such movement.
2.   When an obstruction exists making it necessary to drive to the left of the
center of the roadway, provided, any person so doing shall yield the right of
way to all vehicles traveling in the proper direction upon the unobstructed
portion of the roadway within such distance as to constitute an immediate
hazard.
3.   Upon a roadway divided into three (3) marked lanes for traffic under the
rules applicable thereon.
4.   Upon a roadway restricted to one-way traffic.
B.   Any vehicle proceeding at less than the normal speed of traffic at the
time and place and under the conditions then existing shall be driven in the
right hand lane then available for traffic upon all roadways, or as close as
practicable to the right hand curb or edge of the roadway, except when
overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the same direction or when
preparing for a left turn at an intersection, an alley, private road or
driveway.
C.   A vehicle shall not be driven upon any roadway having four (4) or more
lanes for moving traffic and providing for two-way movement of traffic, to the
left of the centerline of the roadway, except when authorized by official
traffic control devices designating certain lanes to the left side of the
center of the roadway for use by traffic not otherwise permitted to use such
lanes, or except as permitted under subsection A2 of this section. This
subsection shall not be construed as prohibiting the crossing of the centerline
in making a left turn into or from an alley, private road or driveway. (1993
Code)
6-5C-2: MEETING AND TURNING TO RIGHT:1. IC §321.298.1
Except as otherwise provided in section
6-5C-1 of this article, vehicles or persons on horseback meeting each other on
any roadway shall yield one-half (1/2) of the roadway by turning to the right.
(1993 Code)
6-5C-3: OVERTAKING A VEHICLE:2. IC §321.299.2
The following rules shall govern the overtaking and passing of vehicles
proceeding in the same direction, subject to those limitations, exceptions and
special rules hereinafter stated:
A.   The driver of a vehicle overtaking another vehicle proceeding in the same
direction shall pass to the left thereof at a safe distance and shall not again
drive to the right side of the roadway until safely clear of the overtaken
vehicle.
B.   Except when overtaking and passing on the right is permitted, the driver
of an overtaken vehicle shall give way to the right in favor of the overtaking
vehicle and shall not increase the speed of the overtaken vehicle until
completely passed by overtaking vehicle. (1993 Code)
6-5C-4: FAILURE TO RECOGNIZE SIGNAL:
Iowa Code section 321.300 has been repealed. (Ord. 2100, 6-29-2015)
6-5C-5: BURDEN OF PROOF:
Iowa Code section 321.301 has been repealed. (Ord. 2100, 6-29-2015)
6-5C-6: OVERTAKING AND PASSING:
Iowa Code (2015) section 321.302 is adopted by reference. (Ord. 2100, 6-29-
2015)
6-5C-7: LIMITATIONS ON OVERTAKING ON THE LEFT:1. IC §321.303.1
A vehicle shall not be driven to the left side of the center of the roadway in
overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the same direction unless
the left side is clearly visible and is free of oncoming traffic for a
sufficient distance ahead to permit the overtaking and passing to be completely
made without interfering with the safe operation of a vehicle approaching from
the opposite direction or a vehicle overtaken. The overtaking vehicle shall
return to the right hand side of the roadway before coming within three hundred
feet (300') of a vehicle approaching from the opposite direction when traveling
on a roadway having a legal speed limit in excess of thirty (30) miles per
hour, and the overtaking vehicle shall return to the right hand side of the
roadway before coming within one hundred feet (100') of a vehicle approaching
from the opposite direction when traveling on a roadway having a legal speed
limit of thirty (30) miles per hour or less. (1993 Code)
6-5C-8: PROHIBITED PASSING:2. IC §321.304.2
No vehicle shall, in overtaking and passing another vehicle or at any other
time, be driven to the left side of the roadway under the following conditions:
A.   When approaching the crest of a grade or upon a curve in the highway where
the driver's view along the highway is obstructed for a distance of
approximately seven hundred feet (700').
B.   When approaching within one hundred feet (100') of any narrow bridge,
viaduct or tunnel, when so signposted, or when approaching within one hundred
feet (100') of or traversing any intersection or railroad grade crossing.
C.   Where official signs are in place directing that traffic keep to the right
or a distinctive centerline or off-centerline is marked, which distinctive line
also so directs traffic as declared in the sign manual adopted by the
department of transportation. (1993 Code)
6-5C-9: ONE-WAY ROADWAYS AND ROTARY TRAFFIC ISLANDS:3. IC §321.305.3
A.   Upon a roadway designated and signposted for one-way traffic, a vehicle
shall be driven only in the direction designated.
B.   A vehicle passing around a rotary traffic island shall be driven only to
the right of such island. (1993 Code)
6-5C-10: ROADWAYS LANED FOR TRAFFIC:1. IC §321.306.1
Whenever any roadway has been divided into three (3) or more clearly marked
lanes for traffic, the following rules, in addition to all others consistent
herewith, shall apply:
A.   A vehicle shall be driven as nearly as practical entirely within a single
lane and shall not be moved from such lane until the driver has first
ascertained that such movement can be made with safety.
B.   Upon a roadway which is divided into three (3) lanes, a vehicle shall not
be driven in the center lane except when overtaking and passing another vehicle
where the roadway is clearly visible and such center lane is clear of traffic
within a safe distance, or in preparation for a left turn or where such center
lane is at the time allocated exclusively to traffic moving in the direction in
the vehicle is proceeding and is signposted to give notice of such allocation.
C.   Official signs may be erected directing slow moving traffic to use a
designated lane or allocating specified lanes to traffic moving in the same
direction and drivers of vehicles shall obey the directions of every such sign.
D.   Vehicles moving in a lane designated for slow moving traffic shall yield
the right of way to vehicles moving in the same direction in a lane not so
designated when such lanes merge to form a single lane.
E.   A portion of a highway provided with a lane for slow moving vehicles does
not become a roadway marked for three (3) lanes of traffic. (1993 Code)
6-5C-11: FOLLOWING TOO CLOSELY:2. IC §321.307.2
The driver of a motor vehicle shall not follow another vehicle more closely
than is reasonable and prudent, having due regard for the speed of such
vehicles and the traffic upon and the condition of the highway. (1993 Code)
ARTICLE D. TURNING AND STARTING; SIGNALS
SECTION:
6-5D-1: Authority To Mark
6-5D-2: "U" Turns
6-5D-3: Turning At Intersections
6-5D-4: Turning On Curve Or Crest Of Grade
6-5D-5: Starting Parked Vehicle
6-5D-6: When Signal Required
6-5D-7: Signal Continuous
6-5D-8: Stopping
6-5D-9: Signals By Hand And Arm Or Signal Device
6-5D-1: AUTHORITY TO MARK:
The Public Works Director may cause markers, buttons or signs to be placed
within or adjacent to intersections and thereby require and direct, as traffic
conditions require, that a different course from that specified by the State
law be traveled by vehicles turning at intersections, and when markers, buttons
or signs are so placed, no driver of a vehicle shall turn a vehicle at an
intersection other than as directed and required by such markers, buttons or
signs. (1985 Code §2.1-2.0501; 1993 Code)
6-5D-2: "U" TURNS:
It shall be unlawful for a driver to make a "U" turn at any location when signs
are posted prohibiting a "U" turn. (Ord. 1164, 1-29-1996)
6-5D-3: TURNING AT INTERSECTIONS:1. I.C. §321.311.1
The driver of a vehicle intending to turn at an intersection shall do so as
follows:
A.   Both the approach for a right turn and right turn shall be made as close
as practical to the right-hand curb or edge of the roadway.
B.   Approach for a left turn shall be made in that portion of the right half
of the roadway nearest the center line thereof and after entering the
intersection the left turn shall be made so as to depart from the intersection
to the right of the center line of the roadway being entered.
C.   Approach for a left turn from a two-way street into a one-way street shall
be made in that portion of the right half of the roadway nearest the center
line thereof and by passing to the right of such center line where it enters
the intersection. A left turn from a one-way street into two-way street shall
be made by passing to the right of the center line of the street being entered
upon leaving the intersection. (1993 Code)
6-5D-4: TURNING ON CURVE OR CREST OF GRADE:1. I.C. §321.312.1
No vehicle shall be turned so as to proceed in the opposite direction upon any
curve, or upon the approach to, or near the crest of a grade or hill, where
such vehicle cannot be seen by the driver of any other vehicle approaching from
either direction within five hundred feet (500'). (1993 Code)
6-5D-5: STARTING PARKED VEHICLE:2. I.C. §321.313.2
No person shall start a vehicle which is stopped, standing or parked unless and
until such movement can be made with reasonable safety. (1993 Code)
6-5D-6: WHEN SIGNAL REQUIRED:3. I.C. §321.314.3
No person shall turn a vehicle from a direct course upon a highway unless and
until such movement can be made with reasonable safety and then only after
giving a clearly audible signal by sounding the horn if any pedestrian may be
affected by such movement or after giving an appropriate signal in the manner
hereinafter provided in the event any other vehicle may be affected by such
movement. (1993 Code)
6-5D-7: SIGNAL CONTINUOUS:4. I.C. §321.315.4
A signal of intention to turn right or left shall be given continuously during
not less than the last one hundred feet (100') traveled by the vehicle before
turning when the speed limit is forty five (45) miles per hour or less and a
continuous signal during not less than the last three hundred feet (300') when
the speed limit is in excess of forty five (45) miles per hour. (1993 Code)
6-5D-8: STOPPING:5. I.C. §321.316.5
No person shall stop or suddenly decrease the speed of a vehicle without first
giving an appropriate signal in the manner provided herein to the driver of any
vehicle immediately to the rear when there is opportunity to give such signal.
(1993 Code)
6-5D-9: SIGNALS BY HAND AND ARM OR SIGNAL DEVICE:1. I.C. §321.317.1
A.   Signals Required: The signals required under the provisions of this
Article may be given either by means of the hand and arm as provided in Iowa
Code, section 321.318, or by a mechanical or electrical directional signal
device or light of a type approved by the State and conforming to the
provisions of this Title relating thereto.
B.   Design of Signal Devices: Directional signal devices shall be designed
with a white, yellow or amber lamp or lamps to be displayed on the front of
vehicles and with a lamp or lamps of red, yellow or amber to be displayed on
the rear of vehicles. Such devices shall be capable of clearly indicating any
intention to turn either to the right or to the left and shall be visible and
understandable during both daylight and darkness from a distance of at least
one hundred feet (100') from the front and rear of a vehicle equipped
therewith.
C.   Signals on Vehicles:
1.   It is unlawful for any person to sell or offer for sale or operate on the
highways of the State any vehicle subject to registration under the provisions
of this Title which has never been registered in this or any other state prior
to January 1, 1954, unless the vehicle is equipped with a directional signal
device of a type approved by the State and is in compliance with the provisions
of subsection B of this Section. Motorcycles, motorized bicycles and semi-
trailers and trailers less than forty inches (40") in width are exempt from the
provisions of this Section.
2.   When a vehicle is equipped with a directional signal device, such device
shall at all times be maintained in good working condition. No directional
signal device shall project a glaring or dazzling light. All directional signal
devices shall be self-illuminated when in use while other lamps on the vehicle
are lighted.
D.   Hazard Signals: Whenever any vehicle or combination of vehicles is
disabled or for other reason may present a vehicular traffic hazard requiring
unusual care in approaching, overtaking or passing, the operator then may
display on the vehicle or combination of vehicles four (4) directional signals
of a type complying with the provisions of this Section relating to directional
signal devices in simultaneous operation.
E.   Method of Giving Hand and Arm Signals:1. I.C. §321.318.1 All signals
herein required which may be given by hand and arm shall when so given be given
from the left side of the vehicle and the following manner and interpretation
thereof is suggested:
1.   Left Turn: Hand and arm extended horizontally.
2.   Right Turn: Hand and arm extended upward.
3.   Stop or Decrease of Speed: Hand and arm extended downward. (1993 Code)
ARTICLE E. RIGHT OF WAY
SECTION:
6-5E-1: Entering Intersections From Different Highways
6-5E-2: Left Turns, Yielding
6-5E-3: Entering Through Highways
6-5E-4: Vehicles Entering Stop Or Yield Intersection
6-5E-5: Moving Vehicle Backward On Highway
6-5E-6: Operation On Approach Of Emergency Vehicles
6-5E-7: Approaching Certain Stationary Vehicles
6-5E-1: ENTERING INTERSECTIONS FROM DIFFERENT HIGHWAYS:1. IC §321.319.1
When two (2) vehicles enter an intersection from different highways or public
streets at approximately the same time, the driver of the vehicle on the left
shall yield the right of way to the vehicle on the right.
The foregoing rule is modified at through highways and otherwise as hereinafter
stated in this article. (1993 Code)
6-5E-2: LEFT TURNS, YIELDING:2. IC §321.320.2
The driver of a vehicle intending to turn to the left within an intersection or
into an alley, private road or driveway shall yield the right of way to all
vehicles approaching from the opposite direction which are within the
intersection or so close thereto as to constitute an immediate hazard, then
said driver, having so yielded and having given a signal when and as required
by this article, may make such left turn. (1993 Code)
6-5E-3: ENTERING THROUGH HIGHWAYS:3. IC §321.321.3
The driver of a vehicle shall stop or yield as required by this article at the
entrance to a through highway and shall yield the right of way to other
vehicles which have entered the intersection from said through highway or which
are approaching so closely on said through highway as to constitute a hazard,
but said driver having so yielded may proceed cautiously and with due care
enter said through highway. (1993 Code)
6-5E-4: VEHICLES ENTERING STOP OR YIELD INTERSECTION:1. IC §321.322.1
A.   The driver of a vehicle approaching a stop intersection indicated by a
stop sign shall stop at the first opportunity at either the clearly marked stop
line or before entering the crosswalk or before entering the intersection or at
the point nearest the intersecting roadway where the driver has a view of
approaching traffic on the intersecting roadway before entering the
intersection. Before proceeding, the driver shall yield the right of way to any
vehicle on the intersecting roadway which has entered the intersection or which
is approaching so closely as to constitute an immediate hazard during the time
the driver is moving across or within the intersection.
B.   The driver of a vehicle approaching a yield sign shall slow to a speed
reasonable for the existing conditions and, if required for safety, shall stop
at the first opportunity at either the clearly marked stop line or before
entering the crosswalk or before entering the intersection or at the point
nearest the intersecting roadway where the driver has a view of approaching
traffic on the intersecting roadway. After slowing or stopping, the driver
shall yield the right of way to any vehicle on the intersecting roadway which
has entered the intersection or which is approaching so closely as to
constitute an immediate hazard during the time the driver is moving across or
within the intersection. (1993 Code)
6-5E-5: MOVING VEHICLE BACKWARD ON HIGHWAY:2. IC §321.323.2
A person shall not cause a vehicle to be moved in a backward direction on a
highway unless and until the vehicle can be backed with reasonable safety, and
shall yield the right of way to any approaching vehicle on the highway or an
intersecting highway which is so close as to constitute an immediate hazard.
(1993 Code)
6-5E-6: OPERATION ON APPROACH OF EMERGENCY VEHICLES:
Iowa Code (2015) section 321.324 is adopted by reference. (Ord. 2100, 6-29-
2015)
6-5E-7: APPROACHING CERTAIN STATIONARY VEHICLES:
Iowa Code (2015) section 321.323A is adopted by reference. (Ord. 2100, 6-29-
2015)
ARTICLE F. SPECIAL STOPS, RAILROADS AND HIGHWAYS
SECTION:
6-5F-1: Obedience To Signal Indicating Approach Of Railroad Train Or Railroad
Track Equipment
6-5F-2: Stop At Certain Railroad Crossings
6-5F-3: Certain Vehicles Must Stop
6-5F-4: Heavy Equipment At Crossing
6-5F-5: Stop Or Yield At Highways
6-5F-1: OBEDIENCE TO SIGNAL INDICATING APPROACH OF RAILROAD TRAIN OR RAILROAD
TRACK EQUIPMENT:
When a person driving a vehicle approaches a railroad grade crossing and
warning is given by automatic signal, crossing gates, a flag person or
otherwise of the immediate approach of a railroad train or railroad track
equipment, the driver of the vehicle shall stop within fifty feet (50') but not
less than fifteen feet (15') from the nearest rail and shall not proceed until
the driver can do so safely.
The driver of a vehicle shall stop and remain standing and not traverse such a
grade crossing when a crossing gate is lowered or when a human flagman gives or
continues to give a signal of the approach or passage of a railroad train or
railroad track equipment. (Ord. 2100, 6-29-2015)
6-5F-2: STOP AT CERTAIN RAILROAD CROSSINGS:1. IC §321.342.1
The driver of any vehicle approaching a railroad grade crossing across which
traffic is regulated by a stop sign, a railroad sign directing traffic to stop
or an official traffic control signal displaying a flashing red or steady
circular red colored light shall stop prior to crossing the railroad at the
first opportunity at either the clearly marked stop line or at a point near the
crossing where the driver has a clear view of the approaching railroad traffic.
(1993 Code)
6-5F-3: CERTAIN VEHICLES MUST STOP:2. IC §321.343.2
The driver of a motor vehicle carrying passengers for hire, a school bus, or a
vehicle carrying hazardous material and required to stop before crossing a
railroad track by motor carrier safety rules adopted under Iowa Code, before
crossing at grade any track of a railroad, shall stop the vehicle within fifty
feet (50') but not less than fifteen feet (15') from the nearest rail. While
stopped, the driver shall listen and look in both directions for an approaching
train, and for signals indicating the approach of a train, and shall not
proceed until the driver can do so safely.
No stop need be made at a crossing where a peace officer or a traffic control
device directs traffic to proceed. No stop need be made at a crossing
designated by an "exempt" sign. An "exempt" sign shall be posted only where the
tracks have been partially removed on either side of the roadway. (1993 Code)
6-5F-4: HEAVY EQUIPMENT AT CROSSING:1. IC §321.344.1
A.   No person shall operate or move any caterpillar tractor, steam shovel,
derrick, roller or any equipment or structure having a normal operating speed
of six (6) or less miles per hour or a vertical body or load clearance of less
than nine inches (9") above the level surface of a roadway upon or across any
tracks at a railroad grade crossing without first complying with this section.
B.   Notice of any such intended crossing shall be given to a superintendent of
such railroad and a reasonable time be given to such railroad to provide proper
protection at such crossing.
C.   Before making any such crossing, the person operating or moving any such
vehicle or equipment shall first stop the same not less than ten feet (10') nor
more than fifty feet (50') from the nearest rail of such railway and while so
stopped shall listen and look in both directions along such track for any
approaching train and for signals indicating the approach of a train, and shall
not proceed until the crossing can be made safely.
D.   No such crossing shall be made when warning is given by automatic signal
or crossing gates or a flagman or otherwise of the immediate approach of a
railroad train or car. (1993 Code)
6-5F-5: STOP OR YIELD AT HIGHWAYS:2. IC §321.345.2
The state, based on an engineering study, with reference to primary highways,
and local authorities with reference to other highways under their
jurisdiction, may designate through highways and erect stop signs or yield
signs, in accordance with specifications established by the state at specified
entrances to the highway or may designate any intersection as a stop
intersection or as a yield intersection and erect like signs at one or more
entrances to such intersection. (1993 Code)
ARTICLE G. MISCELLANEOUS RULES
SECTION:
6-5G-1: Unattended Motor Vehicle
6-5G-2: Obstruction To Driver's View
6-5G-3: Coasting Prohibited
6-5G-4: Acts Prohibited On Fully Controlled Access Facilities
6-5G-5: Following Fire Apparatus
6-5G-6: Crossing Fire Hose
6-5G-7: Putting Debris On Highway
6-5G-8: Removing Injurious Material
6-5G-9: Clearing Up Wrecks
6-5G-10: General Traffic Regulations
6-5G-1: UNATTENDED MOTOR VEHICLE:1. IC §321.362.1
No person driving or in charge of a motor vehicle shall permit it to stand
unattended without first stopping the engine, or when standing upon any
perceptible grade without effectively setting the brake thereof and turning the
front wheels to the curb or side of the highway. (1993 Code)
6-5G-2: OBSTRUCTION TO DRIVER'S VIEW:2. IC §321.363.2
No person shall drive a vehicle when it is so loaded, or when there are in the
front seat such number of persons, exceeding three (3), as to obstruct the view
of the driver to the front or sides of the vehicle or as to interfere with the
driver's control over the driving mechanism of the vehicle.
No passenger in a vehicle shall ride in such position as to interfere with the
driver's view ahead or to the sides, or to interfere with the driver's control
over the driving mechanism of the vehicle. (1993 Code)
6-5G-3: COASTING PROHIBITED:3. IC §321.364.3
The driver of a motor vehicle shall not drive with the source of motive power
disengaged from the driving wheels except when disengagement is necessary to
stop or to shift gears. (1993 Code)
6-5G-4: ACTS PROHIBITED ON FULLY CONTROLLED ACCESS FACILITIES:1. IC §321.366.1
It is unlawful for a person, except a person operating highway maintenance
equipment or an authorized emergency vehicle, to do any of the following on a
fully controlled access facility:
A.   Drive a vehicle over, upon or across a curb, central dividing section or
other separation or dividing line.
B.   Make a left turn or a semicircular or U-turn at a maintenance crossover
where an official sign prohibits the turn.
C.   Drive a vehicle except in the proper lane provided for that purpose and in
the proper direction and to the right of the central dividing curb, separation,
section or line.
D.   Drive a vehicle into the facility from a local service road.
E.   Stop, park or leave standing a vehicle, whether attended or unattended,
upon the paved portion.
F.   Stop, park or leave standing a vehicle, whether attended or unattended,
upon the shoulders or the right of way except at designated rest areas or in
case of an emergency or other dire necessity.
For the purpose of this section, fully controlled access facility is a highway
which gives preference to through traffic by providing access connections at
interchanges with selected public roads only and by prohibiting crossings at
grade or direct access at driveway connections. (1993 Code)
6-5G-5: FOLLOWING FIRE APPARATUS:2. IC §321.367.2
The driver of any vehicle other than one on official business shall not follow
any fire apparatus traveling in response to a fire alarm closer than five
hundred feet (500') or drive into or park such vehicle within the block where
fire apparatus has stopped in answer to a fire alarm. (1993 Code)
6-5G-6: CROSSING FIRE HOSE:3. IC §321.368.3
No vehicle shall be driven over any unprotected hose of the fire department
when laid down on any street or private driveway, to be used at any fire or
alarm of fire, without the consent of the fire department official in command.
(1993 Code)
6-5G-7: PUTTING DEBRIS ON HIGHWAY:1. IC §321.369.1
No person shall throw or deposit upon any highway any glass bottle, glass,
nails, tacks, wire, cans, trash, garbage, rubbish, litter, offal or any other
debris. No substance likely to injure any person, animal or vehicle upon such
highway shall be thrown or deposited by any person upon any highway. Any person
who violates any provision of this section or section
 6-5G-8 of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. (1993 Code)
6-5G-8: REMOVING INJURIOUS MATERIAL:2. IC §321.370.2
Any person who drops, or permits to be dropped or thrown, upon any highway any
destructive or injurious material and other material as defined in section
6-5G-7 of this article shall immediately remove the same or cause it to be
removed. (1993 Code)
6-5G-9: CLEARING UP WRECKS:3. IC §321.371.3
Any person removing a wrecked or damaged vehicle from a highway shall remove
any glass or other injurious substance dropped upon the highway from such
vehicle. (1993 Code)
6-5G-10: GENERAL TRAFFIC REGULATIONS:
A.   Proof of security against liability - driving without liability coverage.
Iowa Code (2011) section 321.20B is adopted by reference.
1.   The person cannot provide proof of vehicle liability insurance coverage
with the occurrence of a motor vehicle accident.
2.   The person cannot provide proof of vehicle liability insurance coverage
without the occurrence of a motor vehicle accident.
B.   Operation without registration. Iowa Code (2011) section 321.98 is adopted
by reference.
C.   Fraudulent use of registration. Iowa Code (2011) section 321.99 is adopted
by reference.
D.   Operation without proper driver's license. Iowa Code (2011) section
321.174 is adopted by reference.
E.   Child restraint devices. Iowa Code (2011) section 321.446 is adopted by
reference.
F.   Safety belts and safety harnesses - use required. Iowa Code section
321.445 is adopted by reference.
G.   Operation of motor vehicle with expired license. Iowa Code (2015) section
321.174A is adopted by reference.
H.   Permitting unauthorized minor to drive. Iowa Code (2015) section 321.219
is adopted by reference.
I.   Permitting unauthorized person to drive. Iowa Code (2015) section 321.220
is adopted by reference.
J.   Display of plates. Iowa Code (2015) section 321.37 is adopted by
reference.
K.   Injuring or tampering with vehicle. Iowa Code (2015) section 321.78 is
adopted by reference. (Ord. 2121, 10-19-2015)
L.   Use of electronic communication device while driving. Iowa Code (2017)
section 321.276 is adopted by reference. (Ord. 2298, 4-30-2018)
CHAPTER 6
PARKING REGULATIONS
SECTION:
6-6-1: Parking Prohibited
6-6-2: Parking For Certain Purposes Illegal
6-6-3: Illegal Parking On Private Property
6-6-4: Fire Lanes
6-6-5: Handicapped Parking
6-6-6: Loading And Unloading Zones
6-6-7: Snow Removal
6-6-8: Truck Parking Limited
6-6-9: Manner Of Parking
6-6-10: Signs Required
6-6-11: Stopping On Traveled Way; Exception
6-6-12: Officers Authorized To Remove
6-6-13: Removal From Bridge
6-6-14: Moving Other Vehicle
6-6-15: Parking Violations; Failure To Pay
6-6-16: Penalty
6-6-1: PARKING PROHIBITED:
No one shall stop, stand or park a vehicle except when necessary to avoid
conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a peace
officer or traffic control device, in any of the following places:
A.   Crosswalk: On a crosswalk at an intersection.
B.   Center Parkway: On the center parkway or dividing area of any divided
street.
C.   Mailboxes: Within twenty feet (20') on either side of a mailbox which is
so placed adjacent to the roadway.
D.   Sidewalks: On or across a sidewalk.
E.   Driveway: In front of or within three feet (3') of a public or private
driveway.
F.   Intersection: Within, or within ten feet (10') of an intersection of any
street or alley.
G.   Fire Hydrant: Within five feet (5') of a fire hydrant.
H.   Stop Sign Or Signal: Within ten feet (10') upon the approach to any
flashing beacon, stop or yield sign, or traffic control signal located at the
side of a roadway.
I.   Railroad Crossing: Within fifty feet (50') of the nearest rail of a
railroad crossing, except when parked parallel with such rail and not
exhibiting a red light.
J.   Fire Station: Within twenty feet (20') of the driveway entrance to any
fire station and on the side of a street opposite the entrance to any fire
station within seventy five feet (75') of said entrance when properly
signposted.
K.   Excavations: Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction
when such stopping, standing or parking would obstruct traffic.
L.   Double Parking: On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at
the edge or curb of a street.
M.   Hazardous Locations: When, because of restricted visibility or when
standing or parked vehicles would constitute a hazard to moving traffic, or
when other traffic conditions require, the chief of police may cause curbings
to be painted with a yellow color and erect no parking or standing signs.
N.   Theaters, Hotels And Auditoriums: A space of fifty feet (50') is hereby
reserved at the side of the street in front of any theater, auditorium, hotel
having more than twenty five (25) sleeping rooms, hospital, nursing home,
taxicab stand, bus depot, church or other building where large assemblages of
people are being held, within which space, when clearly marked as such, no
motor vehicle shall be left standing, parked or stopped except in taking on or
discharging passengers or freight and then only for such length of time as is
necessary for such purpose.
O.   Alleys Generally: No person shall park a vehicle within an alley in such a
manner or under such conditions as to leave available less than ten feet (10')
of width of the roadway for free movement of vehicular traffic, and no person
shall stop, stand or park a vehicle within an alley in such a position as to
block the driveway entrance to any abutting property.
P.   Parking Or Terrace: No person shall park or drive a vehicle upon the
parking or terrace, designated as that area between the curb line and the
sidewalk line, where curbing has been installed. (1985 Code §2.1-2.1007; amd.
1993 Code; Ord. 2415, 5-4-2020)
6-6-2: PARKING FOR CERTAIN PURPOSES ILLEGAL:
No person shall park a vehicle upon any public street or right of way or upon
school district or municipally owned property for any of the following
principal purposes:
A.   Sale: Displaying such vehicle for sale.
B.   Repairing: For washing, greasing or repairing such vehicle except such
repairs as are necessitated by an emergency.
C.   Advertising: Displaying advertising.
D.   Merchandise Sales: Selling merchandise from such vehicle except in a duly
established marketplace and in accordance with applicable provisions of this
code and other applicable city regulations or policies as approved by the city
council.
E.   Storage: Storage or as junkage or dead storage for more than forty eight
(48) hours1. See section
4-4-2 of this code.1. (Ord. 1359, 5-3-1999)
6-6-3: ILLEGAL PARKING ON PRIVATE PROPERTY:
No person shall drive, stop, stand, or park a vehicle onto or upon privately
owned property or in an area developed as an off street parking facility,
without the consent of the owner, lessee or person in charge of such privately
owned property or facility. A violation of this section shall place such
vehicle in the status of an illegally parked vehicle, and upon complaint of the
owner, lessee or person in charge of the privately owned property or facility,
said vehicle may be dealt with pursuant to section 
6-2-3-5 of this title; provided, however, no vehicle shall be deemed illegally
parked under this section on land zoned commercial or industrial unless the
owner, lessee or person in charge of such privately owned property or facility
shall first post in a conspicuous location a sign or signs designating the
specific use of the off street parking facility. (1985 Code §2.1-2.1022)
6-6-4: FIRE LANES:2. See also section
4-3-4 of this code.2
No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle in a fire lane as provided
herein.
A.   Fire Lanes Established: The fire chief may designate fire lanes on any
private road or driveway where deemed necessary to assure access to property or
premises by authorized emergency vehicles.
B.   Signs And Markings: Wherever a fire lane has been designated, the public
works director shall cause appropriate signs and markings to be placed
identifying such fire lanes and the parking prohibition established by this
section.
C.   Exception: The provisions of this section shall not apply to authorized
emergency vehicles. (1985 Code §2.1-2.1025; amd. 1993 Code)
D.   Scheduled Violation: A violation of this section is a scheduled violation
and subject to a fine of fifty dollars ($50.00). (Ord. 1287, 2-23-1998)
6-6-5: HANDICAPPED PARKING:
Parking for the use of the physically handicapped is provided as follows:
A.   Public Property: The city council, by resolution, may set aside on or off
street parking spaces as handicapped parking spaces.
B.   Private Property: A person may set aside handicapped parking spaces on the
person's property, provided each parking space is clearly and prominently
designated as a handicapped parking space, and provided that such signage
designating each space is in accordance with state law using the international
symbol of accessibility.
   C.   Unlawful Use:
1.   Iowa Code (2018) section 321L.4 is adopted by reference.
2.   "Unlawful Use" shall also include any other activity which results in the
obstruction of a handicapped parking space unless otherwise allowed under this
code or state law.
D.   Scheduled Violation: A violation of this section is a scheduled violation
which shall be imposed upon the owner, operator, or lessee of the vehicle and
subject to a fine as per state code. (1985 Code §2.1-2.1008; Amended 1993 Code;
Ord. 2379, 8-19-2019)
6-6-6: LOADING AND UNLOADING ZONES:
It shall be unlawful to park a vehicle for any purpose or length of time other
than for the loading and unloading of material or merchandise or passengers in
any designated loading zone.
A.   Loading Zones Identified: The locations designated as loading zones shall
be marked by signs with the words "loading zone" and the designated area marked
off with yellow paint with the words "no parking - loading zone" visibly
stenciled inside the marked off area, and it shall be the duty of the driver or
operator of any vehicle to park the vehicle within the limits of the marked off
loading zone areas.
B.   Loading Zones Designated: See section
6-9-13 of this title for specific loading and unloading zones. (1985 Code §2.1-
2.1021; amd. 1993 Code)
6-6-7: SNOW REMOVAL:
No person shall park, abandon, or leave unattended any vehicle on any public
street, alley, or city owned off street parking area during any snow emergency
proclaimed by the mayor, public works director, or their respective designees.
A snow emergency parking ban shall continue from its proclamation through five
o'clock (5:00) P.M. the following day. The mayor, public works director, or
their respective designees may extend the duration of the parking ban if
conditions require additional time to clear the snow and ice. Notice of an
extension shall be posted in the same manner as a proclamation of snow
emergency and shall contain the date and time the parking ban shall expire.
Such a parking ban shall be of uniform application. The city shall publish
information regarding the responsibilities of vehicle owners under this section
in the fall and/or winter editions of the "WDM Magazine" distributed to city
residents, as well as post such information on the city of West Des Moines
website in the fall and/or winter of each year. When predictions or occurrences
indicate the need, the mayor, public works director, or their respective
designees, shall proclaim the snow emergency and direct the appropriate city
employee to post said proclamation on the city of West Des Moines website and
forward notice of the proclamation to at least two (2) radio and two (2)
television stations that broadcast their signals into the city of West Des
Moines. Such emergency may be extended or shortened as the emergency warrants
or when conditions warrant. This section shall not be construed as suspending
parking limitations or restrictions imposed by any other section of this title.
In addition to enforcement of this section by police officers, code enforcement
officials and public works employees have the authority to enforce the
provisions of this section. The code enforcement officials and public works
employees shall have the power to issue citation-complaints for violations of
this section and impound vehicles found in violation of this section as
provided in subsections
 6-6-15A and G of this chapter. (Ord. 1844, 10-5-2009)
6-6-8: TRUCK PARKING LIMITED:
No person shall park a motor truck, semitrailer or other motor vehicle with
trailer attached in violation of the following regulations. The provisions of
this section shall not apply to pickup, light delivery or panel delivery
trucks.
A.   Diagonal Parking Areas: No such vehicle shall be left unattended or parked
in any diagonal or angle parking district.
B.   Two Hour Limit: No such vehicle shall be left unattended or parked on any
public street for a period of time in excess of two (2) hours.
C.   Public Off Street Parking: No such vehicle shall be left unattended or
parked in a twenty four (24) hour public off street parking zone in the
locations designated in section
6-9-6-3 of this title.
D.   Semitrailers And Special Mobile Equipment: It shall be unlawful to park a
trailer, semitrailer, implement of husbandry, special mobile equipment, mobile
home or travel trailer, except bicycles, in a twenty four (24) hour public off
street parking zone designated in section
6-9-6-3 of this title. (1985 Code §2.1-2.1015)
6-6-9: MANNER OF PARKING:
A.   Adjacent To Curb: No person shall stand or park a vehicle in a roadway
other than parallel with the edge of the roadway headed in the direction of
lawful traffic movement and with the right hand wheels of the vehicle within
eighteen inches (18") of the curb or edge of the roadway and not placed closer
than four feet (4') from another vehicle except as hereinafter provided in the
case of angle parking and vehicles parked on the left hand side of one-way
streets.
B.   Park Adjacent To Curb On One-Way Street: No person shall stand or park a
vehicle on the left hand side of a one-way street other than parallel with the
edge of the roadway headed in the direction of lawful traffic movement and with
the left hand wheels of the vehicle within eighteen inches (18") of the curb or
edge of the roadway and not closer than four feet (4') from another vehicle
except as hereinafter provided in the case of angle parking.
C.   Angle Parking; Manner: Upon those streets or portions of streets which
have been signed or marked for angle parking, no person shall park or stand a
vehicle other than at an angle to the curb or edge of the roadway as indicated
by such signs and markings and with the right hand front wheel, if parked on
the right hand side, or the left hand front wheel, if parked on the left hand
side of a one-way street, within twelve inches (12") of the curb. No part of
any vehicle, or the load thereon, when parked within a diagonal parking
district, shall extend into the roadway more than a distance of sixteen feet
(16') when measured at right angles to the adjacent curb or edge of roadway.
D.   Stalls And Sections: Where now or hereafter stalls or sections may be
marked or painted upon the surface of any street or portion thereof, and
including upon publicly owned parking lots or alleys located within the zoned
Valley Junction historic business district, it shall be the duty of the driver
or operator of any vehicle to park the same within the limits of one of the
said stalls or sections and not over, across, or outside said lines.
E.   Parking On Grass: No person shall stand or park a vehicle on grass on
public property, unless the city council, parks and recreation director, or
designee has specifically authorized parking on the grass within a designated
area. This provision does not apply to authorized emergency vehicles or
authorized maintenance vehicles. (Ord. 2110, 8-24-2015)
6-6-10: SIGNS REQUIRED:
Whenever by this chapter or any other section of this code any parking time
limit is imposed or parking is prohibited on designated streets or portions of
streets, it shall be the duty of the city engineer to erect or cause to be
erected appropriate signs giving notice thereof and no such regulations shall
be effective unless signs are erected and in place at the time of any alleged
offense. When the signs are so erected giving notice thereof, no person shall
disobey the restrictions stated on such signs. (1985 Code §2.1-2.1024)
6-6-11: STOPPING ON TRAVELED WAY; EXCEPTION:1. IC §321.354.1
A.   Prohibition: Upon any highway outside of a business district, rural
residence district or residence district a person shall not stop, park or leave
standing a vehicle, whether attended or unattended:
1.   Upon the paved part of the highway when it is practical to stop, park or
leave the vehicle off that part of the highway, however, a clear and
unobstructed width of at least twenty feet (20') of the paved part of the
highway opposite the standing vehicle shall be left for the free passage of
other vehicles. As used in this subsection, "paved highway" includes an asphalt
surfaced highway.
2.   Upon the main traveled part of a highway other than a paved highway when
it is practical to stop, park or leave the vehicle off that part of the
highway. However, a clear and unobstructed width of that part of the highway
opposite the standing vehicle shall be left to allow for the free passage of
other vehicles.
A clear view of the stopped vehicle shall be available from a distance of two
hundred feet (200') in each direction upon the highway. However, school buses
may stop on the highway for receiving and discharging pupils and all other
vehicles shall stop for school buses which are stopped to receive or discharge
pupils, as provided in Iowa Code. This subsection does not apply to a vehicle
making a turn as provided in section
6-5D-3 of this title.
B.   Disabled Vehicle2. IC §321.355.2: Subsection A of this section shall not
apply to the driver of any vehicle which is disabled while on the paved or
improved or main traveled portion of a highway in such manner and to such
extent that it is impossible to avoid stopping and temporarily leaving such
disabled vehicle in such position. (1993 Code)
6-6-12: OFFICERS AUTHORIZED TO REMOVE:3. IC §321.356.3
Whenever any peace officer finds a vehicle standing upon a public highway or in
a publicly-owned parking lot in violation of any of the provisions of this
chapter, such officer is hereby authorized to remove or move such vehicle, or
require the driver or other person in charge of the vehicle to move the same,
to be parked in compliance with this chapter. (1993 Code; amd. Ord. 2606, 4-15-
2024)
6-6-13: REMOVAL FROM BRIDGE:1. IC §321.357.1
Whenever any peace officer finds a vehicle unattended upon any bridge or
causeway or in any tunnel where such vehicle constitutes an obstruction to
traffic, such officer is hereby authorized to provide for the removal of such
vehicle to the nearest garage or other place of safety. (1993 Code)
6-6-14: MOVING OTHER VEHICLE:2. IC §321.359.2
No person shall move a vehicle not owned by such person into any such
prohibited area or away from a curb such distance as is unlawful. (1993 Code)
6-6-15: PARKING VIOLATIONS; FAILURE TO PAY:
A.   Notice On Illegally Parked Vehicles: Whenever any motor vehicle without a
driver is found parked or stopped in violation of any of the restrictions
imposed by this chapter or any other city ordinance or by state law, police
officers, code enforcement officers, and any other city employees designated by
the police chief finding such vehicle shall take its registration number and
may take any other information displayed on the vehicle which may identify its
owner or user and shall conspicuously affix to such vehicle a citation-
complaint, in writing, on a form as provided by this code for the owner to
appear to the charge against him or her at the city's finance department. In
addition to enforcement of this chapter by police officers, code enforcement
officials, and designated city employees, fire department officials and any
other city employees designated by the fire chief shall have the authority to
enforce the provisions of this chapter for fire lane violations. Also, in
addition to enforcement of this chapter by police officers, code enforcement
officials, and designated city employees, public works employees shall have the
authority to enforce the provisions of this chapter for snow ordinance
violations.
B.   Failure To Pay Or To Contest: Failure to pay or to contest a parking
citation-complaint within thirty (30) calendar days of its issuance under the
provisions of this chapter shall render the charges contained therein admitted.
C.   Payment Of Parking Citation-Complaint: Persons receiving a citation-
complaint who desire to admit and pay the violation may do so in one of the
following ways:
1.   Place the amount specified on the face of the citation- complaint in the
envelope provided and mail the payment to the city's finance department within
thirty (30) calendar days of the date issued.
2.   Appear in person no sooner than five (5) calendar days but no more than
thirty (30) calendar days after the date of issuance of the citation-complaint.
Place of appearance will be the city's finance department and pay in person the
amount specified on the face of the citation-complaint to the city.
3.   Persons wishing to contest the citation-complaint must do so by appearing
in person in the office of the city's finance department no sooner than five
(5) calendar days but not more than thirty (30) calendar days after the date of
issuance of the citation-complaint.
D.   Notification Of Contest And Assignment Of Court Dates: Persons wishing to
contest the citation-complaint must do so in writing on forms provided by the
city's finance department and shall appear as provided in subsection C3 of this
section. At the time of filing of the notification of contest, a date and time
of court appearance will be established by the city's finance department,
subject to approval by the Polk County clerk of court, and notice thereof
provided to the person contesting the citation-complaint. The person contesting
the citation-complaint will be required to post an unsecured appearance bond in
the amount specified pursuant to section 805.6, code of Iowa (2013), providing
for the setting of unsecured appearance bonds for a scheduled fine. The city's
finance department shall forward the contested citation-complaint to the
traffic division of the Polk County clerk of court. Violations of this chapter
shall be considered traffic violations for purposes of Iowa Code sections 803.3
and 805.13 (2013). Because the city is located in two (2) or more counties and
the city's seat of government is located in Polk County, venue shall be in Polk
County.
E.   Form And Use Of Parking Citation-Complaint Forms: Parking citation-
complaints shall be issued by the police department, including code enforcement
officials, the fire department, the public works department, and other
designated personnel, upon serially numbered sets of parking citation-complaint
forms, each copy of each set to be clearly imprinted with the citation-
complaint number. Copies of the citation-complaint forms shall be used as
follows: one to be used as a notice of violation to be delivered to the owner
of the vehicle, or affixed to the vehicle illegally parked, as provided in
subsection A of this section; one to be placed on file with the city's finance
department which may be proceeded upon as a simple notice pursuant to code of
Iowa, which, if admitted, shall be paid to the city's finance department as
specified in the citation-complaint or which, if denied, shall be handled
pursuant to subsection D of this section; and one to be retained for record
purposes by the police, fire, or public works department.
F.   Habitual Violator: For the purposes of this section, a delinquent parking
citation-complaint is one which has not been paid within thirty (30) calendar
days of the date upon which the violation occurred.
Any person who has allowed three (3) or more parking citation-complaints issued
on a single motor vehicle to become delinquent shall be deemed to be a habitual
violator.
No person shall park a vehicle and permit it to remain standing upon any public
street or public metered lot or city owned parking facility in the city when
there are three (3) or more delinquent parking citation-complaints outstanding
against that vehicle.
A violation of this section shall place such vehicle in the status of an
illegally parked vehicle and the vehicle may be dealt with pursuant to
subsection G of this section.
G.   Removal And Impoundment Of Illegally Parked Vehicles: The police
department may remove and impound vehicles or cause vehicles to be removed and
impounded, when the vehicles are stopped or parked in violation of this chapter
or other city ordinances and, in so doing, may employ such means as are
reasonably necessary. Impounded vehicles shall be stored in a location
designated by the city.
H.   Right Of Owner To Redeem Impounded Vehicle: The registered owner or person
having a legal entitlement to possession of a motor vehicle impounded pursuant
to subsection G of this section may claim the same by appearing personally in
the office of the city's finance department and either paying, in full, all
delinquent parking citation-complaints pursuant to subsection C2 of this
section, or timely contesting the citation-complaints pursuant to the procedure
established in subsection D of this section. The city's finance department,
upon compliance with the above procedure, shall provide the registered owner or
person having a legal entitlement to possession of the motor vehicle, a written
release to be presented to the towing-impoundment entity which, upon payment of
all towing and storage fees by the registered owner or person having legal
entitlement or possession of the motor vehicle, shall enable the individual to
possession of the automobile.
I.   Failure Of Owner To Claim Impounded Vehicle: If an impounded vehicle is
not claimed by the owner within ten (10) calendar days after impoundment, the
unclaimed vehicle shall be placed in the status of and shall be deemed an
abandoned vehicle as provided by state law and/or this code.
J.   Notice Of Impoundment: When a vehicle has been impounded pursuant to
subsection G of this section, the registered owner of the vehicle shall be
sent, by certified mail, to the owner's last known address of record, within
seventy two (72) hours of the impoundment, excluding weekends and holidays, a
notice of said impoundment along with a description of any personal property
contained within the vehicle and of the right to a hearing pursuant to this
chapter. Notice personally presented within said period to said owner or person
having a legal entitlement to possession shall satisfy the mailing requirement.
(Ord. 1985, 4-29-2013)
6-6-16: PENALTY:
A.   In the event a violation of this chapter constitutes a violation charged,
admitted, and collected pursuant to a simple notice of fine as established by
chapter 2 of this title, the fine shall be as follows:
1.   Unless otherwise specified in this title, the scheduled fine for a
violation of the parking regulations provided in this title or any other city
ordinance shall be fifteen dollars ($15.00). For a violation of section
6-6-7 of this chapter, the scheduled fine shall be fifty dollars ($50.00). See
subsection
6-6-4D of this chapter for the scheduled fine for fire lane violations, and
subsection
6-6-5D of this chapter for the scheduled fine for handicapped parking
violations.
2.   In the event the fifteen dollar ($15.00) scheduled fine as set forth in
this subsection A has not been paid or contested within thirty (30) calendar
days from the date of issuance of the parking citation-complaint, the penalty
shall automatically increase to twenty dollars ($20.00), in accordance with
state law.
B.   It is further provided that in the event such violation has been charged
but not admitted and collected pursuant to a simple notice of fine, the
provisions provided in title 1, chapter 4 of this code may also apply. (Ord.
2110, 8-24-2015)
CHAPTER 7
ACCIDENTS
SECTION:
6-7-1: Damage to Vehicle
6-7-2: Property Damage Accidents
6-7-3: Information and Aid; Leaving Scene of Accident
6-7-1: DAMAGE TO VEHICLE:1. I.C. §321.262.1
The driver of any vehicle involved in an accident resulting only in damage to a
vehicle which is driven or attended by any person shall immediately stop such
vehicle at the scene of such accident or as close thereto as possible but shall
forthwith return to and in every event shall remain at the scene of such
accident until the driver has fulfilled the requirements of Section
 6-7-3 of this Chapter. Every such stop shall be made without obstructing
traffic more than is necessary. Any person failing to stop or comply with said
requirements under such circumstances shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and
punished as provided in Iowa Code. (1993 Code)
6-7-2: PROPERTY DAMAGE ACCIDENTS:2. I.C. §321.264.2
A.   Striking Unattended Vehicle: The driver of any vehicle which collides with
any vehicle which is unattended shall immediately stop and shall then and there
either locate and notify the operator or owner of such vehicle of the name and
address of the driver and owner of the vehicle striking the unattended vehicle,
or shall leave in a conspicuous place in the vehicle struck, written notice
giving the name and address of the driver and of the owner of the vehicle doing
the striking and a statement of the circumstances thereof.
B.   Striking Fixtures Upon a Highway:3. I.C. §321.265.3 The driver of any
vehicle involved in an accident resulting in damage to property legally upon or
adjacent to a highway shall take reasonable steps to locate and notify the
owner, a peace officer or person in charge of such property of such fact and of
the driver's name and address and of the registration number of the vehicle
causing the damage and shall, upon request and if available exhibit the
driver's motor vehicle license and shall make report of such accident. (1993
Code)
6-7-3: INFORMATION AND AID; LEAVING SCENE OF ACCIDENT:1. I.C. §321.263.1
A.   The driver of a vehicle involved in an accident relating in injury to or
death of a person or damage to a vehicle which is driven or attended by a
person shall give the driver's name, address and the registration number of the
vehicle the driver is driving and shall, upon request and if available, exhibit
the driver's motor vehicle license to the person struck, the driver or occupant
of, or the person attending the vehicle involved in the accident and shall
render to a person injured in the accident reasonable assistance, including the
transporting or arranging for the transporting of the person for medical
treatment if it is apparent that medical treatment is necessary or if
transportation for medical treatment is requested by the injured person.
B.   If the accident causes the death of a person, all surviving drivers shall
remain at the scene of the accident except to seek necessary aid or to report
the accident to law enforcement authorities. Before leaving the scene of the
fatal accident, each surviving driver shall leave the surviving driver's motor
vehicle license, automobile registration receipt, or other identification data
at the scene of the accident. After leaving the scene of the accident, a
surviving driver shall promptly report the accident to law enforcement
authorities, and shall immediately return to the scene of the accident or
inform the law enforcement authorities where the surviving driver can be
located. (1993 Code)
CHAPTER 8
PEDESTRIANS
SECTION:
6-8-1: Pedestrians Subject to Signals
6-8-2: Pedestrians on Left
6-8-3: Pedestrians Right of Way
6-8-4: Crossing at Other Than Crosswalk
6-8-5: Duty of Driver; Pedestrians Crossing or Working on Highways
6-8-6: Use of Crosswalks
6-8-7: Pedestrians Soliciting Rides
6-8-8: White Cane or Walking Stick, Precautions
6-8-9: Driving Through Safety Zone
6-8-1: PEDESTRIANS SUBJECT TO SIGNALS:1. I.C. §321.325.1
Pedestrians shall be subject to traffic-control signals at intersections as
heretofore declared in this Chapter, but at all other places pedestrians shall
be accorded the privileges and shall be subject to the restrictions stated in
Sections
6-8-3 through
6-8-7 of this Chapter. (1993 Code)
6-8-2: PEDESTRIANS ON LEFT:2. I.C. §321.326.2
Pedestrians shall, at all times when walking on or along a highway, walk on the
left side of such highway. (1993 Code)
6-8-3: PEDESTRIANS RIGHT OF WAY:3. I.C. §321.327.3
Where traffic-control signals are not in place or in operation, the driver of a
vehicle shall yield the right of way, slowing down or stopping if need be to so
yield, to a pedestrian crossing the roadway within any marked crosswalk or
within any unmarked crosswalk at an intersection, except as otherwise provided
in this Chapter. (1993 Code)
6-8-4: CROSSING AT OTHER THAN CROSSWALK:4. I.C. §321.328.4
A.   Every pedestrian crossing a roadway at any point other than within a
marked crosswalk or within an unmarked crosswalk at an intersection shall yield
the right of way to all vehicles upon the roadway.
B.   Any pedestrian crossing a roadway at a point where a pedestrian tunnel or
overhead pedestrian crossing has been provided shall yield the right of way to
all vehicles upon the roadway.
C.   Where traffic-control signals are in operation at any place not an
intersection, pedestrians shall not cross at any place except in a marked
crosswalk. (1993 Code)
6-8-5: DUTY OF DRIVER; PEDESTRIANS CROSSING OR WORKING ON HIGHWAYS:1. I.C.
§321.329.1
A.   Notwithstanding the provisions of Section
6-8-4 of this Chapter, every driver of a vehicle shall exercise due care to
avoid colliding with any pedestrian upon any roadway and shall give warning by
sounding the horn when necessary and shall exercise due care upon observing any
child or any confused or incapacitated person upon a roadway.
B.   Every driver of a vehicle shall yield the right of way to pedestrian
workers engaged in maintenance or construction work on a highway whenever the
driver is notified of the presence of such workers by a flagman or a warning
sign. (1993 Code)
6-8-6: USE OF CROSSWALKS:2. I.C. §321.330.2
Pedestrians shall move, whenever practicable, upon the right half of
crosswalks. (1993 Code)
6-8-7: PEDESTRIANS SOLICITING RIDES:3. I.C. §321.331.3
A.   No person shall stand in a roadway for the purpose of soliciting a ride
from the driver of any private vehicle.
B.   Nothing in this Section or this Title shall be construed so as to prevent
any pedestrian from standing on that portion of the highway or roadway, not
ordinarily used for vehicular traffic, for the purpose of soliciting a ride
from the driver of any vehicle. (1993 Code)
6-8-8: WHITE CANE OR WALKING STICK, PRECAUTIONS:
A.   White Canes Restricted to Blind Persons:4. I.C. §321.332.4 For the purpose
of guarding against accidents in traffic on the public thoroughfares, it shall
be unlawful for any person except persons wholly or partially blind to carry or
use on the streets, highways and public places of the City any white canes or
walking sticks which are white in color or white tipped with red.
B.   Duty of Drivers:1. I.C. §321.333.1 Any driver of a vehicle or operator of
a motor-driven vehicle who approaches or comes in contact with a person wholly
or partially blind carrying a cane or walking stick white in color or white
tipped with red, or being led by a guide dog wearing a harness and walking on
either side of or slightly in front of said blind person, shall immediately
come to a complete stop, and take such precautions as may be necessary to avoid
accident or injury to the person carrying a cane or walking stick white in
color or white tipped with red or being led by a guide dog.
C.   Penalty:2. I.C. §321.334.2 Any person who shall carry a cane or walking
stick such as prescribed in subsection
6-8-8A of this Chapter contrary to the provisions hereof, or who shall fail to
heed the approach of a person lawfully so carrying a cane or walking stick
white in color or white tipped with red, or being led by a guide dog, or who
shall fail to immediately come to a complete stop, and take such precautions
against accident or injury to such person, shall be fined not less than one
dollar ($1.00) nor more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each offense.
(1993 Code)
6-8-9: DRIVING THROUGH SAFETY ZONE:3. I.C. §321.340.3
No vehicle shall at any time be driven through or within a safety zone. (1993
Code)
CHAPTER 9
TRAFFIC SCHEDULES
SECTION:
6-9-1: Official Traffic Controls
6-9-2: Through Streets Stop Required
6-9-3: Stops Or Yields
6-9-3-1: Special Stops Required
6-9-3-2: Four-Way Stop Intersections
6-9-3-3: School Stops (Rep. by Ord. 1179, 5-20-1996)
6-9-3-4: Special Yield Required
6-9-4: Angle Or Diagonal Parking
6-9-5: Parking Prohibited; Enforcement
6-9-5-1: No Parking Zones
6-9-5-2: No Parking On North Side Of Streets
6-9-5-3: No Parking On East Side Of Streets
6-9-5-4: Special Restricted No Parking Areas
6-9-5-5: All Night Parking Prohibited
6-9-5-6: School Loading Zones
6-9-6: Parking Limited
6-9-6-1: Ten Minute Limited Parking
6-9-6-2: Two Hour Limited Parking (Rep. by Ord. 1145, 7-17-1995)
6-9-6-3: Twenty Four Hour Off Street Parking Limit
6-9-6-4: One Hour Limited Parking
6-9-6-5: Four Hour Limited Parking
6-9-6-6: Thirty Minute Limited Parking, Post Office Hours
6-9-7: Turning Restrictions
6-9-7-1: Right Turn On Red Signal Prohibited
6-9-7-2: Left Turn Prohibited
6-9-7-3: U-Turn Prohibited
6-9-8: One-Way Traffic Required
6-9-9: Channelized Intersections
6-9-10: Special Speed Zones
6-9-11: Interstate Highways 35, 80, And 235
6-9-11-1: Stopping, Standing, Or Parking
6-9-11-2: Pedestrians
6-9-11-3: Bicycles, Horses, Etc.
6-9-12: Load Limits; Truck Routes
6-9-12-1: Load And Size Limits
6-9-12-2: Truck Route
6-9-13: Loading And Unloading Zones
6-9-14: Penalty
6-9-1: OFFICIAL TRAFFIC CONTROLS:
Every driver and pedestrian shall observe and comply with the directions
provided by all official traffic control signals.
Intersection Of:
ASHWORTH ROAD and:
   Jordan Creek Parkway
   Prairie View Drive
   First Street
   Eighth Street
   Nineteenth Street
   Twenty Second Street
   Twenty Eighth Street
   Thirty Fifth Street
   Thirty Ninth Street
   Forty Second Street
   Fiftieth Street
   Sixtieth Street
   Seventy Second Street
E.P. TRUE PARKWAY and:
   Jordan Creek Parkway
   Prairie View Drive
   Railroad Avenue and Grand Avenue
   Thirty Fifth Street, Mills Civic Parkway
   Fiftieth Street
   Sixty Eighth Street
   Sixty Eighth Street, 1,700 feet west of (north entrance of Jordan Creek Town
Center)
   78th Place
GRAND AVENUE and:
   Fuller Road
   Interstate 35, east ramps
   Interstate 35, west ramps
   Raccoon River Drive
   Scenic Valley Drive
   Vine Street
   First Street
   Fourth Street
   Eighth Street
   Thirteenth Street
   Fiftieth (South) Street
Intersection Of:
GRAND PRAIRIE PARKWAY and:
   Interstate 80 south ramps
JORDAN CREEK PARKWAY and:
   Aspen Drive
   Bridgewood Boulevard
   E.P. True Parkway, 850 feet south of
   Interstate 80, north ramp
   Interstate 80, south ramp
   Office Plaza Drive
   Vista Drive
   Westown Parkway
   Woodland Avenue
JORDAN CREEK PARKWAY (South) and:
   Cascade Avenue
   Coachlight Drive
   Grand Avenue
   Mills Civic Parkway, 1,000 feet south of
   Stagecoach Drive
MILLS CIVIC PARKWAY and:
   Fuller Road
   Glen Oaks Golf Course, north entrance
   Interstate 35 interchange
   Jordan Creek Parkway
   Jordan Creek Parkway (South), 1,300 feet west of (Mills Civic Parkway)
   Prairie View Drive
   Stagecoach Drive
   Forty First Street
   Fiftieth Street
   Sixty Fourth (South) Street
   Sixty Eighth Street
   Sixty Eighth Street, 1,050 feet west of (south entrance of Jordan Creek Town
Center)
   Eighty First (South) Street
   Eighty Eighth (South) Street
RAILROAD AVENUE and:
   Fuller Road
   Eighth Street
Intersection Of:
UNIVERSITY AVENUE and:
   Farm Bureau driveway/NW
    One Hundred Eighteenth Street (Clive)
   Interstate 35/80, east ramps
   Interstate 35/80, west ramps
   Jordan Creek Parkway
   Northwest One Hundred Forty Second Street (Clive)
   Private driveway (520 feet east of Fiftieth Street)
   Private driveway (1,400 feet east of Fiftieth Street)
   West Lakes Parkway/NW
    One Hundred Twenty Third Street (Clive)
   Twenty Second Street
   Twenty Fifth Street
   Twenty Eighth Street
   Thirty First Street
   Thirty Fifth Street
   Thirty Seventh Street (entrance Westridge Shopping Center)
   Forty Second Street
   Fiftieth Street
   Fifty Ninth Place
   Sixtieth Street
   Ninety Eighth Street
VALLEY WEST DRIVE and:
   Sylvania Drive
WESTOWN PARKWAY and:
   West Lakes Parkway
   Twenty Second Street
   Twenty Eighth Street
   Thirty First Street
   Thirty Fifth Street
   Forty Second Street
   Fiftieth Street
FIRST STREET and:
   Railroad Avenue
FIRST (South) STREET and:
   Park Avenue
Intersection Of:
EIGHTH STREET and:
   Center Street and Interstate 235, south ramps
   Office Park Road
TWENTY SECOND STREET and:
   Interstate 235, north ramps
   Interstate 235, south ramps
   Kingman Avenue
THIRTY FIFTH STREET and:
   Interstate 235, north ramps
   Interstate 235, south ramps
   North drive of Valley West Mall
   Westown Place
   Woodland Avenue
FIFTIETH STREET and:
   Corporate Drive
   Stonebridge Road
FIFTIETH (South) STREET and:
   Wistful Vista Drive
FIFTY FIRST (South) STREET and:
   Mills Civic Parkway
SIXTIETH STREET and:
   E.P. True Parkway
   Mills Civic Parkway
   Vista Drive
   Westown Parkway
   Fifty Ninth Place
SIXTIETH (South) STREET and:
   Village View Drive
   Wistful Vista Drive
   March 2018
Intersection Of:
SIXTY FOURTH (South) STREET and:
   Coachlight Drive
SIXTY FIFTH STREET and:
   Ashworth Road
SIXTY EIGHTH STREET and:
   Coachlight Drive
   Wistful Vista Drive
SIXTY EIGHTH (South) STREET and:
   Stagecoach Drive
EIGHTY EIGHTH STREET and:
   Ashworth Road - east intersection
   Ashworth Road - west intersection
   Raccoon River Drive
NINETY SECOND STREET and:
   University Avenue
(1985 Code §2.1-2.0609; amd. Ord. 838, 10-12-1987; Ord. 864, 10-10-1988; Ord.
937, 11-26-1990; Ord. 946, 4-29-1991; Ord. 988, 2-3-1992; Ord. 999, 3-30-1992;
1993 Code; Ord. 1057, 8-16-1993; Ord. 1065, 10-25-1993; Ord. 1114, 11-21-1994;
Ord. 1119, 1-16-1995; Ord. 1148, 8-14-1995; Ord. 1193, 7-29-1996; Ord. 1244, 5-
5-1997, eff. 7-1-1997; Ord. 1304, 5-4-1998; Ord. 1318, 7-13-1998; Ord. 1345,
12-28-1998; Ord. 1411, 5-30-2000; Ord. 1495, 11-11-2002; Ord. 1550, 9-29-2003;
Ord. 1584, 6-21-2004; Ord. 1602, 10-25-2004; Ord. 1642, 7-18-2005; Ord. 1644,
8-15-2005; Ord. 1686, 5-8-2006; Ord. 1766, 7-30-2007; Ord. 1807, 6-16-2008;
Ord. 1819, 11-17-2008; Ord. 1826, 3-23-2009; Ord. 1827, 3-23-2009; Ord. 1831,
6-29-2009; Ord. 1833, 8-10-2009; Ord. 1938, 11-28-2011; Ord. 1959, 9-17-2012;
Ord. 2109, 8-24-2015; Ord. 2128, 11-30-2015; Ord. 2134, 12-28-2015; Ord. 2139,
2-22-2016; Ord. 2168, 8-22-2016; Ord. 2178, 10-31-2016; Ord. 2188, 12-12-2016;
Ord. 2251, 9-18-2017; Ord. 2392, 12-2-2019; Ord. 2478, 6-21-2021; Ord. 2638,
10-21-2024)
6-9-2: THROUGH STREETS STOP REQUIRED:
Every driver of a vehicle shall stop in accordance with an official traffic
control device, unless a yield is permitted by this chapter before entering an
intersection with the following designated through streets:
Through Street From To
Through Street            From                       To
Army Post Road            East corporate limits      West corporate limits
Ashworth Road             First Street               Western corporate limits
Aspen Drive               Jordan Creek Parkway       Western corporate limits
                         Prairie View Drive         Fifty Eighth Street
                         Forty First Street         Knolls Road
Beechtree Drive           Sixtieth Street            Sixty Eighth Street
Booneville Road           Eighty Eighth (South)      Western terminus
                          Street
Bridgewood Boulevard      Jordan Creek Parkway       Western terminus of
                                                     Bridgewood Boulevard
Brookview Drive           Thirty Second Street       Thirty Fifth Street
Brown's Woods Drive       First (South) Street       Eleventh (South) Street
Buffalo Road              East corporate limits      The western terminus at
                                                     Nineteenth Street Place
Cascade Avenue            Jordan Creek Parkway       Western terminus
Center Street Place       Seventeenth Street         Twentieth Street
Chalk Street              Eighty Eighth Street       West corporate limits
Coachlight Drive          Sixtieth (South) Street    Sixty Second (South)
                                                     Street
                         Eighty First (South)       Eighty Eighth (South)
                          Street                     Street
Cody Drive                Jordan Creek Parkway       Eighty First Street
                         Prairie View Drive         Fifty Eighth Street
                         Sixty Fifth Place          Jordan Creek Parkway
                         Eighty First Street        Western terminus
Corporate Drive           Forty Fifth Street         Fiftieth Street
County Line (South) Road  East corporate limits      West corporate limits
E.P. True Parkway         Grand Avenue               West corporate limits
Fairlawn Drive            Twenty Fourth Street       Twenty Eighth Street
Fuller Road               Railroad Avenue            Thirty Fifth (South)
                                                     Street
Giles Street              Twenty Eighth Street       Thirty Fifth Street
Grand Avenue              East corporate limits      West corporate limits
Grand Prairie Parkway     North Corporate Limits     Raccoon River
(South)
                                                     Southern terminus of Grand
                         Raccoon River              Prairie Parkway
                                                     (Southwest)
Jordan Creek Parkway      North corporate limits     South corporate limits
Kingman Drive             Ninetieth Street           Ninety Second Street
Knolls Road               Fiftieth Street            The northern terminus at
                                                     Aspen Drive
Lincoln Street            230 feet east of           Fuller Road
                          Thirteenth (South) Street
Locust Street             Eighth Street              Sixteenth Street
Maffitt Lake Road         Southwest connector        West corporate limits
Maffitt Lake (SE) Road    Soteria (SE) Avenue        Veterans Parkway
Maple Street              E.P. True Parkway          Thirty Fifth Street
                         Eighth Street              Fourteenth Street
Meadow Lane               Twenty Seventh Street      Thirty Fifth Street
Mills Civic Parkway       E.P. True Parkway          Sixtieth Street
                         Sixtieth (South) Street    Western terminus of Mills
                                                     Civic Parkway
Orilla (South) Road       Maffit Lake Road           South corporate limits
Pine Avenue               East corporate limits      Southwest connector
Pleasant Street           The east terminus at Forty Fiftieth Street
                          Fifth Street
Pommel Place              Thirty Fifth Street        Thirty Ninth Street
                          The beginning of Prairie
Prairie View Drive        View Drive at Center       South terminus
                          Street
Prospect Road             Nineteenth Street          Twenty Fourth Street
Raccoon River Drive       Grand Avenue               Western terminus of
                                                     Raccoon River Drive
Railroad Avenue           East corporate limits      The west terminus at E.P.
                                                     True Parkway
Stagecoach Drive          Mills Civic Parkway        Western terminus of
                                                     Stagecoach Drive
                         Eighty Eighth (South)      Western terminus
                          Street
Stonebridge Road          Thirty Fifth Street        Fiftieth Street
Sugar Creek Drive         Eighty Eighth (South)      Ninety Fifth (South)
                          Street                     Street
Thornwood Road            Thirty Fifth (South)       Grand Avenue
                          Street
University Avenue         Twenty Second Street       West corporate limits
Veterans Parkway          East corporate limits      Western terminus of
                                                     Veterans Parkway
Vine Street               East corporate limits      Ashworth Road
Vista Drive               Center Street              Jordan Creek Parkway
Walnut Woods Drive        Eleventh (South) Street    Forty Second (South)
                                                     Street
Western Hills Drive       Thirty Fifth Street        Cody Drive
Westown Parkway           The eastern terminus at    Western corporate limits
                          Nineteenth Place
                         Sixtieth Street            Jordan Creek Parkway
Wistful Vista Drive       South Prairie View Drive   West corporate limits
                         Sixtieth (South) Street    Sixty Second (South)
                                                     Street
Woodland Avenue           Twenty Second Street       Fiftieth Street
                         Sixty Eighth Street        Jordan Creek Parkway
Woodland Park Drive       Woodland Avenue            Ashworth Road
First Street              North corporate limits     Railroad Avenue
First (South) Street      Brown's Wood Drive         Army Post Road
Fourth Street             Ashworth Road              Railroad Avenue
Fifth Street              Grand Avenue               Railroad Avenue
Eighth Street             North corporate limits     Railroad Avenue
Eleventh Street           Office Park Road           Ashworth Road
Eleventh (South) Street   Brown's Woods Drive        Army Post Road
Sixteenth Street          Ashworth Road              Grand Avenue
Seventeenth Street        Buffalo Road               Pleasant Street
Nineteenth Street         Ashworth Road              E.P. True Parkway
Nineteenth (South) Street Grand Avenue               Fuller Road
Twenty Second Street      North corporate limits     Ashworth Road
Twenty Third Street       Ashworth Road              Prospect Avenue
Twenty Eighth Street      North corporate limits     Vine Street
Thirty Fifth Street       North corporate limits     E.P. True Parkway
Thirty Fifth (South)      Army Post Road             Maffitt Lake Road
Street
                         Mills Civic Parkway        Grand Avenue
Thirty Ninth Street       Woodland Avenue            Western Hills Drive
Forty First (South)       E.P. True Parkway          Mills Civic Parkway
Street
Forty Second Street       North corporate limits     Ashworth Road
Forty Second (South)      Oakwood Lane               Grand Avenue
Street
Forty Fifth Street        The north terminus at      Woodland Avenue
                          Pleasant Street
Fiftieth Street           North corporate limits     E.P. True Parkway
Fiftieth (South) Street   E.P. True Parkway          Grand Avenue
Fifty Sixth Street        E.P. True Parkway          Wistful Vista Drive
Fifty Seventh Court       E.P. True Parkway          Wistful Vista Drive
Fifty Eighth Street       Vista Drive                Eastern terminus at Cody
                                                     Drive
Sixtieth Street           North corporate limits     Wistful Vista Drive
Sixtieth (South) Street   Wistful Vista Drive        Grand Avenue
Sixty Eighth Street       Cody Drive                 Wistful Vista Drive
Sixty Eighth (South)      Wistful Vista Drive        South terminus of Sixty
Street                                               Eighth Street
Eighty First Street       Ashworth Road              E.P. True Parkway
                         E.P. True Parkway          Bridgewood Boulevard
Eighty First (South)      Bridgewood Boulevard       Mills Civic Parkway
Street
                         Mills Civic Parkway        South terminus of Eighty
                                                     First (South) Street
Eighty Eighth Street      Ashwood Road               Nine Iron Drive
                         University Avenue          Lake Drive
Eighty Eighth (South)     Mills Civic Parkway        Booneville Road
Street
Ninetieth Street          University Avenue          Kingman Drive
Ninety First (South)      Cascade Avenue             Stagecoach Drive
Street
                         Mills Civic Parkway        Cascade Avenue
                         Stagecoach Drive           Booneville Road
Ninety Second Street      North corporate limits     South terminus of Ninety
                                                     Second Street
Ninety Third (South)      Stagecoach Drive           Sugar Creek Drive
Street
                         Sugar Creek Drive          Booneville Road
Ninety Fifth (South)      Cascade Avenue             Stagecoach Drive
Street
                         Mills Civic Parkway        Cascade Avenue
                         Stagecoach Drive           Booneville Road
Ninety Eighth Street      University Avenue          Ashwood Road
One Hundredth (South)     Booneville Road            Stagecoach Drive
Street
 
(1985 Code §2.1-2.0601; amd. Ord. 891, 10-2-1989; Ord. 974, 11-1-1991; Ord.
1001, 3-30-1992; Ord. 1027, 9-14-1992; 1993 Code; Ord. 1103, 10-24-1994; Ord.
1195, 7-29-1996; Ord. 1208, 10-21-1996; Ord. 1324, 8-24-1998; Ord. 1347, 1-11-
1999; Ord. 1348, 1-11-1999; Ord. 1385, 9-7-1999; Ord. 1410, 5-30-2000; Ord.
1502, 12-9-2002; Ord. 1603, 10-25-2004; Ord. 1669, 1-3-2006; Ord. 1692, 6-5-
2006; Ord. 1718, 12-4-2006; Ord. 1722, 1-15-2007; Ord. 1752, 5-7-2007; Ord.
1768, 7-30-2007; Ord. 1968, 12-10-2012; Ord. 2004, 9-30-2013; Ord. 2039, 6-2-
2014; Ord. 2153, 6-13-2016; Ord. 2156, 7-11-2016; Ord. 2172, 10-17-2016; Ord.
2179, 10-31-2016; Ord. 2277, 2-5-2018; Ord. 2335, 12-26-2018; Ord. 2393, 12-2-
2019; Ord. 2433, 8-17-2020 ; Ord. 2537, 9-6-2022 )
6-9-3: STOPS OR YIELDS:
6-9-3-1: SPECIAL STOPS REQUIRED:
Every driver of a vehicle shall stop in accordance with the following:
Street Vehicles Traveling Shall Stop At
Street                         Vehicles Traveling Shall Stop At
Abram Drive                                       91st Street
Alley between Fifth Street and    North        Locust Street
Sixth Street
Army Post Road                                    Forty Second (South) Street
Aspen Drive                                       Sixty Third Street
Brookview Drive                   East         Thirty Second Street
Canyon Drive                                      Ninetieth Street
Cedarwood Drive/Cedarwood                         Ninety Fifth Street
Court
Center Street                                     Fifty Sixth Street
Coachlight Drive                                  Eighty First (South) Street
Coachlight Drive                                  Ninety first (South) Street
Colt Drive                                        Fifty Fifth Street
Corporate Drive                   East         Forty Fifth Street
Dakota Drive                                      Seventy First Street
Fairlawn Drive                                    Twenty Fourth Street
Frontage road (City school                        East access road City Hall
campus)                                           (805 feet east of centerline
                                                  of Waterford Drive)
                                                  West access road City Hall
                                                  (south of Waterford Drive)
Glenwood Drive                                    Thirty Third (South) Street
Heatherwood Drive                 South        Heatherwood Drive
                                  West         Heatherwood Drive
Hidden Creek                      East         Commerce Drive
High Street                       West         Forty Fifth (South) Street
Locust Street                                     Thirty Third Street
Maple Street                                      Thirtieth Street
                                  West         Fourteenth Street
Meadow Lane                       East         Twenty Seventh Street
                                                  Locust Street
Meadow Valley Drive/Forty                         Wistful Vista Drive
Ninth (South) Street
Mountain Avenue                   East         Fourteenth Street
Office Park Road                  West         Fifteenth Street
Office Plaza Drive North          South        Office Plaza Drive South
Orchard Drive                                     Sixty Third Street
                                                  Sixty Fifth Street
Pine Avenue                       West         Eleventh (South) Street
Pommel Place                                      Fortieth Street
Pommel Place                                      Seventy Sixth Street
Prospect Road                                     Ninth Street
                                                  Tenth Street
                                                  Eleventh Street
                                  West         Thirteenth Street
Red Sunset Drive/Red Sunset                       Ninety Fifth Street
Court
Reed Lane                                         Seventy First Street
Silver Street                                     Ninetieth Street
Valley Ridge Court                West         Briar Ridge
Valley View Drive                                 Thirty Fourth (South) Street
Walnut Street                                     Ninth Street
Westown Parkway                                   Eighty Eighth Street
Westown Place                     West         Thirty Sixth Street
Wistful Vista Drive               West         Eighty Second (South) Street
Woodland Avenue                   West         Fifteenth Street
Second Street                                     Elm Street
                                                  Locust Street
                                                  Maple Street
                                                  Walnut Street
Third Street                                      Elm Street
                                                  Locust Street
                                                  Maple Street
                                                  Walnut Street
Sixth Street                                      Elm Street
                                                  Locust Street
                                                  Walnut Street
Seventh Street                                    Elm Street
                                                  Locust Street
                                                  Maple Street
                                                  Walnut Street
Eleventh Street                   North        Maple Street
                                                  Office Park Road
                                                  Walnut Street
Twelfth Street                    North        Prospect Road
Seventeenth Street                                Pleasant Street
Eighteenth Street                 North        Pleasant Street
Twenty Sixth Street                               Crown Flair Drive
Thirtieth Street                  South        Maple Street
Thirty Sixth Street                               Aspen Drive
Thirty Seventh Street                             Brookview Drive
Forty Fifth (South) Street                        Westwood Drive
Fiftieth (South) Place                            Oakwood Lane
                                                  Park Circle
Sixtieth (Southwest) Street                       Kerry (Southwest) Street
Sixty Fifth Street                                Aspen Drive
Seventy Second Place                              Pommel Place
Eighty Eighth Street              North        Oxford Drive
Ninety Fourth Street              South        Bishop Drive
 
(1985 Code §2.1-2.0602; amd. Ord. 883, 9-5-1989; Ord. 891, 10-2-1989; Ord. 921,
8-6-1990; Ord. 938, 11-26-1990; Ord. 976, 11-1-1991; 1993 Code; Ord. 1194, 7-
29-1996; Ord. 1314, 6-29-1998; Ord. 1487, 7-8-2002; Ord. 1813, 9-8-2008; Ord.
1852, 12-28-2009; Ord. 1856, 1-25-2010; Ord. 1964, 10-29-2012; Ord. 1969, 12-
10-2012; Ord. 2040, 6-2-2014; Ord. 2073, 12-1-2014; Ord. 2094, 6-1-2015; Ord.
2164, 8-8-2016; Ord. 2214, 4-17-2017; Ord. 2308, 6-11-2018; Ord. 2325, 8-6-
2018; Ord. 2367, 6-3-2019; Ord. 2377, 8-5-2019; Ord. 2402, 1-6-2020; Ord. 2433,
8-17-2020; Ord. 2434, 8-17-2020; Ord. 2444, 10-5-2020; Ord. 2586, 11-20-2023;
Ord. 2597, 1-2-2024)
6-9-3-2: FOUR-WAY STOP INTERSECTIONS:
Every driver of a vehicle shall stop before entering the following designated
four-way stop intersections:
Grand Prairie Parkway (South) and Mills Civic Parkway
Fourth Street and Maple Street
Fourth Street and Vine Street
Sixth Street and Maple Street
Eighth Street and Vine Street
Eighth (South) Street and County Line (South) Road
Nineteenth Street and Vine Street
Twenty Second Street and Vine Street
Thirty Fifth Street and Western Hills Drive
Thirty Fifth (South) Street and Fuller Road
Thirty Ninth Street and Stonebridge Road
Thirty Ninth Street and Western Hills Drive
Forty Second Street and Woodland Avenue
Sixtieth (South) Street and E.P. True Parkway
Sixty Fourth (South) Street and Wistful Vista Drive
Eighty First Street and E.P. True Parkway
Eighty First Street/Eighty First Street (South) and Bridgewood Boulevard
(1985 Code §2.1-2.0603; amd. Ord. 895, 12-27-1989; Ord. 938, 11-26-1990; Ord.
975, 11-1-1991; 1993 Code; Ord. 1324, 8-24-1998; Ord. 1346, 1-11-1999; Ord.
1347, 1-11-1999; Ord. 1348, 1-11-1999; Ord. 1503, 12-9-2002; Ord. 1538, 8-4-
2003; Ord. 1666, 12-5-2005; Ord. 1742, 4-9-2007; Ord. 2065, 11-17-2014; Ord.
2295, 4-16-2018; Ord. 2309, 6-11-2018; Ord. 2538, 9-6-2022)
6-9-3-3: SCHOOL STOPS:
(Rep. by Ord. 1179, 5-20-1996)
6-9-3-4: SPECIAL YIELD REQUIRED:
Every driver of a vehicle shall yield in accordance with the following:
Street Vehicles Traveling And Turning Onto Shall Yield At
Street        Vehicles    And Turning Onto             Shall Yield At
              Traveling
Flagstone Way South       Right       Blue Stem Circle Blue Stem Circle
Grand Prairie
Parkway       North-South                              Veterans Parkway
(Southwest)
Office Plaza  South                                    Office Plaza Drive
Drive North                                            South
Prairie View  North       Right       Blue Stem Circle Blue Stem Circle
(South) Drive
              West        Right       Blue Stem Circle Blue Stem Circle
Village View  East        Right       Blue Stem Circle Blue Stem Circle
Drive
Fourth Street North       East        Grand Avenue     Grand Avenue
Eighth Street North       East        Center Street    Center Street
              South       West        Office Park Road Office Park Road
Ninety Second North-south n/a         n/a              Westown Parkway
Street
 
(1985 Code §2.1-2.0603; amd. Ord. 895, 12-27-1989; Ord. 938, 11-26-1990; Ord.
975, 11-1-1991; 1993 Code; Ord. 1324, 8-24-1998; Ord. 1346, 1-11-1999; Ord.
1347, 1-11-1999; Ord. 1348, 1-11-1999; Ord. 1503, 12-9-2002; Ord. 1538, 8-4-
2003; Ord. 1666, 12-5-2005; Ord. 1742, 4-9-2007; Ord. 2065, 11-17-2014; Ord.
2295, 4-16-2018; Ord. 2309, 6-11-2018; Ord. 2538, 9-6-2022)
6-9-4: ANGLE OR DIAGONAL PARKING:
Angle or diagonal parking shall be permitted only in the following locations:
 
Street         From                        To                             Side
Elm Street     Fifth Street                Alley between Fifth Street and North
                                           Sixth Street
Maple Street   Alley between Fifth Street  Sixth Street                   North
               and Sixth Street
Railroad Place Fourth Street               Fifth Street                   North
Walnut Street  Alley between Fourth Street Alley between Fifth Street and South
               and Fifth Street            Sixth Street
Fifth Street   Locust Street               Railroad Avenue                West
               Locust Street               Railroad Place                 East
 
(1985 Code §2.1-2.1003; amd. 1993 Code; Ord. 1201, 10-21-1996; Ord. 1317, 7-13-
1998)
6-9-5: PARKING PROHIBITED; ENFORCEMENT:
The Chief of Police and designees have authority to enforce all properly posted
no parking zones. (1993 Code)
6-9-5-1: NO PARKING ZONES:
No one shall stop, stand or park a vehicle in any of the following specifically
designated no parking zones except when necessary to avoid conflict with other
traffic or in compliance with the direction of a peace officer or traffic
control signal:
Street From To Side
Street               From                 To                    Side
Alley                200 block of Ninth   200 block of Eleventh North and south
                     Street               Street
Army Post Road       East corporate       West corporate limits  
                     limits
Ashworth Road        East corporate       West corporate limits  
                     limits
                     230 feet east of     220 feet west of
Aspen Drive          centerline on        centerline on         South
                     Fiftieth Street      Fiftieth Street
Beechtree Drive      Sixtieth Street      Sixty Eighth Street   South
                     Centerline of        150 feet south of
Bennett Drive        Nineteenth (South)   centerline of         South
                     Street               Nineteenth (South)
                                          Street
Bentley Drive        Fiftieth (South)     Fifty First (South)   South
                     Street               Street
Bishop Drive         Eighty Eighth Street Ninety Second Street  South
                     Eighty Eighth Street Ninety Eighth Street  South
                    Centerline of Ninety 400 feet west         South
                     Second Street
Booneville Road      Glen Oaks Drive      Sixtieth (South)       
                                          Street
Bridgewood Boulevard Jordan Creek Parkway West terminus         South
Bridgewood Drive     Cottonwood Lane      Bridgewood Boulevard  West
                    Cottonwood Lane      E.P. True Parkway     West
Bridgewood (South)   Bridgewood Boulevard Wistful Vista Drive   West
Drive
                    E.P. True Parkway    Wistful Vista Drive   West
Brown’s Woods DriveFirst (South) Street Eleventh (South)      South
                                          Street
Buffalo Road         East corporate       Nineteenth Street      
                     limits               Place
                     Eighty Eighth        250 feet west of
Cascade Avenue       (South) Street       centerline of Ninety  South
                                          First (South) Street
Cedar Drive          Woodland Avenue East Woodland Avenue West  South
Center Street        East terminus at     Hoak Drive            South
                     Walnut Creek
Center Street Place  Seventeenth Street   Twentieth Street       
Chalk Street         Eighty Eighth Street Ninety Eighth Street  South
                                          Alley between Fourth
Clegg Road           Fourth Street        Street and Fifth      South
                                          Street
                    169 feet east of     Eighth Street         South
                     Eighth Street
Coachlight Drive     Sixtieth (South)     Sixty Eighth (South)  South
                     Street               Street
                    Eighty First (South) Eighty Eighth (South) South
                     Street               Street
                    Eighty Fourth        Eighty Eighth (South) South
                     (South) Street       Street
Cody Drive           Sixty Fifth Place    Western terminus of   South
                                          Cody Drive
Corporate Drive      Forty Second Street  Fiftieth Street       South
Delavan Drive        Grand Avenue         Terminus of Delavan   South
                                          Drive
E.P. True Parkway    Grand Avenue         West corporate limits  
                     Alley between Fourth
Elm Street           Street and Fifth     Fifth Street          South
                     Street
                     145 feet east of
                    centerline of Eighth Eighth Street         South
                     Street
                     1,230 feet west of   310 feet east of
                     centerline of Thirty centerline of Fuller
Frontage road (City  Fifth (South) Street Road (west property   North and south
school campus)       (west side of        line of West Des
                     parking lot of       Moines School
                     library)             District)
Fuller Road          Grand Avenue         Mills Civic Parkway   South
                    Railroad Avenue      Grand Avenue           
                                          150 feet west of
Giles Street         Twenty Eighth Street centerline of Twenty  South
                                          Eighth Street
                     162 feet east of
                    centerline of Valley Valley West Drive     South
                     West Drive
Grand Avenue         East corporate       West corporate limits  
                     limits
Grand Prairie        North corporate      Raccoon River         West
Parkway (South)      limits
Grand Prairie                             Southern terminus of
Parkway (Southwest)  Raccoon River        Grand Prairie Parkway West
                                          (Southwest)
                     200 feet east of     200 feet west of
Harper Lane          centerline of Ninety centerline of Ninety  South
                     Second (South)       Second (South) Street
                     Street
Hawthorne Drive      Fiftieth (South)     Fifty First (South)   South
                     Street               Street
                     160 feet east of
                    centerline of        Fiftieth (South)      South
                     Fiftieth (South)     Street
                     Street
Hidden Point (South) Stagecoach Drive     Terminus of Hidden    West
Court                                     Point (South) Court
Hillside             Fourth Street        100 feet west of      South
                                          Fourth Street
                     112 feet east of
                    centerline of Fourth Fourth Street         South
                     Street
Industrial Circle    Eighteenth (South)   Nineteenth (South)    South
                     Street               Street
Jordan Creek Parkway North corporate      Bridgewood Boulevard  West
                     limits
Jordan Creek (South)                      South terminus of
Parkway              Bridgewood Boulevard Jordan Creek (South)  West
                                          Parkway
Kingman Avenue       Twentieth Street     Twenty Second Street  South
Knolls Court         Fifty Second Place   Pommel Place          West
                    Pommel Place         South terminal of     East
                                          Knolls Court
Lake Drive           Westown Parkway      Jordan Creek Parkway  South
Lincoln Street       First (South) Street Eleventh (South)      South
                                          Street
                     230 feet east of
                    centerline of        Fuller Road           South
                     Thirteenth (South)
                     Street
Locust Street        Fifth Street         Sixth Street          South
                     150 feet east of     25 feet west of
                    centerline of Meadow centerline of Meadow  South
                     Lane                 Lane
Maffitt Lake (SE)    East corporate       West corporate limits South
Road                 limits
Maple Street         Eleventh Street      Fourteenth Street      
                     Alley between Fifth
                    Street               Sixth Street          South
                     and Sixth Street
                     90 feet east of
                    centerline of Eighth Eighth Street         South
                     Street
                                          75 feet west of
                    Sixth Street         centerline of Sixth   South
                                          Street
                                          100 feet east of
                    Valley West Drive    centerline of Valley  South
                                          West Drive
                                          115 feet east of
Meadow Lane          Valley West Drive    centerline of Valley  South
                                          West Drive
Mills Civic Parkway  E.P. True Parkway    Terminus of Mills      
                                          Civic Parkway
                                          105 feet west of
Mountain Avenue      Fourteenth Street    centerline of         South
                                          Fourteenth Street
Office Park Road     Eighth Street        Fifteenth Street       
Office Plaza Drive   Vista Drive          Jordan Creek Parkway  South
                     200 feet north of
Park Lane            the centerline of    Vine Street           West
                     Vine Street
Pine Avenue          East corporate       Western terminus      South
                     limits
Pleasant Street      Centerline of Forty  Centerline of         South
                     Ninth Street         Fiftieth Street
                    Fifty Eighth Street  Fifty Ninth Street    South
Pommel Circle        Sixtieth Street      East end of cul-de-   South
                                          sac
                     77 feet north of     41 feet south of
Prairie View Drive   centerline of Fifty  center of Fifty Third West
                     Third Street         Street
                     240 feet south of
                    center of Boulder    South terminus        Both
                     Drive
Prairie View (South)                      South terminus of
Drive                Prairie View Drive   Prairie View (South)  West
                                          Drive
                                          48 feet west of
Prospect Street      Grand Avenue         centerline of Grand   South
                                          Avenue
                     46 feet east of
                    centerline of        Thirteenth Street     South
                     Thirteenth Street
Raccoon River Drive  Grand Avenue         West corporate limits South
Railroad Avenue      East corporate       Grand Avenue           
                     limits
Railroad Place       Fourth Street        Fifth Street          South
                                          360 feet north of
Scenic Valley Drive  Grand Avenue         centerline of Grand   West
                                          Avenue
Soteria (SE) Avenue  Willow Creek (SE)    County Line (SE) Road West
                     Drive
Stagecoach Drive     Mills Civic Parkway  West terminus of      South
                                          Stagecoach Drive
Stonebridge Road     Stonebridge Circle   Fifty First Street    South
                     Eighty Eighth        250 feet west of
Sugar Creek Drive    (South) Street       centerline of Ninety  South
                                          Second (South) Street
                     250 feet east of
Sugar Street         centerline of Ninety Ninety Third (South)  South
                     Second (South)       Street
                     Street
                     Centerline of Thirty 130 feet west of
Sylvania Drive       Second Street        centerline of Thirty  South
                                          Second Street
University Avenue    East corporate       West corporate limits  
                     limits
                     150 feet east of
Val High Road        centerline of Eighth Eighth Street         South
                     Street
Veterans Parkway     East corporate       Western terminus of   South
                     limits               Veterans Parkway
Village View Drive   Sixtieth (South)     Sixty Fourth (South)  South
                     Street               Street
                     Centerline of        195 feet south of
Vine Street          Ashworth Road        centerline of         West
                                          Ashworth Road
                    East corporate       Fourth Street          
                     limits
                    Fifth Street         Twenty Seventh Street  
                     78 feet east of
                    centerline of Fifth  Fifth Street          North
                     Street
Vista Drive          Sixtieth Street      Jordan Creek Parkway   
                     272 feet east of
                    centerline of        Sixtieth Street       South
                     Sixtieth Street
Walnut Street        East corporate       Second Street          
                     limits
                    Fifty First Street   Fifty Second Street   South
Walnut Woods Drive   Eleventh (South)     Forty Second (South)  West
                     Street               Street
                     160 feet east of
Waterford Drive      centerline of        Fiftieth (South)      South
                     Fiftieth (South)     Street
                     Street
West Lakes Parkway   North corporate      Terminus of West       
                     limits               Lakes Parkway
Westown Parkway      Nineteenth Place     West terminus of      South
                                          Westown Parkway
Westown Place        Thirty Fifth Street  Thirty Sixth Street    
White Crane (SE)     Soteria (SE) Avenue  Eastern terminus      South
Road
Wistful Vista Drive  Prairie View (South) West terminus of      South
                     Drive                Wistful Vista Drive
                    Sixtieth (South)     Sixty Eighth (South)  South
                     Street               Street
Woodland Avenue      Cedar Drive (west    Fiftieth Street        
                     intersection)
                    Centerline of        Centerline of         South
                     Twentieth Street     Twentieth Place
                     Centerline of Twenty 166 feet west of
                    Second Street        centerline of Twenty  South
                                          Second Street
                     Centerline of Twenty 250 feet east of
                    Sixth Street         centerline of Twenty  South
                                          Sixth Street
                    Thirty Third Street  Forty Ninth Street     
                     (north intersection)
                     115 feet east of     Centerline of Thirty
                    centerline on Thirty First Street          South
                     First Street
                     Centerline of        235 feet south of
Woodland Park Drive  Woodland Avenue      centerline of         West
                                          Woodland Avenue
First Street         North corporate      Railroad Avenue        
                     limits
First (South) Street Railroad Avenue      South corporate        
                                          limits
                                          260 feet south
Fourth Street        Ashworth Road        centerline of Grand   West
                                          Avenue
                    Hillside Avenue      Railroad Avenue       West
                     (south intersection)
Fourth Street        260 feet south of    Hillside Avenue
(cont.)              centerline of Grand  (south intersection)  West1
                     Avenue
                                          90 feet south of
Fifth Street         Grand Avenue         centerline of Grand   West
                                          Avenue
                    Vine Street          Locust Street         West
                                          45 feet south of
                    Walnut Street        centerline of Walnut  East and West
                                          Street
                     230 feet north of    200 feet south of
                    centerline of        centerline of         West
                     Colonial Circle      Colonial Circle
                                          170 feet south of
Sixth Street         Maple Street         centerline of Maple   West
                                          Street
                     96 feet north of
                    centerline of        Ashworth Road         West
                     Ashworth Road
                     129 feet north of
                    centerline of        Railroad Avenue       West
                     Railroad Avenue
Eighth Street        North corporate      Railroad Avenue        
                     limits
                                          80 feet south of
Tenth Street         Grand Avenue         centerline of Grand   West
                                          Avenue
                     100 feet north of
                    center of Vine       Vine Street           West
                     Street
                                          67 feet south of
Eleventh Street      Grand Avenue         centerline of Grand   West
                                          Avenue
                    Office Park Road     Ashworth Road          
                                          125 feet south of
                    Vine Street          centerline of Vine    West
                                          Street
                     75 feet north of
                    center of Vine       Vine Street           West
                     Street
Eleventh (South)     Brown’s Woods DriveArmy Post Road        West
Street
                    Railroad Avenue      Lincoln Street        West
                                          133 feet south of
Twelfth Street       Ashworth Road        centerline of         West
                                          Ashworth Road
                     Centerline of Vine   106 feet south of
                    Street               centerline of Vine    West
                                          Street
Twelfth Street       60 feet north of
(cont.)              centerline of Vine   Vine Street           West
                     Street
                     167 feet north of
                    centerline of Grand  Grand Avenue          West
                     Avenue
Thirteenth Street    Ashworth Road        Vine Street            
                    Locust Street        Walnut Street         West
                                          78 feet south of
                    Vine Street          centerline of Vine    West
                                          Street
Thirteenth (South)   Railroad Avenue      Lincoln Street        West
Street
                     Centerline of        102 feet south of
Fourteenth Street    Ashworth Road        centerline of         West
                                          Ashworth Road
                    Mountain Avenue      Grand Avenue           
                     280 feet north of
                    centerline of Maple  Railroad Avenue       West
                     Street
                                          100 feet south of
Sixteenth Street     Vine Street          centerline of Vine    West
                                          Street
Sixteenth (South)                         1,556 feet south of
Street               Fuller Road          centerline of Fuller  West
                                          Road
                                          182 feet south of
Seventeenth Street   Buffalo Road         centerline of Buffalo West
                                          Road
                     130 feet north of    150 feet south of
                    centerline of Center centerline of Center  West
                     Place                Street
                     Centerline of        150 feet south of
Eighteenth Street    Buffalo Road         centerline of Buffalo West
                                          Road
Eighteenth (South)   Fuller Road          Industrial Circle     West
Street
                                          245 feet south of
Nineteenth Street    Ashworth Road        centerline of         West
                                          Ashworth Road
                    Centerline of Vine   North curb line of    West
                     Street               Pearl Street
                    Elm Circle           E.P. True Parkway     West
                     157 feet north of    170 feet south of
                    centerline of Vine   centerline of Vine    West
                     Street               Street
Nineteenth (South)                        1,165 feet south of
Street               Fuller Road          centerline of Fuller  West
                                          Road
                    Grand Avenue         Fuller Road            
Nineteenth Street    Centerline of        160 feet south of
Place                Buffalo Road         centerline of Buffalo West
                                          Road
Twentieth Street     Kingman Avenue       Center Street Place    
                     150 feet north of
Twenty First Street  centerline of Vine   Vine Street           West
                     Street
Twenty Second Street North corporate      Ashworth Road          
                     limits
                                          130 feet south of
                    Vine Street          centerline of Vine    West
                                          Street
Twenty Second        Army Post Road       Maffitt Lake Road     West
(South) Street
Twenty Third Street  Ashworth Road        Crown Flair Drive      
                     100 feet north of
Twenty Fourth Street centerline of Vine   Vine Street           West
                     Street
Twenty Fifth Street  North corporate      Westown Parkway        
                     limits
                                          140 feet south of
Twenty Eighth Street Ashworth Road        centerline of         West
                                          Ashworth Road
                    North corporate      Ashworth Road          
                     limits
                     150 feet north of
                    centerline of Giles  Giles Street          West
                     Street
Twenty Ninth Street  Westown Parkway      To terminus at         
                                          Thirtieth Street
Thirtieth Street     Westown Parkway      To terminus at Twenty  
                                          Ninth Street
                     245 feet north of
                    centerline of Vine   Vine Street           West
                     Street
Thirty First Street  North corporate      Westown Parkway        
                     limits
                     Centerline of        170 feet south of
Thirty Second Street Sylvania Drive       centerline of         West
                                          Sylvania Drive
                     235 feet north of
                    centerline of Vine   Vine Street           West
                     Street
Thirty Fifth Street  North corporate      E.P. True Parkway      
                     limits
Thirty Fifth (South) Army Post Road       Maffitt Lake Road     West
Street
                    Mills Civic Parkway  Grand Avenue           
Thirty Sixth Street  North corporate      Westown Parkway        
                     limits
                                          113 feet south of
Thirty Ninth Street  Ashworth Road        centerline of         West
                                          Ashworth Road
                     100 feet north of    147 feet south of
                    centerline of        centerline of Western West
                     Western Hills Drive  Hills Drive
                     1,010 feet north of
                    centerline of E.P.   E.P. True Parkway     West
                     True Parkway
                                          75 feet south of
Fortieth Street      Ashworth Road        centerline of         West
                                          Ashworth Road
Forty First (South)  E.P. True Parkway    Mills Civic Parkway   West
Street
Forty Second Street  North corporate      Ashworth Road          
                     limits
Forty Second (South) Walnut Woods Drive   Maffitt Lake Road     West
Street
                                          75 feet south of
44th Street          Ashworth Road        centerline of         West
                                          Ashworth Road
Forty Fifth Street   Corporate Drive      Westown Parkway       West
Forty Eighth Street  Corporate Drive      Westown Parkway       West
                     North corporate      574 feet south of
Fiftieth Street      limits               centerline of E.P.     
                                          True Parkway
Fiftieth (South)     574 feet south of    South corporate
Street               centerline of E.P.   limits                 
                     True Parkway
Fifty First (South)  Hawthorne Drive      Park Circle           West
Street
Fifty Second Place   Fifty Second Court   Aspen Drive           West
                                          125 feet south of
Fifty Second Street  E.P. True Parkway    centerline of E.P.    West
                                          True Parkway
Fifty Third Place    Prairie View Drive   Fifty Third Street    West
                                          60 feet south of
Fifty Sixth Street   EP True Parkway      centerline of         East
                                          Highland Court
Fifty Ninth Place    Centerline of        Centerline of         West
                     University Avenue    Sixtieth Street
Fifty Ninth Street   Center Street        Pleasant Street       West
Sixtieth Street      North corporate      Delavan Drive          
                     limits
Sixtieth (South)     Delavan Drive        South corporate        
Street                                    limits
Sixty Fourth Street  Wistful Vista Drive  Beechtree Drive       West
Sixty Fourth (South) Mills Civic Parkway  Wistful Vista Drive   West
Street
                    Mills Civic Parkway  Sixty Eighth (South)  South
                                          Street
Sixty Eighth Street  Cody Drive           E.P. True Parkway     West
                    Cody Drive           Wistful Vista Drive   West
                    North corporate      Westown Parkway        
                     limits
Sixty Eighth (South)                      South terminal of
Street               Wistful Vista Drive  Sixty Eighth (South)  West
                                          Street
Seventy First Street North corporate      Westown Parkway        
                     limits
                                          185 feet north of
78th Place           EP True Parkway      centerline of EP True West
                                          Parkway
Eighty First Street  North terminus       Bridgewood Boulevard  West
Eighty First (South) Bridgewood Boulevard Mills Civic Parkway   West
Street
Eighty Fourth Street E.P. True Parkway    Ashworth Road         West
                                          250 feet south of
Ninetieth Street     Canyon Street        centerline of Westown West
                                          Parkway
                    University Avenue    350 feet south of     West
                                          Bishop Drive
Ninety Second Street North corporate      South terminus of     West
                     limits               Ninety Second Street
Ninety Third (South) 250 feet north of    200 feet south of
Street               centerline of        centerline of         West
                     Stagecoach Drive     Stagecoach Drive
                     200 feet north of    200 feet south of
                    centerline of Harper centerline of Harper  West
                     Lane                 Lane
Ninety Fourth Street University Avenue    Bishop Drive          West
Ninety Fifth Street  Chalk Street         Red Sunset Drive      West
Ninety Sixth Street  University Avenue    Bishop Drive          West
One Hundredth                             Centerline of
(South) Street       Stagecoach Drive     Wildfire (South)      West
                                          Avenue
 
Note:
    1.    Except for hours of 6:00 P.M. to 2:00 A.M., Sundays and legal
holidays.
(1985 Code § 2.1-2.1009; amd. Ord. 880, 7-24-1989; Ord. 885, 10-2-1989; Ord.
890, 12-2-1989; Ord. 949, 5-13-1991; Ord. 973, 11-1-1991; Ord. 991, 2-18-1992;
Ord. 1008, 6-12-1992; Ord. 1029, 9-14-1992; Ord. 1034, 10-26-1992; Ord. 1044,
2-1-1993; 1993 Code; Ord. 1056, 7-19-1993; Ord. 1067, 11-8-1993; Ord. 1069, 11-
8-1993; Ord. 1102, 10-24-1994; Ord. 1111, 11-7-1994; Ord. 1133, 6-5-1995; Ord.
1134, 6-5-1995; Ord. 1135, 6-5-1995; Ord. 1159, 11-8-1995; Ord. 1171, 3-25-
1996; Ord. 1182, 6-3-1996; Ord. 1192, 7-15-1996; Ord. 1204, 10-21-1996; Ord.
1206, 10-21-1996; Ord. 1218, 11-18-1996; Ord. 1263, 7-28-1997; Ord. 1333, 10-5-
1998; Ord. 1381, 7-26-1999; Ord. 1385, 9-7-1999; Ord. 1391, 11-15-1999; Ord.
1403, 4-17-2000; Ord. 1404, 4-17-2000; Ord. 1450, 10-1-2001; Ord. 1464, 12-10-
2001; Ord. 1466, 12-26-2001; Ord. 1473, 4-1-2002; Ord. 1489, 9-3-2002; Ord.
1493, 10-14-2002; Ord. 1496, 11-11-2002; Ord. 1499, 11-25-2002; Ord. 1504, 12-
9-2002; Ord. 1527, 4-28-2003; Ord. 1549, 9-29-2003; Ord. 1551, 10-27-2003; Ord.
1594, 8-30-2004; Ord. 1621, 2-28-2005; Ord. 1667, 12-5-2005; Ord. 1670, 1-3-
2006; Ord. 1685, 5-8-2006; Ord. 1693, 6-5-2006; Ord. 1705, 8-28-2006; Ord.
1719, 12-4-2006; Ord. 1723, 1-15-2007; Ord. 1790, 12-3-2007; Ord. 1798, 2-11-
2008; Ord. 1861, 4-5-2010; Ord. 1867, 5-17-2010; Ord. 1884, 11-1-2010; Ord.
1885, 11-1-2010; Ord. 1915, 4-18-2011; Ord. 1919, 5-31-2011; Ord. 1952, 6-11-
2012; Ord. 1966, 11-12-2012; Ord. 2005, 9-30-2013; Ord. 2051, 8-25-2014; Ord.
2095, 6-1-2015; Ord. 2131, 12-14-2015; Ord. 2158, 7-11-2016; Ord. 2161, 7-25-
2016; Ord. 2173, 10-17-2016; Ord. 2200, 2-21-2017; Ord. 2215, 4-17-2017; Ord.
2278, 2-5-2018; Ord. 2310, 6-11-2018; Ord. 2317, 7-9-2018; Ord. 2336, 12-26-
2018; Ord. 2343, 2-4-2019; Ord. 2374, 7-15-2019; Ord. 2395, 12-2-2019; Ord.
2419, 6-15-2020; Ord. 2420, 6-15-2020; Ord. 2489, 9-7-2021; Ord. 2496, 11-1-
2021; Ord. 2601, 2-19-2024; Ord. 2607, 4-15-2024; Ord. 2644, 12-2-2024)
6-9-5-2: NO PARKING ON NORTH SIDE OF STREETS:
Parking of vehicles in the street on the north side of all streets in the City,
running in an east to west direction is hereby prohibited, except for:
Street From To
Street          From                 To
Cedar Drive     Woodland Avenue East Woodland Avenue West
Cody Drive      Sixty Eighth Street  Seventy Second Place
Elm Street      Fourth Street        Seventh Street
Maple Street    Fourth Street        Sixth Street
Pleasant Street Fifty Eighth Street  Fifty Ninth Street
Pommel Circle   Sixtieth Street      East end of cul-de-sac
Railroad Place  Fourth Street        Fifth Street
Vine Street     Fourth Street        Fifth Street
Walnut Street   Fifty First Street   Fifty Second Street
 
(1993 Code; amd. Ord. 1135, 6-5-1995; Ord. 1797, 2-11-2008; Ord. 1884, 11-1-
2010; Ord. 1885, 11-1-2010; Ord. 2607, 4-15-2024)
6-9-5-3: NO PARKING ON EAST SIDE OF STREETS:
Parking of vehicles in the street on the east side of all streets in the City
running in a north to south direction is hereby prohibited, except as follows:
Street From To
Street               From               To
Knolls Court         Fifty Second Place Pommel Place
Fifth Street         Vine Street        Railroad Place
Twenty Fifth Street  Crown Flair Drive  Fairlawn Drive
Fifty Second Court   Fifty Second Place Aspen Drive
Fifty Third Place    Prairie View Drive Fifty Third Street
Fifty Sixth Street   E.P. True Parkway  Beechtree Drive
Fifty Ninth Street   Center Street      Pleasant Street
Eighty Fourth Street Aspen Drive        290 feet south of Ashworth Road
 
(1985 Code §2.1-2.1001; amd. 1993 Code; Ord. 1066, 10-25-1993; Ord. 1202, 10-
21-1996; Ord. 1218, 11-18-1996; Ord. 1868, 5-17-2010; Ord. 2420, 6-15-2020)
6-9-5-4: SPECIAL RESTRICTED NO PARKING AREAS:
No one shall stop, stand or park a vehicle in any of the following specifically
designated no parking zones during the hours specifically outlined in the
following subsections, except only when necessary to avoid conflict with other
traffic or in compliance with the direction of a peace officer or traffic
control signal:
A.   No parking, school days (August 15 through June 15), 8:00 A.M. to 4:00
P.M., Monday through Friday:
Street Side From To
Street                Side  From                  To
Aspen Drive           South Thirty Fifth Street   Thirty Eighth Street
                      South Thirty Ninth Street   Fortieth Street
Belle Mar Drive       West  Woodland Avenue       Maplenol Drive
Brookview Drive       South Thirty Second Street  Thirty Eighth Street
Clared Circle         South Marcourt Lane         End of cul-de-sac
Colt Drive            South Forty First Street    Forty Second Street
Dakota Drive          South Thirty Ninth Street   Fortieth Street
Denny Court           South Thirty First Street   End of cul-de-sac
Francrest Drive       South Thirty Ninth Street   Maplenol Drive
Maplenol Circle       West  Maplenol Drive        End of cul-de-sac
Maplenol Drive        West  Ashworth Road         Belle Mar Drive
                      West  Woodland Avenue       Belle Mar Drive
Marcourt Lane         West  Francrest Drive       Maplenol Drive
Orchard Circle        South Thirty First Street   End of cul-de-sac
Orchard Drive         South Thirty First Street   End of cul-de-sac
Pleasant Street       South Thirty First Street   Thirty Second Street
                            224 feet east of      248 feet west of
                      South centerline of Thirty  centerline of Thirty Third
                            Third Street          Street
Pommel Place          South Thirty Fifth Street   Thirty Ninth Street
Prospect Avenue       South Thirty Second Street  Thirty Third Street
Saundra Circle        South Cul-de-sac            Thirty Second Street
Sylvania Drive        South Twenty Eighth Street  Thirty First Street
                      South Thirty Second Street  Thirty Third Street
Vividell Circle       South
Vividell Lane         West  Woodland Avenue       Belle Mar Drive
Woodland Avenue       South Twenty Eighth Street  Thirty Third Street
                                                  intersection (north)
Seventeenth Street    West  Center Place          Buffalo Road
Twenty Third Street   West  Crown Flair Drive     Prospect Avenue
Thirty First Street   West  Pleasant Street       Woodland Avenue
Thirty Second Street  West  Sylvania Drive        Ashworth Road
                      West  Pleasant Street       Woodland Avenue
Thirty Third Street   West  Pleasant Street       Sylvania Drive
                                                  intersection (east)
                      West  Pleasant Street       Woodland Avenue
                            100 feet south of     100 feet north of
                      West  centerline of Western centerline of Stonebridge
                            Hills Drive           Drive
Thirty Fourth Street  West  Brookview Drive       Meadow Lane
Thirty Sixth Street   West  Brookview Drive       Aspen Drive
                      West  Aspen Drive           Pommel Place
Thirty Seventh Street West  Ashworth Road         End of cul-de-sac
Thirty Eighth Street  West  Brookview Drive       Aspen Drive
                      West  Pommel Place          Western Hills Drive
Thirty Ninth Street   West  Ashworth Road         Dakota Drive
Forty First Street    West  Ashworth Road         Aspen Drive
Forty Second Street   West  Colt Drive            Aspen Drive
 
B.   No parking, school days (August 15 through June 15), 8:00 A.M. to 4:00
P.M., Monday through Saturday:
 
Street              Side From            To
Thirty Ninth Street West Woodland Avenue Ashworth Road
Fortieth Street     West Ashworth Road   Western Hills Drive
 
C.   For the purpose of protecting public safety, the City may designate
temporary no parking areas as necessitated by a public improvement project for
the duration of the public improvement project. A parking ban under this
subsection must be recommended by the Director of the Department of
Engineering, approved by the City Manager, posted on the City website, and the
no parking area marked with signage twenty-four (24) hours prior to the
implementation of the parking ban. During a parking ban under this subsection,
no one shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle in any portion of the designated no
parking area, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in
compliance with the direction of a peace officer or traffic control signal.
(Ord. 1169, 3-25-1996; amd. Ord. 1151, 9-11-1995; Ord. 1170, 3-25-1996; Ord.
1183, 6-3-1996; Ord. 1245, 5-5-1997; Ord. 1375, 6-28-1999; Ord. 1386, 9-7-1999;
Ord. 1408, 5-30-2000; Ord. 1409, 5-30-2000; Ord. 1443, 4-30-2001; Ord. 1459,
10-29-2001; Ord. 1471, 3-18-2002; Ord. 1486, 6-24-2002; Ord. 1533, 7-7-2003;
Ord. 1535, 8-4-2003; Ord. 1546, 9-29-2003; Ord. 1547, 9-29-2003; Ord. 1555, 11-
10-2003; Ord. 1556, 11-10-2003; Ord. 1639, 7-5-2005; Ord. 1650, 10-10-2005;
Ord. 1658, 10-24-2005; Ord. 1659, 11-7-2005; Ord. 1660, 11-7-2005; Ord. 1664,
11-21-2005; Ord. 1936, 10-31-2011; Ord. 2054, 9-8-2014; Ord. 2183, 11-14-2016;
Ord. 2253, 10-2-2017; Ord. 2375, 7-15-2019)
6-9-5-5: ALL NIGHT PARKING PROHIBITED:
No person, except physicians or other persons on emergency calls, shall park a
vehicle on any of the following named streets between the hours of two o'clock
(2:00) A.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M. of any day:
Street Side From To
Street         Side  From          To
Elm Street     North Fourth Street Sixth Street
               South Fourth Street Alley between Sixth Street and Seventh
                                   Street
Maple Street   North Fourth Street Sixth Street
               South Fourth Street Alley between Fifth Street and Sixth Street
Railroad Place North Fourth Street Fifth Street
Walnut Street  South Fourth Street Alley between Fifth Street and Sixth Street
Fifth Street   East  Vine Avenue   Railroad Place
               West  Locust Street Railroad Avenue
Sixth Street   West  Elm Street    Maple Street
 
(1985 Code §2.1-2.1014; amd. 1993 Code; Ord. 1146, 7-17-1995; Ord. 1203, 10-21-
1996; Ord. 1915, 4-18-2011; Ord. 2283, 3-5-2018)
6-9-5-6: SCHOOL LOADING ZONES:
The following designated locations are hereby reserved for the exclusive use of
school buses to load and unload passengers and such designated locations shall
be appropriately marked by signs. It shall be unlawful to stop any vehicle
other than a school bus in any of the locations designated in this section
between the hours of eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. and four o'clock (4:00) P.M. on
school days, except to avoid an accident or in obedience to the signal of a
police officer or a traffic control device.
 
Street      Side  From                           To
Vine Street North 240 feet east of centerline of 60 feet west of centerline of
                  Sixteenth Street               Sixteenth Street
                  123 feet west of centerline of 163 feet west of Fourteenth
            North Fourteenth Street (south       Street (south intersection)
                  intersection)
 
(1985 Code §2.1-2.1023; amd. 1993 Code; Ord. 1070, 11-8-1993; Ord. 1071, 11-8-
1993)
6-9-6: PARKING LIMITED:
6-9-6-1: TEN MINUTE LIMITED PARKING:
Subject to all other provisions of the Traffic Code, it shall be unlawful to
park a vehicle directly in front of the Municipal Building, when signs are
posted, for more than ten (10) minutes, except on Sunday.
Additional locations:
The southerly 3 parking stalls of the City's parking lot along the rear of lot
line of the north 36 feet of Lot 11, block 11 of Valley Junction, official plat
of West Des Moines, Iowa. Between the hours of 5:00 P.M. to 10:00 P.M. (1993
Code)
The 3 parking stalls directly behind and adjacent to the northwest corner of
the City of West Des Moines Human Services Office, 318 5th Street, Lots 4 and
5, block 19 of the 1st Addition to Valley Junction, official plat of West Des
Moines, Iowa. (Ord. 1554, 11-10-2003)
6-9-6-2: TWO HOUR LIMITED PARKING:
(Rep. by Ord. 1145, 7-17-1995)
6-9-6-3: TWENTY FOUR HOUR OFF STREET PARKING LIMIT:
It shall be unlawful to park a vehicle continuously at the following locations
for more than twenty four (24) hours:
Lot A:
All of Lots 12, 13, 15 and 16, block 19, 1st Addition to Valley Junction.
Lot B:
All of Lots 13, 14, 15, 16 and 17, block 10, Valley Junction.
Parts of Lots 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 11 and 12, block 10, Valley Junction
which are either owned by the City or on which the City holds an easement for
public parking.
Lot C:
All of Lots 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 14 and 17, block 11, Valley Junction.
Parts of Lots 6, 7, 8, 11, 12, 13, 16 and 18, block 11, Valley Junction which
are either owned by the City or on which the City holds an easement for public
parking.
Lot D:
All of Lots 15, 16, and 17, block 5, Valley Junction.
Parts of Lots 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 11, 12, 13 and 14, block 5, Valley Junction
which are either owned by the City or on which the City holds an easement for
public parking.
Lot E:
All of Lots 4, 5 and 6, block 4, Valley Junction.
Parts of Lots 10 and 13, block 4, Valley Junction which are either owned by the
City or on which the City holds an easement for public parking.
(1985 Code §2.1-2.1020; amd. 1993 Code)
6-9-6-4: ONE HOUR LIMITED PARKING:
Subject to all other provisions of this chapter, it shall be unlawful to park a
vehicle in any block for more than one hour between the hours of nine o'clock
(9:00) A.M. and six o'clock (6:00) P.M., except Sundays, upon the following
described streets:
 
Street       Side  From          To
Maple Street North Fourth Street Alley between Fourth Street and Fifth Street
            South Fourth Street Alley between Fourth Street and Fifth Street
 
(Ord. 1127, 4-24-1995)
6-9-6-5: FOUR HOUR LIMITED PARKING:
Subject to all other provisions of this chapter, it shall be unlawful to park a
vehicle in any block for more than four (4) hours between the hours of nine
o'clock (9:00) A.M. and six o'clock (6:00) P.M., except Sundays, upon the
following described streets:
Street Side From To
Street         Side  From                     To
Elm Street     North Fourth Street            Seventh Street
               South Fourth Street            Alley between Sixth Street and
                                              Seventh Street
Maple Street   North Fourth Street            Sixth Street
               South Fourth Street            Alley between Fifth Street and
                                              Sixth Street
Railroad Place North Fourth Street            Fifth Street
Walnut Street  South Fourth Street            Alley between Fifth Street and
                                              Sixth Street
Fifth Street   East  133 feet south of Locust Railroad Place
                     Street
               West  Walnut Street            Railroad Place
 
(Ord. 1145, 7-17-1995; amd. Ord. 1915, 4-18-2011; Ord. 2284, 3-5-2018)
6-9-6-6: THIRTY MINUTE LIMITED PARKING, POST OFFICE HOURS:
Subject to all other provisions of this chapter, it shall be unlawful to park a
vehicle in the designated area described below during normal U.S. Post Office
business hours for more than thirty (30) minutes:
 
Street       Side From                         To
Fifth Street West 100 feet south centerline of 300 feet south centerline of
                  Locust Street                Locust Street
 
(Ord. 1200, 10-21-1996)
6-9-7: TURNING RESTRICTIONS:
6-9-7-1: RIGHT TURN ON RED SIGNAL PROHIBITED:
Vehicular traffic facing a steady red signal shall not proceed or make a right
turn at the following locations when appropriate signs are in place:
 
Street Direction To                Direction
I-235  West      Valley West Drive North
I-235  West      Fiftieth Street   North
 
(1985 Code §2.1-2.0503; amd. Ord. 992, 2-18-1992; Ord. 1728, 2-12-2007)
6-9-7-2: LEFT TURN PROHIBITED:
Vehicle traffic proceeding as described below shall not proceed or make a left
turn at the following locations when appropriate signs are in place:
 
Street            Direction To                      Direction
Valley West Drive South     Eastbound entrance ramp East
 
(Ord. 1228, 2-10-1997; amd. Ord. 1506, 1-6-2003; Ord. 1583, 6-21-2004)
6-9-7-3: U-TURN PROHIBITED:
Vehicle traffic proceeding as described below shall not proceed or make a U-
turn at the following locations when appropriate signs are in place:
 
Street               Direction  Location
Ashworth Road        Eastbound  690 feet east of the centerline of Jordan Creek
                                Parkway
Jordan Creek Parkway Northbound Westown Parkway
Jordan Creek Parkway Soutbound  850' South of EP True Parkway
Mills Civic Parkway  Westbound  Prairie View Drive
 
(Ord. 1526, 4-28-2003; amd. Ord. 2237, 7-24-2017; Ord. 2639, 10-21-2024)
6-9-8: ONE-WAY TRAFFIC REQUIRED:
Upon the following streets and alleys vehicular traffic, other than permitted
cross traffic, shall move only in the indicated direction when appropriate
signs are in place:
 
Street                From                    To              Direction
Alley between Fifth   110 feet north of
Street and Sixth      centerline of Railroad  Railroad Avenue Northbound
Street                Avenue
Alley between Sixth   260 feet south of Maple
Street and Seventh    Street centerline       Railroad Avenue Northbound
Street
Alley between Seventh
Street and Eighth     Maple Street            Railroad Avenue Northbound
Street
Railroad Place        Fourth Street           Fifth Street    Eastbound
Wistful Vista Drive   Traffic circle          Traffic circle  Counterclockwise
Fifth Street          Vine Street             Railroad Avenue Northbound
 
(1985 Code §2.1-2.0901; amd. Ord. 980, 11-15-1991; 1993 Code; Ord. 1405, 4-17-
2000; Ord. 1630, 5-9-2005; Ord. 2048, 8-11-2014)
6-9-9: CHANNELIZED INTERSECTIONS:
Traffic at the following channelized intersections shall move in accordance
with traffic control devices located at such intersections:
 
Street          On Curve Approaching
Westown Parkway Eastbound lane of Westown Parkway
Fourth Street   Grand Avenue
 
(1985 Code §2.1-2.0902; amd. Ord. 1315, 7-13-1998; Ord. 1837, 8-24-2009)
6-9-10: SPECIAL SPEED ZONES:
No person shall drive a motor vehicle on the following designated streets or
portions thereof, at a speed in excess of that specified herein. Special speed
zones are established as follows:
All Granular Surfaced Roadways
On all granular surfaced roadways within the City limits at 35 miles per hour
unless a special speed zone is established which requires a lower speed limit.
Street From To Speed
               (mph)
Street                  From                    To                       Speed
                                                                         (mph)
Adams Street            East corporate limits   West corporate limits    35
Army Post Road          East corporate limits   Western terminus         45
Ashworth Road           East corporate limits   West corporate limits    35
                        Sixty Eighth Street     Seventy Second Street    25/35*
Booneville Road         Eighty Eighth (South)   Western terminus         35
                        Street
Bridgewood Boulevard    Jordan Creek Parkway    West terminus            35
Brown's Woods Drive     First (South) Street    Eleventh (South) Street  35
Cascade Avenue          Jordan Creek (South)    Eighty First (South)     35
                        Parkway                 Street
Chalk Street            Eighty Eighth Street    Ninety Second Street     35
E.P. True Parkway       Grand Avenue            Prairie View Drive       35
                                                1,300 feet east of
                        Jordan Creek Parkway    centerline of Eighty     35
                                                First Street
                        Prairie View Drive      Fifty Sixth Street       25/35*
                        Fifty Sixth Street      Sixtieth Street          35
                        Sixtieth Street         Jordan Creek Parkway     40
                        Eighty First Street     West corporate limits    35
                        1,300 feet east of
                        centerline of Eighty    Eighty First Street      25/35*
                        First Street
                                                1,285 feet west of
Fuller Road             Railroad Avenue         centerline of Thirty     35
                                                Fifth (South) Street
                        1,305 feet east of
                        centerline of Mills     Mills Civic Parkway      35
                        Civic Parkway
                        1,285 feet west of      1,305 feet east of
                        centerline of Thirty    centerline of Mills      25/35*
                        Fifth (South) Street    Civic Parkway
Grand Avenue            East corporate limits   Fourteenth Street        35
                        Vine Street             Scenic Valley Drive      35
                        Fourteenth Street       Vine Street              25/35*
                        680 feet west of west   Western terminus         40
                        I-35 ramp
                        Scenic Valley Drive     680 feet west of west I- 45
                                                35 ramp
Grand Prairie Parkway   North corporate limits  1,500 feet south of      35
(South)                                         north corporate limits
                                                Southern terminus of
                        Raccoon River Drive     Grand Prairie Parkway    40
                                                (South)
                        1,500 feet south of     Mills Civic Parkway      40
                        north corporate limits
Interstate 35           West interchange of     South corporate limits   65
                        Interstate 35/80/235
Interstate 35/80        North corporate limits  West interchange of      65
                                                Interstate 35/80/235
Interstate 80           West interchange of     Sixtieth Street          55
                        Interstate 35/80/235
                        Sixtieth Street         West corporate limits    65
Interstate 235          East corporate limits   West interchange of      60
                                                Interstate 35/80/235
Iowa Highway 5          East corporate limits   Interstate 35            65
Jordan Creek Parkway    North corporate limits  Bridgewood Boulevard     40
Jordan Creek (South)    Bridgewood Boulevard    South terminus           40
Parkway
Kerry (Southwest)       Warren (Southwest)      Western terminus of      35
Street                  Avenue                  Kerry (Southwest) Avenue
Lake Drive              Westown Parkway         Jordan Creek Parkway     30
                                                2,150 feet west of
Lincoln Street          East corporate limits   centerline of First      25
                                                (South) Street
                        Eleventh (South) Street 3,150 feet west of       25
                                                Eleventh (South) Street
                        2,150 feet west of
                        centerline of First     Eleventh (South) Street  35
                        (South) Street
Maffitt Lake Road       Thirty Fifth (South)    West corporate limits    45
                        Street
Maffitt Lake (SE) Road  Soteria (SE) Avenue     Thirty Fifth (SE) Street 35
Mills Civic Parkway     E.P. True Parkway       Interstate 35            35
                        Interstate 35           West terminus            40
Office Plaza Drive      Vista Drive             Jordan Creek Parkway     30
Pine Avenue             East corporate limits   Southwest connector      35
Prairie View Drive      E.P. True Parkway       Ponderosa Drive          30
Prairie View Drive      Ponderosa Drive         Blue Stem Circle         30
(South)
Raccoon River Drive     Grand Avenue            West terminus            45
Railroad Avenue         East corporate limits   Grand Avenue             35
Railroad Place          Fourth Street           Fifth Street             20
Soteria (SE) Avenue     Willow Creek (SE) Drive County Line (SE) Road    35
Stagecoach Drive        Mills Civic Parkway     Western terminus         35
Stagecoach Drive        140 feet east of Ninety Western terminus         25/35*
                        Third (South) Street
University Avenue       Twenty Second Street    West ramp of Interstate  35
                                                35/80
                        West ramp of Interstate West corporate limits    45
                        35/80
Valley West Drive       South ramp Interstate   E.P. True Parkway        30
(Thirty Fifth Street)   235
Veterans Parkway        East corporate limits   400 feet west of Adams   40
                                                Street
                        400 feet west of Adams  Western terminus of      45
                        Street                  Veterans Parkway
Village View Drive      Sixtieth (South) Street Sixty Fourth (South)     35
                                                Street
Vista Drive             Sixtieth Street         Jordan Creek Parkway     35
Walnut Woods Drive      Eleventh (South) Street Forty Second (South)     40
                                                Street
Warren (Southwest)      Adams (Southwest)       Southern terminus of
Avenue                  Street                  Warren (Southwest)       35
                                                Avenue
West Lakes Parkway      North corporate limits  Terminus of West Lakes   30
                                                Parkway
Westown Parkway         Twenty Second Street    Forty Second Street      30
                        Forty Second Street     West corporate limits    35
White Crane (SE) Road   Soteria (SE) Avenue     Eastern terminus Soteria 35
                                                (SE) Avenue
First Street            Grand Avenue            Railroad Avenue          40
                        North corporate limits  Grand Avenue             35
First (South) Street    Brown's Woods Drive     Army Post Road           40
                        Railroad Avenue         1,000 feet south of      40
                                                Railroad Avenue
                        1,000 feet south of     East corporate limits    50
                        Railroad Avenue
Fifth Street            Vine Street             Railroad Avenue          20
Eighth Street           Clegg Road              Ashworth Road            25/35*
                        North corporate limits  Clegg Road               35
Eleventh (South) Street Brown's Woods Drive     Army Post Road           35
                        Railroad Avenue         Lincoln Street           25
Nineteenth Street       Ashworth Road           E.P. True Parkway        30
Twentieth (South)       County Line (South)     South corporate limits   35
Street                  Road
                        Maffitt Lake Road       South corporate limits   45
Twenty Second Street    Ashworth Road           South ramp Interstate    30
                                                235
                        North corporate limits  South ramp Interstate    35
                                                235
Twenty Second (South)   Army Post Road          Maffitt Lake Road        35
Street
Twenty Fifth Street     North corporate limits  Westown Parkway          30
Twenty Eighth Street    North corporate limits  Interstate 235           30
Thirty First Street     North corporate limits  Westown Parkway          30
Thirty Fifth Street     Ashworth Road           E.P. True Parkway        30
                        North corporate limits  South ramp Interstate    35
                                                235
Thirty Fifth (South)    Army Post Road          Maffitt Lake Road        35
Street
                        Mills Civic Parkway     Grand Avenue             35
Thirty Sixth Street     North corporate limits  Westown Parkway          30
                        1,008 feet north of
Thirty Ninth Street     centerline of E.P. True E.P. True Parkway        25
                        Parkway
Forty Second Street     North corporate limits  Woodland Avenue          30
Forty Second (South)    Army Post Road          Maffitt Lake Road        35
Street
                        Walnut Woods Drive      Army Post Road           45
                                                575 feet south of
Fiftieth Street         Ashworth Road           centerline of E.P. True  35
                                                Parkway
                                                225 feet north of
                        North corporate limits  centerline of Woodland   35
                                                Avenue
                        225 feet north of       Ashworth Road            25/35*
                        Woodland Avenue
Fiftieth (South) Street Maffitt Lake Road       South corporate limits   45
                        575 feet south of
                        centerline of E.P. True Grand Avenue             35
                        Parkway
Fifty Ninth Place       North corporate limits  Sixtieth Street          30
Sixtieth Street         North corporate limits  Sixtieth (South) Street  35
Sixtieth (South) Street Sixtieth Street         Grand Avenue             35
Sixtieth (Southwest)    Veterans Parkway        Kerry (Southwest) Street 35
Street
Sixty Fourth Street     Mills Civic Parkway     Sixty Eighth (South)     30
                                                Street
                        Wistful Vista Drive     Beechtree Drive          35
Sixty Fourth (South)    Mills Civic Parkway     Wistful Vista Drive      35
Street
Sixty Eighth Street     E.P. True Parkway       Sixty Eighth (South)     35
                                                Street
                        North corporate limits  Westown Parkway          30
Sixty Eighth (South)    Sixty Eighth Street     South terminus           35
Street
Seventy First Street    North corporate limits  Westown Parkway          30
Eighty First Street     Ashworth Road           Bridgewood Boulevard     35
                        E.P. True Parkway       Beechtree Lane           25/35*
Eighty First (South)    Bridgewood Boulevard    Southern terminus        35
Street
Eighty Eighth Street    Nine Iron Drive         Bridgewood Boulevard     35
                        University Avenue       Lake Drive               25
Eighty Eighth (South)   Bridgewood Boulevard    Raccoon River Drive      35
Street
Ninety Second Street    North corporate limits  Terminus of Ninety       35
                                                Second Street
 
*The maximum speed limit with the variable display speed limit signs and
beacons in operation shall be 25 mph. The maximum speed limit with variable
display speed limit signs and beacons not activated shall be 35 mph. The hours
of operation shall be established by the City Engineer.
(1985 Code §2.1-2.0410; amd. Ord. 866, 11-21-1988; Ord. 889, 11-3-1989; Ord.
968, 9-6-1991; Ord. 977, 11-1-1991; Ord. 989, 2-18-1992; Ord. 1000, 3-30-1992;
Ord. 1020, 8-17-1992; Ord. 1025, 8-31-1992; Ord. 1028, 9-14-1992; Ord. 1032,
10-12-1992; 1993 Code; Ord. 1060, 8-30-1993; Ord. 1144, 7-17-1995; Ord. 1152,
9-11-1995; Ord. 1153, 9-25-1995; Ord. 1205, 10-21-1996; Ord. 1316, 7-13-1998;
Ord. 1342, 11-16-1998; Ord. 1346, 1-11-1999; Ord. 1376, 6-28-1999; Ord. 1385,
9-7-1999; Ord. 1462, 10-29-2001; Ord. 1497, 11-11-2002; Ord. 1505, 12-9-2002;
Ord. 1587, 8-2-2004; Ord. 1614, 11-8-2004; Ord. 1640, 7-5-2005; Ord. 1668, 12-
5-2005; Ord. 1691, 5-22-2006; Ord. 1714, 11-20-2006; Ord. 1717, 12-4-2006; Ord.
1769, 7-30-2007; Ord. 1775, 8-13-2007; Ord. 1791, 12-3-2007; Ord. 1805, 6-2-
2008; Ord. 1823, 12-15-2008; Ord. 1825, 1-12-2009; Ord. 1834, 8-10-2009; Ord.
1853, 12-28-2009; Ord. 1888, 11-15-2010; Ord. 1927, 7-25-2011; Ord. 1970, 12-
10-2012; Ord. 2066, 11-17-2014; Ord. 2074, 12-1-2014; Ord. 2129, 11-30-2015;
Ord. 2132, 12-14-2015; Ord. 2159, 7-11-2016; Ord. 2165, 8-8-2016; Ord. 2174,
10-17-2016; Ord. 2262, 11-13-2017; Ord. 2264, 11-27-2017; Ord. 2301, 5-14-2018;
Ord. 2337, 12-26-2018; Ord. 2396, 12-2-2019; Ord. 2403, 1-6-2020; Ord. 2435, 8-
17-2020 ; Ord. 2497, 11-1-2021 )
6-9-11: INTERSTATE HIGHWAYS 35, 80, AND 235:
6-9-11-1: STOPPING, STANDING, OR PARKING:
No person shall stop, park, or leave standing, any vehicle whether attended or
unattended, within the right-of-way of Interstate Highways 35, 80, and 235
within the boundaries of the City except duly authorized construction,
maintenance, and law enforcement vehicles and vehicles present for the purpose
of servicing or removing a disabled vehicle or aiding the injured. The
foregoing shall not apply to the driver of any vehicle which is disabled in
such manner and to such extent that it is impossible to avoid stopping and
temporarily leaving such disabled vehicle in such position. The driver of a
disabled vehicle shall, if possible, stop or push the vehicle off the paved or
improved part of the main traveled part of the right-of-way. Whenever any peace
officer finds a vehicle standing upon such right-of-way in violation hereof or
disabled, such officer is hereby authorized to remove such vehicle or to cause
the driver or other person in charge of such vehicle to remove same. (Ord.
2061, 11-3-2014)
6-9-11-2: PEDESTRIANS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to walk upon, along, or across any portion
of the right-of-way of Interstate Highways 35, 80, and 235 within the
boundaries of the City, except for persons engaged in construction,
maintenance, or law enforcement thereon, and except for persons present thereon
in connection with leaving or removing a disabled vehicle or giving aid to the
injured. The right-of-way of Interstate Highways 35, 80, and 235 include the
exit and entrance ramp areas. Nothing herein set forth shall be construed as
prohibiting pedestrian traffic from traversing upon sidewalks or pedestrian
overpasses or underpasses which cross the said interstate right of way. (Ord.
2061, 11-3-2014)
6-9-11-3: BICYCLES, HORSES, ETC.:
No person shall drive, ride, or lead any horse or other animal upon any portion
of the Interstate Highways 35, 80, and 235 within the boundaries of the city,
nor shall any person ride or drive any bicycle or vehicle other than a motor
vehicle upon said interstate highways. Nothing herein contained shall be
construed as prohibiting the otherwise lawful transportation of a horse, other
animals, bicycle, or other vehicle within or upon a motor vehicle upon said
interstate highways, nor shall this section be construed as prohibiting the
otherwise lawful towing of a trailer or other vehicle thereon by means of a
motor vehicle. (Ord. 2061, 11-3-2014)
6-9-12: LOAD LIMITS; TRUCK ROUTES:
6-9-12-1: LOAD AND SIZE LIMITS:
A.   Load Limits: Unless otherwise provided, no person shall operate any
vehicle on a public street or highway within the city of West Des Moines with a
gross weight in excess of eighty thousand (80,000) pounds. The maximum limit
allowed for vehicles weighing eighty thousand (80,000) pounds or less shall be
as set forth in Iowa Code chapter 321, "size, weight and load" or succeeding
legislation.
B.   Size Limits: Unless otherwise provided, no person shall operate any
vehicle on a public street or highway within the city of West Des Moines in
excess of the size limits as provided in Iowa Code chapter 321, "size, weight
and load" or succeeding legislation.
C.   Overweight Vehicle: Any vehicle with a gross vehicle weight in excess of
eighty thousand (80,000) pounds but less than one hundred fifty six thousand
(156,000) pounds shall be designated an "overweight vehicle" and shall not
operate on a public street or highway within the city of West Des Moines
without a valid annual permit issued by the Iowa department of transportation.
Vehicles weighing in excess of one hundred fifty six thousand (156,000) pounds
shall be designated an "overweight vehicle" and shall not operate on a public
street or highway within the city of West Des Moines without a valid single
trip permit issued by the city of West Des Moines. Operation of an overweight
vehicle with a validly issued permit shall only be allowed to operate on those
public roadways within the city of West Des Moines not prohibited on the
"overweight/oversize truck embargo locations" map maintained and administered
by the West Des Moines department of public works and on file in the office of
the city clerk.
D.   Oversize Vehicle: Any vehicle in excess of the size limits as provided in
Iowa Code chapter 321, "size, weight and load" or succeeding legislation or up
to one hundred twenty feet (120') in length or thirteen feet five inches
(13'5") in width or fifteen feet five inches (15'5") in height shall be
designated an oversize vehicle and shall not operate on a public street or
highway within the city of West Des Moines without a valid annual permit issued
by the Iowa department of transportation. Any vehicle in excess of one hundred
twenty feet (120') in length or thirteen feet five inches (13'5") in width or
fifteen feet five inches (15'5") in height shall be designated as an oversize
vehicle and shall not operate on a public street or highway within the city of
West Des Moines without a valid single trip permit issued by the city of West
Des Moines. Operation of an oversize vehicle with a validly issued permit shall
only be allowed to operate on those public roadways within the city of West Des
Moines not prohibited on the "oversize truck embargo locations" map maintained
and administered by the West Des Moines department of public works and on file
in the office of the city clerk.
E.   Permit Fee: The fee for a single trip permit to operate an overweight/
oversize or overweight vehicle shall be established by resolution of the West
Des Moines city council. (Ord. 1690, 5-22-2006)
6-9-12-2: TRUCK ROUTE:
Truck route regulations are established as follows:
A.   Truck Routes Designated: Every motor vehicle or combination of vehicles,
including attached trailers, with an actual weight, gross vehicle weight
rating, or gross combination weight rating of fourteen thousand (14,000) pounds
or more, when loaded or empty, shall only travel upon the city streets
identified below, unless that vehicle is making a scheduled or definite stop
within the city for the purpose of loading or unloading cargo or passengers at
a specific location within the city, is an exempt vehicle as defined in this
section, or has obtained a special permit from the city as set forth in this
section. (Ord. 2105, 7-27-2015)
Street From To
Street                    From                      To
Army Post Road            East corporate limits     West corporate limits
Ashworth Road             East corporate limits     West corporate limits
Buffalo Road              East corporate limits     Nineteenth Street Place
E.P. True Parkway         Grand Avenue              West corporate limits
Fuller Road               Railroad Avenue           Grand Avenue
Grand Avenue              East corporate limits     West corporate limits
Grand Prairie Parkway     North corporate limits    Racoon River
(South)
Grand Prairie Parkway     Racoon River              Southern terminus of Grand
(Southwest)                                         Prairie Parkway (Southwest)
Industrial Circle         Nineteenth (South) Street Eighteenth (South) Street
Jordan Creek Parkway      North corporate limits    Bridgewood Boulevard
Jordan Creek (South)      Bridgewood Boulevard      South terminus
Parkway
Lincoln Street            First (South) Street      Eleventh (South) Street
                          Thirteenth (South) Street Fuller Road
Maffitt Lake Road         Southwest connector       Twentieth (South) Street
                          Thirty Fifth (South)      Fiftieth (South) Street
                          Street
Mills Civic Parkway       E.P. True Parkway         Terminus at Mills Civic
                                                    Parkway
Raccoon River Drive       Grand Avenue              West corporate limits
Railroad Avenue           East corporate limits     Grand Avenue
Stagecoach Drive          Mills Civic Parkway       West terminus
University Avenue         Twenty Second Street      West corporate limits
                                                    (south side only)
Veterans Parkway          East corporate limits     Western terminus of
                                                    Veterans Parkway
Vista Drive               Sixtieth Street           Jordan Creek Parkway
Westown Parkway           Nineteenth Street Place   West corporate limits
First Street              North corporate limits    Railroad Avenue
First (South) Street
contiguous with Iowa      Railroad Avenue           East corporate limits
Highway 28
Eighth Street             North corporate limits    Grand Avenue
Eleventh (South) Street   Railroad Avenue           Lincoln Street
Thirteenth (South) Street Railroad Avenue           Lincoln Street
Eighteenth (South) Street Fuller Road               Industrial Circle
Nineteenth Street         Ashworth Road             E.P. True Parkway
Nineteenth (South) Street Fuller Road               Industrial Circle
Twentieth (South) Street  Maffitt Lake Road         South corporate limits
Twenty Second Street      North corporate limits    Ashworth Road
Thirty Fifth Street       North corporate limits    E.P. True Parkway
Thirty Fifth (South)      Army Post Road            Maffitt Lake Road
Street
Forty Second (South)      Walnut Woods Drive        Army Post Road
Street
                                                    574 feet south of
Fiftieth Street           North corporate limits    centerline of E.P. True
                                                    Parkway
                          574 feet south of
Fiftieth (South) Street   centerline of E.P. True   Grand Avenue
                          Parkway
                          Maffitt Lake Road         South corporate limits
Sixtieth Street           North corporate limits    Wistful Vista Drive
Sixtieth (South) Street   Wistful Vista Drive       Grand Avenue
Sixty Eighth Street       E.P. True Parkway         Wistful Vista Drive
Sixty Eighth (South)      Wistful Vista Drive       South terminus
Street
Ninety Second Street      University Avenue         Ashworth Road
 
(Ord. 2105, 7-27-2015; amd. Ord. 2175, 10-17-2016; Ord. 2267, 12-11-2017; Ord.
2397, 12-2-2019)
B.   Deliveries Off Truck Route: Any motor vehicle or combination of vehicles,
including attached trailers, with an actual weight, gross vehicle weight
rating, or gross combination weight rating of fourteen thousand (14,000) pounds
or more, when loaded or empty, making a scheduled or definite stop within the
City for the purpose of loading or unloading cargo or passengers at a specific
location within the City, shall proceed over or upon the designated truck
routes set forth in this section to the nearest point of its scheduled or
definite stop and shall proceed thereto, load or unload, and return by the most
direct route to its point of departure from said designated route. The motor
vehicle operator shall provide sufficient proof upon request by a police
officer to ascertain whether the driver has satisfied the requirements of this
subsection.
C.   Employer's Responsibility: The owner or any other person, employing or
otherwise directing the driver of any vehicle shall not require or knowingly
permit the operation of such vehicle upon a street in any manner contrary to
this section.
D.   Exempt Vehicles: This section does not prohibit the following:
1.   Emergency Vehicles: The operation of emergency vehicles upon any street
within the City.
2.   Public Utilities: The operation of trucks owned or operated by the City,
public utilities, or any contractor hired by the City or public utility while
engaged in the repair, maintenance or construction of streets, public
improvements or street utilities in the City.
3.   Buses: The operation of any school bus or public bus upon any street in
the City.
4.   Waste Removal Vehicles: The operation of trucks upon any street in the
city for purposes of removing solid waste, yard waste, or recycling from
businesses and residences located within the city.
5.   Recreational Vehicles: The operation of any recreational vehicles and vans
used for private, noncommercial transport and recreational activities.
6.   Detoured Trucks: The operation of trucks upon any officially established
detour in any case where such trucks could lawfully operate upon the street for
which such detour is established.
E.   Clerk Maintains Maps: The city clerk or designee shall keep and maintain
accurate maps setting out truck routes and streets upon which truck traffic is
permitted; the maps shall be kept on file in the office of the city clerk or
designee and shall be available to the public.
F.   Signs Posted: Signs shall be posted along all truck routes showing the
direction thereof and to notify motor vehicle operators of the use, approach,
and entrance of such truck routes.
G.   Weigh In: When the gross vehicle weight rating or gross combination weight
rating of a motor vehicle cannot be immediately determined, the city's police
officers shall have the authority to require any person driving or in control
of any motor vehicle not proceeding over a truck route or street over which
truck traffic is permitted, to proceed to any public or private scale available
for the purpose of weighing and determining whether this section has been
violated, if the police officer has a reasonable and articulable basis to
believe that the actual weight of the vehicle in question exceeds fourteen
thousand (14,000) pounds. The city shall not be required to prove the actual
weight of the vehicle or combination of vehicles, including attached trailers,
in question if it has been determined that the gross vehicle weight rating or
gross combination weight rating exceeds fourteen thousand (14,000) pounds.
H.   Special Permit: Any driver or owner of any motor vehicle prohibited from
traveling or traversing any street other than a designated truck route that
wishes to be granted a limited waiver of the requirements detailed in
subsections A and B of this section, and which does not qualify as an exempt
vehicle as provided in this section, may seek to obtain a special permit from
the city public works department director or designee to use a street not
designated as a truck route within the city. The public works department
director or designee may grant such permit imposing terms, conditions, and
restrictions as the department director or designee deems appropriate.
I.   Violation And Penalty: It is unlawful for any driver or owner of a motor
vehicle to violate the provisions of this section. Violations of this section
are declared to be municipal infractions and may be punished as provided in
title 1, chapter 4 of this code. Police officers shall also be authorized to
issue citation-complaints. A one hundred dollar ($100.00) civil penalty shall
be imposed for each violation where a citation-complaint has been issued. Any
driver or owner of a motor vehicle traveling in violation of this section may
be subject to a municipal infraction and/or a citation-complaint. (Ord. 2105,
7-27-2015)
6-9-13: LOADING AND UNLOADING ZONES:
The following loading and unloading zones are hereby designated:
 
Location         From             To              Maximum Time Hours Affected
                 South 3 parking
                 stalls along
City parking lot rear lot line of                 10 minutes   5:00 P.M. to 10:
                 lot 11, block 11                              00 P.M.
                 Valley Junction
                 plat
                 145 feet east of 47 feet east of
Prospect Street  centerline of    centerline of   30 minutes   24 hours
(south side)     Thirteenth       Thirteenth
                 Street           Street
 
(1993 Code)
6-9-14: PENALTY:
Unless otherwise provided herein or by the Code of Iowa, any person who
violates the provisions of this chapter, upon conviction, shall be punished not
in excess of a one hundred five dollar ($105.00) fine or in excess of thirty
(30) days’ imprisonment. (Ord. 1381, 7-26-1999; amd. Ord. 2497, 11-1-2021)
CHAPTER 10
SNOWMOBILES AND ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLES
SECTION:
6-10-1: Snowmobile Defined
6-10-2: Places Of Operation
6-10-3: Manner Of Operation
6-10-4: All-Terrain Vehicles In Residential Districts
6-10-1: SNOWMOBILE DEFINED:
For use in this chapter, the term "snowmobile" shall mean any self-propelled
vehicle weighing less than one thousand (1,000) pounds which utilizes wheels
with low pressure tires and is designed to operate on land or ice or is
equipped with sled type runners or skis, endless belt type tread, or any
combination thereof, and is designed for travel upon snow, land or ice, except
any vehicle registered as a motor vehicle under state law. (1985 Code §2.1-
6.01)
6-10-2: PLACES OF OPERATION:
The operators of snowmobiles shall observe the following limitations as to
where snowmobiles may be operated:
A.   Unplowed Streets: Snowmobiles may be operated upon streets which have not
been plowed during the snow season.
B.   Other Streets: Snowmobiles may be operated on any street within the city
for the sole and exclusive purpose of using the most direct roadway for the
ingress to and egress from the city. No snowmobile shall be driven on any
roadway solely for entertainment or pleasure.
C.   Parks And Other Public Land: Snowmobiles shall not be operated in any city
park, playground or upon any other publicly owned property except with the
express permission of the governing body thereof.
D.   Private Property: No snowmobile shall be operated upon private property
without the express consent of the owner thereof.
E.   Sidewalk Or Parking: No snowmobiles shall be operated upon the public
sidewalk, nor shall they be operated upon that portion of the street located
between the curb line and the sidewalk or property line commonly referred to as
the "parking" except for purposes of crossing the same to a public street upon
which operation is authorized by this chapter. (1985 Code §2.1-6.02)
6-10-3: MANNER OF OPERATION:
No person shall operate a snowmobile in the city except as hereafter provided:
A.   Registration: No snowmobile shall be operated in the city unless
registered pursuant to state law and unless the identifying number set forth in
the registration is displayed on each side of the snowmobile.
B.   Equipment: All snowmobiles shall be equipped with muffling devices, lights
and other equipment required by state law or regulation.
C.   Traffic Code: Snowmobile operators shall observe all state and local
traffic control regulations and devices.
D.   Speed: Snowmobiles shall not be operated on streets at a speed in excess
of that posted nor at any time at a rate of speed greater than reasonable and
proper under all existing circumstances.
E.   Careless Operation: No person shall operate a snowmobile in a careless,
reckless or negligent manner so as to endanger the person or property of
another or to cause injury or damage thereto.
F.   Intoxicated: No person shall operate a snowmobile while under the
influence of intoxicating liquor or narcotics or habit forming drugs.
G.   Lights: No person shall operate a snowmobile without a lighted headlight
and taillight when required for safety.
H.   Unattended: No operator or owner shall leave or allow a snowmobile to be
or remain unattended on public property while the motor is running or with keys
in the ignition switch.
I.   Flag: No snowmobile shall be operated upon a street without displaying a
flag with an area of not less than six inches by nine inches (6" x 9") of
fluorescent orange color on a staff holder to put such flag at least five feet
(5') above the surface of the street.
J.   Direct Crossing: A snowmobile may make a direct crossing of a prohibited
street or highway provided:
1.   The crossing is made at an angle of approximately ninety degrees (90°) to
the direction of the street or highway and at a place where no obstruction
prevents a quick and safe crossing; and
2.   The snowmobile is brought to a complete stop before crossing the shoulder
or main traveling way of the street or highway;
3.   The driver yields the right of way to all oncoming traffic which
constitutes an immediate hazard.
K.   Hours Of Operation Limited: No snowmobile shall be operated in the city
between the hours of ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) A.M.
except for emergency situations or for loading and unloading from a transport
trailer.
L.   Thaw Ban: Snowmobiles shall not be operated during a publicized thaw ban
in areas posted to prohibit such operation.
M.   Single File: Snowmobiles shall be driven in a single file manner in the
proper lane of traffic as close to the curb or edge of roadway as is possible
under existing conditions.
N.   Towing: No item shall be towed by a snowmobile unless coupled to said
snowmobile by a rigid towbar. (1985 Code §2.1-6.03; amd. 1993 Code)
6-10-4: ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLES IN RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS:
A person shall not operate an all-terrain vehicle as defined in Iowa Code
section 321I.1(1) within residentially zoned areas of the city, nor shall a
property owner or tenant knowingly allow operation of such vehicles on property
owned or leased by said owner or tenant in a residentially zoned area of the
city, unless at least one of the following circumstances applies:
A.   The all-terrain vehicle is being used for property maintenance including
mowing, spraying, hauling or similar tasks.
B.   The operation of the all-terrain vehicle does not cause dirt or dust to be
deposited on adjoining private properties, public land or public rights of way
and the operation of the all-terrain vehicle is not audible from adjoining
private properties.
Violation of this section is a simple misdemeanor punishable by a fine of fifty
dollars ($50.00). (Ord. 1585, 7-19-2004)
CHAPTER 11
BICYCLES
SECTION:
6-11-1: Scope Of Regulations
6-11-2: Definitions
6-11-3: Alteration Of Serial Frame Number
6-11-4: Applicability Of Motor Vehicle Laws
6-11-5: Operation Of Bicycles
6-11-6: Lamps And Reflectors
6-11-7: Stopping
6-11-8: Sirens And Whistles Prohibited
6-11-9: Obedience To Signals
6-11-10: Bicycle Lanes
6-11-11: Animals Or Animal Drawn Vehicles
6-11-12: All-Terrain Vehicles; Bicycle Safety Flag Required
6-11-13: Special Penalty
6-11-1: SCOPE OF REGULATIONS:
These regulations shall apply whenever a bicycle is operated upon any street or
upon any public multiuse trail, subject to those exceptions stated herein.
(Ord. 1941, 12-27-2011)
6-11-2: DEFINITIONS:
BICYCLE: Either of the following:
A.   A device having up to four (4) wheels and having at least one saddle or
seat for the use of a rider which is propelled by human power.
B.   A device having up to four (4) wheels with fully operable pedals and an
electric motor of one horsepower or less.
MULTIUSE TRAIL: A way or place, the use of which is controlled by the city as
an owner of real property, designated by the multiuse trail maps, as approved
by resolution by the city council, and no multiuse trail shall be considered as
a street or highway. (Ord. 1941, 12-27-2011)
6-11-3: ALTERATION OF SERIAL FRAME NUMBER:
It shall be unlawful for any person to wilfully or maliciously remove, destroy,
mutilate or alter the manufacturer's serial frame number of any bicycle. (Ord.
1941, 12-27-2011)
6-11-4: APPLICABILITY OF MOTOR VEHICLE LAWS:
Every person operating a bicycle upon the city streets, highways, or park roads
shall be entitled to all of the rights and be subject to all of the duties
applicable to the driver of a motor vehicle by the laws of this city and state,
except as otherwise provided in this chapter and except as to those provisions
of ordinances and statutes which by their nature have no application to the
operation of a bicycle. (Ord. 1941, 12-27-2011)
6-11-5: OPERATION OF BICYCLES:
A.   Control With Hands On Handlebars: The operator of a bicycle upon a street,
sidewalk, highway, park road or multiuse trail shall keep the bicycle under
control at all times and at all times during operation shall have one or both
hands upon the handlebars and the feet engaged with the braking device if the
braking device is designed to be actuated by the feet.
B.   Emerging From Alley Or Driveway: The operator of a bicycle emerging from
an alley, driveway or building shall, upon approaching a sidewalk or the
sidewalk area extending across any alleyway or driveway, yield the right of way
to all pedestrians approaching on the sidewalk or sidewalk area, and upon
entering the roadway, shall yield the right of way to all vehicles approaching
on the roadway.
C.   Carrying Packages: No person operating a bicycle upon a street, sidewalk,
highway, park road or multiuse trail shall carry any package, bundle or article
which prevents the rider from keeping at least one hand upon the handlebars.
D.   Operation On Sidewalk: Bicycles may be operated upon the public sidewalks
in a careful and prudent manner except in accordance herewith:
1.   Business District: No person shall ride a bicycle upon a sidewalk within a
business district.
2.   Other Locations: No person shall ride a bicycle upon a sidewalk where
signs are erected to prohibit riding on the sidewalk.
3.   Yield Right Of Way: Every person lawfully operating a bicycle upon a
public sidewalk, shall yield the right of way when approaching a pedestrian and
shall give audible signal before overtaking and passing.
E.   Clinging To Other Vehicles: No person riding upon any bicycle on a street,
sidewalk, highway, park road or multiuse trail shall attach the bicycle or
himself or herself to any moving vehicle by tow rope, hand grip or otherwise.
F.   Following Emergency Vehicles: No person riding a bicycle shall follow
closer than five hundred feet (500') of an emergency vehicle as defined by Iowa
Code section 321.1 which has emergency lights and/or siren activated, and shall
not stop, park, or leave a bicycle within five hundred feet (500') of an
emergency vehicle stopped in response to an emergency.
G.   Reckless Operation: No person shall operate a bicycle with wilful or
wanton disregard for the safety of persons or property.
H.   Parking: No person shall leave a bicycle lying on its side on any
sidewalk, or shall park a bicycle on a sidewalk in any other position, so that
there is not an adequate path for pedestrian traffic. Local authorities may, by
ordinance or resolution, prohibit bicycle parking in designated areas of the
public highway, provided that appropriate signs are erected.
I.   Interstate: No person shall ride or drive any bicycle upon any interstate
within the city.
J.   Improper Riding: A person propelling a bicycle on any street, sidewalk,
highway, park road or multiuse trail, shall not ride other than upon or astride
a permanent and regular seat attached to the bicycle and shall not use a
bicycle to carry more persons at one time than the number of persons for which
the bicycle is designed and equipped. This section does not apply to the use of
a bicycle in a parade or special event authorized by the city. (Ord. 1941, 12-
27-2011)
6-11-6: LAMPS AND REFLECTORS:
Every person operating a bicycle upon the city streets, highways, park roads,
or multiuse trails shall be responsible for providing and using equipment as
provided herein:
A.   Every bicycle ridden at any time from sunset to sunrise and at such other
times when conditions such as fog, snow, sleet, or rain provide insufficient
lighting to render the bicycle clearly discernible to persons and vehicles on
the highway at a distance of three hundred feet (300') ahead shall be equipped
with a lamp on the front exhibiting a white light visible from a distance of at
least three hundred feet (300') to the front.
B.   Every bicycle shall be equipped with a lamp on the rear exhibiting a red
light visible from a distance of three hundred feet (300') to the rear; except
that a red reflector may be used in lieu of a rear light.
C.   Equivalent equipment such as headlamps and red light attachments to the
arm or leg may be used in lieu of a lamp on the front and a red light on the
rear of the bicycle.
D.   A peace officer riding a police bicycle is not required to use either
front or rear lamps if duty so requires. (Ord. 1941, 12-27-2011)
6-11-7: STOPPING:
Every bicycle used upon the city streets, sidewalks, highways, park roads or
multiuse trails shall be able to come to a complete stop within a safe
distance. (Ord. 1941, 12-27-2011)
6-11-8: SIRENS AND WHISTLES PROHIBITED:
A bicycle shall not be equipped with and a person shall not use upon a bicycle
any siren or whistle. This section shall not apply to bicycles ridden by peace
officers in the line of duty. (Ord. 1941, 12-27-2011)
6-11-9: OBEDIENCE TO SIGNALS:
Every person operating a bicycle upon the city streets, highways, or park roads
shall obey the directions of official traffic signals, signs and other control
devices applicable to motor vehicles, unless otherwise directed by a police
officer, and shall obey direction signs relative to turns permitted. Every
person operating a bicycle on a multiuse trail shall obey the regulations
applicable to pedestrians and the requirements provided for in sections
6-11-5,
6-11-6,
6-11-7, and
6-11-8 of this chapter. (Ord. 1941, 12-27-2011)
6-11-10: BICYCLE LANES:
A.   Whenever a bicycle lane has been established on a roadway, any person
operating a bicycle upon the roadway moving in the same direction may ride
within the bicycle lane.
B.   Any person operating a bicycle within a bicycle lane may move out of the
lane when overtaking and passing another bicycle, vehicle, or pedestrian within
the lane or about to enter the lane if such overtaking and passing cannot be
done safely within the lane.
C.   No person operating a bicycle shall leave a bicycle lane until the
movement can be made with reasonable safety and then only after giving an
appropriate signal.
D.   No person shall drive a motor vehicle in a bicycle lane established on a
roadway except as follows:
1.   To park where parking is permitted.
2.   To enter or leave the roadway.
3.   To prepare for a turn within a distance of two hundred feet (200') from
the intersection. (Ord. 1941, 12-27-2011)
6-11-11: ANIMALS OR ANIMAL DRAWN VEHICLES:
A person riding an animal or driving an animal drawing a vehicle upon a roadway
is subject to the provisions of this title applicable to the driver of a
vehicle, except those provisions of this title which by their nature can have
no application. (Ord. 1941, 12-27-2011)
6-11-12: ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLES; BICYCLE SAFETY FLAG REQUIRED:
All-terrain vehicles shall be operated on a highway only between sunrise and
sunset and only when the operation on the highway is incidental to the
vehicle's use for agricultural purposes. A person operating an all-terrain
vehicle on a highway shall have a valid motor vehicle license and the vehicle
shall be operated at speeds of less than thirty (30) miles per hour. When
operated on a highway, an all-terrain vehicle shall have a bicycle safety flag
which extends not less than five feet (5') above the ground attached to the
rear of the vehicle. The bicycle safety flag shall be triangular in shape with
an area of not less than thirty (30) square inches, be Day-Glo in color, and
shall be in lieu of the reflective equipment required by Iowa Code section
321.383. (Ord. 1941, 12-27-2011)
6-11-13: SPECIAL PENALTY:
Any person violating the provisions of this chapter may, in lieu of the
standard penalty provided for violations of this code, suffer his bicycle to be
impounded by the city for not less than five (5) days for the first offense,
ten (10) days for a second offense and thirty (30) days for a third offense.
(Ord. 1941, 12-27-2011)
CHAPTER 12
EQUIPMENT
SECTION:
6-12-1: Lighting Equipment
6-12-2: Horns, Sirens And Bells
6-12-3: Mufflers, Prevention Of Noise
6-12-4: Mirrors
6-12-5: Windshield Requirements
6-12-6: Engine And Compression Brakes
6-12-1: LIGHTING EQUIPMENT:
A.   Lighted Lamps Required1. IC §321.384.1:
1.   Every motor vehicle upon a highway within the city, at any time from
sunset to sunrise, and at such other times when conditions such as fog, snow,
sleet or rain provide insufficient lighting to render clearly discernible
persons and vehicles on the highway at a distance of five hundred feet (500')
ahead, shall display lighted headlamps as provided in this section, subject to
exceptions with respect to parked vehicles as hereinafter stated.
2.   Whenever requirement is hereinafter declared as to the distance from which
certain lamps and devices shall render objects visible or within which such
lamps or devices shall be visible, said provisions shall apply during the times
stated in subsection A1 of this section upon a straight level unlighted highway
under normal atmospheric conditions unless a different time or condition is
expressly stated.
B.   Headlamps On Motor Vehicles And Motorized Bicycles2. IC §§321.385,
321.386.2:
1.   Every motor vehicle other than a motorcycle or motorized bicycle shall be
equipped with at least two (2) headlamps with at least one on each side of the
front of the motor vehicle, which headlamps shall comply with the requirements
and limitations set forth in this section.
2.   Every motorcycle and motorized bicycle shall be equipped with at least one
and not more than two (2) headlamps which shall comply with the requirements
and limitations of this chapter.
C.   Rearlamps3. IC §321.387.3: Every motor vehicle and every vehicle which is
being drawn at the end of a train of vehicles shall be equipped with a lighted
rearlamp, exhibiting a red light plainly visible from a distance of five
hundred feet (500') to the rear.
D.   Illuminating Plates1. IC §321.388.1: Either the rearlamp or a separate
lamp shall be so constructed and placed as to illuminate with a white light the
rear registration plate and render it clearly legible from a distance of fifty
feet (50') to the rear. When the rear registration plate is illuminated by an
electric lamp other than the required rearlamp, the two (2) lamps shall be
turned on or off only by the same control switch at all times when headlamps
are lighted.
E.   Lamps On Parked Vehicles; Exception2. IC §§321.395, 321.396.2:
1.   Whenever a vehicle is parked or stopped upon a roadway or shoulder
adjacent thereto, outside of a business district whether attended or unattended
during the times mentioned in subsection A of this section, such vehicle shall
be equipped with one or more lamps which shall exhibit a white or amber light
on the roadway side visible from a distance of five hundred feet (500') to the
front of such vehicle and a red light visible from a distance of five hundred
feet (500') to the rear, except that local authorities may provide by ordinance
or resolution that no lights need be displayed upon any such vehicle when
stopped or parked in accordance with the local parking regulations upon a
highway where there is sufficient light to reveal any person or object within a
distance of five hundred feet (500') upon such highway. Lamps on parked or
stopped vehicles, except trucks, trailers or semitrailers, as required to be
exhibited by this section, but not including running lights, shall not be
lighted at any time when the vehicle is being driven on the highway unless the
headlamps are also lighted. Any lighted headlamps upon a parked vehicle shall
be depressed or dimmed.
2.   Subsection E1 of this section shall not apply when an accident
extinguishes said light and renders a vehicle incapable of use, and when the
person in control of the vehicle erects, at the earliest opportunity after the
accident, such proper light at or near the vehicle as will give warning of the
presence of said vehicle.
F.   Flashing Lights3. IC §321.423.3:
1.   Definitions: As used in this subsection, unless the context otherwise
requires:
ADVANCED EMERGENCY MEDICAL CARE PROVIDER: As defined in Iowa Code.
BASIC EMERGENCY MEDICAL CARE PROVIDER: As defined in Iowa Code.
FIRE DEPARTMENT: A paid or volunteer fire protection service provided by the
city.
HAZARD LIGHTS: Lights which flash yellow or amber to the front of the vehicle
and red to the rear of the vehicle simultaneously.
MEMBER: A person who is a member in good standing of the fire department or a
person who is an advanced or basic emergency medical care provider employed by
an ambulance, rescue or first responder service.
2.   Prohibited Lights: A flashing light on or in a motor vehicle is prohibited
except as follows:
a.   On an authorized emergency vehicle.
b.   On a vehicle as a means of indicating a right or left turn, a mechanical
failure, or an emergency stop or intent to stop.
c.   On a motor vehicle used by a rural mail carrier when stopping or stopped
on or near a highway in the process of delivering mail, if such a light is any
shade of color between white and amber and if it is mounted as a dome light on
the roof of the vehicle.
d.   On a vehicle being operated under an excess size permit issued under Iowa
Code.
e.   A flashing blue light on a vehicle upon which a blue light is permitted
pursuant to subsection F3 of this section.
f.   A flashing white light, used in conjunction with hazard lights, is
permitted on a vehicle pursuant to subsection F7 of this section.
g.   A white flashing strobe light mounted on a school bus as permitted under
Iowa Code.
3.   Blue Light: A blue light shall not be used on any vehicle except:
a.   A vehicle owned or exclusively operated by the fire department; or
b.   A vehicle authorized by the state when:
(1)   The vehicle is owned by a member of the fire department.
(2)   The request for authorization is made by the member on forms provided by
the state.
(3)   Necessity for authorization is demonstrated in the request.
(4)   The chief of the fire department certifies that the member is in good
standing with the fire department and recommends that the authorization be
granted.
4.   Expiration Of Authority: The authorization shall expire at twelve o'clock
(12:00) midnight on December 31 five (5) years from the year in which it was
issued, or when the vehicle is no longer owned by the member, or when the
member has ceased to be an active member of the fire department or of an
ambulance, rescue or first responder service or when the member has used the
blue or white light beyond the scope of its authorized use.
5.   When Used: The certificate of authorization shall be carried at all times
with the certificate of registration of the authorized vehicle and the operator
of the vehicle shall not illuminate the blue or white light except in any of
the following circumstances:
a.   When the member is en route to the scene of a fire or is responding to an
emergency in the line of duty requiring the services of the member.
b.   When the authorized vehicle is transporting a person requiring emergency
care.
c.   When the authorized vehicle is at the scene of an emergency.
d.   The use of the blue or white light in or on a private motor vehicle shall
be for identification purposes only.
6.   Amber Flashing Light: A farm tractor, farm tractor with towed equipment,
self-propelled implement of husbandry, road construction or maintenance
vehicle, road grader or other vehicle principally designed for use off the
highway which, when operated on a primary or secondary road, is operated at a
speed of twenty five (25) miles an hour or less, shall be equipped with and
display an amber flashing light visible from the rear at any time from sunset
to sunrise. All vehicles specified in this subsection which are manufactured
for sale or sold in this state shall be equipped with an amber flashing light.
The type, number, dimensions and method of mounting of the lights shall be
determined by the state. The state, when approving the light, shall be guided
as far as practicable by the standards of the American Society of Agricultural
Engineers.
7.   Flashing White Light: Except as provided in Iowa Code and subsection F2c
of this section, a flashing white light shall only be used on a vehicle when
used in conjunction with hazard lights and a flashing white light shall not be
used on a vehicle except in any of the following circumstances:
a.   On a vehicle owned or exclusively operated by an ambulance, rescue or
first responder service.
b.   On a vehicle authorized by the state when all of the following apply:
(1)   The vehicle is owned by a member of an ambulance, rescue or first
responder service.
(2)   The request for authorization is made by the member on forms provided by
the Iowa department of public health.
(3)   Necessity for authorization is demonstrated in the request.
(4)   The head of an ambulance, rescue or first responder service certifies
that the member is in good standing and recommends that the authorization is
granted.
c.   On an authorized emergency vehicle. (1993 Code)
6-12-2: HORNS, SIRENS AND BELLS:
A.   Horns And Warning Devices1. IC §321.432.1: Every motor vehicle, when
operated upon a highway, shall be equipped with a horn in good working order
and capable of emitting sound audible under normal conditions from a distance
of not less than two hundred feet (200'), but no horn or other warning device
shall emit an unreasonably loud or harsh sound or a whistle. The driver of a
motor vehicle shall, when reasonably necessary to ensure safe operation, give
audible warning with the horn but shall not otherwise use such horn when upon a
highway.
B.   Sirens And Bells Prohibited2. IC §321.433.2: No vehicle shall be equipped
with nor shall any person use upon a vehicle any siren, whistle or bell, except
as otherwise permitted in this subsection. It is permissible but not required
that any commercial vehicle be equipped with a theft alarm signal device which
is so arranged that it cannot be used by the driver as an ordinary warning
signal. Any authorized emergency vehicle may be equipped with a siren, whistle
or bell, capable of emitting sound audible under normal conditions from a
distance of not less than five hundred feet (500') and of a type approved by
the state, but such siren shall not be used except when such vehicle is
operated in response to an emergency call or in the immediate pursuit of an
actual or suspected violator of the law, in which said latter events the driver
of such vehicle shall sound said siren when necessary to warn pedestrians and
other drivers of the approach thereof. (1993 Code)
6-12-3: MUFFLERS, PREVENTION OF NOISE:3. IC §321.436.3
Every motor vehicle shall at all times be equipped with a muffler in good
working order and in constant operation to prevent excessive or unusual noise
and annoying smoke, and no person shall use a muffler cutout, bypass or similar
device upon a motor vehicle on a highway. (1993 Code)
6-12-4: MIRRORS:1. IC §321.437.1
Every motor vehicle shall be equipped with a mirror so located as to reflect to
the driver a view of the highway for a distance of at least two hundred feet
(200') to the rear of such vehicle. Any motor vehicle so loaded, or towing
another vehicle in such manner, as to obstruct the view in a rearview mirror
located in the driver's compartment shall be equipped with a side mirror so
located that the view to the rear will not be obstructed; however, when such
vehicle is not loaded or towing another vehicle the side mirrors shall be
retracted or removed. All van or van type motor vehicles shall be equipped with
outside mirrors of unit magnification, each with not less than 19.5 square
inches of reflective surface, installed with stable supports on both sides of
the vehicle, located so as to provide the driver a view to the rear along both
sides of the vehicle, and adjustable in both the horizontal and vertical
directions to view the rearward scene. (1993 Code)
6-12-5: WINDSHIELD REQUIREMENTS:
A.   Windshields And Windows:
1.   A person shall not drive a motor vehicle equipped with a windshield, side
wings, or side or rear windows which do not permit clear vision.
2.   A person shall not operate on the highway a motor vehicle equipped with a
front windshield, a side window to the immediate right or left of the driver,
or a side wing forward of and to the left or right of the driver which is
excessively dark or reflective so that it is difficult for a person outside the
motor vehicle to see into the motor vehicle through the windshield, window, or
side wing. The minimum measurable standard of transparency established by the
state of Iowa and the Iowa department of transportation is adopted by this
reference and shall apply to violations of this subsection.
B.   Windshield Wipers: The windshield on every motor vehicle shall be equipped
with a device for cleaning rain, snow, or other moisture from the windshield,
which device shall be so constructed as to be controlled or operated by the
driver of the vehicle. (Ord. 1753, 5-21-2007)
6-12-6: ENGINE AND COMPRESSION BRAKES:
A.   It shall be unlawful for the driver of any motor vehicle to use or operate
within the city any engine brake, compression brake, dynamic braking device, or
mechanical exhaust device designed to aid in the braking or deceleration of the
vehicle that results in excessive, loud, unusual, or explosive noise from such
vehicle, unless such use is necessary to avoid imminent danger. Violations of
this section shall be considered to be equipment violations. Emergency vehicles
shall be exempt from the application of this section.
B.   The use of an engine brake, compression brake, dynamic braking device, or
mechanical exhaust device designed to aid in the braking or deceleration of any
motor vehicle in such a manner so as to be audible at a distance of three
hundred feet (300') from the vehicle shall constitute evidence of a prima facie
violation of this section. (Ord. 1782, 10-22-2007)
CHAPTER 13
PANHANDLING
SECTION:
6-13-1: Purpose And Intent
6-13-2: Definitions
6-13-3: Place Of Panhandling
6-13-4: Manner Of Panhandling
6-13-5: Penalties
6-13-1: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
The purpose of this chapter is to protect the health, safety, and welfare of
the citizens of West Des Moines and the general public by restricting
panhandling in inherently dangerous and high traffic areas where motor vehicles
typically prepare to accelerate or decelerate within a relatively short
distance with or without the direction of traffic control devices as drivers
exit or enter the interstate highway interchanges in West Des Moines. This
chapter also regulates the manner of panhandling to promote the health, safety,
and welfare of all involved persons. (Ord. 2062, 11-3-2014)
6-13-2: DEFINITIONS:
EXIT AND ENTRANCE POINTS TO INTERSTATE HIGHWAY INTERCHANGES IN WEST DES MOINES:
For purposes of this chapter, exit and entrance points to interstate highway
interchanges in West Des Moines means: a) the entire paved surfaces for the
interstate highway exit and entrance ramps, plus an additional sixteen feet
(16') in any direction from the edge of such paved surfaces; and b) the entire
paved surfaces of adjacent public streets or highways within one hundred fifty
feet (150') of the interstate highway exit and entrance ramps, plus an
additional twelve feet (12') in any direction from the edge of such paved
surfaces. Exit and entrance points to interstate highway interchanges in West
Des Moines include any and all locations within the city where there is an exit
or entrance to Interstate Highway 35, 80, or 235.
PANHANDLING: For purposes of this chapter, panhandling is any request made in
person, with or without initiating or attempting to initiate personal contact,
seeking an immediate donation of money or other thing of value, including, but
not limited to, food, beverage, or employment. Panhandling includes the
purchase of an item for an amount far exceeding its value under circumstances
where a reasonable person would understand that the purchase is in substance a
donation. Panhandling may include passively standing or sitting with a sign or
other indication that a person is seeking donations. Panhandling is allowed
within the city as long as said individual refrains from doing so within the
areas set forth in the definition of "exit and entrance points to interstate
highway interchanges in West Des Moines" provided herein, and as long as said
individual does not violate any other provisions contained within this chapter.
(Ord. 2062, 11-3-2014)
6-13-3: PLACE OF PANHANDLING:
It shall be unlawful for any individual to panhandle when the person solicited
is in any of the following places within the city:
A.   In any vehicle on the traveled portions of the "exit and entrance points
to interstate highway interchanges in West Des Moines" area, as defined in this
chapter.
B.   On public property in the "exit and entrance points to interstate highway
interchanges in West Des Moines" area, as defined by this chapter. (Ord. 2062,
11-3-2014)
6-13-4: MANNER OF PANHANDLING:
It shall be unlawful for any individual to panhandle in any of the following
manners at any location within the city:
A.   By standing, sitting, or otherwise being present in or on the travel
portion of a public or private street or highway; the entire width of the
roadway shall be deemed the travel portion of a public or private street or
highway, including the edge or curb of the roadway and any median or island
that separates directional traffic on the street or highway;
B.   By using profane or abusive language, either during the solicitation or
following a refusal;
C.   While under the influence of alcohol or any illegal narcotic or controlled
substance; or
D.   By any statement, gesture, or other communication which a reasonable
person in the situation of the person solicited would perceive to be offensive
or a threat. (Ord. 2062, 11-3-2014)
6-13-5: PENALTIES:
Any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter may be charged
with a simple misdemeanor criminal offense, pursuant to section
5-2-1 of this code, or receive a municipal infraction civil citation, pursuant
to title 1, chapter 4 of this code. The city shall have the discretion to
enforce this chapter either as a simple misdemeanor or a municipal infraction.
(Ord. 2062, 11-3-2014)
TITLE 7
PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY
Streets, Sidewalks And Alleys   1
Controlled Access Facilities   1A
Street Excavations   1B
Reserved   1C
Residential Block Parties   1D
Special Event Permits   1E
Communications Systems Within Public Right-Of-Way   2
Installation And Operation Of Small Cell Broadband Infrastructure   2A
Railroads   3
Public Benches (Rep. by Ord. 2017, 12-30-2013)   4
Newsracks (Rep. by Ord. 2010, 10-14-2013)   5
Cemetery   6
Airport Authority (Rep. by Ord. 2011, 10-14-2013)   7
Sewer Regulations   8
General Provisions   8A
Use Of Public Sewers   8B
Sanitary Sewer Service Charges   8C
Private Sewer Systems   8D
Illicit Discharge To Storm Sewer System   8E
Industrial Waste   8F
Postconstruction Stormwater Management   8G
Major Stormwater Drainage Facilities Connection Fee Districts   8H
Water Supply Protection   9
Trees And Shrubs   10
Park Regulations   11
Library Regulations   12
Special Assessments For Streets   13
Utility Systems   14
Public Arts   15
CHAPTER 1
STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND ALLEYS
SECTION:
7-1-1: Use Of Public Ways Restricted
7-1-2: Definition
7-1-3: Prohibited Acts And Conditions
7-1-4: Encroachments
7-1-5: Removal Of Snow And/Or Ice Accumulations
7-1-6: Maintenance Of Parking Terrace And Sidewalks
7-1-7: Sidewalk Construction
7-1-8: Street Names
7-1-9: Street And Sidewalk Grades
7-1-10: Vacation And Disposal
7-1-11: Penalty
7-1-1: USE OF PUBLIC WAYS RESTRICTED:
A.   Use Of Streets For Business Purposes: It shall be unlawful to park, store
or place any vehicle, equipment, machinery, or any goods, wares, and
merchandise of any kind upon any public street or right-of-way, or Municipally
owned property for the purpose of storage, exhibition, sale or offering same
for sale, except in accordance with applicable provisions of this Code and
other applicable City regulations or policies as approved by the City Council.
B.   Obstruction Of Public Ways: It shall be unlawful for any person to place
or cause to be placed over, into or upon any of the public streets and
sidewalks of the City any obstruction whatsoever, including any building,
fence, structure, projection, awnings, canopies, marquees, signs, flags,
lumber, timber, brick, stone or other material, coal, wood, goods, wares or
merchandise, decorations, planters, rubbish, debris, produce or other
commodities, except for the purpose of immediate transfer, or for immediate
construction or lawful repair of such street or sidewalk, or except as may be
excepted in this chapter or in other ordinances of the City.
C.   Certain Commercial Use Of Public Sidewalks: Due to minimal setbacks of
buildings from the public right-of-way and in an effort to encourage a lively,
viable, pedestrian oriented street culture in the Valley Junction Historic
Business (VJHB) District, the use of the public sidewalks may be allowed in
accordance with the following provisions:
1.   Storing Of Goods On Sidewalks Restricted: Nothing in this section shall be
construed as permitting the long term or permanent storing of goods on
sidewalks. No person shall leave upon any sidewalk in front of his/her place of
business any goods, wares or merchandise which may be left there by the person
delivering or receiving the goods to or from the owner or occupant of any place
of business for a longer period than six (6) hours.
2.   Display Of Goods: Any proprietor of an establishment in the Valley
Junction Historic Business (VJHB) District may apply for an annual sidewalk
encroachment permit to use a maximum of three feet (3') in width of the public
sidewalk next to and in front of his/her building or business for the purpose
of displaying samples of goods kept by him/her for sale, provided that the
sidewalk is not less than eight feet (8') in width and a minimum of five feet
(5') of unobstructed public sidewalk is maintained for the free passage of
pedestrian traffic on the public sidewalk. The City may, in granting a permit
under this subsection, require more than five feet (5') of unobstructed public
sidewalk clearance if, in the reasonable determination of the City, such
additional clearance is necessary in the interests of public safety, health, or
welfare, in light of the particular circumstances involved with the specific
permit application, or the physical characteristics of the public sidewalk area
in question.
Nothing shall be used or set out on the sidewalk for such purposes which might
endanger or injure the person or the apparel of anyone who might pass on the
sidewalk.
An annual permit and fee for encroachment into the public- right-of-way for the
use of the public sidewalk area shall be submitted on a form furnished by the
City and obtained through the City Clerk's Office. Proof of insurance, along
with a hold harmless and indemnification agreement to the benefit of the City
on a form furnished by the City in accordance with subsection C6 of this
section and obtained through the City Clerk's Office, shall also be provided in
conjunction with the permit application.
3.   Tables, Chairs, Planters, Benches And Other Privately Owned Street
Furniture: With the exception of a sidewalk cafe as described elsewhere in this
section, any proprietor of an establishment in the Valley Junction Historic
Business (VJHB) District may use that portion of the public sidewalk that is
immediately adjacent to and that lies in between the front or side property
lines, extended to the curb, for the purpose of providing tables, chairs and/or
benches, for the convenience of and use by such proprietor's customers and
others, with the following restrictions:
a.   Such proprietor and the proprietor's employees shall not at any time serve
any food or beverages to customers or others seated at such tables, chairs and/
or benches, unless approved and in compliance with the provisions for sidewalk
cafes as outlined in this section or elsewhere within this Code.
b.   A minimum of five feet (5') of unobstructed public sidewalk must be
provided adjacent to any tables, chairs, benches, merchandise and any street
furniture (public and private), in order to allow for the free passage of
pedestrian traffic on the public sidewalk. The City may, in granting a permit
under this subsection, require more than five feet (5') of unobstructed public
sidewalk clearance if, in the reasonable determination of the City, such
additional clearance is necessary in the interests of public safety, health, or
welfare, in light of the particular circumstances involved with the permit
application, and/or due to the physical characteristics of the public sidewalk
area in question.
c.   No tables, chairs and/or benches shall be attached in any manner to the
public sidewalk or to any public fixtures located on the public sidewalk
without specific written approval of the City. The proprietor shall be
responsible for any damage to the public sidewalk or to any public fixtures
located on the public sidewalk by said tables, chairs and/or benches.
d.   Each night within thirty (30) minutes of the closing time of the
establishment, all tables, chairs and/or benches shall either:
(1)   Be removed from the public right-of-way restoring the sidewalk to its
normal condition as a pedestrian walkway; or
(2)   Be moved to a location on the public sidewalk that directly abuts the
front of the building in which such establishment is located, stacked neatly,
and secured by means of chains and locks or some other secure means approved by
the City so that they cannot be used to cause damage to persons or property
during the hours such establishment is closed. Tables, chairs, display
structure, merchandise and/or benches shall not be attached in any manner to
the public sidewalk or to any public fixtures located on the public sidewalk.
If the proprietor selects this alternative, the proprietor shall be responsible
for insuring that such items do not cause damage to persons or property during
the hours such establishment is closed.
e.   Before a proprietor of such an establishment may lawfully place any
tables, chairs, benches or any other street furniture on the public sidewalk in
front of such establishment, the proprietor shall file an application for a
sidewalk encroachment permit and pay a non-refundable permit fee in such amount
as shall be determined from time to time by resolution of the City Council.
Each year, the proprietor of the establishment shall be required to file proof
of insurance in accordance with subsection C6 of this section; however, a new
permit fee and a new hold harmless and indemnification agreement shall not be
required unless there is a change of ownership.
4.   Sign Encroachments: Due to the minimal building setbacks of the buildings
in the Valley Junction Historic Business (VJHB) District, the following
exceptions shall apply:
a.   For any permanent sign or structure that projects over the public right-
of-way from the building, the property owner shall provide proof of insurance,
along with a hold harmless and indemnification agreement to the benefit of the
City on a form furnished by the City in accordance with subsection C6 of this
section and obtained through the City Clerk's Office.
b.   Temporary movable signs on public sidewalks. Any proprietor of an
establishment in the VJHB District, may file an annual sidewalk encroachment
permit application and fee, to use a portion of the public sidewalk that is
immediately adjacent to and that lies in between the side property lines, as
extended to the curb, for the purpose of displaying one (1) temporary movable
sign for said establishment.
c.   The portion of the public sidewalk that may be used by the proprietor of
such establishment for the display of such signs is the area of the public
sidewalk that extends from the storefront of the establishment to the adjacent
street curb and between the side property lines of the building in which the
establishment is located, as such side property lines are extended to the
adjacent street curb.
d.   All such temporary signs must at all times maintain at least a two foot
(2') setback from the outside edge of said sign to the inside edge of the
street curb.
e.   In order to allow for the free passage of pedestrian traffic on the public
sidewalk, a minimum of five feet (5') of unobstructed public sidewalk must be
provided at all times. That unobstructed area may be between the storefront and
the edge of the sign closest to the storefront, or the sign and any other
obstruction to the free movement on the public sidewalk, including but not
limited to, private street furniture, public street furniture, light pole, tree
wells, and car overhang over the sidewalk. However, the City may, in granting a
permit under this subsection, require more than five feet (5') of unobstructed
public sidewalk clearance if, in the reasonable determination of the City, such
additional clearance is necessary in the interest of public safety, health, or
welfare, in light of the particular circumstances involved with the physical
characteristics of the public sidewalk area in question.
f.   No such temporary movable sign shall be attached in any manner to the
public sidewalk, or to any public fixtures within the right-of-way, including
but not limited to, light poles, traffic signs, tables, chairs, or other
fixtures, or on top of any temporary elevations such as fill material or
snowbanks.
g.   No such temporary sign shall exceed two and one-half feet (21/2') in width
and three and one-half feet (31/2') in height as measured to the outer frame
measurements and height measured from the natural grade of the sidewalk surface
adjacent to such establishment.
h.   No more than one (1) such sign may be placed in front of any single store-
front.
i.   All such signs must be well-maintained and kept in good repair.
j.   By the closing time of such establishment each day, such sign shall be
moved inside the building and restore the public sidewalk to its normal
condition as a pedestrian walkway.
k.   Before the proprietor of any establishment may lawfully place any
temporary sign on the public sidewalk, the proprietor shall file an application
for a sidewalk encroachment permit with the City Clerk, on a form furnished by
the City, and shall pay a non- refundable annual permit fee in such amount as
shall be determined by resolution of the City Council. The application and an
accompanying diagram or site plan shall show:
(1)   The dimensions, including the length and width, of the public sidewalk
that is adjacent to said establishment, as described in this subsection;
(2)   The five foot (5') area of unobstructed public sidewalk which is to be
reserved for pedestrian use;
(3)   The two foot (2') setback from the outside edge of said sign to the
inside edge of the street curb;
(4)   The approximate location where the sign shall be positioned;
(5)   The size of said sign to its outer dimensions; and
(6)   Other information and documentation as the City may require in order to
demonstrate that the proprietor complies with the requirements of this
subsection.
The application shall also be accompanied by:
(1)   Written consent to the filing of said application from the owner of the
building in which such establishment is located, if the applicant is not the
owner of the building; and
(2)   Proof of insurance, along with a hold harmless and indemnification
agreement to the benefit of the City on a form furnished by the City in
accordance with subsection C6 of this section and obtained through the City
Clerk's Office.
The City Clerk shall forward a copy of the application, to the Development
Review Team (DRT) for evaluation of compliance with the requirements of this
subsection, and compliance with the interest of public safety, health, or
welfare. The Development Review Team may approve, approve with conditions, deny
the application or refer to the City Council for further direction.
l.   Any permit issued under this subsection shall be applicable for the
calendar year in which it is issued, and may be renewed with the filing of an
application by the proprietor for following years with the payment of the
required annual fee and proof of insurance. The application for renewal shall
state whether or not any of the contents of the original application are being
revised, failing which, the contents of the application for renewal shall be
deemed to be the same as contained in the original application.
m.   In the event that ownership of the establishment holding the permit is
sold, conveyed or transferred to another person or entity, the permit shall not
thereby be transferred. The new owner shall be required to file a new and
separate application for such a permit, as provided in this subsection.
n.   The City reserves the right to limit the number of permits issued under
this subsection if necessary to maintain adequate pedestrian flow, to permit
adequate access to building entrances, to safeguard pedestrian and traffic
safety, to preserve the aesthetic quality of the surrounding area, or for any
other valid public purpose. The City reserves the right to either deny an
application which otherwise meets the requirements of this subsection, or to
require the proprietor to meet additional terms and conditions for issuance of
a permit beyond the requirements set forth in this subsection if, in the
reasonable determination of the City, either granting the permit, or granting
it without such additional terms and conditions, would not adequately protect
and preserve the rights, privileges, and property of the City or its residents,
or would not adequately protect or preserve the peace, safety, health, welfare,
comfort or convenience of the City's residents.
o.   The City may order the immediate removal of any such temporary sign in the
event such sign is causing a hazard to public safety, health or welfare; is
interfering with the unobstructed passage of pedestrians; is unsightly in
appearance; is interfering with the removal of ice and snow from the public
sidewalks; or for any other reason affecting public safety, health or welfare.
p.   A permit issued under this subsection may be revoked by the City if the
proprietor holding the permit does any of the following:
(1)   Fails to move the sign inside the building by closing time of the
establishment as required in this subsection;
(2)   Fails to pay the fee for issuance or renewal of the permit;
(3)   Fails to operate in strict compliance with all of the provisions of this
subsection, of all other City ordinances, and of State law;
(4)   Creates or allows to exist a safety hazard in connection with the
placement of the sign; or
(5)   Fails to maintain insurance coverage as required.
q.   Upon the occurrence of any of the events described, the City Clerk shall
give the proprietor of such establishment written notice of revocation of the
permit, and the permit holder shall thereupon immediately cease to place the
sign on the public sidewalk adjacent to the proprietor's establishment. The
permit holder may file an appeal to the revocation of the permit within ten
(10) days of the date of notice of revocation in accordance with subsection C7
of this section.
ILLUSTRATION 7-1-1
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5dd626f68508237cd281a645678e92f34786b23f/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2548.jpg]
5.   Sidewalk Cafes On The Public Right-Of-Way: In the Valley Junction Historic
Business (VJHB) District, the use of the public sidewalks for sidewalk cafes
and outdoor service areas may be allowed in accordance with the following
provisions, or as otherwise allowed by City Council:
a.   The following words, terms and phrases, when used in matters related and
regulated in this subsection, shall have the following meanings ascribed to
them, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. Where
words and phrases used in this chapter are defined by State law, such
definitions shall apply to the use of such words and phrases in this chapter
and are adopted by reference. Those definitions so adopted that are further
defined or are reiterated in this section shall have the meanings set out in
this section.
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES: Any beverage containing more than one- half of one percent
of alcohol by volume including alcoholic liquor, wine, and beer.
PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY: Any public street, alley, roadway, sidewalk, walkway,
right-of-way or public way designed for vehicular, bicycle, or pedestrian
travel that is dedicated to public use and/or publicly owned.
PUBLIC SIDEWALK: The improved portion of the public right- of-way lying between
the traveled portion of the street and the private property line or building
line, which is paved and intended primarily for pedestrian use.
RESTAURANT OR BAR/RESTAURANT CLASS 1 (See Title 9, Zoning,
Chapter 6  for classification information): A business that serves food to
customers and has more than fifty percent (50%) of their sales from food.
SIDEWALK CAFÉ: An outdoor area meeting the requirements of this subsection that
is temporarily situated on a public sidewalk and which is adjacent to and
contiguous with any side of a building in which a restaurant or bar/restaurant
Class 1 (see Title 9, Zoning,
Chapter 6  for classification information) is located, and in which food and
beverages are served for consumption by persons sitting or standing at tables
within such area. Sidewalk cafes must be situated on the same level as the
adjacent sidewalk lying outside the sidewalk café.
SIDEWALK CAFE ELEMENTS: All tables, chairs, fencing, planters and plants, and
any other privately owned property comprising the sidewalk cafe, which are
approved for use in a sidewalk cafe by this section or in a sidewalk cafe
permit.
SIDEWALK CAFE PERMIT: A sidewalk encroachment permit issued by the City for
operation of a sidewalk cafe within the public right-of-way or on public
property which meets all of the requirements of this division and all other
applicable ordinances of the City and all State laws.
b.   Use of public sidewalks for sidewalk cafes shall only be permitted in
those areas of the City which meet all of the following requirements:
(1)   Are within the public right-of-way of the City;
(2)   Are within those areas of the City that are zoned Valley Junction
Historic Business (VJHB) District;
(3)   Are within an area of the public sidewalk where the public right-of-way
directly abuts a private building line; and
(4)   Meet all of the other requirements of this section.
c.   The sidewalk cafe area must be adjacent to and contiguous with one (1)
side of the building it serves, and in which a restaurant is located and
operating, and may not extend beyond the property lines of the parcel
containing the building when extended perpendicularly to the adjacent street.
No sidewalk cafe shall be located within ten feet (10') of any public alley.
d.   A minimum of five feet (5') of unobstructed public sidewalk must be
provided between the boundary of the sidewalk cafe area and any other
obstruction to the free movement on the public sidewalk, including, but not
limited to, private street furniture, public street furniture, light pole, tree
wells, and car overhang over the sidewalk. The City may, in granting the
sidewalk cafe permit, require more than five feet (5') of unobstructed public
sidewalk clearance for any sidewalk cafe if, in the reasonable determination of
the City, such additional clearance is necessary in the interests of public
safety, health, or welfare, in light of the particular circumstances involved
with the specific cafe permit application, the configuration of the proposed
sidewalk cafe, and/or due to the physical characteristics of the public
sidewalk, parking areas and streets adjacent thereto.
e.   A minimum two feet (2') of unobstructed clearance must be maintained on
each side of any doorway leading from the building onto the public sidewalk.
f.   Sidewalk cafes that serve alcoholic beverages must be in compliance with
all other local, County and State requirements for outdoor alcohol sales.
g.   The boundary of the sidewalk cafe area shall be delineated by, and the
sidewalk cafe elements divided from, that portion of the adjacent public
sidewalk lying outside of the sidewalk cafe area, by a barrier at least three
feet (3') in height, consisting of:
(1)   Fencing or other rigid structure; or
(2)   Ropes of a design or type approved by the City.
h.   Each night within thirty (30) minutes of the closing time of the sidewalk
cafe, all sidewalk cafe elements must either:
(1)   Be removed from the public right-of-way restoring the sidewalk cafe to
its normal condition as a pedestrian walkway; or
(2)   Be moved to a location on the public sidewalk that directly abuts the
front of the building in which such establishment is located, stacked neatly,
and secured by means of chains and locks or some other secure means approved by
the City so that they cannot be used to cause damage to persons or property
during the hours such establishment is closed. If the proprietor attaches any
sidewalk cafe elements to approved public property, the proprietor shall be
responsible for restoring such property to its original condition or condition
of suitable agreement with the City, such as use of seasonal plugs, whenever
the elements are removed. Upon completion of the repairs, the City will inspect
for compliance.
The proprietor may select either of the above alternatives, provided that, if
the proprietor selects the alternative which leaves the sidewalk cafe elements
on the public sidewalk, the proprietor shall be responsible for insuring that
such sidewalk cafe elements do not cause damage to persons or property and do
not inhibit or obstruct regular sidewalk maintenance including, but not limited
to ordinary repair and snow removal.
i.   Except as expressly provided for in subsection C5h(2) of this section, no
property shall be stored on the public right-of-way.
j.   Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection C5h(2) of this section, if
the proprietor elects to close the sidewalk cafe during certain times of the
year, as provided for in this section, then all sidewalk cafe elements shall be
removed from the public right-of-way.
k.   Sidewalk cafe elements may consist of tables, chairs, fencing, planters
and plants, and umbrellas and awnings and similar fixtures if approved by the
City as part of the sidewalk encroachment permit process.
l.   A sidewalk cafe may not use or incorporate into the sidewalk cafe area any
public fixtures such as benches, seats, planters, trash receptacles, lampposts,
or any other publicly owned structures located in any part of the public right-
of-way, unless approved by the City as a part of the sidewalk encroachment
permit process.
m.   Except as otherwise expressly provided in subsection C5h(2) of this
section, stacking of chairs or tables in the sidewalk cafe area is not
permitted at any time.
n.   Outdoor heaters are allowed if approved by the City as part of the
sidewalk encroachment permit process and is in compliance with Fire Code as
adopted by the City.
o.   No advertising or signage shall be permitted in a sidewalk cafe area
except that the name of the establishment may be printed on chairs, tables,
umbrellas or other amenities for identification purposes as approved by the
City.
p.   In the event of any damage to the surface of any part of the public
sidewalk lying within or immediately adjacent to the confines or boundaries of
the sidewalk cafe area, the proprietor of the sidewalk cafe shall repair the
damage to the specifications of the Director of Public Services. If the
proprietor fails or refuses to repair such damage within thirty (30) days after
written notice from the City to do so, the Director of Public Services, or
their designee, shall cause the work to be done and billed to the proprietor
and/or property owner. All costs, including administration and City staff time
shall be computed and will be invoiced as part of the project. Any failure of
the proprietor and/or property owner to reimburse the City for the cost of such
work shall be grounds for termination of the proprietor's sidewalk cafe permit.
Any such costs shall be deducted from the proprietor's cash deposit provided to
the City, and the balance may be collected from the proprietor and/or property
owner by legal proceedings instituted by the City, including placing a lien on
the property.
q.   The sidewalk cafe shall be equipped with an inside or outside water source
to clean the sidewalk cafe area, as provided within this section.
r.   The City reserves the right to limit the number of permits issued for
sidewalk cafes if necessary to maintain adequate pedestrian flow, to permit
adequate access to building entrances, to safeguard pedestrian and traffic
safety, to preserve the aesthetic quality of the surrounding area, or for any
other valid public purpose.
s.   Operation of sidewalk cafes shall comply with all of the following
provisions:
(1)   If alcoholic beverages are served in the sidewalk cafe area, the
proprietor of the sidewalk cafe shall obtain the necessary liquor control
license or wine or beer permit which covers the sidewalk cafe area from the
Iowa Alcoholic Beverages Division, and shall otherwise comply with all
requirements of the Iowa Alcoholic Beverage Control Act, chapter 123, Code of
Iowa, and title 3, chapter 2, "Beer And Liquor Control", of this Code.
(2)   A sidewalk cafe serving alcoholic beverages shall have an employee who
shall monitor the sidewalk cafe area at all times during the hours alcoholic
beverages are served or are available for service and/or consumption to prevent
underage consumption and any alcoholic beverages from leaving the approved
service area.
(3)   The sidewalk cafe, as a part of a restaurant, must be licensed by the
State and/or County Health Departments and comply with all requirements of laws
applicable to establishments that sell food to the public for consumption on
the premises.
(4)   Sidewalk cafes may be installed no earlier than April 1, and all
components thereof shall be removed from the public passageway on or before
November 15 of each year.
(5)   The hours of operation for sidewalk cafes shall be from no earlier than
seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. to no later than ten thirty o'clock (10:30) P.M.,
Sunday through Thursday, and no earlier than seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. to no
later than twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight on Friday and Saturdays. The
sidewalk cafe area shall be restored to its normal condition as a pedestrian
walkway at all other times, including during certain times of the year that the
sidewalk cafe is not open for business, as provided within this section.
(6)   Food and beverages, other than alcoholic beverages, must be available for
service to and consumption by patrons in a sidewalk cafe during all hours of
operation.
(7)   The sidewalk cafe area shall be served by waiters or restaurant staff at
all times during all hours of operation.
(8)   Sidewalk cafes shall not play or allow the playing of music, whether live
or recorded, that involves the use of sound amplification equipment, and no
speakers, microphones, or other sound amplification equipment shall be used in
conjunction with televisions, radios or other audio or video devices in a
sidewalk cafe area at any time during the hours of operation, unless a sound
permit has been issued for the use.
(9)   Lighting of the sidewalk cafe area shall not unreasonably reflect onto
adjacent properties or cause disturbance to residential quarters located above
or nearby.
(10)   The proprietor of the sidewalk cafe area and the restaurant with which
it is affiliated, or its employees or agents, shall clean the sidewalk cafe
area on a daily basis, including cleaning of tables, chairs, trash receptacles,
and the surface of the sidewalk within the sidewalk cafe area. All garbage,
trash, litter and other debris shall be picked up and collected whenever the
trash receptacles appear to be full. All garbage, trash and other debris
located on the public sidewalk adjacent to the sidewalk cafe area, and
extending for ten feet (10') on any side thereof, shall be the responsibility
of the sidewalk cafe proprietor, or its employees or agents, to pick up and
dispose of properly, during all hours of operation and before closing. No trash
receptacles or sidewalk cafe elements shall be hosed down in the sidewalk cafe
area or in any part of the public sidewalk at any time. The sidewalk within or
adjacent to the sidewalk cafe shall not be hosed down during cold weather, when
ice could form thereon.
(11)   The City may require additional restroom capacity in the restaurant
located within the building adjacent to the sidewalk cafe area in order to
comply with the requirements of City or State Building, Fire or other
applicable codes.
(12)   Occupancy limits, including the occupancy load of the sidewalk cafe
area, shall comply with all applicable City or State Building, Fire, or other
applicable codes.
(13)   No entrances or exits to the adjacent building shall be blocked or
obstructed by any sidewalk cafe elements or other materials or property.
(14)   Entrance into or exit out of a sidewalk cafe area shall be through the
adjacent building, unless such entrance or exit to the sidewalk cafe is located
at and adjacent to the main entrance to the building in which the restaurant is
located. The Fire Marshal shall have authority to determine emergency exiting
needs and pathways.
(15)   The operation of each sidewalk cafe shall be in entire conformity with
all applicable Federal, State and local laws and regulations, including all
applicable Fire Code requirements.
(16)   Patrons of the sidewalk cafe shall wear shirts and shoes at all times,
or they shall not be admitted to or served in the sidewalk cafe area.
(17)   The sidewalk cafe and the adjacent restaurant shall be subject to
inspection by any City employee or agent of the City at any time during
business hours.
t.   Before a restaurant may lawfully establish a sidewalk cafe on the public
sidewalk adjacent to its building, or a business may utilize a portion of the
public sidewalk adjacent to its building, the proprietor of the restaurant or
business shall file an application with the City Clerk for a sidewalk
encroachment permit on a form furnished by the Clerk. The application shall be
accompanied by each of the following items:
(1)   Proof of insurance, along with a hold harmless and indemnification
agreement to the benefit of the City on a form furnished by the City in
accordance with subsection C6 of this section and obtained through the City
Clerk's Office.
(2)   Written consent from the owner of the building in which the restaurant or
business is located, if the applicant is not the owner of the building.
(3)   A significantly detailed, accurate site plan showing:
(A)   The dimensions of the proposed use area, including the length and width
of the area of the public sidewalk that is adjacent to said establishment;
(B)   The five foot (5') area of unobstructed public sidewalk which is to be
reserved for pedestrian use;
(C)   The location where the tables, chairs, benches, planters, fencing, roping
or barrier will be placed during the hours of operation, and the size and
number of other sidewalk furniture associated with the use;
(D)   The location where the tables, chairs and/or benches shall be stored
during the hours when such establishment is closed;
(E)   In the event the establishment elects not to move said items inside the
establishment each night, the means by which such tables, chairs, benches,
etc., shall be secured;
(F)   The distance between the boundaries of the use area and all adjacent
street curbs, buildings, property lines, street intersections, alleys, and
fixtures in the public sidewalk;
(G)   An illustration of compliance with the provision of a minimum two foot
(2') clearance between any such tables, chairs and/or benches and each side of
any doorway leading from the establishment onto the public sidewalk; and
(H)   Such other information and documentation as the City may require in order
to demonstrate compliance with the requirements of this subsection and show
that the proposed sidewalk encroachment shall not unreasonably interfere with:
(i)   Adequate pedestrian flow;
(ii)   Access to building entrances;
(iii)   Pedestrian and traffic safety; and
(iv)   The aesthetic quality of the surrounding area.
(4)   A non-refundable annual permit fee in such amount as shall be determined
from time to time by resolution of the City Council.
(5)   A cash deposit in the sum acceptable to the City to cover any damage to
the public sidewalk included within the use area. If the fencing or other items
are permanently affixed to public property, the property owner will furnish the
City with a cost estimate during the application process that provides a
detailed summary of the repairs and costs to repair the items in public
property. The cash deposit shall be refunded by the City Clerk upon expiration,
non-renewal or other termination of the sidewalk encroachment permit, if there
is no damage to the public sidewalk after removal of the use from the public
right-of-way.
(6)   If applicable, proof that the applicant holds a valid liquor control
license or wine or beer permit for the restaurant which is adjacent to the
proposed sidewalk cafe and proof that the applicant has applied to the Iowa
Alcoholic Beverages Division for approval to extend the "premises" covered by
such license or permit to include the entire sidewalk cafe area, if the
applicant is applying for authority to serve alcoholic beverages in the
sidewalk cafe area. No sidewalk encroachment permit for a cafe to serve alcohol
shall be issued by the City Clerk until such liquor control license or wine or
beer permit has actually been issued as provided in this subsection.
(7)   A listing of the effective dates during the calendar year that the
proprietor intends to use the area of the sidewalk or operate the sidewalk
cafe. Sidewalk cafes may be installed no earlier than April 1, and all
components thereof shall be removed from the public passageway on or before
November 15 of each year. The proprietor shall specify the beginning and ending
dates during the calendar year that the sidewalk cafe will be open. The
proprietor may revise the effective dates of operation by written notice to the
City no more often than once during each permit year; however, may revise such
effective dates at the time the permit is renewed each year.
u.   The City Clerk shall forward a copy of the proprietor's application,
together with all other information and documentation required in connection
with said application, to the Special Event Permit Review Team for evaluation
of compliance with the requirements of this subsection, the interests of public
safety, health or welfare, and preservation of the aesthetics of the area.
(1)   If the application is approved as being in compliance with the
requirements of this subsection, the City Clerk shall issue a permit.
(2)   If the application is not approved by the City Clerk, he/she shall notify
the applicant of the reason or reasons the application was not approved. The
applicant shall be afforded a period of thirty (30) days from the date of the
City Clerk's notice, within which to revise the application in an effort to
comply with the requirements of this subsection and to correct the reasons for
denial thereof. The applicant may appeal a denial of the permit within ten (10)
days of the date of notice of denial in accordance with subsection C7 of this
section.
(3)   Any permit issued under this subsection shall be issued for a period to
the end of the calendar year, and may be renewed upon the filing of an
application for renewal by the proprietor for following years upon payment of
the required annual fee, submittal of proof of insurance, and indemnification
and hold harmless agreements in accordance with subsection C6 of this section.
The application for renewal shall state whether or not any of the contents of
the original application is being revised, or modified from the previous year.
Failure to identify any changes from the previous/original application as part
of a renewal application shall be deemed as a continuation of the same as that
contained in the prior/original application.
(4)   In the event that ownership of the establishment holding the permit is
sold, conveyed or transferred to another person or entity, the permit shall not
thereby be transferred. The new owner shall be required to file a new and
separate application for such a permit, as provided in this subsection.
(5)   The City reserves the right to limit the number of permits issued under
this subsection if necessary to maintain adequate pedestrian flow, to permit
adequate access to building entrances, to safeguard pedestrian and traffic
safety, to preserve the aesthetic quality of the surrounding area, or for any
other valid public purpose.
(6)   The City reserves the right to either deny an application which otherwise
meets the requirements of this subsection, or to require the proprietor to meet
additional terms and conditions for issuance of a permit beyond the
requirements set forth in this subsection if, in the reasonable determination
of the City, either granting the permit, or granting it without such additional
terms and conditions, would not adequately protect and preserve the rights,
privileges, and property of the City or of its residents, or would not
adequately protect or preserve the peace, safety, health, welfare, comfort or
convenience of the City's residents.
(7)   The City may order the immediate removal of any or all of a permit
holder's tables, chairs, benches and any other private street furniture in the
event such items are causing a hazard to public safety, health or welfare, are
interfering with the unobstructed passage of pedestrians, are unsightly in
appearance or unsanitary in condition, are interfering with removal of ice and
snow from the public sidewalks, will interfere with scheduled repairs or
maintenance of public infrastructure within the area, or for any other reason
affecting public safety, health or welfare.
(8)   A permit issued under this subsection shall be revoked if the proprietor
holding the permit does any of the following:
(A)   Fails to maintain a valid license or permit, if applicable, covering the
establishment adjacent to where the tables, chairs, benches and other street
furniture are located;
(B)   Fails to either move the tables, chairs and/or benches inside the
establishment, or fails to secure them, as required above in this subsection;
(C)   Fails to pay the fee for issuance or renewal of the permit;
(D)   Fails to operate in strict compliance with all of the provisions of this
subsection, of all other City ordinances, and of State law; or
(E)   In connection with the placement or use of the tables, chairs, benches or
other street furniture creates or allows to exist a safety hazard, health
hazard, or public nuisance under State law or City ordinance.
(F)   Upon the occurrence of any of the events described above, the City Clerk
shall give the proprietor of such establishment written notice of revocation of
the permit, and the permit holder shall thereupon immediately cease activities
on the public sidewalk adjacent to the proprietor's establishment. The permit
holder may file an appeal to the revocation of the permit within ten (10) days
of the date of notice of revocation in accordance with subsection C7 of this
section.
(G)   A permit shall not be issued under this subsection unless the applicant,
at the time of filing of an application for issuance or renewal of a permit,
furnishes to the City with proof of insurance, along with a hold harmless and
indemnification agreement to the benefit of the City on a form furnished by the
City in accordance with subsection C6 of this section and obtained through the
City Clerk's Office.
6.   Insurance, Hold Harmless And Indemnification Requirements: No application
for a sidewalk encroachment permit shall be issued under this subsection unless
the applicant, at the time of filing an application for issuance or renewal of
a permit, furnishes proof of insurance, and executes a hold harmless and
indemnification agreement in favor of the City that meets the following
requirements:
a.   Commercial general liability insurance coverage in the amount of one
million dollars ($1,000,000.00) per occurrence and two million dollars
($2,000,000.00) in the aggregate for bodily injury and property damage, with
the City to be named as an additional insured on the policy, with an
endorsement to be issued as part of the insurance policy, evidencing compliance
with this requirement; and
b.   A hold harmless and indemnification agreement on a form furnished by the
City, under which the proprietor agrees to indemnify and hold the City harmless
from any liability for damages arising out of the placement of items in the
public right-of-way.
7.   Revocation And Appeal Process: Upon the occurrence of any of the events
described above that cause the revocation of a sidewalk encroachment permit,
the City Clerk shall give the proprietor of such establishment written notice
of the revocation of the sidewalk encroachment permit, and the permit holder
shall thereupon immediately cease to place any signs, displays or merchandise,
tables, chairs, benches and other street furniture on the public sidewalk
adjacent to the proprietor's establishment. The permit holder may appeal the
revocation of the permit by written notice of appeal mailed or delivered to the
City Clerk within ten (10) days of the date of notice of revocation. An appeal
of a revocation shall be heard by the Municipal Code Hearing Officer.
8.   Right To Terminate: The City shall retain the right to terminate any
permit granted under this subsection upon seven (7) days' written notice, and
may require the removal of all signs, displays and merchandise, tables, chairs,
benches, and other street furniture from the public sidewalk adjacent to an
establishment, if the City Council, after due consideration, determines that
there is a reasonable and substantial need for the use of the public right-of-
way being occupied by such items for a valid public purpose. The determination
of the City Council shall be final, and there shall be no right of appeal from
such decision.
9.   Violation: Any person violating any provision of this section upon
conviction shall be punished as set forth in section
1-4-1 of this Code.
D.   Construction Staging On Public Property: The use of public property,
except public streets and sidewalks, may be allowed at the City's sole
discretion for the staging of construction vehicles, equipment, materials, and
related items for a development project within close proximity on a temporary
basis. If allowed by the City, the parties shall enter into a short-term lease
agreement permitting the parking, storing, placing of construction related
items on city property. Said lease agreement may be approved administratively
by city staff unless the areas to be utilized exceeds two thousand (2,000)
square feet. (Ord. 2210, 4-17-2017; amd. Ord. 2498, 11-15-2021; Ord. 2566, 5-
15-2023)
7-1-2: DEFINITION:
For use in this chapter the following term is defined:
ABUTTING PROPERTY OWNER: The owner of property which is immediately adjacent to
the public right-of-way, regardless of the number of parcels which make up the
right-of-way.
RIGHT OF WAY: An area of land, the right to possession of which is secured or
reserved by public ownership or easement by the state or a governmental
subdivision for roadway purpose.
SIDEWALK: All permanent public walks in business, residential or suburban
areas. (1985 Code § 8-2.01; amd. Ord. 2603, 3-18-2024)
7-1-3: PROHIBITED ACTS AND CONDITIONS:
A.   Injuring Public Road: It shall be unlawful for any person to obstruct,
deface, or injure any public road in any manner. (1985 Code §8-1.0102)
B.   Defacing: It shall be unlawful for a person to scatter or place any paste,
paint or writing on any sidewalk. (1985 Code §8-2.11)
C.   Debris On Sidewalks: It shall be unlawful for a person to throw or deposit
on any sidewalk any glass, nails, glass bottle, tacks, wire, cans, trash,
garbage, rubbish, litter, offal, or any other debris, or any other substance
likely to injure any person, animal or vehicle. (1985 Code §8-2.12)
D.   Fires On Sidewalks: It shall be unlawful for a person to make a fire of
any kind on any sidewalk. (1985 Code §8-2.09)
E.   Fuel On Sidewalk: It shall be unlawful for a person to place or allow any
fuel to remain upon any sidewalk. (1985 Code §8-2.10)
F.   Removal Of Warning Devices: It shall be unlawful for a person to wilfully
remove, throw down, destroy or carry away from any highway, street, alley,
avenue or bridge any lamp, obstruction, guard or other article or things, or
extinguish any lamp or other light, erected or placed thereupon for the purpose
of guarding or enclosing unsafe or dangerous places in said highway, street,
alley, avenue or bridge without the consent of the person in control thereof.
(1985 Code §8-1.0101)
G.   Placing Debris On Streets: It shall be unlawful for any person to throw or
deposit on any street any glass, glass bottle, nails, tacks, wire, cans, trash,
garbage, rubbish, litter, offal, or any other debris, or any other substance
likely to injure any person, animal or vehicle. (1985 Code §8-1.0103)
H.   Playing In Streets: It shall be unlawful for any person to coast, sled or
play games on streets or highways, except in the areas blocked off by the Chief
of Police for such purposes. (1985 Code §8-1.0104)
I.   Traveling On Barricaded Street Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any
person to travel or operate any vehicle on any street or public way temporarily
closed by barricades, lights, signs or flares placed thereon by the authority
or permission of any City official, police officer or member of the Fire
Department. (1985 Code §8-1.0105)
J.   Washing Vehicle On Streets Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any person
to use any public sidewalk or street for the purpose of washing or cleaning any
automobile, truck equipment or any vehicle of any kind when such work is done
for hire or as a business. This shall not be construed to prevent any person
from washing or cleaning his own vehicle or equipment when it is lawfully
parked in the street. (1985 Code §8-1.0108)
K.   Burning Prohibited: No person shall burn any trash, leaves, rubbish or
other combustible material in any curb and gutter or on any paved or surfaced
street. (1985 Code §8-1.0109)
7-1-4: ENCROACHMENTS:
A.   Encroaching Steps: It shall be unlawful for a person to erect or maintain
any stairs or steps to any building upon any part of any sidewalk without
permission by resolution of the council. (1985 Code §8-2.07)
B.   Openings And Enclosures: It shall be unlawful for a person to:
1.   Stairs And Railings: Construct or build a stairway or passageway to any
cellar or basement by occupying any part of the sidewalk, or to enclose any
portion of a sidewalk with a railing without permission by resolution of the
council.
2.   Openings: Keep open any cellar door, grating or cover to any vault on any
sidewalk except while in actual use with adequate guards to protect the public.
3.   Protect Openings: Neglect to properly protect or barricade all openings on
or within six feet (6') of any sidewalk. (1985 Code §8-2.08)
C.   Dumping Of Snow: It shall be unlawful for any person to throw, push or
place or cause to be thrown, pushed or placed, any ice or snow from private
property, sidewalks or driveways onto the traveled way of streets so as to
obstruct gutters or impede the passage of vehicles upon the street or to create
a hazardous condition therein; except where, in the cleaning of large
commercial drives in the business district it is absolutely necessary to move
the snow onto the streets temporarily, such accumulation shall be removed
promptly by the property owner or his agent, and only after first making
arrangements for such prompt removal at the owner's cost of the accumulation
within a reasonably short time. (1985 Code §8-1.0110)
7-1-5: REMOVAL OF SNOW AND/OR ICE ACCUMULATIONS:
A.   Intent Of Section: Snow and ice accumulation on sidewalks pose a threat to
pedestrian traffic. It is the city's policy to place the responsibility for
removal of snow and/or ice from sidewalks on the abutting property owner and in
instances where the abutting property owner fails to properly remove and/or
treat snow and/or ice accumulations, the city may take appropriate action at
the owner's expense to secure the removal of snow and ice. It is the intent of
this section to provide for certain procedures relative to the removal of snow
and ice from sidewalks and for certain penalties for failure to act hereunder.
B.   Enforcement Of Section: The Director of Public Services, the Director of
Development Services, or the Police Chief or their designated representative
shall enforce the provisions of this section.
C.   Definitions: Unless otherwise expressly stated or the context clearly
indicates a different intention, the following terms shall have the meanings
given in this subsection:
ACCUMULATIONS: Snow and/or ice deposits.
PERSON: Includes an individual or group or association of individuals; a firm
or any member thereof; a corporation, or any executive officer, manager, person
in charge or employee thereof; and the use of a pronoun specifying one gender
shall include both genders.
PROPERTY OWNER: The record titleholder or the contract purchaser of record, if
any.
SNOW SEASON: The period beginning October 1 and ending May 1.
D.   Obligation Of Property Owner:
1.   The owner of any property abutting a public sidewalk with the exception of
bike paths and combination bike paths/pedestrian walkways maintained by the
city, shall remove snow, ice and accumulations from sidewalks within a
reasonable time but in no case more than twenty-four (24) hours following the
cessation of the weather or other event by which they were deposited, provided,
however, that in extraordinary weather circumstances the Director of Public
Services or their designated representative may extend the period of time
provided herein. In those situations the Director of Public Services or their
designated representative will deliver to representative news media a statement
indicating the amount of additional time the property owners shall have to
remove accumulations from sidewalks.
2.   If accumulations are not removed as required above, including any
extraordinary weather circumstances, or required treatment pursuant to
subsection E of this section is not completed and maintained, the Director of
Public Services or their designated representative is hereby authorized to
personally serve upon the owner or responsible party of the property a written
notice to abate which shall include a description of the violation and City
Code section, a description of the action necessary to abate the violation
along with a specified time period to abate. Failure to comply with the order
to abate will cause the City to undertake such abatement and assess the actual
and administrative costs in addition to any other action provided for in City
Code. In lieu of personal service, service of this notice shall be deemed
adequate by posting the notice in a conspicuous place on the property or
building where the violation has occurred. If there is no building on the
property, a sign shall be posted on the property providing notice. The owner or
responsible party of the property in violation must comply with the notice and
shall have twenty-four (24) hours from the time of service or posting of this
notice in which to take corrective action and bring the sidewalk into
compliance with this code. The existence of extraordinary weather conditions as
determined by the Director of Public Services, pursuant to this subsection,
shall extend the twenty-four (24) hours until such extraordinary weather
conditions have dissipated. Upon notification by the Director of Public
Services of the end of extraordinary weather conditions, the twenty-four (24)
hours will start. If the accumulations are not timely removed or the required
treatment pursuant to subsection E of this section is not completed and
maintained, the City Attorney or their designated representative is authorized
to issue a municipal citation pursuant to section 364.22 of the code of Iowa or
to seek alternative relief pursuant to this section.
3.   A second subsequent violation of this section shall not be considered a
repeat offense pursuant to section 364.22(1), code of Iowa, for the purposes of
increasing the civil penalty provided in said code section, unless the prior or
preceding offenses have occurred within the current snow season.
E.   Treatment Of Unremovable Snow And/Or Ice: When accumulations have formed
upon any sidewalk so that it cannot be reasonably removed, the abutting
property owner shall within the period set forth in subsection D of this
section keep and maintain such accumulations sprinkled with fine cinders, sand
or deicing chemicals in such manner as to provide traction and prevent the
sidewalk from being dangerous to persons using the same. Nothing in this
subsection shall be construed to be a substitute for the removal of
accumulations, as required in subsection D of this section. This subsection
shall only apply when accumulations cannot be reasonably removed, however, all
accumulations shall be removed as soon as practical.
F.   Unlawful Deposit Of Snow And/Or Ice: No person shall remove, or cause to
be removed, accumulations from private premises and deposit the same or cause
the same to be deposited upon any public street, avenue, alley, public square
or traveled area within the city.
      The City Attorney or their designated representative is authorized to
issue a civil citation pursuant to section 364.22(4) of the code of Iowa to
anyone violating this subsection indicating said person is in violation of this
subsection and is subject to the penalties provided for in section 364.22, the
code of Iowa.
G.   Alternative Relief: In any proceeding seeking a civil penalty for
violations of the provisions of this section the Director of Development
Services or their designated representative may seek additional alternative
relief appropriate to the condition to be abated, including relief set forth in
subsection H of this section.
H.   Removal By The City Of West Des Moines: Whenever accumulations have
remained on any sidewalk in violation of subsection D of this section and/or
whenever unremovable accumulations have formed on any sidewalk in violation of
subsection E of this section, and the time for the property owner to take
action after service of the notice has expired, the city may cause such
accumulations to be removed and/or treatment of unremovable accumulations
either by use of city personnel and equipment or by contracting for the work to
be undertaken.
I.   Right To Assess: When the city removes or causes to be removed
accumulations and/or treats accumulations, the city may assess the actual cost
plus any administrative costs of removing such accumulations from the abutting
property owners' sidewalks and/or treatment of unremovable accumulations, in
addition to taking any other action provided for in this section.
J.   Assessment Of Costs: The actual cost, including any administrative costs,
as determined by the finance director or their designated representative in
removing accumulations or treatment of accumulations from sidewalks abutting
private property, shall be paid by the owner of the property abutting thereon.
The property owner shall be sent a bill by the finance director for said costs
to permit voluntary payment thereof by the property owner. The bill shall be
sent within thirty (30) days of the city's action as set forth in subsection H
of this section. Failure to pay said bill within thirty (30) days after mailing
of bill will cause the action to appear on a schedule of assessments to be
forwarded to the city clerk for consideration by the city council.
K.   Schedule Of Assessments: Whenever any accumulations have been removed from
any sidewalks or treatment of the sidewalks for unremovable accumulations by
the city as provided in this section, and the right to assess provided for in
subsection I of this section is invoked, the city shall cause to be prepared a
schedule giving the name of the owner, so far as known, a description of the
property, the date when the work was done, and the amount charged to each lot,
and for what work and materials the charge was made. As soon thereafter as
practicable the schedule shall be filed with the city clerk for consideration
by the city council.
L.   Adoption Of Assessment Schedule: The city council shall consider all
objections to the schedule of assessments for the removal of accumulations from
sidewalks, duly filed, and shall by resolution approve a schedule of
assessments.
M.   Certification For Collection: Upon adoption and approval by the city
council of the schedule of assessments and certification by the city clerk, the
city clerk shall file said assessments with the county treasurer for collection
in the manner provided by law. (Ord. 1026, 8-31-1992; amd. Ord. 1605, 10-25-
2004; Ord. 1878, 8-23-2010, eff. 9-17-2010; Ord. 2614, 6-3-2024)
7-1-6: MAINTENANCE OF PARKING TERRACE AND SIDEWALKS:
A.   Responsibility Of Property Owner: It shall be the responsibility of the
abutting property owner to maintain all property outside the lot and property
lines and inside the curb lines upon the public streets, except that the
abutting property owner shall not be required to remove diseased trees or dead
wood on the publicly owned property or right of way. For the purpose of this
subsection, abutting property shall be determined by following a perpendicular
line to the property line from the closest point in the curb line of the
adjoining public street.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5dd626f68508237cd281a645678e92f34786b23f/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4749.png]
B.   Failure To Maintain Parking On Terrace: If the abutting property owner
does not perform an action required under the above section within a reasonable
time, the city may perform the required action and assess the cost against the
abutting property for collection in the same manner as a property tax.
C.   Responsibility For Sidewalk Maintenance: It shall be the responsibility of
the abutting property owners to maintain in a safe and hazard free condition
any sidewalk outside the lot and property lines and inside the curb lines or
travelled portion of the public street.
D.   Failure To Maintain Sidewalks; Personal Injuries: If the abutting property
owner does not maintain sidewalks as required and action is brought against the
city for personal injuries alleged to have been caused by its negligence, the
city may notify in writing any person by whose negligence it claims the injury
was caused. The notice shall state the pendency of the action, the name of the
plaintiff, the name and location of the court where the action is pending, a
brief statement of the alleged facts from which the cause arose, that the city
believes the person notified is liable to it for any judgment rendered against
the city, and asking the person to appear and defend. A judgment obtained in
the suit is conclusive in any action by the city against any person so
notified, as to the existence of the defect or other cause of the injury or
damage, as to the liability of the city to the plaintiff in the first named
action, and as to the amount of the damage or injury. The city may maintain an
action against the person notified to recover the amount of the judgment
together with all the expenses incurred by the city in the suit.
E.   City May Order Repairs: If the abutting property owner does not maintain
sidewalks as required, the city may serve notice on such owner, by certified
mail to the abutting property owner as shown by the records maintained by the
county, requiring the abutting property owner to repair, replace or reconstruct
the affected sidewalks within a reasonable time. If the certified mailing has
been unclaimed or returned to the city, the city may also attempt to serve the
notice by regular mail to the abutting property owner. Unclaimed or returned
mail shall not constitute improper notification if the city has mailed the
notice(s) to the address of record for the abutting property owner. If such
action is not completed by the abutting property owner within the time stated
in the certified mail notice, the city may perform the required action and
assess the costs against the abutting property for collection in the same
manner as a property tax, following the assessment procedures detailed in
section
7-1-5 of this chapter. (Ord. 2086, 3-9-2015; amd. Ord. 2654, 3-24-2025)
7-1-7: SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION:
Sidewalks shall be constructed or reconstructed in accordance with the
following:
A.   Permit Required: No sidewalk shall be constructed or reconstructed without
first receiving a permit therefor from the city.
B.   Permit Fee: The permit fee for sidewalk construction shall be as follows:
 
New construction                          $10.00
Reconstruction (less than 20 linear feet) 3.00
 
C.   Standard Specifications: All sidewalk construction or reconstruction shall
conform with standard specifications for such work on file in the office of the
city engineer.
D.   Location: Residential sidewalks shall be located with the inner edge (edge
nearest the abutting private property) one foot (1') from the property line
unless the council shall establish a different distance due to circumstances.
(1985 Code §8-2.05)
7-1-8: STREET NAMES:
A.   Naming New Streets: New streets shall be assigned names in accordance with
the West Des Moines roadway naming and addressing guidelines. The naming of
private roadways shall follow the same naming and addressing guidelines as
public roadways.
B.   Changing Name Of Street: The council may, by ordinance, change the name of
a street. (Ord. 1999, 8-19-2013)
C.   Recording Street Names: Following adoption of an ordinance naming or
changing the name of a street, the mayor and clerk shall certify and file a
copy thereof with the county recorder and county auditor. (1985 Code §8-1.0403)
D.   Official Street Name Map: Streets within the city are named as shown on
the official street name map which is hereby adopted by reference and declared
to be a part of this section. The official street name map shall be identified
by the signature of the mayor, and bearing the seal of the city under the
following words:
"This is to certify that this is the Official Street Name Map referred to in
Section
7-1-8 D of the City Code of West Des Moines, Iowa".
Said map shall remain in the custody of the city engineer. (1985 Code §8-
1.0404)
E.   Revision Of Street Name Map: If in accordance with the provisions of this
section, changes are made in street names, such changes shall be entered on the
official street name map promptly after the amendment has been approved by the
council with an entry on the official street name map as to ordinance number
and date of adoption. (1985 Code §8-1.0405)
7-1-9: STREET AND SIDEWALK GRADES:
A.   Established Grades: The grades of all streets, alleys and sidewalks which
have been heretofore established by ordinance are hereby confirmed, ratified
and established as official grades. (1985 Code §8-1.0601)
B.   Record Maintained: The clerk shall maintain a record of all established
grades and furnish information concerning such grades upon request. (1985 Code
§8-1.0602)
7-1-10: VACATION AND DISPOSAL:
A.   Power To Vacate: When, in the judgment of the council, it would be in the
best interest of the city to vacate a street or alley or portion thereof, they
may do so in accordance with the provisions of this section.
B.   Plan and Zoning Commission: The commission shall submit a written report
including recommendations to the council within thirty (30) days of the hearing
date for the proposed vacation.
C.   Notice Of Vacation Hearing: A notice of public hearing shall be published
once, in a newspaper of general circulation in the City not less than four (4)
days nor more than twenty (20) days before the date of hearing, at which time
the proposal to vacate will be considered by both the Plan and Zoning
Commission and the City Council.
D.   Findings Required: No street or alley, or portion thereof, shall be
vacated unless the council finds that:
1Public Use: The street or alley proposed to be vacated is not needed for the
use of the public, and therefor, its maintenance at public expense is no longer
justified.
2Abutting Property: The proposed vacation will not deny owners of property
abutting on the street or alley reasonable access to their property.
E.   Disposal Of Streets Or Alleys: When in the judgment of the council it
would be in the best interest of the city to dispose of a vacated street or
alley, or portion thereof, they may do so by resolution following notice and
hearing.
F.   Disposal By Gift Limited: The city may not dispose of a vacated street or
alley, or portion thereof, by gift except to a governmental body for a public
purpose. (1985 Code §§ 8-1.0501 - 8-1.0506; amd. Ord. 2376, 8-5-2019)
7-1-11: PENALTY:
Any person in violation of the provisions of this chapter shall constitute a
municipal infraction as established in subsection
1-4-1B of this code. (Ord. 954, 7-8-1991)
ARTICLE A. CONTROLLED-ACCESS FACILITIES
SECTION:
7-1A-1: Access Controls Imposed
7-1A-2: Definition
7-1A-3: Right of Access Limited
7-1A-4: Unlawful Use of Controlled-Access Facility
7-1A-5: Parking
7-1A-6: Exercise of Police Power
7-1A-1: ACCESS CONTROLS IMPOSED:
There are hereby fixed and established controlled-access facilities within the
City described as follows:
A.   Project No. I-80-3(18)125: On the primary road system extension
improvement, Project No. I-80-3(18)125, within the City of West Des Moines,
described as follows:
On I-80, beginning at the west City limits easterly to Station 1358+60
including all ramps (A,B,C,D) at the I-35, 80, 235 interchange, regulating
access to and from abutting properties along said highway all in accordance
with the plans for such improvement identified as Project No. I-80-3(18)125, on
file in the office of the Clerk.
B.   Project No. I-235-2(17)73: On the primary road system extension
improvement, Project No. I-235-2(17)73, within the City of West Des Moines,
described as follows:
On I-235, beginning at Station 1358+60 east to Station 147432.53 = Station
181+59.13 to Station 198+72.99 at the east City limits. Also on 35th Street
from Station 6391+50 (a point 757' south of I-235) north to Station 6406+50 (a
point 743' north of I-235). Also on 22nd Street from Station 8435+50 (a point
659' south from I-235) north to Station 8448+50 (a point 641' north from the I-
235). Also all ramps on 35th, 22nd Street and Rancho Grade Boulevard
Interchanges within the corporation limits, regulating access to and from
abutting properties along said highway all in accordance with the plans for
such improvement identified as Project No. I-235-2(17)73, on file in the office
of the Clerk. (1985 Code §8-1.0204; 1993 Code)
7-1A-2: DEFINITION:
The term "controlled-access facility" shall mean a highway or street especially
designed for through traffic, and over, from or to which owners or occupants of
abutting land or other persons have no right or easement or only a controlled
right or easement of access, light, air or view by reason of the fact that
their property abuts upon such controlled-access facility or for any other
reason. (1985 Code §8-1.0202)
7-1A-3: RIGHT OF ACCESS LIMITED:
No person shall have any right of ingress or egress to, from or across any
controlled-access facility except at such points as may be permitted by the
Iowa Department of Transportation and designated by ordinance. (1985 Code §8-
1.0203)
7-1A-4: UNLAWFUL USE OF CONTROLLED-ACCESS FACILITY:
It shall be unlawful for any person to:
A.   Cross Dividing Line: Drive a vehicle over, upon or across any curb,
central dividing section or other separation or dividing line on such
controlled-access facilities.
B.   Turns: Make a left turn or a semi-circular or U-turn except through an
opening provided for that purpose in the dividing curb section, separation or
line.
C.   Use of Lanes: Drive any vehicle except in the proper land provided for
that purpose and in the proper direction and to the right of the central
dividing curb, separation section or line.
D.   Enter Facility: Drive any vehicle into the controlled-access facility from
a local service road except through an opening provided for that purpose in the
dividing curb or dividing section or dividing line which separates such service
road from the controlled-access facility property. (1985 Code §8-1.0205)
7-1A-5: PARKING:
Parking of any nature shall be prohibited on any portion of I-80 and I-235 and
all ramps from Station 1293+13.6 (west city limits) east to Station 198+72.99
(east city limits), also on 22nd Street from Station 8433+00 (a point 909'
southerly from the I-235) northerly to Station 8451+75 (a point 966' northerly
from the I-235), also on 35th Street from Station 6388+50 (a point 1057'
southerly from the I-235) northerly to Station 6405+50 (a point 643' northerly
from the I-235). (1985 Code §8-1.0206)
7-1A-6: EXERCISE OF POLICE POWER:
This Article shall be deemed an exercise of the police power of the City under
chapter 306A, Code of Iowa, for the preservation of the public peace, health,
safety and for the promotion of the general welfare. (1985 Code §8-1.0201)
ARTICLE B. STREET EXCAVATIONS
SECTION:
7-1B-1: Short Title
7-1B-2: Definitions
7-1B-3: Permits Required; Application
7-1B-4: Excavation Permit Fees
7-1B-5: Bond, Certificate of Insurance and Deposit Requirements
7-1B-6: Maintenance of Drawings
7-1B-7: Manner of Excavation
7-1B-8: Barriers and Warning Devices
7-1B-9: Restoration of Excavated Site
7-1B-10: Emergency Excavation Work
7-1B-11: Preservation of Monuments
7-1B-12: Relocation and Protection of Utility
7-1B-13: Abandonment of Substructures
7-1B-14: Inspections
7-1B-15: Liability of City
7-1B-1: SHORT TITLE:
This Article shall be known and may be cited as the STREET EXCAVATION ORDINANCE
OF THE CITY OF WEST DES MOINES, IOWA. (1985 Code §8-1.0701)
7-1B-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this Article, the following terms, phrases, words, and
their derivations shall have the meaning given herein. When not consistent with
the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words in the
plural number include the singular number, and words in the singular number
include the plural number. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely
directory.
CITY: The City of West Des Moines or its duly appointed representative.
EXCAVATION: Any opening in the surface of a public place made in any manner
whatsoever, except an opening into a lawful structure below the surface of a
public place, the top of which is flush with the adjoining surface and so
constructed as to permit frequent openings without injury or damage to the
public place. Excavation shall include any tunneling under the surface of any
public place in the City.
FACILITY: Pipe, sewer, pipeline, tube, main, service, trap, vent, vault,
manhole, meter, gauge, regulator, valve, conduit, wire, tower, pole, pole line,
anchor, cable, junction box, transformer or any other material, structure, or
object of any kind or character, whether enumerated herein or not, which is or
may be lawfully constructed, left, placed or maintained in, upon, along,
across, under or over any public place.
PERSON: Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or
organization of any kind, including private or public utility.
PUBLIC PLACE: Any public street, way, place, alley, sidewalk, park, square,
plaza or any other similar public property owned or controlled by the City and
dedicated to public use.
SUBSTRUCTURE: Any pipe, conduit, duct, tunnel, manhole, vault, buried cable or
wire, or any other similar structure located below the surface of any public
place.
UTILITY: A private company and/or corporation or Municipal department engaged
in providing a particular service to the general public. (1985 Code §8-1.0702)
7-1B-3: PERMITS REQUIRED; APPLICATION:
A.   Excavation Permit:1. See also subsection 8-2C-10F of this Code.1 No person
shall make any excavation or fill any excavation in any public place without
first obtaining a permit to do so from the City except as otherwise provided in
this Article. No permit to make an excavation in a public place shall be issued
except as provided in this Article. No permit is required to place utility
poles. (1985 Code §8-1.0703)
B.   Tunneling Permit: No person shall tunnel under the surface of any public
place in the City for the purpose of making any gas, sewer, water, steam
heating pipe or underground electric connection without first obtaining a
permit required herein. (1985 Code §8-1.0704)
C.   Application: No excavation permit shall be issued unless a written
application (on a form provided by the City) for the issuance of an excavation
permit is submitted to the City. The written application shall state the name
and address and principal place of business of the applicant, the authority of
applicant to occupy the public place for which the permit is sought,
appropriate indemnifying bond or insurance certificate, the location and
dimensions of the installation or removal and the approximate size of the
excavation to be made, the purpose of the facility and the approximate time
which will be required to complete such work, including backfilling said
excavation and removing all obstructions, material and debris. An extension of
time may be granted by the City for good and sufficient reasons. The
application when approved and signed by the City, shall constitute a permit.
(1985 Code §8-1.0705)
7-1B-4: EXCAVATION PERMIT FEES:
A permit fee shall be charged by the City for the issuance of an excavation
permit. The fee for each permit shall be twenty dollars ($20.00). Permit fee is
not required by utilities holding a franchise from the City. (1985 Code §8-
1.0706)
7-1B-5: BOND, CERTIFICATE OF INSURANCE AND DEPOSIT REQUIREMENTS:
A.   Indemnifying Bond or Certificate of Insurance: Before an excavation
permit, as herein provided, is issued the applicant shall deposit with the City
an indemnifying bond payable to the city or present and file a certificate of
insurance in favor of the city in such amounts of not less than one hundred
thousand dollars ($100,000.00) for any one person killed or injured, three
hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00) for total liability for all persons
killed or injured in one accident and fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) for
any property damage, incurred as a result of an accident.
The indemnifying bond or certificate of insurance shall indemnify and save
harmless the city, its officers, employees, and its political subdivisions
against any and all damages, claims, losses, demands, judgments, actions or
causes of actions, including payments made under the workmen's compensation
laws and any costs including attorney fees arising out of or in connection with
the excavation or tunneling and other works covered by the excavation permit or
for which the city, city council, or any city officer or employee including its
political subdivision may be held liable by reason of any accident or injury to
any person, including permittee, its agents or employees, or any property
through the fault of the permittee, its agents or employees, either in not
properly guarding the excavation or the maintenance of the excavation or for
any other injury resulting from the negligence, wrongful acts, faults or
misconduct on the part of the permittee, its agents or employees.
Permittee agrees to indemnify the city or its political subdivision for any
damages or injuries to any of the improvements, structures or facilities of the
city or its political subdivision in the performance of any excavation work or
resulting from such excavation.
The city, its agents, employees or political subdivisions shall not be liable
nor share any cost incident to the removal, reconstruction or relocation of any
structure or facility of any permittee or any person or of any utility placed
in any public place, public right of way or public easement, in the exercise of
any power the city or political subdivision now has or which may hereafter be
authorized or permitted by the laws of the state. In addition, if the city or
its political subdivision elects to alter or change the grade of any street,
alley, or public way, permittee shall, upon reasonable notice by the city or
its political subdivision, remove, or relocate any substructure or facility at
permittee's expense.
An annual indemnifying bond or certificate of insurance for a specified period
given under this provision shall remain in full force and effect during the
period specified in the application to cover all excavation work in public
places.
Utilities operated under the supervision of the utilities division, Iowa
department of commerce, utilities holding a franchise from the city, city
departments and other governmental agencies, may be relieved of the obligation
of submitting an indemnifying bond or certificate of insurance in favor of the
city or its political subdivision, but the relief granted hereunder, shall not
be construed to exonerate said utilities from the indemnification and
liabilities set forth under this section. (1985 Code §8-1.0707; amd. 1993 Code)
B.   Cash Deposits: Cash deposits shall be required as follows: (1985 Code §8-
1.0708; amd. 1993 Code)
1.   Special Deposits: The application for an excavation permit to perform
excavation work under this article shall be accompanied with a two hundred
dollar ($200.00) cash deposit made to the city for deposit with the finance
director. The city may use any or all of such deposit to pay the cost of any
work the city performs to restore or maintain the public place as herein
provided in the event the permittee fails to perform such work, in which event
the permittee will not be issued any more permits until the special deposit is
again reinstated. (1985 Code §8-1.0708; amd. 1993 Code; Ord. 1878, 8-23-2010,
eff. 9-17-2010)
2.   Refund Of Special Deposits: Upon application by the permittee, all special
deposits shall be refunded by the city to the permittee upon the expiration of
twenty four (24) month period dated from completion of last excavation.
3.   Utility Companies: Where excavations or tunneling are made by utility
companies operating under a franchise issued by the city or under the
supervision of the utilities division, Iowa department of commerce or utilities
operated by governmental agencies, a permit may be granted without making such
deposit. In such cases, the utilities shall be liable for the actual cost of
any work required to be done by the city in restoring the area covered by such
excavations in as good a condition as the same was before such work was done.
Further provided, however, the city may in the future require such deposit from
any such utility if a bill rendered in accordance with this section remains
unpaid thirty (30) days after date of billing. (1985 Code §8-1.0708; amd. 1993
Code)
7-1B-6: MAINTENANCE OF DRAWINGS:
Every person owning, using, controlling or having an interest in substructures
or facilities, under, upon, along, over and across the surface of any public
place used for the purpose of supplying or conveying gas, electricity,
communication impulse, water, steam, ammonia or oil in the city, shall file
with the city within one hundred twenty (120) days after April 6, 1972, a map
or set of maps each drawn to a scale of not less than one inch to two hundred
feet (1" = 200'), scale showing in detail the plan location, size and kind of
installation, if known, of all substructures, except service lines designed to
serve single properties beneath the surface of the public place belonging to,
used by or under the control of such person having any interest, and shall file
with the city annually at a time specified by the city, a corrected map or set
of maps each drawn to said scale, including all installations made during the
previous year to and including the last day of such year; provided, however,
that a public utility owner may in lieu of the above provide locations of any
utility upon request and locate same for city. (1985 Code §8-1.0730)
7-1B-7: MANNER OF EXCAVATION:
A.   Breaking Through Pavement: The following shall apply when breaking through
any paving within the City.
1.   Paving Broken: Heavy duty pavement breakers may be prohibited by the City
when the use endangers existing substructures or other property.
2.   Portland Cement Concrete Paving: Saw cutting of Portland cement concrete
shall be required by the City when the nature of the work or the condition of
the street warrants. The depth of the cut shall be not less than one inch (1")
in depth; however, depths greater than one inch (1") may be required by the
City when circumstances warrant. Saw cutting may be required by the City
outside of the limits of the excavation over cave-outs, overbreaks and small
floating sections.
3.   Bituminous Paving: Approved cutting of bituminous pavement surface ahead
of excavations may be required by the City to confine pavement damage to the
limits of the trench.
4.   Sidewalk: Sections of sidewalk shall be removed to the nearest score line
or joint.
5.   Unstable Pavement: Unstable pavement shall be removed over cave-outs and
overbreaks and the subgrade shall be treated as the main trench.
6.   Pavement Edges: Pavement edges shall be trimmed to a vertical face and
neatly aligned with the center line of the trench.
7.   Outside Trench Lines: Cut-outs outside of the trench lines must be normal
or parallel to the trench line.
8.   New Pavement: Boring or other methods to prevent cutting of new pavement
may be required by the City.
9.   Existing Damage: The permittee shall not be required to repair pavement
damage existing prior to excavation unless his cut results in small floating
sections that may be unstable, in which case permittee shall remove and pave
the area. (1985 Code §8-1.0719)
B.   Depth of Structures: No person shall, without written permission of the
City, install any substructure, except manholes, vaults, valve casings,
culverts and catch basins at a vertical distance less than:
1.   Streets: Twenty four inches (24") below the established flow line of the
nearest gutter. If said flow line is not established, then the depth shall be
at a minimum of twenty four inches (24") below the surface of the nearest
outermost edge of the travelled portion of the street.
2.   Parkway: The minimum depth of any substructure shall be sixteen inches
(16") below established gutter grade when said substructure parallels the
parkway. However, the City may permit lesser depths on special application. The
minimum depth of any substructure shall be twelve inches (12") below the top of
the established sidewalk or curb when such substructure is at right angles to
the parkway. However, the City may permit lesser depths on special application.
3.   Other Public Places: The minimum depth of any substructure in any other
public place shall be twelve inches (12") below the surface; provided, however,
that the City may permit a lesser depth in special cases.
4.   Exceptions: Nothing in this Section shall impose a duty upon the permittee
to maintain said specifications as required herein upon subsequent changes of
grade in the surface unless the grade in said substructure interferes with the
maintenance of, or travel on, a public street. (1985 Code §8-1.0720)
C.   Care of Excavated Material: All materials excavated from trenches and
piled adjacent to the trench or in any street shall be piled and maintained in
such manner as not to endanger those working in the trench, pedestrians or
users of the streets, and so that as little inconvenience as possible is caused
to those using streets and adjoining property. Where the confines of the area
being excavated are too narrow to permit the piling of excavated material
beside the trench, such as might be the case in a narrow alley, the City shall
have authority to require that the permittee haul the excavated material to a
storage site and then rehaul it to the trench site at the time of backfilling.
It shall be the permittee's responsibility to secure the necessary permission
and make all necessary arrangements for all required storage and disposal
sites. All trench and tunnel excavations and construction shall conform with
the safety requirements for shoring, bracing and ladders in trenches in
accordance with State of Iowa, laws on trench and tunnel safety, as they now or
may hereafter exist. All material excavated shall be laid compactly along the
side of the trench and kept trimmed so as to cause as little inconvenience as
reasonably possible to vehicular and pedestrian traffic, or as specified by the
City. Whenever necessary, in order to expedite the flow of traffic or to abate
the dirt or dust nuisance, toe boards or bins may be required by the City to
prevent the spreading of dirt into traffic lanes. (1985 Code §8-1.0716)
D.   Protection of Adjoining Property: The permittee shall at all times at his
or its own expense preserve and protect from injury any adjoining property by
providing proper foundations and taking other measures suitable for the
purpose. Where in the protection of such property it is necessary to enter upon
private property for the purpose of taking appropriate protecting measures, the
permittee shall obtain a license from the owner of such private property for
such purpose. The permittee shall, at its own expense shore up and protect all
buildings, walls, fences or other property likely to be damaged during the
progress of the excavation work and shall be responsible for all damage to
public or private property or highways resulting from its failure to properly
protect and carry out said work. Whenever it may be necessary for the permittee
to trench through any lawn area said area shall be reseeded or the sod shall be
carefully cut and rolled and replaced after ditches have been backfilled as
required in this article. All construction and maintenance work shall be done
in a manner calculated to leave the lawn area clean of earth and debris and in
a condition as nearly as possible to that which existed before such work began.
The permittee shall not remove, even temporarily, any trees or shrubs which
exist in parking strip areas without first obtaining the consent of the
appropriate city department or city official having control of such property.
(1985 Code §8-1.0715)
E.   Clearance For Vital Structures: The excavation work shall be performed and
conducted so as not to interfere with access to fire hydrants, fire stations,
fire escapes, water gates, underground vaults, valve housing structures and all
other vital equipment. (1985 Code §8-1.0711)
F.   Protection Of Traffic: The permittee shall maintain safe crossings for two
(2) lanes of vehicle traffic at all street intersections where possible and
safe crossings for pedestrians at intervals of not more than three hundred feet
(300'). If an excavation is made across any public street, alley or sidewalk,
adequate crossings shall be maintained for vehicles and for pedestrians. If the
street is not wide enough to hold the excavated material without using part of
the adjacent sidewalk, a passageway at least one-half (1/2) of the sidewalk
width shall be maintained along such sidewalk line. (1985 Code §8-1.0712)
G.   Trenches In Pipe Laying: The maximum length of open trench permissible at
any time shall be in accordance with existing ordinances or regulations or as
may be specified by the city and no greater length shall be open for pavement
removal, excavation, construction, backfilling, patching and all other
operations without the written permission of the city. (1985 Code §8-1.0723)
H.   Prompt Completion Of Work: After an excavation is commenced, the permittee
shall prosecute with diligence and expedition all excavation work covered by
the excavation permit and shall promptly complete such work and restore the
street to its original condition, or as near as may be, so as not to obstruct
the public place or travel thereon more than is reasonably necessary. (1985
Code §8-1.0724)
I.   Noise, Dust And Debris: Each permittee shall conduct and carry out
excavation work in such manner as to avoid unnecessary inconvenience and
annoyance to the general public and occupants of neighboring property. The
permittee shall take the appropriate measures to reduce to the fullest extent
practicable in the performance of the excavation work, noise, dust and
unsightly debris and between the hours of ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. and seven
o'clock (7:00) A.M. shall not use, except with the express written permission
of the city or in case of an emergency as herein otherwise provided, any tool,
appliance or equipment producing noise of sufficient volume to disturb the
sleep or repose of occupants of the neighboring property. (1985 Code §8-1.0727)
J.   Protection Of Watercourses: The permittee shall maintain all gutters free
and unobstructed for the full depth of the adjacent curb and for at least one
foot (1') in width from the face of such curb at the gutterline. Whenever a
gutter crosses an intersecting street, an adequate waterway shall be provided
and at all times maintained. The permittee shall make provisions to take care
of all surplus water, muck, salt, slickings or other runoff pumped from
excavations or resulting from sluicing or other operations and shall be
responsible for any damage resulting from its failure to so provide. (1985 Code
§8-1.0718)
K.   Cleanup: As the excavation work progresses, all streets shall be
thoroughly cleaned of all rubbish, excess earth, rock and other debris
resulting from such work. All cleanup operations at the location of such
excavation shall be accomplished at the expense of the permittee and shall be
completed to the satisfaction of the city. From time to time, as may be ordered
by the city and in any event immediately after completion of said work, the
permittee shall, at his or its own expense, clean up and remove all refuse and
unused materials of any kind resulting from said work, and upon failure to do
so within twenty four (24) hours after having been notified to do so by the
city said work may be done by the city and the cost thereof charged to the
permittee and the same may be deducted from the cash deposits made to the city
by the permittee. (1985 Code §8-1.0717)
7-1B-8: BARRIERS AND WARNING DEVICES:
A.   Protective Measures And Routing Of Traffic: It shall be the duty of every
person permitted to cut or make an excavation in or upon the public place, to
place and maintain barriers and warning devices necessary for safety of the
general public.
B.   Placement Of Warning Devices: Warning signs, markers, and other devices
shall be placed far enough in advance of the construction operation to alert
traffic within a public street and cones and other approved devices shall be
placed to channel traffic, in accordance with the most current official edition
of the "Manual On Uniform Traffic Control Devices" (MUTCD).
C.   Inconvenience Minimized: The permittee shall take appropriate measures to
assure that during the performance of the excavation work, traffic conditions
as near normal as possible shall be maintained at all times so as to minimize
inconvenience to the occupants of the adjoining property and to the general
public.
D.   Rerouting Traffic: When traffic conditions permit the city may by written
approval, allow the closing of streets and alleys to all traffic for a period
of time if it is necessary. The written approval of the city may require that
the permittee give notification to various public agencies and to the general
public, the cost thereof to be borne by the permittee. In such cases, such
written approval shall not be valid until such notice is given. (Ord. 1950, 5-
29-2012)
7-1B-9: RESTORATION OF EXCAVATED SITE:
A.   Restoration Of Surface: Street surface damaged by excavation shall be
restored in the following manner:
1.   By Permittee: Upon completion of the backfilling, resurfacing of an
excavation within a public place for the installation or removal of
substructures or facilities the city shall require the permittee to resurface
that portion of the street surface damaged by the permittee's excavation,
resurfacing shall be done in a manner and under specifications prescribed by
the city and subject to the inspection of the city and shall be completed
within a period of sixty (60) days after such authorization to complete final
resurfacing, or sooner upon notification by the city.
2.   By City: Permanent resurfacing of excavation may, at its option, be made
by the city. The top surface of the backfill shall be covered with one inch
(1") of bituminous temporary resurfacing material, by the permittee. Such
temporary paving material shall be cold mix, except that the permittee may use
or the city may require hot mix. All temporary paving material shall conform
closely enough to the level of the adjoining paving surface and shall be
compacted so that it is hard enough and smooth enough to be safe for pedestrian
travel over it as well as for vehicular traffic to pass safely over it at a
legal rate of speed. The permittee shall maintain temporary paving for a period
not exceeding ninety (90) days after all backfilling is completed, unless
additional time is required by the city, and shall keep same safe for
pedestrian and vehicular traffic until the excavation has been resurfaced with
permanent paving by the city, except that if it is not possible to maintain the
surface of the temporary paving in a safe condition for pedestrian travel or
vehicular traffic, then the permittee shall maintain barriers and lights where
required herein. Cost of resurfacing to be charged to the permittee. (1985 Code
§8-1.0722)
B.   Backfilling: Fine material, free from lumps and stone, selected from the
soil shall be thoroughly compacted around and under the substructure to the
upper level of such substructure. Above the upper level of the substructure,
backfill material shall be placed to the subgrade of the pavement in lifts
consistent with the type of soil involved and the degree of consolidation
specified by the city. Broken pavement, large stones, roots and other debris
shall not be used in the backfill. The number and size of each lift shall be
dependent upon the type of soil involved. Such backfill shall be done in a
manner that will permit the restoration of the surface to a density condition
not less than that existing prior to excavation unless otherwise specified by
the city. The city may require soil tests to be furnished by a recognized soil
testing laboratory or registered professional engineer specializing in soil
mechanics when, in its opinion, backfill for any excavation is not being
adequately compacted. In order for the resurfacing to be permitted, such tests
must show that the backfill material meets the minimum requirements as
prescribed by the city. All expense of such tests shall be borne by the
permittee. (1985 Code §8-1.0721)
7-1B-10: EMERGENCY EXCAVATION WORK:
A.   Urgent Work: When traffic conditions, the safety or convenience of the
traveling public or the public interest require that the excavation work be
performed as emergency work the city shall have full power to order, at the
time the permit is granted, that a crew of men and adequate facilities be
employed by the permittee twenty four (24) hours a day to the end that such
excavation work may be completed as soon as possible. (1985 Code §8-1.0725)
B.   Emergency Action: Nothing in this article shall be construed to prevent
the making of such excavations as may be necessary for the preservation of life
or property or for the location of trouble in conduit or pipe, or for making
repairs, provided that the person making such excavation shall apply to the
city for such a permit on the first working day after such work is commenced.
(1985 Code §8-1.0726)
7-1B-11: PRESERVATION OF MONUMENTS:
Any monument set for the purpose of locating or preserving the lines of any
street or property subdivision, or a precise survey reference point, or a
permanent survey bench mark within the city, shall not be removed or disturbed
or caused to be removed or disturbed without first obtaining permission in
writing from the city to do so. Permission to remove or disturb such monuments,
reference points or bench marks shall only be granted upon condition that the
person applying for such permission shall pay all expenses incident to the
proper replacement of this monument by the city. (1985 Code §8-1.0728)
7-1B-12: RELOCATION AND PROTECTION OF UTILITY:
The permittee shall not interfere with any existing facility without the
written consent of the city and the owner of the facility. If it becomes
necessary to relocate an existing facility, this shall be done by its owner. No
facility, either owned by the city or a person or utility, shall be moved to
accommodate the permittee unless the cost of such work be borne by the
permittee or unless other arrangements are so made. The permittee shall support
and protect, by timbers or otherwise, all pipes, conduits, poles, wires or
other apparatus which may be in any way affected by the excavation work, and do
everything necessary to support, sustain and protect them under, over, along or
across said work. The permittee shall secure approval of the method of support
and protection from the owner of the facility. In case any of said pipes,
conduits, poles, wires, or apparatus or any substructures or facility should be
damaged, including any pipe coating or other encasement or devices, the
permittee shall promptly notify the owner thereof. All damaged facilities shall
be repaired by the agency or person owning them and the expense of such repairs
shall be charged to the permittee. It is the intent of this section that the
permittee shall assume all liability for damage to facilities or substructures
and any resulting damage or injury to anyone because of such facility or
substructure damage and such assumption of liability is a contractual
obligation of the permittee. The only exception will be such instances where
damage is exclusively due to the negligence of the owning utility. The city
shall not be made a party to any action because of this section. The permittee
shall inform itself as to the existence and location of all underground
facilities and substructures and protect the same against damage. (1985 Code
§8-1.0713)
7-1B-13: ABANDONMENT OF SUBSTRUCTURES:
Whenever the use of a substructure or facility is abandoned, except the
abandonment of service lines designed to serve single properties, the person
owning, using, controlling, or having an interest therein, shall within thirty
(30) days after such abandonment file with the city a statement in writing
giving in detail the location of the substructure or facility so abandoned. If
such abandoned substructure or facility is in the way, or subsequently becomes
in the way, of an installation of the city or any other public body, the owner
shall remove such abandoned substructure or facility or pay the cost of its
removal during the course of excavation for construction of the facility or
substructure by the city or any other public body. (1985 Code §8-1.0714)
7-1B-14: INSPECTIONS:
The city shall make such inspections as are reasonably necessary in the
enforcement of this article. The city shall have the authority to promulgate
and cause to be enforced such rules and regulations as may be reasonably
necessary to enforce and carry out the intent of this article. (1985 Code §8-
1.0729)
7-1B-15: LIABILITY OF CITY:
This article shall not be construed as imposing upon the city or any official
or employee or political subdivision any liability or responsibility for
damages to any person injured by the performance of any excavation work for
which an excavation permit is issued hereunder, nor shall the city or any
official or employee or political subdivision thereof be deemed to have assumed
any such liability or responsibility by reason of inspections authorized
hereunder, the issuance of any permit or the approval of any excavation work.
(1985 Code §8-1.0731)
ARTICLE C. RESERVED
(Ord. 2007, 10-14-2013, eff. 1-1-2014)
ARTICLE D. RESIDENTIAL BLOCK PARTIES
SECTION:
7-1D-1: Regulations
7-1D-2: Purpose And Intent
7-1D-3: Application And Permit Required
7-1D-4: Application Requirements
7-1D-5: Permit Review Process
7-1D-6: Fees Required
7-1D-7: Hold Harmless And Indemnification Agreement Required
7-1D-8: Appeal Procedure
7-1D-9: Permit Revocation
7-1D-10: Violations
7-1D-11: Penalties
7-1D-1: REGULATIONS:
The following regulations shall apply to residential block party applications
submitted to the city. (Ord. 2007, 10-14-2013, eff. 1-1-2014)
7-1D-2: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
These regulations prescribe the conditions through which residential block
parties of limited duration may be permitted to occur on local public streets
within the city that involve a request to conduct an event open to a specific,
defined neighborhood or area once per calendar year, where no admission fee
will be charged for attendance, where alcoholic beverages will not be sold or
where no entrance fee or admission will be charged for service of alcoholic
beverages, where a local public street closure, if necessary, will not exceed
six (6) hours, and where the use of portable restroom facilities will not be
necessary. (Ord. 2007, 10-14-2013, eff. 1-1-2014)
7-1D-3: APPLICATION AND PERMIT REQUIRED:
A residential block party permit shall be required for all events that relate
to the stated purpose and intent of this article. A residential block party
permit must be timely applied for and issued by the city prior to the
commencement of the event. It shall be unlawful for any person to engage,
sponsor, or participate in any event described herein without having first
applied for and obtained a permit in accordance with this article. Receiving
approval of a residential block party permit from the city shall not preclude,
supersede, circumvent, or waive the applicant's responsibility to obtain any
additional permits, licenses, and approvals for other applicable local, state,
and federal regulations. The city reserves the right to impose special
guidelines and restrictions for any residential block party based upon the
nature of the proposed event, the proposed location of the event, and the
anticipated attendance of the event. City staff shall be responsible for the
issuance of residential block party permits because these events only involve
local public streets and not arterial or collector streets, as those streets
have been classified in the current comprehensive plan, within the city. (Ord.
2007, 10-14-2013, eff. 1-1-2014)
7-1D-4: APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS:
For any residential block party defined or described within this article, the
following information shall be submitted with the application to the city:
A.   A written application for a residential block party permit shall be
submitted to the city on a form provided by the city. The application must set
forth, at a minimum, the following information regarding the proposed event:
1.   The name, address, telephone number, and e-mail address of the applicant
(s) of the event and contact person(s).
2.   The date and duration of time for the proposed event, specifically
identifying the date and duration of time for which the requested use of city
property or right of way would occur.
3.   An accurate description of that portion of the city property or right of
way proposed to be used, including a detailed map. The detailed map should
depict the requested location of any activities, tents, barricades, traffic
control devices and personnel, signage, and trash collection necessary for the
proposed event.
4.   The estimated number of participants or attendees.
5.   Whether the applicant has obtained or will obtain required permits for any
of the following: tents or inflatables and amplified sound.
B.   After the initial filing of the application, city staff may request
additional information from the applicant to determine whether a residential
block party permit should be issued.
C.   Applications must be submitted not less than thirty (30) calendar days
prior to the proposed start date of the event, unless the city decides to waive
the deadline. The city reserves the right to reject any applications that have
not been timely submitted to the city. Sixty percent (60%) of the residents
within the directly affected area, including any listing agent with a home for
sale within the area, must be in favor of and approve of the request before the
city would issue a residential block party permit. (Ord. 2007, 10-14-2013, eff.
1-1-2014)
7-1D-5: PERMIT REVIEW PROCESS:
A.   City staff shall review applications, identify potential issues and
concerns, and work with the applicant to propose possible solutions to resolve
those identified issues and concerns. The city staff review shall include the
city clerk or designee, and may include representatives of the police, fire,
emergency medical services, public works, and development services departments.
Additional city staff from other departments may assist with the review
depending upon the details of the proposed event.
B.   City staff shall consider, at a minimum, the following criteria in
reviewing the residential block party permit application. City staff reserves
the right to consider additional criteria in its review as deemed necessary.
1.   Whether the applicant has supplied all of the requested information to
city staff.
2.   Whether the applicant has obtained necessary permits involving tents or
inflatables and amplified sound.
3.   Whether the concentration of persons or the closure of a local public
street or other public property at the event would unduly interfere with proper
fire and police protection of, or other emergency service through, the event or
to areas adjacent to the event's location.
4.   Whether the date, time, size, or location of the event would substantially
interrupt the safe and orderly movement of pedestrian and vehicular traffic in
the vicinity of the event's location.
5.   Whether negative police or other reports of past activities held or
sponsored by the applicant or in the same general location merit a
recommendation of denial.
6.   Whether the applicant, including event participants, have violated city
code provisions or city policies at past events.
7.   Whether the applicant has timely paid the city all fees due and owing
under any city code provision or city policy.
8.   Whether the applicant has obtained sixty percent (60%) approval of the
proposed event from affected residents and submitted that information to the
city in acceptable form.
9.   Whether any item or exhibit requested to be placed within the closed local
public street or right of way would prevent or limit the access of emergency
vehicles.
10.   Whether the applicant has obtained barricades approved by the city in
terms of size, number, and color to completely close the local public street
during the event, and whether the barricades will have lights added after
sunset.
11.   Whether the local public street closing will be from cross intersection
to cross intersection to prohibit traffic from traveling onto the closed
street.
12.   Whether the applicant has designated a person or persons to monitor and
maintain the proper position of the barricades during the event, and to remove
the barricades from the local public street immediately following the
conclusion of the event.
13.   Whether the applicant has provided certification to the city that the
applicant has attempted to contact all affected residents. (Ord. 2007, 10-14-
2013, eff. 1-1-2014)
7-1D-6: FEES REQUIRED:
A.   The applicant for a residential block party permit shall pay the
applicable nonrefundable application fee in the amount set in the schedule of
fees the city council has adopted by resolution. The application fee must be
paid at the time of submittal of the application.
B.   If the permitted event will require the use of any city equipment,
facilities, or services, the applicant shall pay the estimated costs for the
use of the city equipment, facilities, or services in advance of the event if
the city requests such advanced payment be made, or the city may direct the
applicant to pay the actual costs for the use of the city equipment,
facilities, or services following the event within thirty (30) calendar days of
billing by the city. (Ord. 2007, 10-14-2013, eff. 1-1-2014)
7-1D-7: HOLD HARMLESS AND INDEMNIFICATION AGREEMENT REQUIRED:
The applicant must sign a hold harmless and indemnification agreement with the
city, representing that the applicant possesses legal authority to enter into
this agreement on behalf of all of the event participants, in which the
applicant and the event participants hold the city harmless and indemnify the
city for any negligent, reckless, or intentional act attributable to the
applicant or the event participants. The petition indicating that there is at
least sixty percent (60%) support for the proposed event should include
language providing an acknowledgment that those persons participating in the
event agree to hold the city harmless and indemnify the city for any injuries
or damages sustained during the event, which includes the time associated with
preparation before the event and cleanup or removal after the event. (Ord.
2007, 10-14-2013, eff. 1-1-2014)
7-1D-8: APPEAL PROCEDURE:
A.   City staff's decision to approve or deny a residential block party permit
may be appealed to the city council by making a written request to the city
clerk. The appeal will be placed on the agenda for the next available city
council meeting.
B.   After receiving the appeal and considering any submitted comments, the
city council shall affirm, reverse, or modify the decision of city staff. The
decision of the city council shall be the final determination as to whether or
not the city approves the residential block party permit. (Ord. 2007, 10-14-
2013, eff. 1-1-2014)
7-1D-9: PERMIT REVOCATION:
A residential block party permit for any event in progress may be revoked and
the event terminated by the chief of police or the fire chief, or their
respective designees, if the safety of the public is imminently endangered by
activities generated during the event, the participants or attendees engage in
violent or destructive behavior causing injury to persons or damage to
property, or if there is a major violation of the conditions of the permit such
that the standards of issuance have not been satisfied. (Ord. 2007, 10-14-2013,
eff. 1-1-2014)
7-1D-10: VIOLATIONS:
No person shall violate any of the provisions of this article, and specifically
shall not commit any of the following unlawful acts:
A.   No person shall hold, sponsor, or be in charge of any activity for which a
residential block party permit is required without possessing a valid
residential block party permit.
B.   No person shall violate any condition placed upon a residential block
party permit.
C.   No person shall provide false or inaccurate information on a written
application for a residential block party permit. (Ord. 2007, 10-14-2013, eff.
1-1-2014)
7-1D-11: PENALTIES:
Any person who violates any of the provisions of this article may be charged
with a simple misdemeanor criminal offense, pursuant to section
5-2-1 of this code, or receive a municipal infraction civil citation, pursuant
to title 1, chapter 4 of this code. The city shall have the discretion to
enforce this article either as a simple misdemeanor or a municipal infraction.
(Ord. 2007, 10-14-2013, eff. 1-1-2014)
ARTICLE E. SPECIAL EVENT PERMITS
SECTION:
7-1E-1: Regulations
7-1E-2: Purpose And Intent
7-1E-3: Application And Permit Required
7-1E-4: Application Requirements
7-1E-5: Permit Review Process
7-1E-6: Fees Required
7-1E-7: Insurance Required
7-1E-8: Appeal Procedure
7-1E-9: Permit Revocation
7-1E-10: Violations
7-1E-11: Penalties
7-1E-1: REGULATIONS:
The following regulations shall apply to special event permit applications
submitted to the city. (Ord. 2013, 11-25-2013, eff. 1-1-2014)
7-1E-2: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
These regulations prescribe the conditions through which special events of
limited duration may be permitted to occur within the city that involve a
request from an individual or organization to use city property or right of way
in the conduct or promotion of the event, thereby creating an anticipated
significant impact to city property or right of way, such as increased vehicle
or pedestrian traffic or the closure of a public street, and it is advisable or
necessary to include city staff in the preparation, planning, coordination, and
approval of the requested special event to promote the health, safety, and
welfare of the general public and of the event participants or attendees. (Ord.
2013, 11-25-2013, eff. 1-1-2014)
7-1E-3: APPLICATION AND PERMIT REQUIRED:
A special event permit shall be required for all events that relate to the
stated purpose and intent of this article. A special event permit must be
timely applied for and issued by the city prior to the commencement of the
event. It shall be unlawful for any person or organization to engage, sponsor,
or participate in any event described herein without having first applied for
and obtained a permit in accordance with this article. Receiving approval of a
special event permit from the city shall not preclude, supersede, circumvent,
or waive the applicant's responsibility to obtain any additional permits,
licenses, and approvals for other applicable local, state, and federal
regulations. The city reserves the right to impose special guidelines and
restrictions for any special event based upon the nature of the proposed event,
the proposed location of the event, and the anticipated attendance of the
event. The city also reserves the right to temporarily suspend other city code
requirements for any special event based upon the particular event details.
City staff shall be responsible for the issuance of special event permits that
only involve local public streets or do not involve lane closure(s) of arterial
or collector streets, as those streets have been classified in the current
comprehensive plan, within the city. The city council shall decide whether to
issue special event permits that do involve lane closure(s) of arterial or
collector streets, as those streets have been classified in the current
comprehensive plan, within the city, following receipt of a recommendation from
city staff. (Ord. 2013, 11-25-2013, eff. 1-1-2014)
7-1E-4: APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS:
For any special event defined or described within this article, the following
information, at a minimum, shall be submitted with the application to the city:
A.   A written application for a special event permit shall be submitted to the
city on a form provided by the city. The application must set forth the
following information regarding the proposed special event:
1.   The name, address, telephone number, and e-mail address of the applicant
(s) and sponsor(s) of the event and contact person(s).
2.   If the proposed special event would be conducted for, on behalf of, or by
an organization, the name, address, and telephone number of the headquarters of
the organization and of the authorizing responsible heads of such organization.
3.   The date(s) and duration of time for the proposed special event,
specifically identifying the date(s) and duration of time for which the
requested use of the city property or right of way would occur.
4.   An accurate description of that portion of the city property or right of
way proposed to be used, including a detailed map. The detailed map should
depict the requested location of any activities, structures, tents, barricades,
parking, traffic control devices and personnel, signage, trash collection, and
portable restroom facilities necessary for the proposed event.
5.   The estimated number of participants or attendees.
6.   The proposed type of special event, described in detail, including a
description of the planned activities and the proposed location.
7.   Whether the applicant has obtained or will obtain required permits for any
of the following: the sale of alcoholic beverages, tents or inflatables,
amplified sound, fireworks, temporary signs, and any applicable building
permits.
B.   After the initial filing of the application, city staff may request
additional information from the applicant to determine whether a special event
permit should be issued, including, but not limited to, a crowd control plan.
C.   Applications that impact or include a commercially zoned district must be
submitted not less than ninety (90) calendar days prior to the proposed start
date of the special event, unless the city decides to waive the deadline. The
city reserves the right to reject any applications that have not been timely
submitted to the city.
D.   All other applications must be submitted not less than thirty (30)
calendar days prior to the proposed start date of the special event, unless the
city decides to waive the deadline. The city reserves the right to reject any
applications that have not been timely submitted to the city.
E.   If the proposed event would be held in a residentially zoned area, sixty
percent (60%) of the residents within the area directly affected, including any
listing agent with a home for sale within the area, must be in favor of and
approve of the request before the city would issue a special event permit. The
city reserves the right to waive this requirement as it deems necessary.
F.   If the proposed event would be held within the Valley Junction historic
business district (VJHB), seventy five percent (75%) of the businesses within
the area directly affected must be in favor of and approve of the request
before the city would issue a special event permit. For any special event that
would involve the closure of 5th Street between the 100 and 300 blocks, at
least seventy five percent (75%) of the businesses located within the 100 and
300 blocks of 5th Street, and any businesses located on the immediate side
streets off of 5th Street within the 100 and 300 blocks, must be in favor of
and approve of the request. The city reserves the right to waive these
requirements as it deems necessary. Iowa nonprofit organizations that sponsor
or organize at least thirty (30) events each calendar year within the VJHB for
the benefit and promotion of the VJHB shall be exempt from the seventy five
percent (75%) approval requirement.
G.   Before the city decides to approve the special event permit, the city may
require the applicant to provide notice of the proposed event to all affected
neighboring property owners and known tenants. The city may also require the
applicant to petition or canvass affected neighboring property owners and known
tenants to ascertain whether there is sufficient support for the proposed
event. Alternatively, the city may elect to provide the notification to the
affected neighboring property owners and known tenants itself and the applicant
shall then be responsible for reimbursing the city for the incurred costs.
(Ord. 2013, 11-25-2013, eff. 1-1-2014)
7-1E-5: PERMIT REVIEW PROCESS:
A.   City staff shall review applications, identify potential issues and
concerns, and work with the applicant to propose possible solutions to resolve
those identified issues and concerns. The city staff review shall include the
city clerk or designee, and representatives of the police, fire, emergency
medical services, public works, parks and recreation, and development services
departments. Additional city staff from other departments may assist with the
review depending upon the details of the proposed event.
B.   The parks and recreation department shall review special event permit
applications for events held exclusively within a city park or greenway in
accordance with city park policies, rules, and regulations that do not require
city staff from multiple departments as part of the planning or execution of
the event and do not cause anticipated significant impact to nearby public
streets or other city property.
C.   City staff shall consider, at a minimum, the following criteria in
reviewing the special event permit application. City staff reserves the right
to consider additional criteria in its review as deemed necessary.
1.   Whether the applicant has supplied all of the requested information to
city staff.
2.   Whether the applicant has obtained necessary permits involving the sale of
alcoholic beverages, tents or inflatables, amplified sound, fireworks,
temporary signs, and any applicable building permits.
3.   Whether the applicant has previously held events of similar size and scope
within the city.
4.   Whether the date, time, size, or location of the event would substantially
interrupt the safe and orderly movement of pedestrian and vehicular traffic in
the vicinity of the event's location.
5.   Whether the concentration of persons or the closure of a public street at
the event would unduly interfere with proper fire and police protection of, or
other emergency service through, the event or to areas adjacent to the event's
location.
6.   Whether the estimated number of participants or attendees or the size or
type of event equipment is sufficient to close a public street, or if there is
an alternative available to closing a public street.
7.   Whether another special event permit has already been granted for
substantially the same date, time, or location within the city.
8.   Whether the size or time of the event would require so great a diversion
of the city police department as to prevent normal police protection at another
previously scheduled event in the city.
9.   Whether city personnel necessary to regulate and monitor the event can
reasonably be made available.
10.   Whether the event is reasonably likely to cause injury to persons or
property and if there is adequate planning for crowd control of participants or
attendees.
11.   Whether adequate sanitation or other health facilities will be available
at the event.
12.   Whether there is a sufficient number of parking places within a
reasonable distance to accommodate the number of vehicles expected.
13.   Whether the time, size, or nature of the event is compatible with the
normal activity at that location.
14.   Whether the proposed use or event will likely have a significant adverse
environmental impact.
15.   Whether negative police or other reports of past activities held or
sponsored by the applicant or in the same location merit a recommendation of
denial.
16.   Whether the applicant, including its employees, agents, and volunteers,
have violated city code provisions or city policies at past events.
17.   Whether the applicant has timely paid the city all fees due and owing
under any city code provision or city policy.
18.   If required, whether the applicant has obtained sixty percent (60%)
approval of the proposed event from affected neighboring residents and
submitted that information to the city in acceptable form.
19.   If required, whether the applicant has obtained seventy five percent
(75%) approval of the proposed event from affected neighboring businesses
within the VJHB and submitted that information to the city in acceptable form.
(Ord. 2013, 11-25-2013, eff. 1-1-2014)
7-1E-6: FEES REQUIRED:
A.   The applicant for a special event permit shall pay the applicable
nonrefundable application fee in the amount set in the schedule of fees the
city council has adopted by resolution. The application fee must be paid at the
time of submittal of the application.
B.   If the permitted event will require the use of any city equipment,
facilities, or services, the applicant shall pay the estimated costs for the
use of the city equipment, facilities, or services in advance of the event if
the city requests such advanced payment be made, or the city may direct the
applicant to pay the actual costs for the use of the city equipment,
facilities, or services following the event within thirty (30) calendar days of
billing by the city. (Ord. 2013, 11-25-2013, eff. 1-1-2014)
7-1E-7: INSURANCE REQUIRED:
A.   The applicant shall be responsible for obtaining insurance coverage for
the special event, in types and amounts as determined by the city. The
applicant shall also provide the city with a certificate of insurance, naming
the city as an additional insured, sufficiently in advance of the scheduled
event.
B.   The applicant must also sign a hold harmless and indemnification agreement
with the city in which the applicant holds the city harmless and indemnifies
the city for any negligent, reckless, or intentional act attributable to the
applicant or the applicant's officials, employees, agents, or volunteers. (Ord.
2013, 11-25-2013, eff. 1-1-2014)
7-1E-8: APPEAL PROCEDURE:
A.   City staff's decision to approve or deny a special event permit may be
appealed to the city council by making a written request to the city clerk. The
appeal will be placed on the agenda for the next available city council
meeting.
B.   After receiving the appeal and considering any submitted comments, the
city council shall affirm, reverse, or modify the decision of city staff. The
decision of the city council shall be the final determination as to whether or
not the city approves the special event permit. (Ord. 2013, 11-25-2013, eff. 1-
1-2014)
7-1E-9: PERMIT REVOCATION:
A special event permit for any event in progress may be revoked and the event
terminated by the chief of police or the fire chief, or their respective
designees, if the safety of the public is imminently endangered by activities
generated during the event, the participants or attendees engage in violent or
destructive behavior causing injury to persons or damage to property, or if
there is a major violation of the conditions of the permit such that the
standards of issuance have not been satisfied. (Ord. 2013, 11-25-2013, eff. 1-
1-2014)
7-1E-10: VIOLATIONS:
No person shall violate any of the provisions of this article, and specifically
shall not commit any of the following unlawful acts:
A.   No person shall hold, sponsor, or be in charge of any activity for which a
special event permit is required without possessing a valid special event
permit.
B.   No person shall violate any condition placed upon a special event permit.
C.   No person shall provide false or inaccurate information on a written
application for a special event permit. (Ord. 2013, 11-25-2013, eff. 1-1-2014)
7-1E-11: PENALTIES:
Any person who violates any of the provisions of this article may be charged
with a simple misdemeanor criminal offense, pursuant to section
5-2-1 of this code, or receive a municipal infraction civil citation, pursuant
to title 1, chapter 4 of this code. The city shall have the discretion to
enforce this article either as a simple misdemeanor or a municipal infraction.
(Ord. 2013, 11-25-2013, eff. 1-1-2014)
CHAPTER 2
COMMUNICATIONS SYSTEMS WITHIN PUBLIC RIGHT OF WAY
SECTION:
7-2-1: Definitions
7-2-2: License Required
7-2-3: Application For License
7-2-4: Granting Of License
7-2-5: Amendment To License
7-2-6: Regulations
7-2-7: Relocation Or Removal When Required By Public Needs
7-2-8: License Fees
7-2-9: Hold Harmless; Insurance; Bond
7-2-10: Failure To Secure, Renew Or Comply With License
7-2-11: Transfers And Assignments
7-2-12: Notice Of Action; Appeal
7-2-13: Cables And Wires
7-2-14: Construction Of Chapter
7-2-15: Police Regulations
7-2-16: Antennas And Towers
7-2-1: DEFINITIONS:
Unless otherwise expressly stated or the context clearly indicates a different
intention, the following terms shall, for the purpose of this chapter, have the
meanings in this section:
CITY MANAGER: The city manager of the city of West Des Moines, Iowa, or his or
her designee.
COMMUNICATIONS SYSTEM: Any telephone or telegraph system or any other system of
cables, wires or conduits, and any related equipment, facilities, manholes or
overhead poles, operated and maintained for communication purposes.
CUSTOMER: Any person who purchases any services provided by a communications
system.
DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS: The director of public works of the city of West Des
Moines, Iowa, or his or her designee.
FINANCE DIRECTOR: The finance director of the city of West Des Moines, Iowa, or
his or her designee.
LICENSEE: The person who is issued a license in accordance with the provisions
of this chapter.
LOCAL EXCHANGE AREA: An area, as established under regulations of the state of
Iowa, in which intra-area communications service is provided by a carrier
subject to regulation by the state of Iowa.
LOCAL EXCHANGE CARRIER: The operator of a local exchange system in a local
exchange area.
LOCAL EXCHANGE SYSTEM: A communications system furnishing communications
services between stations all located within a local exchange area.
LONG DISTANCE CARRIER: The operator of a long distance system.
LONG DISTANCE SYSTEM: A communications system furnishing communications
services between stations located in different local exchange areas.
PUBLIC RIGHT OF WAY: Any public street, highway, avenue, alley, bridge or
sidewalk within the city. Also, any public utility easement. (Ord. 969, 9-30-
1991; amd. Ord. 1878, 8-23-2010, eff. 9-17-2010)
7-2-2: LICENSE REQUIRED:
No person shall install, construct, reconstruct, repair or operate a
communications system upon, under, over or within any public right of way in
the city unless and until a written license is obtained from the director of
public works pursuant to this chapter. All such licenses shall be nonexclusive.
(Ord. 969, 9-30-1991)
7-2-3: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
An application for a license shall be filed with the director of public works
upon a form provided by the director of public works for that purpose, shall be
in conformance with any adopted city utility accommodation policy, and shall
include as a minimum the following information:
A.   The name, address and telephone number of the applicant.
B.   The name, address and telephone number of a responsible person whom the
city may notify or contact at any time concerning the communications system.
C.   An engineering site plan showing the proposed location of the
communications system, including any manholes, the size, type and proposed
depth of any conduit or other enclosures, and the relationship of the
communications system to all existing streets, sidewalks, poles, utilities and
other improvements within the public right of way.
D.   Any additional information which the director of public works in his or
her discretion may reasonably require. (Ord. 969, 9-30-1991)
7-2-4: GRANTING OF LICENSE:
All licenses required by this chapter shall be granted by the director of
public works. The director of public works shall review each application and
shall grant each license which he or she determines to be in compliance with
the requirements of this chapter and any other applicable legal requirements.
In granting a license, the director of public works may change the proposed
location of the communications system where necessary to avoid interference
with other cables, wires, conduits, pipes, sewers or other facilities placed
within the public right of way. (Ord. 969, 9-30-1991)
7-2-5: AMENDMENT TO LICENSE:
In the event that a licensee with a current license proposes to expand, reduce,
relocate or modify any portion of its communications system within public right
of way, the licensee shall file an application for an amendment to its current
license with the director of public works. An application for an amendment to a
current license shall include relevant new information of the type required in
connection with the initial application for a license, and it shall be
considered and granted by the director of public works in the same manner as
the original license application. However, if the amendment involves only one
or more new hook-on connections to the main licensed communications system, and
if the new connections will be made entirely through existing underground
utility conduit or ducts so as not to require any excavation in the public
right of way, or by means of overhead wires or cables between existing utility
poles, then the licensee shall not be required to pay an additional
administrative fee as a part of the application for amendment. (Ord. 969, 9-30-
1991)
7-2-6: REGULATIONS:
A.   No license required under this chapter, or amendment to such license,
shall be granted for any communications system until the required fees have
been paid, and until a complete application has been filed with and approved by
the director of public works.
B.   The system shall be installed or constructed in accordance with the terms
of the license granted by the director of public works.
C.   Once the system is constructed, the licensee shall, within sixty (60)
calendar days, file with the director of public works an as built survey
specifying the actual location of the system, including any manholes, and the
licensee shall provide such signs or other economically feasible means of
locating the system as may be reasonably required by the director of public
works, including, a requirement that the licensee contract with a one call
locating service or similar locating service for inclusion of the system by the
service.
D.   If it becomes necessary to dig into, excavate in or in any manner break up
any public right of way in connection with the installation, construction or
reconstruction, repair, operation, disconnection or removal of the system, the
licensee shall first obtain a permit from the city to do so in accordance with
chapter 1, article B of this title.
E.   All technical standards governing installation, construction,
reconstruction, repair, operation, disconnection and removal of a
communications system licensed hereunder shall be in accordance with all
applicable federal communications commission and other federal, state and city
laws and regulations.
F.   The licensee shall maintain all parts of the system in good condition,
order and repair.
G.   The licensee shall be responsible for repairing or reimbursing any public
or private party for any damage to their property caused by negligence of the
licensee, or its agents, employees or contractors, in connections with the
installation, construction, reconstruction, repair, operation, disconnection or
removal of the licensee's communication system.
H.   Any license required under this chapter shall not be granted to authorize
placement of a communications system in any space which is required for public
use.
I.   Failure by the licensee to comply with any of the requirements of the
license or this chapter shall constitute grounds for termination of the license
by the city. (Ord. 969, 9-30-1991)
7-2-7: RELOCATION OR REMOVAL WHEN REQUIRED BY PUBLIC NEEDS:
A.   The licensee shall, upon forty eight (48) hours' notice from the city and
at no cost to the city, protect or support any or all of its communications
system when required to do so by the city because of street or other public
excavation, construction, repair, grading or regrading; traffic conditions;
installation of sewers, drains, water pipes or city owned power or signal
lines; installation or construction of any other type of structure by the city
or any other public agency; or any other type of improvement which promotes the
public health, safety or welfare.
B.   The licensee shall, upon sixty (60) calendar days' notice from the city
and at no cost to the city, temporarily or permanently disconnect, relocate
within the same or other public right of way, or remove any or all of its
communications system when required to do so by the city because of street or
other public excavation, construction, repair, grading or regrading; traffic
conditions; installation of sewers, drains, water pipes or city owned power or
signal lines; vacation or relocation of public right of way; installation or
construction of any other type of structure by the city or any other public
agency; or any other type of improvement which promotes the public health,
safety or welfare. If sixty (60) calendar days' notice is not adequate to
fulfill the conditions of this subsection, the licensee may petition the
director of public works for an additional specified time period which may be
granted at the discretion of said director. (Ord. 969, 9-30-1991)
7-2-8: LICENSE FEES:
A.   It shall be a term and condition of any license issued pursuant to this
chapter that, as part of the consideration supporting the issuance of such
license and the city's permission thereby to occupy and use the public right of
way of the city, the licensee shall pay to the city fees computed as follows:
(Ord. 969, 9-30-1991)
1.   An administrative fee of five hundred dollars ($500.00) shall be due and
payable to the city at the time of filing of the initial license application
and at the time of filing of each proposed amendment to the license, subject to
the exemption provided in section
7-2-5 of this chapter. The city council may, by resolution, change the amount
of said administrative fee. (Ord. 1930, 8-22-2011)
B.   The following communications systems shall be exempt from the use fee
requirements:
1.   Local exchange systems either operated pursuant to authority granted by
the state or operated in competition with another local exchange system,
provided the other system is operated pursuant to authority granted by the
state. For the purposes of this subsection, the term "competition" shall have
the meaning ascribed to the term in section 476.1 1985, code of Iowa.
2.   Long distance systems.
3.   Communications systems franchised by the city or used for a purpose
accessory and subordinate to the conduct of a utility franchised by the city.
(Ord. 969, 9-30-1991)
C.   Upon receipt of payment of any of the fees required under this chapter,
and recording the same in his or her files, the director of public works shall
deliver same to the finance director who shall deposit the same into the city's
general fund.
D.   The acceptance of any fee payment by the city shall not be construed as an
acknowledgment that the amount paid is the correct amount due, nor shall
acceptance of payment be construed as a release of any claim which the city may
have for additional sums due and payable. All fee payments shall be subject to
audit by the finance director and assessment or refund if the payment is found
to be in error. In the event that such audit results in an assessment by an
additional payment to the city, such additional payment shall be due and
payable immediately. (Ord. 969, 9-30-1991; amd. Ord. 1878, 8-23-2010, eff. 9-
17-2010)
E.   The licensee shall pay interest at a rate of eighteen percent (18%) per
annum on any overdue fees calculated from the due date for the fee.
F.   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to limit the liability of the
licensee for all applicable federal, state and local taxes.
G.   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prevent the city council
from exercising the right of the city to change the amount of any of the fees
required by this section. (Ord. 969, 9-30-1991)
7-2-9: HOLD HARMLESS; INSURANCE; BOND:
It shall be a term and condition of any license issued pursuant to this chapter
that, as part of the consideration supporting the issuance of such license and
the city's permission thereby to occupy and use the public right of way of the
city, the licensee shall assume the following obligations:
A.   The licensee shall indemnify, protect, save and hold harmless and defend
the city, its officers and employees from and against any and all liability,
losses, judgments, awards, damages and injury to property, or bodily injury or
death to any person, including payments made under workers' compensation laws,
which the city may suffer or incur or a third party may suffer or incur arising
out of or in any way connected with the installation, construction,
reconstruction, repair, operation, disconnection or removal or the licensee's
licensed communications system. The licensee shall pay all reasonable expenses
incurred by the city in defending itself with regard to any of the
aforementioned claims, including, but not limited to, all costs such as
attorney fees and the value of any services rendered by the city attorney or
any other officers or employees of the city. If any litigation on account of
any such claims shall be commenced against the city, and upon receipt by the
licensee of written notice of such litigation from the city, the licensee shall
defend the same at its own cost and expense. The record of any judgment
rendered against the city on account of such claims shall be conclusive as
against the licensee and shall entitle the city to recover the full amount
thereof with interest and costs and attorney fees incurred by the city. The
right of action therefor shall accrue to the city as soon as judgment shall
have been rendered. The city shall fully cooperate with the licensee's defense
of any such claim or action. Nothing herein shall be construed to require
licensee to indemnify, protect, save and hold harmless the city for the
negligent act or wilful act of the city, its employees or its contractors.
(Ord. 969, 9-30-1991)
B.   Immediately upon issuance of the required license, the licensee shall
purchase such general liability insurance as is required by the finance
director in conformity with such written standards relative to the amount of
insurance coverage and deductible, the type of insurance policy and the
qualifications of the insurer as shall be promulgated, and as may be amended
from time to time, by the finance director with the approval of the city
attorney. The amount of insurance shall be a minimum of one million dollars
($1,000,000.00) with a maximum deductible of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00).
The licensee shall maintain such insurance coverage for as long as the licensed
communications system remains in place within public right of way. The city
shall be named as an additional insured on the insurance policy, and the policy
shall provide on its face that it may not be canceled except after at least
thirty (30) days' written notice to the city. Immediately upon issuance of the
required license, the licensee shall file with the director of public works and
the finance director certificate of insurance which clearly discloses on its
face coverage in conformity with all of the foregoing requirements, and if
requested by the finance director, the licensee shall additionally submit a
certified copy of the policy. The licensee may petition the finance director to
approve a certificate of self-insurance and documentation to assure said
director of the financial responsibility imposed upon licensee by the insurance
requirements of this subsection in lieu of general liability insurance
requirements. The finance director may approve said petition at the discretion
of said director.
C.   Immediately upon issuance of the required license, the licensee shall file
with the finance director such bond and surety as is required by the finance
director in conformity with such written standards relative to the amount of
the bond and the qualifications of the surety as shall be promulgated by the
finance director. In lieu thereof, the finance director may permit licensee to
provide documentation necessary to assure the said director of the financial
responsibility imposed upon licensee by these bonds and surety requirements.
The purpose of such bond shall be to protect the city from any and all damages
and costs suffered or incurred by the city from any failure by the licensee to
restore all public right of way and other public property affected by the
installation, construction, reconstruction, repair, operation or removal of the
licensed communications system to its proper condition in accordance with city
standards. Such bond shall be maintained by the licensee for as long as the
system remains in place within public right of way and thereafter until the
licensee shall have satisfied in full any and all obligations to the city which
arise out of or pertain to the licensed communications system. (Ord. 969, 9-30-
1991; amd. Ord. 1878, 8-23-2010, eff. 9-17-2010)
7-2-10: FAILURE TO SECURE, RENEW OR COMPLY WITH LICENSE:
A.   Any person who fails to secure the license required under this chapter or
any licensee who fails to comply with the requirements of the license or this
chapter or with any other applicable legal requirements shall, upon
notification of such violation by the director of public works, immediately act
either to abate the violation or to cause the licensee's communications system
either to be removed or to be disconnected and rendered inoperative.
B.   The city reserves the right either to remove or disconnect and render
inoperative any communications system used or maintained contrary to the
provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 969, 9-30-1991)
7-2-11: TRANSFERS AND ASSIGNMENTS:
The licensee shall not transfer or assign all or any portion of its interest
granted pursuant to this chapter without prior written authorization of the
director of public works, which authorization shall not be unreasonably
withheld, conditioned, delayed or denied. For purposes of this section, a
merger or corporate reorganization shall not be deemed a transfer or
assignment. (Ord. 969, 9-30-1991)
7-2-12: NOTICE OF ACTION; APPEAL:
A.   The director of public works shall promptly send by certified mail with
return receipt a written notice advising each prospective licensee or licensee
of any of the following: action by the director of public works in granting or
denying an application for a license pursuant to section
7-2-4 of this chapter, action required of the licensee by the city pursuant to
section
7-2-7 of this chapter, and notification of failure to secure or comply with a
license pursuant to section
7-2-10 of this chapter.
B.   An aggrieved prospective licensee or licensee shall have the right to a
hearing before the city council by filing, within seven (7) calendar days after
receipt of any such notice from the director of public works, a written appeal
with the director of public works specifying the reasons therefor. At least ten
(10) days prior to the date of the city council hearing, the director of public
works shall send written notice of same to the appellant by certified mail with
return receipt. At the city council hearing, the appellant may be represented
by legal counsel, may call witnesses, and present evidence on his or her
behalf, and may cross examine witnesses against him or her. (Ord. 969, 9-30-
1991)
7-2-13: CABLES AND WIRES:
A.   Underground: All cables, wires and conduits in connection with any
communications systems shall be placed underground, except as provided in
subsection B of this section.
B.   Overhead Permitted: Cables, wires and conduits in connection with a
communications system may be placed overhead in the following circumstances:
1.   Areas of the city with an industrial zoning classification and where
existing poles of a franchised utility are to be used.
2.   Where aboveground connection to buildings or other locations above ground
is reasonably necessary. Such aboveground connection shall be by means of poles
located, as far as reasonably practicable, outside of street right of way.
(Ord. 969, 9-30-1991)
7-2-14: CONSTRUCTION OF CHAPTER:
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as an acquiescence in, or
ratification of, the occupation of any of the public right of way or public
places of the city by any person now occupying the same without legal right,
nor shall this chapter be construed as conferring the right to occupy any of
the public right of way or public places of the city upon any such person now
illegally or without authority occupying the same. (Ord. 969, 9-30-1991)
7-2-15: POLICE REGULATIONS:
The provisions of this chapter are subject to such reasonable regulations and
ordinances of a police nature as the city council may, from time to time, deem
necessary to adopt, not destructive of the rights which may accrue to any
person under this chapter. (Ord. 969, 9-30-1991)
7-2-16: ANTENNAS AND TOWERS:
The city is hereby authorized to rent, lease, or convey an interest in public
property to an individual or entity for purposes of locating cellular antennas,
communication towers, or any other enterprises or activities which confer a
public benefit upon the city. (Ord. 1235, 3-24-1997, eff. retroactive to 10-1-
1996)
CHAPTER 2A
INSTALLATION AND OPERATION OF SMALL CELL BROADBAND INFRASTRUCTURE
SECTION:
7-2A-1: Purpose
7-2A-2: Definitions
7-2A-3: Requirement To Comply
7-2A-4: Fees
7-2A-5: Locations Of Small Cell Facilities, Related Ground Equipment, And
Wireless Support Structures
7-2A-6: Consideration Of Alternate Locations
7-2A-7: Guidelines On Placement
7-2A-8: Undergrounding Requirements
7-2A-9: General Aesthetic Requirements
7-2A-10: Aesthetic Requirements
7-2A-11: General Provisions
7-2A-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to establish general procedures and standards,
consistent with all applicable Federal and State laws, for the siting,
construction, installation, colocation, modification, relocation, operation and
removal of small cell wireless technology within the City's right-of-way and on
public property. This chapter shall:
A.   Provide standards, technical criteria and details for small cell
facilities in the City's right-of-way and on public property to be uniformly
applied to all applicants and owners of small cell facilities or support
structures for such facilities.
B.   Enhance the ability of wireless communications carriers to deploy small
cell wireless technology in the City quickly, effectively and efficiently so
that residents, businesses and visitors benefit from ubiquitous and robust
wireless service availability.
C.   Preserve the character of the City's neighborhoods and corridors.
D.   Ensure that small cell facilities and support structures conform with all
applicable health and safety regulations and will blend into their environment
to the greatest extent possible.
E.   Comply with, and not conflict with or preempt, all applicable State and
Federal laws. (Ord. 2339, 1-7-2019)
7-2A-2: DEFINITIONS:
ABANDONED: Means any small cell facilities or wireless support structures that
are unused or inoperable for a period of three hundred sixty five (365) days
without the owner or operator notifying the City and receiving the City's
approval to maintain the facility or structure at the existing location.
ANTENNA: Means communications equipment that transmits or receives radio
frequency signals in the provision of wireless service.
APPLICANT: Means any person applying for a permit hereunder.
CITY: Means the City of West Des Moines.
CITY PROPERTY: Means property other than right-of-way owned by the City.
COLOCATION OR COLOCATE: Means to install, mount, maintain, modify, operate, or
replace wireless facilities on a wireless support structure.
COUNTY: Means Polk, Dallas, Warren or Madison County, Iowa.
DECORATIVE POLE: Means a pole, arch, or structure other than a street light
pole placed in the right-of-way specifically designed and placed for aesthetic
purposes and on which no appurtenances or attachments have been placed except
for any of the following: a) electric lighting; b) specially designed
informational or directional signage; c) temporary holiday or special event
attachments.
DESIGNATED DISTRICT OR DISTRICTS: Means City-designated or Federally-designated
Historic Districts, landmark sites and Conservation Districts as well as
National Register of Historic Places Historic Districts and sites.
INDUSTRIAL AREA: Means an Industrially-zoned area.
OPERATOR: Means a wireless service provider, cable operator, or a video service
provider that operates a small cell facility and provides wireless service.
Operator includes a wireless service provider, cable operator, or a video
service provider that provides information services as defined in the
"Telecommunications Act of 1996", 110 Stat. 59, 47 USC 153(2) and services that
are fixed in nature or use unlicensed spectrum.
ORNAMENTAL POLE: Means a pole or structure placed in the right- of-way to
support traffic signals and/or streetlights which has been specifically
designed and placed for aesthetic purposes.
Ornamental poles often include appurtenances or attachments for flags, planters
and/or other aesthetic features.
PERMIT: Means the non-exclusive grant of authority issued by the City of West
Des Moines to install a small cell facility and/or a wireless support structure
in a portion of the right-of-way in accordance with these guidelines.
PERMITTEE: Means the owner and/or operator who has been issued a permit
pursuant to these guidelines.
PERSON: Means any natural person or any association, firm, partnership, joint
venture, corporation, or other legally recognized entity, whether for-profit or
not-for-profit.
RESIDENTIAL AREA: Means an area zoned for residential use.
RETAIL AND COMMERCIAL AREAS: Means an area zoned for commercial or retail use.
RIGHT-OF-WAY: Means the surface of, and the space within, through, on, across,
above, or below, any public street, public road, public highway, public
freeway, public lane, public path, public alley, public court, public sidewalk,
public boulevard, public parkway, public drive, public easement, and any other
land dedicated or otherwise designated for a compatible public use, which is
owned or controlled by the City of West Des Moines.
SMALL CELL FACILITY: Means a wireless facility that meets both of the following
requirements:
A.   Each antenna is located inside an enclosure of not more than six (6) cubic
feet in volume or, in the case of an antenna that has exposed elements, the
antenna and all of its exposed elements could fit within an enclosure of not
more than six (6) cubic feet in volume.
B.   All other wireless equipment associated with the facility that is
cumulatively not more than twenty eight (28) cubic feet in volume. The
calculation of equipment volume shall not include electric meters, concealment
elements, telecommunications demarcation boxes, grounding equipment, power
transfer switches, cut-off switches, and vertical cable runs for the connection
of power and other services.
STATE: Means the State of Iowa.
TOLL: Means the pause or delay of the running of the required time period.
TRAFFIC SIGNAL POLE: Means a City owned or operated pole or structure designed
for or used for the placement of traffic control signals and/or devices.
UTILITY POLE: Means a structure that is designed for, or used for the purpose
of carrying lines, cables, or wires for electric or telecommunications service.
"Utility pole" excludes street signs and decorative poles.
WIRELESS SUPPORT STRUCTURE: Means a pole, such as a monopole, either guyed or
self-supporting, street light pole, fifteen foot (15') or taller sign pole, or
utility pole capable of supporting small cell facilities. Wireless support
structure excludes: a) a utility pole or other facility owned or operated by a
Municipal electric utility; b) a utility pole or other facility used to supply
traction power to public transit systems, including railways, trams, streetcars
and trolley buses; or c) a traffic signal pole. (Ord. 2339, 1-7-2019)
7-2A-3: REQUIREMENT TO COMPLY:
Placement, modification, operation, relocation and removal of a small cell
facility and/or wireless support structure shall comply with this chapter and
all relevant and applicable City of West Des Moines ordinances consistent with
this chapter at the time the permit for installation, modification, relocation
or removal is approved and as amended from time to time. (Ord. 2339, 1-7-2019)
7-2A-4: FEES:
The City reserves the right to conduct a rate study to determine fair and
appropriate fees associated with permit application review and approval,
placement and inspection of small cell facilities, support structures, and
equipment. (Ord. 2355, 4-1-2019)
7-2A-5: LOCATIONS OF SMALL CELL FACILITIES, RELATED GROUND EQUIPMENT, AND
WIRELESS SUPPORT STRUCTURES:
A.   Most Preferable Locations: The following are the most preferred areas for
new small cell facilities:
1.   Industrial areas if not adjacent to a Municipal park, residential area, or
designated district.
2.   Highway rights-of-way areas if not adjacent to a Municipal park,
residential area or designated district.
3.   Retail and commercial areas if not adjacent to a Municipal park,
residential area or designated district.
B.   Colocation Preference: It is the City's strong preference that whenever an
applicant proposes to place a new wireless support structure with a small cell
facility within two hundred fifty feet (250') from an existing wireless support
structure, the applicant either co-locate with the existing facility or
demonstrate that a colocation is either not technically feasible or space on
the existing facility is not potentially available.
C.   Least Preferable Locations: The following are the least preferred areas
for new small cell facilities:
1.   Residential areas.
2.   Municipal parks.
3.   Designated districts.
Maps, which may be updated from time to time, showing the boundaries of the
above areas are available on the City's website at http://www.wdm.iowa.gov.
D.   Order Of Preference For Wireless Support Structures: The following list
indicates the order of preference for wireless support structures for small
cell facilities. Images of the Municipal service poles are in exhibit A on file
in the City.
1.   Existing Utility Poles: It is the City's preference that small cell
facilities be installed on existing utility poles (electric or telephone) or
lashed onto existing telephone or electrical lines between existing utility
poles.
2.   Non-Ornamental Municipal Service Poles: If the applicant does not have the
right to use existing utility poles or lines under reasonable terms and
conditions or the utilization imposes technical limits, the City prefers that
the applicant consider existing non-ornamental Municipal street light poles.
3.   New Poles: If the first two (2) items are unavailable, preference should
be given to the installation of a new pole to serve as a wireless support
structure.
4.   Ornamental Municipal Service Poles: The use of ornamental Municipal street
lights as wireless support structures is discouraged. These should only be
proposed if the three (3) items listed above are unavailable or when requested
by the City based on the proposed location.
5.   Sign Poles (15 Feet Or Taller): The only sign poles that may be considered
are those that are at least fifteen feet (15') tall. These are the least
preferred option for a wireless support structure. (Ord. 2339, 1-7-2019; amd.
Ord. 2355, 4-1-2019)
7-2A-6: CONSIDERATION OF ALTERNATE LOCATIONS:
The City reserves the right to propose an alternate wireless support structure
to the one proposed in the application. The City may also propose an alternate
location for a new wireless support structure within one hundred feet (100') of
the proposed location or within a distance that is equivalent to the width of
the right-of-way in or on which the new wireless support structure is proposed,
whichever is greater, which the operator shall use if it has the right to use
the alternate location on reasonable terms and conditions and the alternate
location does not impose technical limits or additional costs. (Ord. 2339, 1-7-
2019; amd. Ord. 2355, 4-1-2019)
7-2A-7: GUIDELINES ON PLACEMENT:
Generally, an applicant shall construct and maintain small cell facilities and
wireless support structures in a manner that does not: a) obstruct, impede or
hinder the usual travel or public safety on a right-of-way; b) obstruct the
legal use of a right- of-way by other utility providers; c) violate
nondiscriminatory applicable codes; d) violate or conflict with this or any
relevant and applicable City of West Des Moines ordinance; and e) violate the
Federal Americans With Disabilities Act.
The City desires to promote cleanly organized and streamlined facilities using
the smallest and least intrusive means available to provide wireless services
to the community. Generally, a small cell facility and/or wireless support
structure shall match and be consistent with the materials and finish of the
adjacent Municipal poles of the surrounding area adjacent to their location. In
the absence of adjacent Municipal poles, the wireless support structure shall
match the materials and finish of the adjacent utility poles. Unless
specifically approved by the City, the number of small cell facilities located
on a single pole shall not exceed two (2). (Ord. 2355, 4-1-2019)
A.   Antennas On Existing Or Replaced Utility Poles: The antenna(s) associated
with collocation on existing or replaced utility poles must have concealed
cable connections, antenna mount and other hardware. The maximum dimensions for
antennas shall not be more than six (6) cubic feet in volume, including any
enclosure for the antenna.
B.   Right-Of-Way: Small cell facilities and wireless support structures and
related equipment shall be placed, as much as possible, in line with other
utility features and in a location that minimizes any obstruction, impediment
or hindrance to the usual travel or public safety on a right-of-way.
C.   Height Above Ground:
1.   Small Cell Facilities: Small cell facilities shall be installed at least
eight feet (8') above the ground. If a small cell facility attachment is
projecting toward the street, for the safety and protection of the public and
vehicular traffic, the City may require the attachment to be installed no less
than sixteen feet (16') above the ground.
2.   New Wireless Support Structures: In areas where there is no wireless
support structure or utility pole taller than thirty feet (30') in height above
ground level and the maximum allowable height for building construction in the
underlying zoning district is thirty feet (30') in height above ground level or
less, the overall height of a new wireless support structure and any co-located
antennas shall not be more than thirty feet (30') in height above ground level.
In all other areas, the overall height of a new wireless support structure and
any co-located antennas shall not be more than forty feet (40') in height above
ground level.
3.   Existing Wireless Support Structures: For an existing wireless support
structure, the antenna and any associated shroud or concealment material are
permitted to be co-located at the top of the existing wireless support
structure and shall not increase the height of the existing wireless support
structure by more than five feet (5').
D.   Protrusion: No protrusions from the outer circumference of the existing
structure or pole shall be more than two feet (2'). The pole and all
attachments to the pole that are projecting, or any equipment or appurtenance
mounted on the ground, shall comply with Americans With Disabilities Act and
shall not obstruct an existing or planned sidewalk or walkway. The City, at its
option, may waive the requirement to limit the protrusion to no more than two
feet (2').
E.   Location Of Equipment - General: Small cell facilities and related
equipment shall not impede pedestrian or vehicular traffic in the right-of-way.
If any small cell facility or wireless support structure is installed in a
location that is not in accordance with the plans approved by the City, impedes
pedestrian or vehicular traffic and/or does not comply or otherwise renders the
right-of-way non-compliant with applicable laws, including the Americans With
Disabilities Act, then the operator shall promptly remove the small cell
facilities and/or wireless support structure. If the operator does not complete
removal in a reasonable timeframe, the City will remove it and bill the
operator for the cost of the removal.
The applicant is required to incorporate ambient noise suppression measures
and/or required to place the equipment in locations less likely to impact
adjacent residences or businesses to ensure compliance with all applicable
noise regulations.
1.   Utility Lines: Service lines must be placed underground whenever feasible
to avoid additional overhead lines. For metal poles, undergrounded cables and
wires must transition directly into the pole base without any external junction
box.
2.   Spools And Coils: To reduce clutter and deter vandalism, excess fiber
optic or coaxial cables for small cell facilities shall not be spooled, coiled
or otherwise stored on the pole except within an approved enclosure such as a
cage or cabinet.
3.   Above-Ground Conduit: On wood poles, all above-ground wires, cables and
connections shall be encased in the smallest section or smallest diameter PVC
channel, conduit, u-guard, or shroud feasible, with a maximum dimension of four
inches (4") in diameter. Such conduit shall be finished in zinc, aluminum or
stainless steel, or colored to match those metal finishes.
F.   Location Of Ground Mounted Equipment: Ground equipment should be minimal
and the least intrusive. It should be placed to minimize any obstruction,
impediment, or hindrance to the usual travel or public safety on a right-of-
way, maximize the line of sight required to add to safe travel of vehicular and
pedestrian traffic and maximize that line of sight at street corners and
intersections and minimize hazards at those locations. The City may deny a
request that negatively impacts vehicular and/or pedestrian safety.
The equipment shroud or cabinet must contain all the equipment associated with
the facility other than the antenna. All cables and conduits associated with
the equipment must be concealed from view, routed directly through the metal
pole (with the exception of wood power poles) and undergrounded between the
pole and the ground- mounted cabinet.
G.   Location Of Pole Mounted Equipment: All pole-mounted equipment must be
installed as flush to the pole as possible. Equipment attached to metal poles
must be installed using stainless steel banding straps. Equipment attached to
wood poles may be bolted to the pole or installed using stainless steel banding
straps. When the straps are attached to a metal pole, they must match the color
of the pole. Through-bolting or use of lag bolts is prohibited. All pole
mounted equipment shall be located as close together as technically possible
and if possible, on the same side of the pole.
When pole-mounted equipment is either permitted or required, all equipment
other than the antenna(s), electric meter and disconnect switch must be
concealed within an equipment cage. An equipment cabinet may not extend more
than twenty four inches (24") from the face of the pole. The equipment cabinet
must be non-reflective, colored to match the existing pole if attached to a
metal pole, and in the color of brushed aluminum if attached to a wood pole.
Equipment cabinets should be mounted as flush to the pole as possible. Any
standoff mount for the equipment cabinet may not exceed four inches (4").
1.   Electric Meter: The City strongly encourages site operators to use flat-
rate electric service when it would eliminate the need for a meter. When a
meter is necessary, site operators shall use the smallest and least intrusive
electric meter available. Whenever permitted by the electric service provider,
the electric meter base should be painted to match the pole.
2.   Telephone/Fiber Optic Utilities: Cabinets for telephone and/or fiber optic
utilities may not extend more than twenty four inches (24") from the face of
the pole, and must be painted, wrapped or otherwise colored to match the pole.
Microwave or other wireless backhaul is discouraged when it would involve a
separate and unconcealed antenna.
H.   Undergrounded Equipment Vaults: Equipment in an environmentally controlled
underground vault may be required in some areas where technologically feasible
and appropriate for the location.
I.   New Wireless Support Structures:
1.   Spacing: The City strongly discourages more than one new wireless support
structure per block and will not approve more than one per two hundred fifty
feet (250') on each side of the street to minimize the hazard of poles adjacent
to roadways and minimize visual clutter and distractions to vehicular traffic.
An exemption may be granted if the applicant can demonstrate that this
restriction has the effect of preventing wireless service to this location.
Wireless support structures shall be spaced apart from utility poles or
wireless support structures supporting small cell facilities at the same
spacing between utility poles in the immediate proximity.
If multiple requests are received to install two (2) or more poles that would
violate the spacing requirement or to co- locate two (2) or more small cell
facilities on the same wireless support structure, priority will be given to
the first request received that meets these guidelines.
2.   Alignment With Other Poles: The centerline of any new wireless support
structure must be aligned, as much as possible, with the centerlines of
existing poles on the same street segment, but only if the new structure's
height does not conflict with overhead power utility lines and facilities.
3.   General Restrictions On New Wood Poles: In all locations, the City
reserves the right to require a metal pole rather than a wood pole based on the
built and/or natural environmental character of the proposed site location. The
City, at its discretion, may deny approval of any new wood poles in a
designated district.
4.   Wood Pole Footings And Foundations: All new wood poles must be direct
buried to a depth determined, stamped, sealed and signed by a professional
engineer licensed and registered by the State of Iowa, and subject to the
City's review and approval.
5.   Metal Pole Footings And Foundations: All new metal poles must be supported
with a reinforced concrete pier. The design including the pier, footings and
anchor bolts shall be stamped, sealed and signed by a professional engineer
licensed and registered by the State of Iowa, and subject to the City's review
and approval. All anchor bolts must be concealed from public view with an
appropriate pole boot or cover subject to the City's prior approval.
6.   Metal Pole Material: All metal poles must be constructed from hot-dip
galvanized steel or other corrosion-resistant materials approved by the City
and finished in accordance with these guidelines to avoid rust stains on
adjacent sidewalks, buildings or other improvements.
7.   Metal Pole Finish: Metal poles must be painted black unless otherwise
waived by the City. The applicant may select a paint or powder coat system in
compliance with ATSM standards.
8.   Lighting, Planters, Flags, Banners: The City may require the applicant to
install functional streetlights and/or brackets to hold hanging flower
planters, flags and/or banners when technically feasible and the City
determines that such additions will enhance the overall appearance and
usefulness of the proposed facility. The City may install hanging flower
planters, flags and/or banners utilizing the brackets.
J.   City-Owned Wireless Support Structures:
1.   Required Load Analysis: Installations on all City-owned poles shall have
an industry standard pole load analysis completed, sealed and signed by a
professional engineer licensed and registered by the State of Iowa and
submitted to the City with each permit application indicating that the City-
owned pole to which the small cell facility will be attached will safely
support the load.
2.   Height Of Attachments: All attachments on all City-owned poles shall be at
least eight feet (8') above grade and if a small cell facility is projecting
toward the street, for the safety and protection of the public and vehicular
traffic, the City may require the attachment to be installed no less than
sixteen feet (16') above the ground.
3.   Power Source: A small cell facility on a City-owned wireless support
structure may use the same power source that provides power for the original
purpose of the wireless support structure. The City will provide a proposed
flat rate for anticipated annual cost of power.
4.   Installations On Street Lights: Installations on all street lights must
not interfere with the integrity of the facility in any way that may compromise
the safety of the public. The installation must not interfere with other
existing uses on the pole such as street lights, hanging flower planters,
flags, and/or banners. Installation of small cell facilities on any street
light shall: a) be encased in a separate conduit than the street light
electronics; b) have a separate electric power connection than the street light
structure; and c) have a separate access point than the street light structure.
5.   Installations On Sign Poles (15 Feet Or Taller): Installations on sign
poles may only occur if the sign pole is fifteen feet (15') or taller.
6.   Reservation Of Space For Future Public Safety Or Transportation Uses: An
application for space on a City owned or operated wireless support structure
that conflicts with space reserved for future public safety or transportation
uses documented in an approved plan in place at the time of the application
will be denied unless the operator pays for the replacement of the pole or
wireless support structure and the replaced pole or wireless support structure
will accommodate the future use and the small cell facility. (Ord. 2339, 1-7-
2019; amd. Ord. 2355, 4-1-2019)
7-2A-8: UNDERGROUNDING REQUIREMENTS:
The City may deny requests to install structures and facilities in the right-
of-way or on City property in an area where the City has required all
structures and facilities except those owned by the City to be placed
underground or elsewhere in the right-of- way or a utility easement. These
areas are easily identifiable as those locations where electric has been placed
underground; however, if an applicant is uncertain as to whether such
facilities have been placed underground in the area, the applicant should
contact the City for clarification before applying for or installing any
wireless support structures and/or small cell facilities in the area. The
applicant may request a waiver if the operator is unable to achieve its service
objective using a location in the right-of-way or on City property where the
prohibition does not apply, in a utility easement the operator has the right to
access, or in or on other suitable locations or structures made available by
the City at reasonable rates, fees and terms. (Ord. 2339, 1-7-2019; amd. Ord.
2355, 4-1-2019)
7-2A-9: GENERAL AESTHETIC REQUIREMENTS:
A.   Concealment:
1.   New Wireless Support Structures: It is the City's preference that all new
wireless support structures be camouflaged, except, at the City's discretion,
those structures located in an area that is predominantly industrial. The
applicant shall submit its proposal for camouflage with the permit application.
2.   Small Cell Facilities: Small cell facilities shall be concealed or
enclosed as much as possible in an equipment box, cabinet, or other unit that
may include ventilation openings. Unless approved by the City in writing, there
shall be no external cables and wires hanging off a pole. Approved external
cables shall be sheathed or enclosed in a conduit, so that wires are protected
and not visible or visually minimized to the extent possible.
3.   Equipment Enclosures: Equipment enclosures, including electric meters,
shall be as small as possible. Ground-mounted equipment shall incorporate
concealment elements into the proposed design. Concealment may include, but
shall not be limited to, landscaping, strategic placement in less obtrusive
locations and placement within existing or replacement street furniture.
4.   Landscaping: Landscape screening shall be provided and maintained around
ground mounted equipment enclosures. The planting quantity and size should be
such that one hundred percent (100%) screening is achieved within two (2) years
of installation. The City may grant an exemption from this landscaping
requirement based on the characteristics of the specific location for the
equipment enclosure. Tree "topping" or the improper pruning of trees is
prohibited. Any proposed pruning or removal of trees, shrubs or other
landscaping already existing in the right-of-way must be noted in the
application and must be approved by the City.
When underground vaults are proposed, they shall be located to minimize
disruption to the placement of street trees. Adequate planting depth shall be
provided between the top of the vault and the finished grade to allow plants to
grow in a healthy condition. (Ord. 2339, 1-7-2019; amd. Ord. 2355, 4-1-2019)
B.   Allowed Colors: All colors shall match the background of any wireless
support structure that the facilities are located upon. In the case of existing
wood poles, finishes of conduit shall be zinc, aluminum or stainless steel, or
colored to match those metal finishes and equipment cabinets shall be the color
of brushed aluminum. Ground mounted equipment cabinets shall be the color of
brushed aluminum or a shade of green consistent with typical electrical, cable
or telecommunication cabinets. (Ord. 2355, 4-1-2019)
C.   Signage/Lights/Logos/Decals/Cooling Fans:
1.   Signage: Operator shall post its name, location identifying information,
and emergency telephone number in an area on the cabinet of the small cell
facility that is visible to the public. Signage required under this section
shall not exceed 4" x 6", unless otherwise required by law (e.g., RF ground
notification signs) or the City. If no cabinet exists, the signage shall be
placed at the base of the pole.
2.   Lights: New small cell facilities and wireless support structures shall
not be illuminated, except in accord with State or Federal regulations, or
unless illumination is integral to the camouflaging strategy such as design
intended to look like a street light pole.
3.   Logos/Decals: Unnecessary equipment manufacturer decals shall be removed
or painted-over. New small cell facilities and wireless support structures
shall not include advertisements and may only display information required by a
Federal, State or local agency. The smallest and lowest visible radio-frequency
(RF) warning sticker required by government or electric utility regulations
shall be utilized. The RF sticker shall be placed as close to the antenna as
possible.
4.   Cooling Fans: In the event that a cooling fan is needed, in residential
areas the fan shall have a low noise profile. (Ord. 2339, 1-7-2019; amd. Ord.
2355, 4-1-2019)
7-2A-10: AESTHETIC REQUIREMENTS:
The City of West Des Moines prefers that wireless support structures be located
on existing utility poles, with secondary preference given to the placement on
non-ornamental Municipal street light poles. Ornamental Municipal poles should
be avoided if possible.
The City strongly discourages the use of any ornamental streetlight or pole as
a wireless support structure, with use occurring only when no other options
exist, including the ability to install a new wireless support structure. If
used, the height may not be increased more than five feet (5'), the light
fixture must be located at the top of the pole, and the small cell facility
must not interfere with the attachment of flags, hanging planters and/or
banners.
If existing utility poles are not available for colocation, operators may
propose a new wireless support structure. New wireless support structures that
will be more than twenty feet (20') in height shall match the design of the
City's existing traffic signal mast arms. New wireless support structures that
will be twenty feet (20') or less in height shall match the City's
streetlights. Information on the manufacturer and model identification, and
detailed drawings of these support structures are available from the
Engineering Department.
A.   New Wireless Support Structures:
1.   Residential Areas: In residential areas, new wireless support structures
should be located to avoid obstructing the view of building facades by placing
the wireless support structure at a corner, intersection or along a lot line.
New wireless support structures should be located in the yard location where
other overhead utilities are located unless it is not technically feasible to
do so. Applicants shall clearly explain the rationale for requests that deviate
from this expectation.
In order to meet the service needs of operators, the City will consider
requests to locate small cell facilities on other Municipal property such as
Municipal parking lots. (Ord. 2339, 1-7-2019; amd. Ord. 2355, 4-1-2019)
7-2A-11: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
A.   Tree Maintenance: The operator, its contractors and agents shall obtain
written permission from the City before trimming trees in the right-of-way
hanging over its small cell facility and/or wireless support structure to
prevent branches of such trees from contacting attached small cell facility.
When trimming such trees on private property, the operator, its contractors,
and agents shall notify the City and obtain written permission from the
property owner. When directed by the City, operator shall trim under the
supervision and direction of the City. The City shall not be liable for any
damages, injuries, or claims arising from operator's actions under this
subsection.
B.   Graffiti Abatement: As soon as practical, but not later than fourteen (14)
calendar days from the date operator receives notice thereof, operator shall
remove all graffiti on any of its small cell facilities and/or wireless support
structures located in the right-of-way. The City may agree to an extension of
time for abatement when necessitated by the need to order replacement equipment
when such equipment is ordered in a timely manner.
C.   Minor Technical Exceptions: The City recognizes that in some circumstances
strict compliance with these guidelines may result in undesirable aesthetic
outcomes and that minor deviations should be granted when the need for such
deviation arises from circumstances outside the applicant's control.
D.   Waivers: In the event that any applicant justifiably asserts that strict
compliance with any provision in these guidelines, as applied to a specific
proposed small cell facility, would effectively prohibit the provision of
personal wireless services, the City Manager may grant a limited, one-time
exemption from strict compliance. (Ord. 2339, 1-7-2019; amd. Ord. 2355, 4-1-
2019)
CHAPTER 3
RAILROADS
SECTION:
7-3-1: Definitions
7-3-2: Warning Signals
7-3-3: Obstructing Streets
7-3-4: Crossing Maintenance
7-3-1: DEFINITIONS:
For use in this Chapter, the following terms are defined:
OPERATOR: Any individual, partnership, corporation or other association which
owns, operates, drives or controls a railroad train.
RAILROAD TRAIN: Any steam, electric or other motor-driven engine and the cars,
if any, coupled to the engine operated on rails, but does not include inter-
urbans and street cars. (1985 Code §8-3.01)
7-3-2: WARNING SIGNALS:
Operators shall sound a horn at least one thousand feet (1,000') before a
street crossing is reached and after sounding the horn, shall ring the bell
continuously until the crossing is passed. Operators shall also sound a whistle
at least one hundred feet (100') before reaching every intersection of the
track and street, sidewalk, alley or similar public crossing within the City
limits. (1985 Code §8-3.02)
7-3-3: OBSTRUCTING STREETS:
A railroad corporation or its employees shall not operate any train in such a
manner as to prevent vehicular use of any highway, street or alley for a period
of time in excess of ten (10) minutes except:
A.   Comply with Signals: When necessary to comply with signals affecting the
safety of the movement of trains.
B.   Avoid Striking: When necessary to avoid striking any object or person on
the track.
C.   Disabled: When the train is disabled.
D.   Safety Regulations: When necessary to comply with governmental safety
regulations including, but not limited to, speed ordinances and speed
regulations.
E.   In Motion: When the train is in motion except while engaged in switching
operations.
F.   No Traffic: When there is no vehicular traffic waiting to use the
crossing.
Any officer or employee of a railroad corporation violating any provision of
this Section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. An employee shall not be guilty
of such violation if his action was necessary to comply with the direct order
or instructions of a railroad corporation or its supervisors. Such guilt shall
then be with the railroad corporation. (1985 Code §8-3.03)
7-3-4: CROSSING MAINTENANCE:
Operators shall construct and maintain good, sufficient and safe crossings over
any street traversed by their rails. (1985 Code §8-3.04)
CHAPTER 4
PUBLIC BENCHES
(Rep. by Ord. 2017, 12-30-2013)
CHAPTER 5
NEWSRACKS
(Rep. by Ord. 2010, 10-14-2013)
CHAPTER 6
CEMETERY
SECTION:
7-6-1: Transfer To City
7-6-2: Jordan Cemetery
7-6-3: Director
7-6-4: Additional Employees
7-6-5: Rules And Regulations
7-6-6: Rates And Charges
7-6-7: Violation Of Rules
7-6-1: TRANSFER TO CITY:
By mutual agreement between the Jordan Cemetery board of trustees and the city
council of the city, the said board has relinquished all cemetery property,
both real and personal under trusteeship, to the city for complete
responsibility and control. (1985 Code §3-5.01)
7-6-2: JORDAN CEMETERY:
It is herewith declared that Jordan Cemetery as now constituted or hereafter
enlarged or changed, shall be a municipal cemetery under the provisions of
chapters 566.20–566.27 of the code of Iowa, as amended, together with city
responsibility for its care and operation. (1985 Code §3-5.02; amd. Ord. 1474,
4-15-2002)
7-6-3: DIRECTOR:
The director of parks and recreation shall be responsible for the operation of
the cemetery. The director or their designee shall operate the cemetery in
accordance with the rules and regulations therefor, and under the direction of
the city manager. (1474, 4-15-2002)
7-6-4: ADDITIONAL EMPLOYEES:
The director of parks and recreation or their designee may retain or employ
additional help for care and maintenance of the cemetery, subject to approval
of the city manager, and all such persons shall be under the supervision of the
said director. The director or their designee shall also arrange for the
opening of all graves and may also retain additional help to assist as deemed
necessary. (Ord. 1474, 4-15-2002)
7-6-5: RULES AND REGULATIONS:
Rules and regulations for municipal cemeteries in the city shall be established
by the city manager. Said rules and regulations may be changed or amended from
time to time by the city manager and shall at all times be on file in the
office of the city clerk for public inspection. (Ord. 1474, 4-15-2002)
7-6-6: RATES AND CHARGES:
Interment charges, rates and sale of lots or spaces and other charges in
connection with the municipal cemetery shall be established by resolution of
the council and may be amended from time to time. (1985 Code §3-5.04)
7-6-7: VIOLATION OF RULES:
Any violation of the rules and regulations shall constitute a violation of this
chapter. Pursuant to subsection
1-4-1B of this code, any violation of the rules and regulations adopted in
accordance with this chapter shall constitute a municipal infraction. (Ord.
1474, 4-15-2002)
CHAPTER 7
AIRPORT AUTHORITY
(Rep. by Ord. 2011, 10-14-2013)
CHAPTER 8
SEWER REGULATIONS
ARTICLE A. GENERAL PROVISIONS
SECTION:
7-8A-1: Purpose
7-8A-2: Definitions
7-8A-3: Sewer Connection Required
7-8A-4: Director of Public Works
7-8A-5: Prohibited Acts
7-8A-6: Service Outside the City
7-8A-7: Right of Entry
7-8A-8: Owner's Liability Limited
7-8A-9: Use of Easements
7-8A-10: Special Penalties
7-8A-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this Article is to establish rules and regulations governing the
treatment and disposal of sanitary sewage within the City in order to protect
the public health, safety and welfare. (1985 Code §3-3.0101)
7-8A-2: DEFINITIONS:
For use in this Article, unless the context specifically indicates otherwise,
the following terms are defined:
BOD (denoting Biochemical Oxygen Demand): The quantity of oxygen utilized in
the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure
in five (5) days at twenty degrees (20o) centigrade, expressed in milligrams
per liter or parts per million.
BUILDING SEWER: The extension from the building drain to the public sewer or
other place of disposal.
BUILDING SEWER STUB: That portion of the building sewer within the City right
of way.
BUILDING DRAIN: That part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system
which receives the discharge from soil, waste, and other drainage pipes inside
the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer, beginning three
feet (3') (1.0 meters) outside the inner face of the building wall.
CITY: The City of West Des Moines, Iowa.
CONTRIBUTOR: Any person responsible for the production of domestic, commercial
or industrial waste which is directly or indirectly discharged into the public
sewer system.
DETACHED SINGLE-FAMILY UNIT: A dwelling unit which is not attached to any other
unit and is intended for the occupancy of one family.
DIRECTOR: The Director of Public Works of the City or his authorized deputy,
agent, or representative.
DOMESTIC SEWAGE: Sewage having a suspended solids content not to exceed four
hundred (400) mg/l and a BOD not to exceed four hundred (400) mg/l and which
does not contain substances, materials or wastes set out in Sections
 7-8B-2 or
7-8B-3 of this Chapter.
DWELLING UNIT: One or more habitable rooms which are occupied or which are
intended or designed to be occupied by one family with facilities for living,
sleeping, cooking and eating.
GARBAGE: Solid wastes from the domestic and commercial preparation, cooking,
and dispensing of food, and from the handling, storage and sale of produce.
INDUSTRIAL WASTES: Solid, liquid or gaseous substances from any industrial,
manufacturing, commercial or business establishment, or process, or from the
development, recovery or processing of any natural resource which any person
discharges or allows to be discharged into the public sewer, but shall not
include any wastes from a building used exclusively for residential purposes
which contains eight (8) dwelling or rooming units, or less.
INSPECTOR: The person duly authorized by the Council to inspect and approve the
installation of building sewers and their connections to the public sewer
system; and to inspect such sewage as may be discharged therefrom.
NATURAL OUTLET: Any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other body
of surface or groundwater.
pH: The logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen ions in grams per
liter of solution.
PARTS PER MILLION (ppm): A weight-to-weight ratio; the parts-per-million value
multiplied by the factor 8.345 shall be equivalent to pounds per million
gallons of water, and for the purposes of this Article it shall mean the same
as milligrams per liter (mg/l).
PAUNCH MANURE: Any material found in the stomachs or paunches of livestock.
PRIVATE SEWER: A sanitary building drain and sewer privately owned and not
directly controlled by public authority.
PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE: The wastes from the preparation, cooking and
dispensing of food that have been shredded to such a degree that all particles
will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public
sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch (1/2") (1.27 centimeters)
in any dimension.
PUBLIC SEWER: A sewer provided by or under the jurisdiction of the City. It
shall include all sewers outside the City which serve one or more persons and
ultimately discharge into the sewers under the jurisdiction of the City.
RESIDENTIAL: Any building which is used as a single-family dwelling or multi-
family dwelling.
SANITARY SEWAGE: Sewage discharging from the sanitary conveniences of dwellings
(including apartment houses and hotels), office buildings, factories or
institutions, and free from storm, surface water, and industrial waste.
SANITARY SEWER: A sewer which carries sewage and to which storm, surface, and
ground waters are not intentionally admitted.
SEWAGE: A combination of the water carried wastes from residences, business
buildings, institutions, and industrial establishments, together with such
ground, surface, and storm waters as may be present.
SEWAGE TREATMENT PLANT: Any arrangement of devices and structures used for
treating sewage.
SEWAGE WORKS OR SEWAGE SYSTEM: All facilities for collecting, pumping,
treating, and disposing of sewage.
SEWER: A pipe or conduit for carrying sewage.
SEWER RENTAL: Any and all charges, rates, fees, or rentals levied against and
payable by contributors, as consideration for the servicing of said
contributors by said sewer system.
SLUG: Any discharge of water, sewage, or industrial waste which in
concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds for any
period of duration longer than fifteen (15) minutes more than five (5) times
the average twenty four (24) hour concentration or flows during normal
operation.
STANDARD METHODS: The examination and analytical procedures set forth in the
most recent edition of "Standard Methods For The Examination Of Water, Sewage,
And Industrial Wastes", published jointly by the American Public Health
Association, the American Water Works Association and the Water Pollution
Control Federation.
STORM DRAIN OR STORM SEWER: A sewer which carries storm and surface waters and
drainage but excludes sewage and industrial wastes, other than unpolluted
cooling water.
SUSPENDED SOLIDS: Solids that either float on the surface of, or are in
suspension in water, sewage, or other liquids, and which are removable by
laboratory filtering.
UNPOLLUTED WATER OR LIQUIDS: Any water or liquid containing none of the
following: free or emulsified grease or oil; substances that may impart taste
and odor or color characteristics; volatile, explosive, toxic or poisonous
substances in suspension, colloidal state or solution; explosive, odorous or
otherwise obnoxious gases. Such water or liquids shall not contain more than
twenty five milligrams per liter (25 mg/l) of suspended solids, and not more
than twenty five milligrams per liter (25 mg/l) of BOD.
WATERCOURSE: A channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously or
intermittently. (1985 Code §3-3.0102; amd. Ord. 903, 4-16-1990; 1993 Code; Ord.
2376, 8-5-2019)
7-8A-3: SEWER CONNECTION REQUIRED:
The owners of any houses, buildings, or properties used for human occupancy,
employment, recreation or other purposes, situated within the city and abutting
on any street, alley or right of way in which there is now located, or may in
the future be located, a public sanitary sewer is hereby required to install,
at such owner's expense, suitable toilet facilities therein and a building
sewer connecting such facilities directly with the proper public sewer, and to
maintain the same all in accordance with the provisions of this article, such
compliance to be completed within sixty (60) days after date of official notice
from the city to do so provided that said public sewer is located within four
hundred feet (400') of the property line of such owner and is of such design as
to receive and convey by gravity such sewage as may be conveyed to it. Such
connection shall be made in full compliance with state and local plumbing
codes. (1985 Code §3-3.0105; amd. Ord. 1509, 2-3-2003)
7-8A-4: DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS:
The director of public works shall be appointed by the council and exercise the
following powers and duties:
A.   Operation And Maintenance: He shall operate and maintain the city sewage
system.
B.   Inspection And Tests: He shall conduct necessary inspections and tests to
assure compliance with the provisions of this article. (1985 Code §3-3.0103;
amd. 1993 Code)
7-8A-5: PROHIBITED ACTS:
No person shall do, or allow, any of the following:
A.   Damage Sewer System: Maliciously, wilfully or negligently break, damage,
destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or
equipment which is a part of the sewer system.
B.   Downspouts: Connect a roof downspout, exterior foundation drain, areaway
drain, or other source of surface runoff or ground water to a building sewer or
building drain which in turn is connected directly or indirectly to a public
sanitary sewer.
C.   Manholes: Open or enter any manhole of the sewer system, except by
authority of the director.
D.   Objectionable Wastes: Place or deposit in any unsanitary manner on public
or private property within the city, or in any area under the jurisdiction of
the city, any human or animal excrement, garbage or other objectionable waste.
E.   Septic Tanks: Construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank,
cesspool or other facility intended or used for the disposal of sewage except
as provided in this article.
F.   Untreated Discharge: Discharge to any natural outlet within the city, or
in any area under its jurisdiction, any sanitary sewage, industrial wastes, or
other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in
accordance with subsequent provisions of this article. (1985 Code §3-3.0104;
amd. 1993 Code)
7-8A-6: SERVICE OUTSIDE THE CITY:
The owners of property outside the corporate limits of the City so situated
that it may be served by the City sewer system may apply to the Council for
permission to connect to the public sewer upon the terms and conditions
stipulated by resolution of the Council. (1985 Code §3-3.0106)
7-8A-7: RIGHT OF ENTRY:
The Director and other duly authorized employees of the City bearing proper
credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all properties for
the purposes of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling and testing in
accordance with the provisions of this Article. The Director or his
representatives shall have no authority to inquire into any processes including
metallurgical, chemical, oil, refining, ceramic, paper or other industries
beyond that point having a direct bearing on the kind and source of discharge
to the sewers or waterways or facilities for waste treatment. (1985 Code §3-
3.0107; 1993 Code)
7-8A-8: OWNER'S LIABILITY LIMITED:
While performing the necessary work on private property, the Director or duly
authorized employees of the City shall observe all safety rules applicable to
the premises established by the owner or occupant and the owner or occupant
shall be held harmless for injury or death to City employees and the City shall
indemnify the owner or occupant against loss or damage to its property by City
employees and against liability claims and demands for personal injury or
property damage asserted against the owner or occupant and growing out of any
gauging and sampling operation, except as such may be caused by negligence or
failure of the owner or occupant to maintain safe conditions. (1985 Code §2-
2.0108; 1993 Code)
7-8A-9: USE OF EASEMENTS:
The Director and other duly authorized employees of the City bearing proper
credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all private
properties through which the City holds a duly negotiated easement for the
purposes of, but not limited to, inspection, observation, measurement,
sampling, repair and maintenance of any portion of the sewage works lying
within said easement. All entry and subsequent work, if any, on said easement,
shall be done in full accordance with the terms of the duly negotiated easement
pertaining to the private property involved. (1985 Code §3-3.0109; 1993 Code)
7-8A-10: SPECIAL PENALTIES:
The following special penalty provisions shall apply to violations of this
Article:
A.   Notice of Violation: Any person found to be violating any provision of
this Article except subsections A, C and D of Section
7-8A-4, shall be served by the City with written notice stating the nature of
the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory
correction thereof. The offender shall, within the period of time stated in
such notice, permanently cease all violations.
B.   Continuing Violations: Any person who shall continue any violation beyond
the time limit provided for in subsection A hereof, shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor, and on conviction thereof shall be fined an amount not exceeding
one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each violation. Each day in which any such
violation shall continue shall be deemed a separate offense.
C.   Injunctions: In addition to any other remedies provided by law, when there
has been a violation of the provisions of any section of this Article, the
Director may request the corporation counsel to bring suit in the District
Court of Polk County, Iowa to prevent further violation of any provisions of
this Article, or to restrain, correct or abate such violation.
D.   Liability Imposed: Any person violating any of the provisions of this
Article shall become liable to the City for any expense, loss, or damage
occasioned the City by reason of such violation. (1985 Code §3-3.0110; 1993
Code)
ARTICLE B. USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS
SECTION:
7-8B-1: Discharge of Effluent
7-8B-2: Prohibited Substances
7-8B-3: Restricted Discharges
7-8B-4: Surface Waters Exception
7-8B-5: Grease Traps and Interceptors Required
7-8B-6: Powers and Authority of Director
7-8B-7: Special Facilities
7-8B-8: Control Manholes; Industrial Wastes
7-8B-9: Measurements, Test and Analyses
7-8B-1: DISCHARGE OF EFFLUENT:
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any storm water runoff,
surface or ground water, roof runoff or subsurface drainage by a direct or
indirect connection into the sanitary sewer system for any new construction
within the area served by the City. Prohibited subsurface drainage shall
include both interior and exterior foundation drains into the sanitary sewer
system. No contributor shall discharge or cause to be discharged any cooling
water or unpolluted industrial process water into any sanitary sewer. (1985
Code §3-3.0201)
7-8B-2: PROHIBITED SUBSTANCES:
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the following
described waters or wastes to any public sewers:
A.   Flammable or Explosive Material: Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil,
petroleum products or derivatives, mineral oil or other flammable or explosive
liquid, solid or gas.
B.   Toxic or Poisonous Materials: Any waters or wastes containing toxic or
poisonous solids, liquids or gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by
interaction with other wastes, to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment
process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, create a public nuisance, or
create any hazard in the receiving waters of the sewage treatment plant,
including but not limited to cyanides in excess of two (2) mg/l as CN in the
wastes as discharged to the public sewer.
C.   Corrosive Wastes: Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than five and
five-tenths (5.5) or having any other corrosive property capable of causing
damage or hazard to structures, equipment, and personnel of the sewage works.
Free acids and alkalis of such wastes must be neutralized to within the range
of pH between five and five-tenths (5.5) and nine and five-tenths (9.5).
D.   Solid or Viscous Substances: Solid or viscous substances in quantities or
of such size capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers, or other
interference with the proper operation of the sewage works such as, but not
limited to, ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags,
feathers, tar, plastics, wood, unground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure,
hair and fleshings, entrails, beer or distillery slops, chemical residues,
paint or ink residues, culinary wastes, tannery wastes, bulk solids and paper
dishes, cups, mild containers, etc., either whole or ground by garbage
grinders.
E.   Excessive BOD, Solids or Flow: Any waters or wastes having 1) a five (5)
day BOD greater than three hundred (300) parts per million by weight, or 2)
containing more than three hundred fifty (350) parts per million by weight of
suspended solids, or 3) having an average daily flow greater than two percent
(2%) of the average sewage flow of the City, shall be subject to the review of
the Director. Where necessary in the opinion of the Director, the owner shall
provide, at his expense, such preliminary treatment as may be necessary to 1)
reduce the biochemical oxygen demand to three hundred (300) parts per million
by weight, or 2) reduce the suspended solids to three hundred fifty (350) parts
per million by weight, or 3) control the quantities and rates of discharge of
such waters or wastes. Plans, specifications, and any other pertinent
information relating to proposed preliminary treatment facilities shall be
submitted for the approval of the Director and no construction of such
facilities shall be commenced until said approvals are obtained in writing.
(1985 Code §3-3.0203; 1993 Code)
7-8B-3: RESTRICTED DISCHARGES:
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged the following described
substances, materials, waters or wastes if it appears likely in the opinion of
the Director that such wastes can harm either the sewers, sewage treatment
process, or equipment, have an adverse effect on the receiving stream or can
otherwise endanger life, limb, public property, or constitute a nuisance. In
forming its opinion as to the acceptability of these wastes, the Director will
give consideration to such factors as the quantities of subject wastes in
relation to flows and velocities in the sewers, materials of construction of
the sewers, nature of the sewage treatment process, capacity of the sewage
treatment plant, degree of treatability of wastes in the sewage treatment
plant, and other pertinent factors. The substances prohibited are:
A.   High Temperature: Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than one
hundred fifty degrees (150o) Fahrenheit (65o centigrade).
B.   Fat, Oil, Grease: Any water or waste containing fats, wax, grease or oils,
whether emulsified or not, in excess of one hundred (100) mg/l or six hundred
(600) mg/l of dispersed or other soluble matter.
C.   Viscous Substances: Water or wastes containing substances which may
solidify or become viscous at temperatures between thirty two degrees and one
hundred fifty degrees (32o - 150o) Fahrenheit (0o and 65o centigrade).
D.   Garbage: Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. The installation
and operation of any garbage grinder equipped with a motor of three-fourths (3/
4) horsepower (0.76 hp metric) or greater shall be subject to the review and
approval of the Director.
E.   Acids: Any waters or wastes containing strong acid iron pickling wastes,
or concentrated plating solution whether neutralized or not.
F.   Toxic or Objectionable Wastes: Any waters or wastes containing iron,
chromium, copper, zinc, and similar objectionable or toxic substances; or
wastes exerting an excessive chlorine requirement, to such degree that any such
material received in the composite sewage at the sewage treatment works exceeds
the limits established by the Director for such materials.
G.   Toxic or Poisonous Wastes: Any water or wastes containing a toxic or
poisonous substance or of high chlorine demand in sufficient quantity to injure
or interfere with any sewage treatment process, constitute a hazard to animals
or humans, or create any hazard in the receiving waters of the effluent of the
sewage treatment plant. Materials such as copper, zinc, chromium, or similar
toxic substances shall be limited to the following average quantities in the
sewage as it arrives at the treatment plant and at no time shall the hourly
concentration at the sewage treatment plant exceed three (3) times the average
concentration.
 
Iron as Fe                  15 parts per million
Chromium as Cr (hexavalent) 5 parts per million
Copper as Cu                3 parts per million
Zinc as Zn                  2 parts per million
Chlorine demand             30 parts per million
 
H.   Odor or Taste: Any waters or wastes containing phenols or other taste or
odor producing substances, in such concentrations exceeding limits which may be
established by the Director as necessary, after treatment of the composite
sewage, to meet the requirements of State, Federal, or other public agencies or
jurisdiction for such discharge to the receiving waters.
I.   Radioactive Wastes. Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life
or concentration as may exceed limits established by the Director in compliance
with applicable State or Federal regulations.
J.   Excess Acidity: Any waters or wastes having a pH in excess of nine and
five-tenths (9.5). Free acids and alkalis of such wastes must be neutralized to
within the range of pH between five and five-tenths (5.5) and nine and nine-
tenths (9.5).
K.   Unusual Wastes: Materials which exert or cause:
1.   Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids (such as, but not limited
to, fuller's earth, lime slurries, and lime residues) or of dissolved solids
(such as, but not limited to, sodium chloride and sodium sulfate).
2.   Excessive discoloration (such as, but not limited to dye wastes and
vegetable tanning solutions).
3.   Unusual BOD, chemical oxygen demand, or chlorine requirements in such
quantities as to constitute a significant load on the sewage treatment works.
4.   Unusual volume of flow or concentration of wastes constituting "slugs" as
defined herein.
L.   Noxious or Malodorous Gases: Any noxious or malodorous gas or other
substance which either singly or by interaction with other wastes is capable of
creating a public nuisance or hazard to life or of preventing entry into sewers
for their maintenance and repair.
M.   Damaging Substances: Any waters, wastes, materials or substances which
react with water or wastes in the sewer system to release noxious gases,
develop color of undesirable intensity, form suspended solids in objectionable
concentration or create any other condition deleterious to structures and
treatment processes.
N.   Untreatable Wastes: Waters or wastes containing substances which are not
amenable to treatment or reduction by the sewage treatment processes employed,
or are amenable to treatment only to such degree that the sewage treatment
plant effluent cannot meet the requirements of other agencies having
jurisdiction over discharge to the receiving waters. (1985 Code §3-3.0204; 1993
Code)
7-8B-4: SURFACE WATERS EXCEPTION:
Special permits for discharging surface waters to a public sanitary sewer may
be issued by the Council upon recommendation of the Director where such
discharge is deemed necessary or advisable for purposes of flushing, but any
permit so issued shall be subject to revocation at any time when deemed to the
best interests of the sewer system. (1985 Code §3-3.0202; 1993 Code)
7-8B-5: GREASE TRAPS AND INTERCEPTORS REQUIRED:
Grease traps and oil/sand interceptors shall be provided for the proper
handling of liquid waste containing grease, flammable wastes, sand, solids,
acid or alkaline substances or other ingredients harmful to the building
drainage system, the public or private sewer or to public or private sewage
disposal as provided by the City Plumbing Code.1. See Title 8, Chapter 2,
Article C of this Code.1
A.   Design and Location: All grease traps and oil/sand interceptors shall be
of a type and capacity as provided by the City Plumbing Code, and shall be
located so as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection.
B.   Maintenance: All grease traps and oil/sand interceptors shall be
maintained by the owner at his expense in a continuously efficient manner at
all times.
C.   Liability Imposed: Any person violating any of the provisions of this
Section shall become liable to the City for any expense, loss or damage
occasioned by the City by reason of such violation. (Ord. 855, 7-11-88)
7-8B-6: POWERS AND AUTHORITY OF DIRECTOR:
If any waters or wastes are discharged, or are proposed to be discharged to the
public sewers, which waters contain the substances or possess the
characteristics enumerated in Section
7-8B-3 of this Article, and which in the judgment of the Director may have a
deleterious effect upon the sewage works, processes, equipment, or receiving
waters, or which otherwise create a hazard to life or constitute a public
nuisance, the Director may:
A.   Rejection: Reject the wastes;
B.   Pretreatment: Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for
discharge to the public sewers;
C.   Controls Imposed: Require control over the quantities and rates of
discharge; and/or
D.   Special Charges: Require payment to cover the added cost of handling and
treating the wastes not covered by existing taxes or sewer charged under the
provisions of Article 8C of this Title. (1985 Code §3-3.0205; 1993 Code)
7-8B-7: SPECIAL FACILITIES:
If the Director permits the pretreatment or equalization of waste flows, the
design and installation of the plants and equipment shall be subject to the
review and approval of the Director and subject to the requirements of all
applicable codes, ordinances and laws. Where preliminary treatment or flow-
equalizing facilities are provided for any waters or wastes, they shall be
maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operation by the owner at
his expense. (1985 Code §3-3.0206; 1993 Code)
7-8B-8: CONTROL MANHOLES; INDUSTRIAL WASTES:
When required by the Director, the owner of any property serviced by a building
sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable control manhole
together with such necessary meters and other appurtenances in the building
sewer to facilitate observation, sampling, and measurement of the wastes. Such
manhole, when required, shall be accessibly and safely located, and shall be
constructed in accordance with plans approved by the Director. The manhole
shall be installed by the owner at his expense, and shall be maintained by him
so as to be safe and accessible at all times. (1985 Code §3-3.0207; 1993 Code)
7-8B-9: MEASUREMENTS, TESTS AND ANALYSES:
All measurements, tests, and analyses of the characteristics of waters and
wastes to which reference is made in this Chapter shall be determined in
accordance with the latest edition of "Standard Methods of the Examination of
Water and Wastewater", published by the American Public Health Association, and
shall be determined at the control manhole provided, or upon suitable samples
taken at said control manhole. In the event that no special manhole has been
required, the control manhole shall be considered to be the nearest downstream
manhole in the public sewer to the point at which the building sewer is
connected. Sampling shall be carried out by customarily accepted methods to
reflect the effect of constituents upon the sewage works and to determine the
existence of hazards to life, limb and property. The particular analyses
involved will determine whether a twenty four (24) hour composite of all
outfalls of a premises is appropriate or whether a grab sample or samples
should be taken. Normally, but not always, BOD and suspended solids analyses
are obtained from twenty four (24) hour composites of all outfalls whereas pH's
are determined from periodic grab samples. (1985 Code §3-3.0208)
ARTICLE C. SANITARY SEWER SERVICE CHARGES
SECTION:
7-8C-1: Charges Required
7-8C-2: Availability Charge
7-8C-3: Basic Rate
7-8C-4: Surcharge Rate
7-8C-5: Private Water Systems
7-8C-6: Payment Of Bills
7-8C-7: Liability
7-8C-8: Lien For Nonpayment
7-8C-9: Special Agreements Permitted
7-8C-10: Annual Revision Of Rates
7-8C-11: Sewer Capital Charge
7-8C-12: Charges For Residential Plats
7-8C-13: Building Charges
7-8C-14: Connection Fee Districts
7-8C-14-1: Grand Avenue West Sanitary Sewer Connection Fee District
7-8C-14-2: South Service Area Sanitary Sewer Connection Fee District
7-8C-14-3: Quail Park/Thornwood Sanitary Sewer Connection Fee District
7-8C-14-4: Raccoon River Basin Sanitary Sewer Connection Fee District
7-8C-14-5: Middle Creek Sanitary Sewer Connection Fee District
7-8C-14-6: Ashworth Road Low Pressure Sanitary Sewer Connection Fee District
7-8C-14-7: South Sixtieth Street Sanitary Sewer Connection Fee District
7-8C-14-8: Dixie Acres Sanitary Sewer Connection Fee District
7-8C-1: CHARGES REQUIRED:
Every contributor whose premises is serviced by a connection with the sanitary
sewer system of the City, either directly or indirectly, shall pay to the City,
rents, rates or charges as hereinafter established.
Funds derived from such charges shall be credited to a separate Sewer Revenue
Enterprise Fund to be expended for sewer maintenance, rehabilitation and
expansion projects which may incorporate the West Des Moines system, such
portions of the ICA system (including plant) as West Des Moines may participate
in and/or for which West Des Moines may be charged, and for the purpose of
retiring principal and interest on bond issues, warrants and pledge orders
issued in connection therewith. (Ord. 965, 8-19-1991)
7-8C-2: AVAILABILITY CHARGE:
Each contributor whose premises is serviced by a connection with the sanitary
sewer system of the City shall pay to the City, through its collection agent,
West Des Moines Water Works, at the same time as payment for water service, a
monthly sanitary sewer availability charge as follows:
 
$3.40 effective July 1, 2017
3.50 effective July 1, 2018
3.59 effective July 1, 2019
3.68 effective July 1, 2020
3.77 effective July 1, 2021
 
with the above noted charges being made on all bills mailed by West Des Moines
Water Works on and after the effective date noted herein.
Any connection to the system occurring before the fifteenth of any month shall
be treated as an entire month for the purpose of charges levied herein. Any
connection occurring on or after the fifteenth of any month, up to and
including the last day of any calendar month, shall be prorated and charged as
one- half (1/2) month for purposes of this article. Any termination of service
occurring before the fifteenth of any month shall be prorated and charged as
one-half (1/2) month for purposes of this article. Any termination of service
occurring on or after the fifteenth of any calendar month shall be treated as
an entire month for the purpose of charges levied herein. No charges shall be
prorated in any increment of less than one- half (1/2) month. (Ord. 2273, 1-22-
2018, eff. 7-1-2018)
7-8C-3: BASIC RATE:
Each contributor whose property lies within the corporate limits of the City
shall pay to the City, through its collection agent, West Des Moines Water
Works, at the same time as payment for water service, a sanitary sewer service
charge computed on water consumption, which charge shall be made at the
following rate:
Rate Per      Effective
1,000 Gallons
Rate Per      Effective
1,000 Gallons
              
6.67          October 1, 2024
7.00          July 1, 2025
7.35          July 1, 2026
7.72          July 1, 2027
8.10          July 1, 2028
8.51          July1, 2029
 
with the above noted charges being made on all bills mailed by West Des Moines
Water Works on and after the effective date noted herein. (Ord. 2273, 1-22-
2018, eff. 7-1-2018; amd. Ord. 2630, 9-3-2024)
7-8C-4: SURCHARGE RATE:
The foregoing rate shall apply if the sewage meets the standard domestic and
commercial sewage as follows:
Suspended solids: Not to exceed four hundred (400) ppm.
Biochemical oxygen demand: Not to exceed four hundred (400) ppm.
If sewage is contributed which does not meet the above standards, there will be
a surcharge where suspended solids and BOD are in excess of four hundred (400)
ppm. The surcharge shall be computed at the rate of ten and one-half cents
($0.105) per one thousand (1,000) gallons of such sewage contributed. (Ord.
965, 8-19-1991; amd. Ord. 1613, 11-8-2004)
7-8C-5: PRIVATE WATER SYSTEMS:
Contributors whose premises is served by a private water system shall pay
sanitary sewer service charges based upon the water used as determined by the
general manager of the West Des Moines Water Works either by an estimate agreed
to by the contributor or by metering the water system at the contributor's
expense. (Ord. 965, 8-19-1991; amd. Ord. 1613, 11-8-2004)
7-8C-6: PAYMENT OF BILLS:
A.   All service charges shall be due and payable under the same terms and
conditions provided for payment for water service from the West Des Moines
Water Works, except that the provision of section
7-8C-8 of this article shall be used to enforce collection of delinquent
sanitary sewer service charges. Questions concerning sanitary service charges
shall, to the extent possible, be handled administratively by staff members of
West Des Moines waterworks and the city who have oversight responsibility for
such charges.
B.   A sanitary sewer service charge credit, equal to the cost of service as
set forth in section
7-8C-3 of this article, may be granted to the owner or tenant of any property
taxed as residential, when water consumption is in excess of ten thousand
(10,000) gallons per regular billing period of the West Des Moines waterworks.
1.   For newly constructed residences for which an occupancy permit has been
granted during the current calendar year, the credit period shall begin with
the regular billing period during which water consumption exceeds ten thousand
(10,000) gallons.
2.   For preexisting residences, the credit period shall begin with the regular
billing period during which an application for such credit is approved, as set
forth below.
3.   Credit periods shall end on the day when a water meter reading for a
regular billing period is obtained, or scheduled to be obtained, in December of
the same calendar year.
4.   No credit shall be granted when water consumption is less than ten
thousand (10,000) gallons during a regular billing period.
C.   The sanitary sewer service charge credit, in the amount described above,
may be granted to any owner or tenant of any property taxed as residential, in
accordance with the following procedure:
1.   For newly constructed residences, such credit shall be administratively
granted when water consumption exceeds ten thousand (10,000) gallons per
regular billing period, without further action by the owner or the tenant.
2.   For preexisting residences, written application shall be submitted to the
West Des Moines waterworks by the owner or tenant, setting forth the following
information:
a.   Owner or tenant's name, address and telephone number;
b.   A description of the improvements which occurred in the yard area; and
c.   Area calculations demonstrating that at least fifty one percent (51%) of
the yard area has been replanted or resodded.
3.   A credit may be administratively granted to apply retroactively to the
regular billing period immediately prior to the billing period during which an
application is approved.
D.   The city manager, in his sole discretion, may authorize sanitary sewer
service charge credits in unique situations, on a case by case basis.
E.   Any person aggrieved by any decision regarding the application of this
article may appeal to the mayor and city council, utilizing the appeals
procedure set forth in section
8-2G-9 of this code. (Ord. 1413, 5-30-2000; amd. Ord. 1613, 11-8-2004)
7-8C-7: LIABILITY:
The owner of the premises serviced and the occupant thereof and the user of the
sanitary sewer service shall be jointly and severally liable for the sewer
service provided to said premises. (Ord. 965, 8-19-1991; amd. Ord. 1613, 11-8-
2004)
7-8C-8: LIEN FOR NONPAYMENT:
Each delinquent account which is transmitted to the finance department by the
West Des Moines waterworks shall thereafter be processed for imposition of a
lien upon the contributor's property as provided by section 384.84 of the Iowa
Code, in the amount of the delinquent account, plus a county administrative fee
for each lien certified as provided in section 384.84 of the Iowa Code, plus a
city delinquency fee in the amount of five dollars ($5.00) to recoup the city's
administrative processing costs and lost investment on the unpaid amount. The
lien herein provided shall apply only to that property or those properties for
which the contributor's account is delinquent. (Ord. 1083, 3-28-1994, eff. 7-1-
1994; amd. Ord. 1613, 11-8-2004; Ord. 1878, 8-23-2010, eff. 9-17-2010)
7-8C-9: SPECIAL AGREEMENTS PERMITTED:
No statement in this article shall be construed as preventing a special
agreement, arrangement or contract between the council and any industrial
concern whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character may be
accepted subject to special conditions, rate and cost as established by the
council; provided further, such rates and agreement shall not be in violation
of any law, or any outside contract between the city and any other corporate
entity. (Ord. 965, 8-19-1991; amd. Ord. 1613, 11-8-2004)
7-8C-10: ANNUAL REVISION OF RATES:
The city will review the user charge system at least yearly and revise user
charge rates as necessary to ensure that the system generates adequate revenues
to pay the costs of operation and maintenance (including replacement and debt
service), and that the system continues to provide for the proportional
distribution of operation, maintenance and expansion (including replacement and
debt service) among users and user classes. Liability to pay user charges as
set out above shall not be contingent upon such review or revision, however.
(Ord. 965, 8-19-1991; amd. Ord. 1613, 11-8-2004)
7-8C-11: SEWER CAPITAL CHARGE:
Except as hereinafter noted, every new contributor whose premises or property
is or will be served by a connection with the sewer system of the city, either
directly or indirectly, shall pay to the city charges hereinafter established
and specified for the purpose of contributing for the capital cost of
construction for improvements completed by the wastewater reclamation authority
for the direct benefit of the city, and for interceptor, trunk and collection
system improvements, except for costs funded by a connection fee. (Ord. 1870,
6-1-2010, eff. 9-1-2010)
7-8C-12: CHARGES FOR RESIDENTIAL PLATS:
Each owner of property, which lies within the corporate limits of the city, who
shall file a final plat shall pay to the city, prior to the release of the plat
for recording at the county recorder's office, a sewer capital charge computed
as follows:
For each lot of record located in a residential zoning district which provides
for one detached single-family unit (e.g., single-family house, detached
single-family townhome, or similar detached single-family residential living
unit) per lot of record, the sum of eight hundred fifty five dollars ($855.00)
per residential development lot. The fee shall be adjusted on July 1 of each
calendar year, rounded to the nearest whole dollar, based on a positive change
in the ENR construction cost index for the one year period ending in April of
the calendar year in which the adjustment is made. The finance director shall
determine the applicable connection fees for each established connection fee
district and the development services department shall maintain on file the
fees effective July 1 of each calendar year.
Such charge shall be in addition to those specified in sections
7-8C-3 and
7-8C-4 of this article.
This section shall be applicable to all final plats filed after the effective
date hereof. This section shall also be applicable to all final plats filed
before the effective date hereof unless the public improvements within the plat
are accepted by the city prior to September 1, 1990. (Ord. 1909, 2-22-2011)
7-8C-13: BUILDING CHARGES:
A.   Residential Building Charge: Each applicant for a building permit for a
dwelling unit within the corporate limits of the city, which premises will be
served by a connection with the sanitary sewer system of the city, shall make a
payment to the sewer capital charge as a part of the building permit fee as
follows:
Four hundred eighty four dollars ($484.00) per dwelling unit. The fee shall be
adjusted on July 1 of each calendar year, rounded to the nearest whole dollar,
based on a positive change in the ENR construction cost index for the one year
period ending in April of the calendar year in which the adjustment is made.
The finance director shall determine the applicable connection fees for each
established connection fee district and the development services department
shall maintain on file the fees effective July 1 of each calendar year.
Such a charge shall not be applicable for any lot on which the dwelling unit
would be located which has paid a sewer capital charge as specified in section
7-8C-12 of this article.
This subsection shall not be applicable to remodeling, reconstruction or
additions to existing single-family residential dwelling units, or remodeling
or reconstruction of multiple-family residential dwelling units.
Such charge under this subsection shall be in addition to those specified in
sections
7-8C-3 and
7-8C-4 of this article.
B.   Nonresidential Building Charges: Each applicant for a building permit for
construction of a nonresidential building within the corporate limits of the
city, whose building is served by a connection with the sanitary sewer system
of the city, shall make a payment to the sewer capital charge as a part of the
building permit fee as follows:
Sixteen dollars ten cents ($16.10) per fixture unit connected to the sanitary
sewer system. The fee shall be adjusted on July 1 of each calendar year,
rounded to the nearest five cents ($0.05), based on a positive change in the
ENR construction cost index for the one year period ending in April of the
calendar year in which the adjustment is made. The finance director shall
determine the applicable connection fees for each established connection fee
district and the development services department shall maintain on file the
fees effective July 1 of each calendar year.
For a new building which replaces an existing nonresidential building
demolished within the previous twelve (12) months, the total fixture units
connected will be reduced by the number of fixture units in the demolished
building.
Fixture unit shall be computed from the table on file in the office of the city
clerk.
Such charges shall be in addition to those specified in sections
7-8C-3 and
7-8C-4 of this article.
C.   Nonresidential Building Modification Charge: Each applicant for a building
permit for the remodeling, additions to existing buildings or construction of
additional buildings on the same commercial or industrial site shall pay a
charge as a part of the building permit as specified in subsection B of this
section for the number of fixture units connected to the sanitary sewer system
increased through the remodeling, additions to existing buildings or
construction of additional buildings on the same site.
D.   Connection Of Existing Buildings: Each owner of an existing building which
connects to the sewage system of the city shall pay the sewer capital charge as
specified in subsection A or B of this section. (Ord. 1909, 2-22-2011)
7-8C-14: CONNECTION FEE DISTRICTS:
A.   The city has determined the necessity of establishing a policy and a
procedure to be utilized to recover the cost of designing and constructing
major sanitary sewer facilities in those instances in which a significant
number of the properties to be benefited by such facilities are not
sufficiently developed to permit the recovery of those costs through the
special assessment process as provided in chapter 384, division IV of the Iowa
Code. The city hereby declares its intent to utilize connection fees, as herein
provided, to recover the costs of designing and constructing such major
sanitary sewer facilities from property owners who connect to such facilities
subsequent to their construction.
It is the intent of this section to set forth the method of recovery of
proportional cost shares from those property owners who connect their
properties to major sanitary sewer facilities subsequent to their construction,
so that in the event that all property, other than street and road right of
way, which lies within the benefited district is connected to the major
sanitary sewer facilities during their expected useful life, then those
properties shall bear, in the aggregate, up to one hundred percent (100%) of
the cost of designing and constructing such facilities, including legal and
administrative expenses associated therewith. (Ord. 1337, 11-2-1998; amd. Ord.
1613, 11-8-2004)
B.   The connection fee ordinance may provide, at the city council's
discretion, that single-family residences within the benefited district and
located within the corporate limits of the city are eligible for connection to
the major sanitary sewer facility. The applicable connection fee for a single-
family residence shall be:
1.   That the owners of residences on parcels of less than one acre in size
located within the city may connect such residences to the major sanitary sewer
facility upon approval of their application for connection, payment of the
connection fee for the parcel as determined by the per acre fee multiplied by
the area of the lot of record on which such residence is located and
construction, at the owner's expense, of appropriate connection structures, as
determined necessary by the city engineer.
2.   That the owners of residences on parcels in excess of one acre in size
located within the city may connect such residences to the major sanitary sewer
facility upon approval of their application for connection, designation in
writing of a one acre single residence parcel and a remainder parcel, payment
of the connection fee for the area of the one acre residence parcel, and
construction at the owner's expense, of appropriate connection structures, as
determined necessary by the city engineer. Any future development of said
parcel shall necessitate a revised application for connection and payment of
the appropriate connection fee.
The connection fee ordinance may also provide, at the city council's
discretion, that sanitary sewer service can be provided to recreational and
park facilities in the same manner and under the same procedures as set forth
in this section for single-family residences within the benefited district.
All other property located within the corporate limits of the city and within a
benefited district shall be eligible for connection to the major sanitary sewer
facility upon approval of an application for connection by the owner thereof as
hereafter provided, and payment of the connection fee for such property,
provided such property has been appropriately subdivided for development, and,
where applicable, all sanitary sewer improvements necessary to serve said
property have been constructed, at the owner's expense, and accepted by the
city. The area for payment of the connection fee shall be determined by the
total area subdivided, less the area of any property to be conveyed to the city
as a public park. For buildable lots of record within the subdivision with an
area greater than one acre the fees shall be determined for one acre of each
lot of record. (Ord. 1895, 12-13-2010)
C.   At the public hearing, the owners of property within the proposed
benefited district shall be heard and may offer comments or objections as to:
1.   The necessity for the project;
2.   The calculation of the area benefited by the proposed major sanitary sewer
facilities;
3.   The estimated cost of the proposed facilities; and
4.   The proposed per acre connection fee.
Upon concluding the hearing, the city council shall rule upon the objections
presented during the hearing and may consider the adoption of the proposed
connection fee ordinance. Upon consideration of the proposed connection fee
ordinance, the council may:
1.   Adopt the ordinance as proposed;
2.   Delete elements or portions of the proposed major sanitary sewer
facilities from the proposed project and the properties served thereby from the
benefited district proposed; or
3.   Amend the ordinance to revise the connection fee.
D.   The connection fee ordinance may provide, at the city council's
discretion, that single-family residences within the benefited district, in
existence or under construction upon the effective date of the ordinance, and
located within the corporate limits of the city, are eligible for connection to
the major sanitary sewer facility. In that event, the ordinance shall include
the following provisions:
1.   That the owners of residences on parcels of less than one acre in size
located within the city may connect such residences to the major sanitary sewer
facility upon approval of their application for connection, payment of the
connection fee for the parcel, and construction, at the owner's expense, of
appropriate connection structures, as determined necessary by the city
engineer, and
2.   That the owners of residences on parcels in excess of one acre in size
located within the city may connect such residences to the major sanitary sewer
facility upon approval of their application for connection, subdivision of said
parcel into a single residence parcel and an outlot, payment of the connection
fee for the residence parcel, and construction, at the owner's expense, of
appropriate connection structures, as determined necessary by the city
engineer. Any future development of said parcel shall necessitate a revised
application for connection and payment of the appropriate connection fee.
The connection fee ordinance may also provide, at the city council's
discretion, that sanitary sewer service can be provided to recreational and
park facilities in the same manner and under the same procedures set forth in
this section for single-family residences within the benefited district.
All other property located within the corporate limits of the city and within a
benefited district shall be eligible for connection to the major sanitary sewer
facility upon approval of an application for connection by the owner thereof,
as hereafter provided, and payment of the connection fee for such property,
provided such property has been appropriately subdivided for development, and,
where applicable, all sanitary sewer improvements necessary to serve said
property have been constructed, at the owner's expense, and accepted by the
city.
E.   After adoption, publication and recording by the city clerk in each county
where property in the benefited district is located, of a connection fee
ordinance for a benefited district, all owners of those properties within the
benefited district whose properties are eligible for connection, and who
propose to connect such properties directly or indirectly to the major sanitary
sewer facility, shall make application to the city for such connection. The
submittal of construction plans to the city for sanitary sewer improvements on
property being subdivided for development shall constitute an application to
the city for purposes of this section. The sewer connection fee shall be due
and payable at the time application is made to the city for connection to the
major sanitary sewer facility. No connection shall be made to a major sanitary
sewer facility until such application has been approved and until the required
connection fee has been paid. The sewer connection fee required by this section
shall be paid before the city will approve the final plat of property subject
to the sewer connection fee. (Ord. 1337, 11-2-1998; amd. Ord. 1613, 11-8-2004)
F.   The sewer connection fee shall be in an amount equal to the maximum area
of contiguous property or fraction thereof, within the benefited district under
common ownership which can be lawfully served through such proposed connection,
multiplied by the per acre connection fee established in the connection fee
ordinance for that benefited district subject to the provisions of this section
for determination of the applicable area for calculation of the connection fee.
The connection fee shall be adjusted on July 1 of each calendar year based on
the change in the ENR construction cost index for the one year period ending in
April of the calendar year in which the adjustment is made. The finance
director shall determine the applicable connection fees for each established
connection fee district and the development services department shall maintain
on file the connection fees in each connection fee district effective July 1 of
each calendar year. (Ord. 1895, 12-13-2010)
G.   The sewer connection fee required by this section shall be due and payable
to the city treasurer.
H.   The sewer connection fee required by this section is in addition to, and
not in lieu of, any other fees for connection required under the plumbing code
or other provisions of this code.
I.   In the event any property owner connects his or her property within a
benefited district to a major sanitary sewer facility without having made
application therefor or without having received approval thereof, or without
having paid the required connection fee established by a connection fee
ordinance, the city shall be entitled to disconnect such private sewer
connection until such time as the property owner has made and received approval
of his or her application, and/or has paid the required connection fee. (Ord.
1337, 11-2-1998; amd. Ord. 1613, 11-8-2004)
7-8C-14-1: GRAND AVENUE WEST SANITARY SEWER CONNECTION FEE DISTRICT:
The Grand Avenue West sanitary sewer connection fee district is hereby
established, consisting of a tract of land in sections 9, 10, 13, 14, 15, 16,
17, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 32, 33, 34 and 35, township 78
north, range 26 west of the 5th principal meridian, Dallas County, Iowa, more
particularly described as follows:
Beginning at the point of intersection of the east line of Section 24, Township
78 North, Range 26 West of the 5th Principal Meridian and the north right-of-
way line of Booneville Road;
Thence north along the east line of said Section 24 to the east quarter corner
of said Section 24;
Thence westerly to the southeast corner of the Lot 44 Lakeview Heights, an
official plat in and forming a part of Dallas County, Iowa;
Thence northerly along the east line of said Lot 44 to the northeast corner of
said Lot 44;
Thence westerly along the northerly line of said Lot 44 to the northwest corner
of said Lot 44;
Thence northerly along the westerly line of Lot 51 Lakeview Heights to the
northwest corner of said Lot 51;
Thence northerly along the westerly line of Lot 52 Lakeview Heights to the
northwest corner of said Lot 52;
Thence northerly along the westerly line of Lot 59 Lakeview Heights to the
northwest corner of said Lot 59;
Thence northerly along the westerly line of Lot 60 Lakeview Heights to the
northwest corner of said Lot 60, said point also being located on the southerly
line of the northeast quarter of the northeast quarter of said Section 24;
Thence westerly along the southerly line of the northeast quarter of the
northeast quarter of said Section 24 to the southwest corner of the northeast
quarter of the northeast quarter of said Section 24;
Thence northerly along the westerly line of the northeast quarter of the
northeast quarter of said Section 24 to the southwest corner of Lot 87 Lakeview
Heights;
Thence northerly along the westerly line of Lot 87 to the northwest corner of
said Lot 87 Lakeview Heights, said corner also being the northwest corner of
the northeast quarter of the northeast quarter of said Section 24;
Thence westerly along the northerly line of the northwest quarter of the
northeast quarter of said Section 24 to the north quarter corner of said
Section 24;
Thence northerly along the east line of the southwest quarter of Section 13,
Township 78 North, Range 26 West, to the center of said Section 13;
Thence westerly along the southerly line of the northwest quarter of said
Section 13 to the west 1/4 corner of said Section 13;
Thence westerly along the southerly line of the northeast quarter of Section
14, Township 78 North, Range 26 West to the center of Section 14;
Thence westerly along the southerly line of the northwest quarter of Section 14
to the west quarter corner of Section 14;
Thence northerly along the westerly line of the southwest quarter of the
northwest quarter of Section 14 to the northwest corner of the southwest
quarter of the northwest quarter of Section 14;
Thence westerly along the southerly line of the northeast quarter of the
northeast quarter of Section 15, Township 78 North, Range 26 West to the
southwest corner of the northeast quarter of the northeast quarter of Section
15;
Thence northerly along the westerly line of the northeast quarter of the
northeast quarter of Section 15 to the northwest corner of the northeast
quarter of the northeast quarter of Section 15;
Thence northerly along the westerly line of the southeast quarter of the
southeast quarter of Section 10, Township 78 North, Range 26 West to the
northwest corner of the southeast quarter of the southeast quarter of Section
10;
Thence easterly along the northerly line of the southeast quarter of the
southeast quarter of Section 10 to the northeast corner of the southeast
quarter of the southeast quarter of Section 10;
Thence northerly along the east line of the southeast quarter of Section 10 to
the east quarter corner of Section 10;
Thence northerly along the easterly line of the northeast quarter of Section 10
to the centerline of Wendover Road;
Thence westerly along the centerline of Wendover Road to a point where the
right-of-way of Wendover Road is adjacent to the southerly right-of-way of
Interstate 80;
Thence southwesterly and westerly along the southerly right-of-way line of
Interstate 80 to the point of intersection with the west line of the southeast
quarter of the southwest quarter of Section 9, Township 78 North, Range 26
West;
Thence southerly along the westerly line of the southwest quarter of the
southeast quarter of Section 9 to the southwest corner of the southwest quarter
of the southwest quarter of Section 9;
Thence southerly along the easterly line of the northwest quarter of the
northwest quarter of Section 16, Township 78 North, Range 26 West to the
southeast corner of the northwest quarter of the northwest quarter of Section
16;
Thence westerly along the southerly line of the northwest quarter of the
northwest quarter of Section 16 to the southwest corner of the northwest
quarter of the northwest quarter of Section 16;
Thence westerly along the southerly line of the northeast quarter of the
northeast quarter of Section 17, Township 78 North, Range 26 West to the
southwest quarter of the northeast quarter of the northeast quarter of Section
17;
Thence westerly along the southerly line of the northwest quarter of the
northeast quarter of Section 17 to the southwest corner of the northwest
quarter of the northeast quarter of Section 17;
Thence southerly along the easterly line of the southeast quarter of the
northwest quarter of Section 17 to the southeast corner of the southwest
quarter of the northwest quarter of Section 17, said point being the center of
Section 17;
Thence westerly along the southerly line of the southeast quarter of the
northwest quarter of Section 17 to the southwest corner of the southeast
quarter of the northwest quarter of Section 17;
Thence southerly along the westerly line of the northeast quarter of the
southwest quarter of Section 17 to the southwest corner of the northeast
quarter of the southwest quarter of Section 17;
Thence southerly along the westerly line of the southeast quarter of the
southwest quarter of Section 17 to the southwest corner of the southeast
quarter of the southwest quarter of Section 17;
Thence easterly along the southerly line of the southeast quarter of the
southwest quarter of Section 17 to the southeast corner of the southeast corner
of the southwest quarter of Section 17, said point also being the north quarter
corner of Section 20, Township 78 North, Range 26 West;
Thence southerly along the easterly line of the northwest quarter of Section 20
to the center of Section 20;
Thence westerly along the southerly line of the northwest quarter of Section 20
to the west quarter corner of Section 20;
Thence southerly along the westerly line of Section 20 to the southwest quarter
corner of said Section 20;
Thence southerly along the westerly line of Section 29, Township 78 North,
Range 26 West, to the southwest quarter corner of said Section 29;
Thence southerly along the westerly line of Section 32, Township 78 North,
Range 26 West, to the high water mark on the north bank of the Raccoon River;
Thence easterly along the high water mark on the north bank of the Raccoon
River through said Section 27, 34, 35, 26, 25 and 30, to the west right-of-way
line of Interstate Highway 35;
Thence northerly along the west right-of-way line of Interstate Highway 35 to
the north line of Section 30, Township 78 North, Range 25 West;
Thence west along the south line of Section 19, Township 78, Range 24 West to
the southeast corner of the southwest quarter of said Section 19;
Thence west along the south line of said Section 19 to the southwest corner of
the east 1/2 of the southwest quarter of said Section 19;
Thence north along the west line of the east 1/2 of the southwest quarter of
said Section 19 to a point on the north right-of-way line of Booneville Road;
Thence northwesterly along the north right-of-way line of Booneville Road to
the point of beginning.
Connection fees are hereby established and shall be imposed upon owners of
properties within the Grand Avenue West sanitary sewer connection fee district,
pursuant to ordinance 1337 1. See section 7-8C-14 of this article. 1, at the
time of application to connect their properties to said sewer facilities, as
follows:
A.   Fee Schedule: From the effective date hereof through June 30, 2011, a
connection fee of three thousand six hundred seventy dollars ($3,670.00) per
acre of property served by the sewer facility shall be imposed. Thereafter, the
per acre connection fee shall be annually adjusted as of July 1 of each year
according to section
7-8C-14 of this article.
B.   Fee Outside District: The above established connection fee schedule shall
also apply to any properties outside the Grand Avenue West sanitary sewer
connection fee district which use or derive benefit from any of the sewer
facilities constructed for the Grand Avenue West sanitary sewer connection fee
district. The appropriate fee shall be imposed at the time of determination
that a benefit is derived by the property.
C.   Exception: The above established connection fee schedule shall not apply
to any properties within the Grand Avenue West sanitary sewer connection fee
district which do not use or derive benefit from any sewer facilities
constructed for the Grand Avenue West sanitary sewer connection fee district.
D.   Payment: The determination that a property is to be connected to the sewer
facilities shall occur, and the appropriate connection fee shall be paid, prior
to the time of release of a final plat for recordation, or issuance of a
building or plumbing permit, whichever occurs first.
E.   Park Facility: The owner of any parcel being used as a public or nonprofit
recreational or park facility upon the effective date hereof may apply for
construction upon annexation to the city and payment of a single acre
connection fee. Any future development of said parcel shall necessitate a
revised application for connection and payment of the appropriate connection
fee.
F.   Community College: Any parcel for which a proposal of development as a
community college campus is under consideration by the city council at the time
of the effective date hereof shall be exempt from payment of any connection fee
to serve the college facilities.
G.   Effect Of Schedule: The above established connection fee schedule shall
remain in force and effect until such time that the city council adopts an
ordinance to adjust the connection fees to be imposed within subsequent years
for the Grand Avenue West sanitary sewer connection fee district. Nothing
herein is intended to restrict the city council from appropriate adjustment of
the connection fee schedule to reflect future construction costs.
H.   Sewers Constructed: The city shall be responsible to design and construct
sewers within the Grand Avenue West sanitary sewer connection fee district as
graphically depicted on exhibit B attached to the ordinance codified herein and
on file in the office of the city clerk. Other sanitary sewers required to
provide sewer service to the Grand Avenue West sanitary sewer connection fee
district shall not be the responsibility of the city to design and construct
under the provisions of the Grand Avenue West sanitary sewer connection fee
district. (Ord. 1891, 11-29-2010, eff. 1-1-2011)
7-8C-14-2: SOUTH SERVICE AREA SANITARY SEWER CONNECTION FEE DISTRICT:
The South Service Area sanitary sewer connection fee district is hereby
established, consisting of a tract of land in sections 14, 21, 22, 23, 26, 27,
28, 29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34 and 35, township 78 north, range 25 west of the
fifth principal meridian, Polk County, Iowa, and sections 4, 5 and 6, township
77 north, range 25 west of the fifth principal meridian, Warren County, Iowa,
more particularly described as follows:
Beginning at the northeast corner of the northwest quarter of section 26,
township 78 north, range 25 west of the fifth principal meridian;
Thence south, along the east line of the northwest quarter of said section 26,
to the center of said section 26;
Thence south, along the east line of the southwest quarter of said section 26,
to the northwest corner of the northeast quarter of said section 35;
Thence east, along the north line of said section 35, to the northeast corner
of the northwest quarter of the northeast quarter of said section 35;
Thence south, along the east line of the west half of the northeast quarter of
said section 35, to the southeast corner of the southwest quarter of the
northeast quarter of said section 35;
Thence south, along the east line of the west half of the southeast quarter of
said section 35, to the southeast corner of the southwest quarter of the
southeast quarter of said section 35;
Thence west, along the south line of said section 35, to the southeast corner
of said section 34;
Thence west along the south line of said section 34, to the northeast corner of
section 4, township 77 north, range 25 west of the fifth principal meridian;
Thence south along the east line of said section 4 to the east quarter corner
of said section 4;
Thence south along the east line of the southeast quarter of said section 4 to
the southeast corner of the north one-half of the north one-half of the
southeast quarter of said section 4;
Thence west along the south line of the north one-half of the north one-half of
the southeast quarter of said section 4 to the southwest corner of the north
one-half of the north one-half of the southeast quarter of said section 4;
Thence west along the south line of the north one-half of the north one-half of
the southwest quarter of said section 4 to the southwest corner of the north
one-half of the north one-half of the southwest quarter of said section 4;
Thence north along the west line of the southwest quarter of said section 4 to
the west quarter corner of said section 4;
Thence west along the north line of the southeast quarter of section 5,
township 77 north, range 25 west of the fifth principal meridian to the
northwest quarter of the northeast quarter of the northeast quarter of the
southeast quarter to said section 5;
Thence south along the west line of the northeast quarter of the northeast
quarter of the southeast quarter of said section 5 to the southwest corner of
the northeast quarter of the northeast quarter of the southeast quarter of said
section 5;
Thence west along the south line of the north one-half of the north one-half of
the southeast quarter of said section 5 to the southwest corner of the north
one-half of the north one-half of the southeast quarter of said section 5;
Thence west along the south line of the northeast quarter of the northeast
quarter of the southwest quarter of said section 5 to the southwest corner of
the northeast quarter of the northeast quarter of the southwest quarter of said
section 5;
Thence south along the east line of the southwest quarter of the northeast
quarter of the southwest quarter of said section 5 to the southeast corner of
the southwest quarter of the northeast quarter of the southwest quarter of said
section 5;
Thence west along the south line of the northeast quarter of the southwest
quarter of said section 5 to the southwest corner of the northeast quarter of
the southwest quarter of said section 5;
Thence west along the south line of the northwest quarter of the southwest
quarter of said section 5 to the southwest corner of the northwest quarter of
the southwest quarter of said section 5;
Thence west along the south line of the north half of the southeast quarter of
section 6, township 77 north, range 25 west of the fifth principal meridian to
a point on the east right-of-way line of Interstate Highway 35;
Thence north along the easterly right-of-way line of Interstate 35; through
said sections 61, 31 and 30 to the high water mark on the south bank of the
Raccoon River;
Thence easterly along the high water mark of the south bank of the Raccoon
River, through said sections 30, 29, 28, 21, 22, 23 and 14, to the east line of
the southwest quarter of said section 14;
Thence south along the east line of the southwest quarter of said section 14,
to the northeast corner of the northwest quarter of said section 23;
Thence south along the east line of the northwest quarter of said section 23,
to the center of said section 23;
Thence south along the east line of the southwest quarter of said section 23,
to the point of beginning.
Connection fees are hereby established and shall be imposed upon owners of
properties within the South Service Area sanitary sewer connection fee
district, pursuant to ordinance 1337 1. See section 7-8C-14 of this article. 1,
at the time of application to connect their properties to said sewer
facilities, as follows:
A.   Fee Schedule: From the effective date hereof through June 30, 2011, a
connection fee of five thousand two hundred sixty dollars ($5,260.00) per acre
of property served by the sewer facility shall be imposed. Thereafter, the per
acre connection fee shall be annually adjusted as of July 1 of each year
according to section
7-8C-14 of this article.
B.   Fee Outside District: The above established connection fee schedule shall
also apply to any properties outside the South Service Area sanitary sewer
connection fee district which use or derive benefit from any of the sewer
facilities constructed for the South Service Area sanitary sewer connection fee
district. The appropriate fee shall be imposed at the time of determination
that a benefit is derived by the property.
C.   Exception: The above established connection fee schedule shall not apply
to any properties within the South Service Area sanitary sewer connection fee
district which do not use or derive benefit from any sewer facilities
constructed for the South Service Area sanitary sewer connection fee district.
D.   Payment: The determination that a property is to be connected to the sewer
facilities shall occur, and the appropriate connection fee shall be paid, prior
to the time of release of a final plat for recordation, or issuance of a
building or plumbing permit, whichever occurs first.
E.   Park Facility: The owner of any parcel being used as a public or nonprofit
recreational or park facility upon the effective date hereof may apply for
construction upon annexation to the city and payment of a single acre
connection fee. Any future development of said parcel shall necessitate a
revised application for connection and payment of the appropriate connection
fee.
F.   Effect Of Schedule: The above established connection fee schedule shall
remain in force and effect until such time that the city council adopts an
ordinance to adjust the connection fees to be imposed within subsequent years
for the South Service Area sanitary sewer connection fee district. Nothing
herein is intended to restrict the city council from appropriate adjustment of
the connection fee schedule to reflect future construction costs.
G.   Sewers Constructed: The city shall be responsible to design and construct
sewers within the South Service Area sanitary sewer connection fee district as
graphically depicted on exhibit B attached to the ordinance codified herein and
on file in the office of the city clerk. Other sanitary sewers required to
provide sewer service to the South Service Area sanitary sewer connection fee
district shall not be the responsibility of the city to design and construct
under the provisions of the South Service Area sanitary sewer connection fee
district. (Ord. 1890, 11-29-2010, eff. 1-1-2011)
7-8C-14-3: QUAIL PARK/THORNWOOD SANITARY SEWER CONNECTION FEE DISTRICT:
The Quail Park/Thornwood sanitary sewer connection fee district is hereby
established consisting of a tract of land located in sections 20 and 21,
township 78 north, range 25 west of the 5th principal meridian, Polk County,
Iowa, more particularly described as follows:
Beginning at a point on the east line of the northeast quarter of Section 20,
Township 78 North, Range 25 West of the 5th Principal Meridian with said point
being located a distance of 600 feet north of the east quarter corner of said
Section 20;
Thence west along a line parallel to and 600 feet north of the south line of
the northeast quarter of said Section 20 to a point on the west line of the
east one-half of the northeast quarter of said Section 20;
Thence south along the west line of the east one-half of the northeast quarter
of said Section 20 to the southwest corner of the east one-half of the
northeast quarter of said Section 20, said point being the northeast corner of
Lot 28, Quail Park Plat 1;
Thence west along the north line of said Lot 28 to the northwest corner of said
Lot 28;
Thence west along the north line of Lot 29, Quail Park Plat 1 to the northwest
corner of said Lot 29;
Thence west along the north line of Lot 30, Quail Park Plat 1 to the northwest
corner of said Lot 30;
Thence west along the north line of Lot 31, Quail Park Plat 1 to the northwest
corner of said Lot 31;
Thence west along the north line of Lot 32, Quail Park Plat 1 to the northwest
corner of said Lot 32;
Thence southerly along the westerly line of said Lot 32 to the southwest corner
of said Lot 32;
Thence southerly along an extension of the westerly line of said Lot 32 across
the right-of-way of Timberwood Drive to a point on the south line of the right-
of-way of Timberwood Drive;
Thence easterly along the southerly right-of-way line of Timberwood Drive to
the northwest corner of Lot 24, Quail Park Plat 1;
Thence southerly along the westerly line of said Lot 24 to the southwest corner
of said Lot 24;
Thence east along the south line of said Lot 24 to the southeast corner of said
Lot 24;
Thence south along the west line of Lot 25, Quail Park Plat 1 to the southwest
corner of said Lot 25;
Thence east along the south line of said Lot 25 to the southeast corner of said
Lot 25;
Thence east along the south line of Lot 26, Quail Park Plat 1 to the southeast
corner of said Lot 26;
Thence east along the south line of Lot 27, Quail Park Plat 1 to the southeast
corner of said Lot 27;
Thence south along the west line of Lot 6, Thornwood to the southwest corner of
said Lot 6;
Thence south along the west line of Lot 5, Thornwood to the southwest corner of
said Lot 5;
Thence south along the west line of Lot 4, Thornwood to the southwest corner of
said Lot 4;
Thence south along the west line of Lot 3, Thornwood to the southwest corner of
said Lot 3;
Thence south along the west line of Lot 2, Thornwood to the southwest corner of
said Lot 2;
Thence south along the west line of Lot 1, Thornwood to the southwest corner of
said Lot 1, said point being located on the north right-of-way line of Grand
Avenue;
Thence easterly along the northerly right-of-way of Grand Avenue to the point
of intersection with the westerly right-of-way line of South 35th Street;
Thence northerly along the westerly right-of-way line of said South 35th Street
to a point 600 feet north of the south line of the northwest quarter of Section
21, Township 78 North, Range 25 West of the 5th Principal Meridian;
Thence west along a line parallel to and 600 feet north of the south line of
the northwest quarter of said Section 21, to the point of beginning.
Connection fees are hereby established and shall be imposed upon owners of
properties within the Quail Park/Thornwood sanitary sewer connection fee
district, pursuant to ordinance 1337 1. See section 7-8C-14 of this article. 1,
at the time of application to connect their properties to said sewer
facilities, as follows: (Ord. 1882, 10-4-2010, eff. 10-8-2010)
A.   Fee Schedule: From the effective date hereof through June 30, 2012, the
connection fee for properties served by the sewer facility shall be:
 
Category Connection Fee (Dollars Per Residential Dwelling Unit)
1        $10,576.00
2        16,833.00
3        13,468.00
 
Thereafter, the above noted connection fees shall be annually adjusted as of
July 1 of each year according to section
7-8C-14 of this article.
Category 1 shall consist of single-family residences served by a dry sanitary
sewer located adjacent to the residential lot.
Category 2 shall consist of single-family residences in the Thornwood
Subdivision and unplatted lots located on the west side of South 35th Street
bounded on the west, north and south by the Thornwood Subdivision.
Category 3 shall consist of all other residences in the connection fee district
not classified as category 1 or category 2. (Ord. 1928, 8-8-2011)
B.   Exception: The above established connection fee schedule shall not apply
to any properties within the Quail Park/Thornwood Sanitary Sewer Connection Fee
District which do not use or derive benefit from any sewer facilities
constructed for the Quail Park/Thornwood Sanitary Sewer Connection Fee
District.
C.   Payment: The determination that a property is to be connected to the sewer
facilities shall occur, and the appropriate connection fee shall be paid, prior
to the time of release of a final plat for recordation, or issuance of a
building or plumbing permit, whichever occurs first.
D.   Single-Family Residence: The connection fee shall be based on each single-
family residential dwelling unit. The fee paid shall be applicable only to that
single-family residential unit. Any division of an existing property that
results in the creation of additional single-family lots or the construction of
additional single-family residences shall subject such additional lots or
residences to the payment of the appropriate connection fee.
E.   Effect Of Schedule: The above established connection fee schedule shall
remain in force and effect until such time that the City Council adopts an
ordinance to adjust the connection fees to be imposed within subsequent years
for the Quail Park/Thornwood Sanitary Sewer Connection Fee District. Nothing
herein is intended to restrict the City Council from appropriate adjustment of
the connection fee schedule to reflect future construction costs.
F.   Sewers Constructed: The City shall be responsible to design and construct
sewers within the Quail Park/Thornwood Sanitary Sewer Connection Fee District
as graphically depicted on exhibit B attached to the ordinance codified herein
and on file in the Office of the City Clerk. Other sanitary sewers required to
provide sewer service to the Quail Park/Thornwood Sanitary Sewer Connection Fee
District shall not be the responsibility of the City to design and construct
under the provisions of the Quail Park/Thornwood Sanitary Sewer Connection Fee
District. (Ord. 1882, 10-4-2010, eff. 10-8-2010)
G.   Pressured System Grinder Pump Service:
1.   The City shall maintain, repair, and replace privately- owned sanitary
sewer pressure system grinder pumps and controls installed within the Quail
Park/Thornwood Sanitary Sewer Connection Fee District and located on private
property ("premises"). "Maintain" includes examination and diagnosis if there
is a reported problem regarding the grinder pump and controls. "Maintain" does
not include regular inspection or service of the grinder pump and controls.
2.   Property owners installing a sanitary sewer pressure system grinder pump
shall use a contractor approved by the City to supply and install the system
grinder pump.
3.   Property owners who have installed a sanitary sewer pressure system
grinder pump shall allow the City and its contractor right of entry and
reasonable access onto the premises for purposes of maintaining, repairing, and
replacing the grinder pump and controls. Said right of entry and access shall
run with the land and be binding upon the property owners, as well as their
successors and assigns, all upon the terms and conditions set forth herein.
4.   The property owners are responsible for the operation of the grinder pump
and controls. The property owners are also responsible for installing,
repairing, and replacing service lines from the residence to the grinder pump
station, the service lines from the grinder pump station to the City's low
pressure sewer system in the public right-of-way, including isolation valves
and backflow prevention devices, and for the electrical service from the
residence to the grinder pump station.
5.   The City is not responsible for any damage to the premises related to
sewer backups, damaged service lines, including isolation valves and backflow
prevention devices, or related to faulty electrical service. The City is solely
responsible for the maintenance, repair, and replacement of the sanitary sewer
pressure system grinder pump and controls. The City is also not responsible for
the cost of any damage, repair, or replacement caused to the grinder pump
attributable to the property owner's negligent, reckless, or intentional
actions. "Attributable to the property owner" includes all residents and guests
of the property owner. The City is further not responsible for any cost
associated with grinder pump services provided by other entities or persons if
the property owner has elected to retain his or her own contractor to perform
these services.
6.   If it has been determined that unsuitable debris has been placed into the
grinder pump sanitary sewer system, the property owner shall be assessed all
costs associated with such repair or replacement. "Unsuitable debris" shall
include, but not be limited to:
a.   Grease, oil, gasoline, flammable material, paint, or strong chemicals.
b.   Metal, bones, or plastic.
c.   Abrasive materials, including, without limitation, sand, rocks, cat
litter, glass, seafood shells, or goldfish stone.
d.   Feminine hygiene products, personal cleaning wipes, diapers, socks, rags,
or cloth.
e.   Stormwater.
7.   Property owners shall not place any structures, landscaping materials,
plant materials, or change the grade of the premises in any way, that would
adversely affect access to the grinder pump sanitary sewer system. Property
owners shall timely disclose any conditions on the premises that would restrict
the City's or its contractor's ability to maintain, repair, or replace the
grinder pumps and controls. (Ord. 2236, 7-24-2017)
7-8C-14-4: RACCOON RIVER BASIN SANITARY SEWER CONNECTION FEE DISTRICT:
The Raccoon River Basin Sanitary Sewer Connection Fee District is hereby
established consisting of a tract of land located in sections 30 and 31,
township 78 north, range 25 west of the 5th principal meridian, Polk County,
Iowa, sections 25, 26, 27, 28, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35 and 36, township 78
north, range 26 west of the 5th principal meridian, Dallas County, Iowa,
section 6, township 77 north, range 25 west of the 5th principal meridian,
Warren County, Iowa, and sections 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 and 6, township 77 north, range
26 west of the 5th principal meridian, Madison County, Iowa, more particularly
described as follows:
Commencing at the point of intersection of the high water mark on the south
bank of the Raccoon River and the westerly right-of-way line of Interstate
Highway 35; thence southerly along the westerly right-of-way line of Interstate
Highway 35 to a point on the south line of the north one-half of the north one-
half of the southwest quarter, Section 6, Township 77 North, Range 25 West;
Thence west along the south line of the north one-half of the southwest quarter
of said Section 6 to a point on the west line of said Section 6;
Thence westerly along the south line of the north one-half of the southeast
quarter of Section 1, Township 77 North, Range 26 West to a point on the west
line of the southeast quarter of said Section 1;
Thence westerly along the south line of the north one-half of the southwest
quarter of said Section 1 to a point on the west line of said Section 1;
Thence westerly along the south line of the north one-half of the southeast
quarter of Section 2, Township 77 North, Range 26 West to a point on the west
line of the southeast quarter of said Section 2;
Thence westerly along the south line of the north one-half of the southwest
quarter of said Section 2 to a point on the west line of said Section 2;
Thence westerly along the south line of the north one-half of the southeast
quarter of Section 3, Township 77 North, Range 26 West to a point on the west
line of the southeast quarter of said Section 3;
Thence westerly along the south line of the north one-half of the southwest
quarter of said Section 3 to a point on the west line of said Section 3;
Thence westerly along the south line of the north one-half of the southeast
quarter of Section 4, Township 77 North, Range 26 West to a point on the west
line of the southeast quarter of said Section 4;
Thence westerly along the south line of the north one-half of the southwest
quarter of said Section 4 to a point on the west line of said Section 4;
Thence westerly along the south line of the north one-half of the southeast
quarter of Section 5, Township 77 North, Range 26 West to a point on the west
line of the southeast quarter of said Section 5;
Thence westerly along the south line of the north one-half of the southwest
quarter of said Section 5 to a point on the west line of said Section 5;
Thence westerly along the south line of the north one-half of the south one-
half of Section 6, Township 77 North, Range 26 West to a point on the west line
of said Section 6;
Thence north along the west line of said Section 6 to the northwest corner of
said Section 6;
Thence north along the west line of Section 31, Township 78 North, Range 26
West to the northwest corner of said Section 31;
Thence north along the west line of Section 30, Township 78 North, Range 26
West to the high water mark on the south bank of the Raccoon River;
Thence easterly along the high water mark on the south bank of the Raccoon
River through Sections 30, 31, 32, 33, 28, 34, 27, 35, 26 and 25, Township 78
North, Range 26 West to a point on the east line of said Section 25;
Thence continuing easterly along the high water mark on the south bank of the
Raccoon River through Section 30, Township 78 North, Range 25 West to the point
of beginning.
Connection fees are hereby established and shall be imposed upon owners of
properties within the Raccoon River Basin sanitary sewer connection fee
district, pursuant to ordinance 1337 1. See section 7-8C-14 of this article. 1,
at the time of application to connect their properties to said sewer
facilities, as follows:
A.   Fee Schedule: From the effective date hereof through June 30, 2011, a
connection fee of six thousand nine hundred fifty dollars ($6,950.00) per acre
of property served by the sewer facility shall be imposed. Thereafter, the per
acre connection fee shall be annually adjusted as of July 1 of each year
according to section
7-8C-14 of this article.
B.   Fee Outside District: The above established connection fee schedule shall
also apply to any properties outside the Raccoon River Basin sanitary sewer
connection fee district which use or derive benefit from any of the sewer
facilities constructed for the Raccoon River Basin sanitary sewer connection
fee district. The appropriate fee shall be imposed at the time of determination
that a benefit is derived by the property.
C.   Exception: The above established connection fee schedule shall not apply
to any properties within the Raccoon River Basin sanitary sewer connection fee
district which do not use or derive benefit from any sewer facilities
constructed for the Raccoon River Basin sanitary sewer connection fee district.
D.   Payment: Except as provided in subsection H, "Preliminary Plat Prior To
Adoption", of this section the determination that a property is to be connected
to the sewer facilities shall occur, and the appropriate connection fee shall
be paid, prior to the time of release of a final plat for recordation, or
issuance of a building or plumbing permit, whichever occurs first.
E.   Park Facility: The owner of any parcel being used as a public or nonprofit
recreational or park facility upon the effective date hereof may apply for
construction upon annexation to the city and payment of a single acre
connection fee. Any future development of said parcel shall necessitate a
revised application for connection and payment of the appropriate connection
fee.
F.   Effect Of Schedule: The above established connection fee schedule shall
remain in force and effect until such time that the city council adopts an
ordinance to adjust the connection fees to be imposed within subsequent years
for the Raccoon River Basin sanitary sewer connection fee district. Nothing
herein is intended to restrict the city council from appropriate adjustment of
the connection fee schedule to reflect future construction costs.
G.   Sewers Constructed: The city shall be responsible to design and construct
sewers within the Raccoon River Basin sanitary sewer connection fee district as
graphically depicted on exhibit B attached to the ordinance codified herein and
on file in the office of the city clerk. Other sanitary sewers required to
provide sewer service to the Raccoon River Basin sanitary sewer connection fee
district shall not be the responsibility of the city to design and construct
under the provisions of the Raccoon River Basin sanitary sewer connection fee
district.
H.   Preliminary Plat Prior To Adoption: Notwithstanding the provisions of
subsection D, "Payment", of this section, for property that is included in a
preliminary plat approved prior to the effective date hereof the payment for
the connection fee for buildable lots of record within the preliminary plat
shall be at the time of the first issuance of a building or plumbing permit for
the applicable lot, and payment of the connection fee for areas within the
final plat not included in a buildable lot of record shall be at the time of
issuance of the first building permit and subsequent building permits within
the plat shall not be issued until the connection fee service for the areas not
included in a buildable lot of record is paid in full. (Ord. 1889, 11-29-2010,
eff. 1-1-2011)
7-8C-14-5: MIDDLE CREEK SANITARY SEWER CONNECTION FEE DISTRICT:
The Middle Creek sanitary sewer connection fee district is hereby established,
consisting of a tract of land located in sections 4, 5, 8 and 9, township 77
north, range 25 west of the 5th principal meridian, Warren County, Iowa, more
particularly described as follows:
Commencing at the southeast corner of the north one-half of the north one-half
of the southeast quarter of section 4, township 77 north, range 25 west of the
5th principal meridian;
Thence west along the south line of the north one-half of the north one-half of
the southeast quarter of said section 4 to the southwest corner of the north
one-half of the north one-half of the southeast quarter of said section 4;
Thence west along the south line of the north one-half of the north one-half of
the southwest quarter of said section 4 to the southwest corner of the north
one-half of the north one-half of the southwest quarter of said section 4;
Thence north along the west line of the southwest quarter of said section 4 to
the west quarter corner of said section 4;
Thence west along the north line of the southeast quarter of section 5,
township 77 north, range 25 west of the fifth principal meridian to the
northwest quarter of the northeast quarter of the northeast quarter of the
southeast quarter to said section 5;
Thence south along the west line of the northeast quarter of the northeast
quarter of the southeast quarter of said section 5 to the southwest corner of
the northeast quarter of the northeast quarter of the southeast quarter of said
section 5;
Thence west along the south line of the north one-half of the north one-half of
the southeast quarter of said section 5 to the southwest corner of the north
one-half of the north one-half of the southeast quarter of said section 5;
Thence west along the south line of the northeast quarter of the northeast
quarter of the southwest quarter of said section 5 to the southwest corner of
the northeast quarter of the northeast quarter of the southwest quarter of said
section 5;
Thence south along the east line of the southwest quarter of the northeast
quarter of the southwest quarter of said section 5 to the southeast corner of
the southwest quarter of the northeast quarter of the southwest quarter of said
section 5;
Thence west along the south line of the northeast quarter of the southwest
quarter of said section 5 to the southwest corner of the northeast quarter of
the southwest quarter of said section 5;
Thence south along the west line of the southeast quarter of the southwest
quarter of said section 5 to the southwest corner of the southeast quarter of
the southwest quarter of said section 5;
Thence east along the south line of the southwest quarter of said section 5 to
the south quarter corner of said section 5;
Thence south along the east line of the northwest quarter of section 8,
township 77 north, range 25 west to a point on the east line of the northeast
quarter, said point being the westerly line of the abandoned 100 foot wide
railroad right-of-way;
Thence southerly along the westerly line of said 100 foot wide abandoned right-
of-way to a point, said point being on a line drawn radially to the original
main line track centerline at a point thereon 1,430 feet northerly of the south
line of the northwest quarter of said section 8;
Thence westerly along a line drawn radially to the centerline of the original
main line track of the abandoned railroad right-of-way to a point, said point
being a distance of 100 feet from the centerline of the original main line
track as measured radially from said centerline;
Thence southerly along the westerly line of the abandoned railroad right-of-
way, said line being a distance of 100 feet as measured radially from the
centerline of the original main line track to the south line of the northwest
quarter of said section 8;
Thence east along the south line of the northwest quarter of said section 8 to
the center of said section 8;
Thence east along the south line of the northeast quarter of said section 8 to
a point 703.72 feet west of the east line of said section 8;
Thence south to a point 703.72 feet west of the east line of the southeast
quarter of said section 8 and 864.00 feet north of the south line of the
northeast quarter of the southeast quarter of said section 8;
Thence east to a point on the east line of said section 8, said point being
864.00 feet north of the south line of the northeast quarter of the southwest
quarter of said section 8;
Thence north along the east line of the southeast quarter of said section 8 to
the east quarter corner of said section 8;
Thence east along the south line of the northwest quarter of section 9,
township 77 north, range 25 west to the center of said section 9;
Thence north along the east line of the northwest quarter of said section 9 to
the north quarter corner of said section 9;
Thence east along the south line of the southeast quarter of section 4,
township 77 north, range 25 west to the southwest quarter of the southeast
quarter of the southeast quarter of said section 4;
Thence north along the west line of the southeast quarter of the southeast
quarter of said section 4 to the northwest corner of the southeast quarter of
the southeast quarter of said section 4;
Thence east along the north line of the southeast quarter of the southeast
quarter of said section 4 to the east line of said section 4;
Thence north along the east line of said section 4 to the point of beginning.
Connection fees are hereby established and shall be imposed upon owners of
properties within the Middle Creek sanitary sewer connection fee district,
pursuant to ordinance 1337 1. See section 7-8C-14 of this article. 1, at the
time of application to connect their properties to said sewer facilities, as
follows:
A.   Fee Schedule: From the effective date hereof through June 30, 2011, a
connection fee of one thousand eight hundred eighty dollars ($1,880.00) per
acre of property served by the sewer facility shall be imposed. Thereafter, the
per acre connection fee shall be annually adjusted as of July 1 of each year
according to section
7-8C-14 of this article.
B.   Fee Outside District: The above established connection fee schedule shall
also apply to any properties outside the Middle Creek sanitary sewer connection
fee district which use or derive benefit from any of the sewer facilities
constructed for the Middle Creek sanitary sewer connection fee district. The
appropriate fee shall be imposed at the time of determination that a benefit is
derived by the property.
C.   Exception: The above established connection fee schedule shall not apply
to any properties within the Middle Creek sanitary sewer connection fee
district which do not use or derive benefit from any sewer facilities
constructed for the Middle Creek sanitary sewer connection fee district.
D.   Payment: The determination that a property is to be connected to the sewer
facilities shall occur, and the appropriate connection fee shall be paid, prior
to the time of release of a final plat for recordation, or issuance of a
building or plumbing permit, whichever occurs first.
E.   Park Facility: The owner of any parcel being used as a public or nonprofit
recreational or park facility upon the effective date hereof may apply for
construction upon annexation to the city and payment of a single acre
connection fee. Any future development of said parcel shall necessitate a
revised application for connection and payment of the appropriate connection
fee.
F.   Effect Of Schedule: The above established connection fee schedule shall
remain in force and effect until such time that the city council adopts an
ordinance to adjust the connection fees to be imposed within subsequent years
for the Middle Creek sanitary sewer connection fee district. Nothing herein is
intended to restrict the city council from appropriate adjustment of the
connection fee schedule to reflect future construction costs.
G.   Sewers Constructed: The city shall be responsible to design and construct
sewers within the Middle Creek sanitary sewer connection fee district as
graphically depicted on exhibit B attached to the ordinance codified herein and
on file in the office of the city clerk. Other sanitary sewers required to
provide sewer service to the Middle Creek sanitary sewer connection fee
district shall not be the responsibility of the city to design and construct
under the provisions of the Middle Creek sanitary sewer connection fee
district. (Ord. 1894, 11-29-2010, eff. 1-1-2011)
7-8C-14-6: ASHWORTH ROAD LOW PRESSURE SANITARY SEWER CONNECTION FEE DISTRICT:
The Ashworth Road low pressure sanitary sewer connection fee district is hereby
established consisting of a tract of land located in Section 6, Township 78
North, Range 25 West of the 5th Principal Meridian, Polk County, Iowa, more
particularly described as follows:
Beginning at the Southwest Corner of the southwest fractional 1/4 of Section 6,
Township 78 North, Range 25 West of the 5th Principal Meridian,
Thence east along the south line of the southwest fractional 1/4 of said
Section 6 to a point 1,924 feet east of the southwest quarter,
Thence north a distance of 33 feet to the point of beginning;
Thence north a distance of 300 feet,
Thence west a distance of 100 feet,
Thence north a distance of 17 feet,
Thence west a distance of 164 feet,
Thence north a distance of 10 feet,
Thence west a distance of 150 feet,
Thence south a distance of 30 feet,
Thence west a distance of 114 feet,
Thence south a distance of 297 feet,
Thence east along a line parallel to and 33 feet north of the south line of the
southwest fractional 1/4 of said Section 6 a distance of 528 feet to the Point
of Beginning.
Connection fees are hereby established and shall be imposed upon owners of
properties within the Ashworth Road low pressure sanitary sewer connection fee
district, pursuant to ordinance 1337 as amended by ordinance 1895 at the time
of application to connect their properties to said sewer facilities, as
follows:
A.   Fee Schedule: From the effective date hereof through June 30, 2015, the
connection fee for properties served by the sewer facility shall be:
 
Connection Fee
(Dollars Per Residential Dwelling Unit)
$24,856.00 Through September 30, 2014
$25,547.00 October 1, 2014 through June 30, 2015
 
The per acre connection fee shall be adjusted annually as of July 1 of each
year according to the annual adjustment in the ENR construction cost index as
provided in section
7-8C-14 of this article.
B.   Exception: The above established connection fee schedule shall not apply
to any properties within the Ashworth Road low pressure sanitary sewer
connection fee district which do not use or derive benefit from any sewer
facilities constructed for the Ashworth Road low pressure sanitary sewer
connection fee district.
C.   Payment: The determination that a property is to be connected to the sewer
facilities shall occur, and the appropriate connection fee shall be paid, prior
to the time of release of a final plat for recordation, or issuance of a
building or plumbing permit, whichever occurs first.
D.   Single-Family Residence: The connection fee shall be based on each single-
family residential dwelling unit. The fee paid shall be applicable only to that
single-family residential unit. Any division of an existing property that
results in the creation of additional single-family lots or the construction of
an additional single-family residence shall subject such additional lots or
residences to the payment of the appropriate connection fee.
E.   Effect Of Schedule: The above established connection fee schedule shall
remain in force and effect until such time that the city council adopts an
ordinance to adjust the connection fees to be imposed within subsequent years
for the Ashworth Road low pressure sanitary sewer connection fee district.
Nothing herein is intended to restrict the city council from appropriate
adjustment of the connection fee schedule to reflect future construction costs.
F.   Sewers Constructed: The city shall be responsible to design and construct
sewers within the Ashworth Road low pressure sanitary sewer connection fee
district as graphically depicted on exhibit A attached to the ordinance
codified herein and on file in the office of the city clerk. Other sanitary
sewers required to provide sewer service to the Ashworth Road low pressure
sanitary Sewer Connection Fee District shall not be the responsibility of the
City to design and construct under the provisions of the Ashworth Road Low
Pressure Sanitary Sewer Connection Fee District. (Ord. 2045, 7-28-2014, eff. 8-
1-2014)
G.   Pressured System Grinder Pump Service:
1.   The City shall maintain, repair, and replace privately- owned sanitary
sewer pressure system grinder pumps and controls installed within the Ashworth
Road Low Pressure Sanitary Sewer Connection Fee District and located on private
property ("premises"). "Maintain" includes examination and diagnosis if there
is a reported problem regarding the grinder pump and controls. "Maintain" does
not include regular inspection or service of the grinder pump and controls.
2.   Property owners installing a sanitary sewer pressure system grinder pump
shall use a contractor approved by the City to supply and install the system
grinder pump.
3.   Property owners who have installed a sanitary sewer pressure system
grinder pump shall allow the City and its contractor right of entry and
reasonable access onto the premises for purposes of maintaining, repairing, and
replacing the grinder pump and controls. Said right of entry and access shall
run with the land and be binding upon the property owners, as well as their
successors and assigns, all upon the terms and conditions set forth herein.
4.   The property owners are responsible for the operation of the grinder pump
and controls. The property owners are also responsible for installing,
repairing, and replacing service lines from the residence to the grinder pump
station, the service lines from the grinder pump station to the City's low
pressure sewer system in the public right-of-way, including isolation valves
and backflow prevention devices, and for the electrical service from the
residence to the grinder pump station.
5.   The City is not responsible for any damage to the premises related to
sewer backups, damaged service lines, including isolation valves and backflow
prevention devices, or related to faulty electrical service. The City is solely
responsible for the maintenance, repair, and replacement of the sanitary sewer
pressure system grinder pump and controls. The City is also not responsible for
the cost of any damage, repair, or replacement caused to the grinder pump
attributable to the property owner's negligent, reckless, or intentional
actions. "Attributable to the property owner" includes all residents and guests
of the property owner. The City is further not responsible for any cost
associated with grinder pump services provided by other entities or persons if
the property owner has elected to retain his or her own contractor to perform
these services.
6.   If it has been determined that unsuitable debris has been placed into the
grinder pump sanitary sewer system, the property owner shall be assessed all
costs associated with such repair or replacement. "Unsuitable debris" shall
include, but not be limited to:
a.   Grease, oil, gasoline, flammable material, paint, or strong chemicals.
b.   Metal, bones, or plastic.
c.   Abrasive materials, including, without limitation, sand, rocks, cat
litter, glass, seafood shells, or goldfish stone.
d.   Feminine hygiene products, personal cleaning wipes, diapers, socks, rags,
or cloth.
e.   Stormwater.
7.   Property owners shall not place any structures, landscaping materials,
plant materials, or change the grade of the premises in any way, that would
adversely affect access to the grinder pump sanitary sewer system. Property
owners shall timely disclose any conditions on the premises that would restrict
the City's or its contractor's ability to maintain, repair, or replace the
grinder pumps and controls. (Ord. 2236, 7-24-2017)
7-8C-14-7: SOUTH SIXTIETH STREET SANITARY SEWER CONNECTION FEE DISTRICT:
The South Sixtieth Street Sanitary Sewer Connection Fee District shall consist
of a tract of land located in section 24, township 78 north, range 26 west of
the 5th principal meridian, Dallas County, Iowa, more particularly described as
follows:
Starting at the northeast corner Lot 60 Lakeview Heights Plat 1, thence west
along the north line of said Lot 60 to the northwest corner of said Lot 60,
thence south along the west line of said Lot 60 to the southwest corner of said
Lot 60, thence south along the west line of Lot 59 Lakeview Heights Plat 1 to
the southwest corner of said Lot 59, thence south along the west line of Lot 52
Lakeview Heights Plat 1 to the southwest corner of said Lot 52, thence south
along the west line of Lot 51 Lakeview Heights Plat 1 to the southwest corner
of said Lot 51, thence east along the south line of said Lot 51 to the
southeast corner of said Lot 51, thence north along the east line of said Lot
51 to the northeast corner of said Lot 51, thence north along the east line of
said Lot 52 to the northeast corner of said Lot 52, thence north along the east
line of said Lot 59 to the northeast corner of said Lot 59, thence north along
the east line of said Lot 60 to the point of beginning.
Connection fees are hereby established and shall be imposed upon owners of
properties within the South Sixtieth Street Sanitary Sewer Connection Fee
District, pursuant to ordinance 1337 as amended by ordinance 1895 at the time
of application to connect their properties to said sewer facilities, as
follows:
A.   Fee Schedule: From the effective date hereof through June 30, 2017, the
connection fee for properties served by the sewer facility shall be:
 
Connection Fee (Dollars Per Residential Dwelling Unit)
$20,300.00
 
The per acre connection fee shall be adjusted annually as of July 1 of each
year according to the annual adjustment in the ENR construction cost index as
provided in section
7-8C-14 of this article.
B.   Payment: The determination that a property is to be connected to the sewer
facilities shall occur, and the appropriate connection fee shall be paid prior
to issuance of a plumbing permit to connect to the sewer or connection to the
sewer, whichever occurs first. The connection fee may be paid in advance of
issuance of a plumbing permit or connection based on the applicable fee at the
time of payment and no additional connection fee is charged at the time of
issuance of a plumbing permit or connection to the sewer.
C.   Single-Family Residence: The connection fee shall be based on each single-
family residential dwelling unit. The fee paid shall be applicable only to that
single-family residential unit. Any division of an existing property that
results in the creation of additional single-family lots or the construction of
any additional single-family residences shall subject such additional lots or
residences to the payment of the appropriate connection fee.
D.   Effect Of Schedule: The above established connection fee schedule shall
remain in force and effect until such time that the City Council adopts an
ordinance to adjust the connection fees to be imposed within subsequent years
for the South Sixtieth Street Sanitary Sewer Connection Fee District. Nothing
herein is intended to restrict the City Council from appropriate adjustment of
the connection fee schedule to reflect future construction costs.
E.   Sewers Constructed: The City shall be responsible to design and construct
sewers within the South Sixtieth Street Sanitary Sewer Connection Fee District
as graphically depicted on exhibit B attached to the ordinance codified herein
and on file in the Office of the City Clerk. (Ord. 2150, 5-31-2016, eff. 6-1-
2016)
7-8C-14-8: DIXIE ACRES SANITARY SEWER CONNECTION FEE DISTRICT:
The Dixie Acres Sanitary Sewer Connection Fee District shall consist of a tract
of land located in section 6, township 78 north, range 25 west of the 5th
principal meridian, Polk County, Iowa, more particularly described as follows:
Starting at the southeast corner of Lot 1 Dixie Acres Plat 1, thence north
along the east line of Dixie Acres Plat 1 to the northeast corner of Lot 4
Dixie Acres Plat 1, thence west along the north line of Lot 4 Dixie Acres Plat
1 to the northwest corner of Lot 4 Dixie Acres Plat 1, thence west across the
right-of-way of 54th Street to the northeast corner of Lot 5 Dixie Acres Plat
1, thence west along the north line of Dixie Acres Plat 1 to the northwest
corner of Lot 5 Dixie Acres Plat 1, thence south along the west line of Dixie
Acres Plat 1 to the southwest corner of Lot 8 Dixie Acres Plat 1, thence east
along the south line of Dixie Acres Plat 1 to the Point of Beginning.
Connection fees are hereby established and shall be imposed upon owners of
properties within the Dixie Acres Sanitary Sewer Connection Fee District,
pursuant to ordinance 1337 as amended by ordinance 1895 at the time of
application to connect their properties to said sewer facilities, as follows:
A.   Fee Schedule: From the effective date hereof through June 30, 2016, the
connection fee for properties served by the sewer facility shall be:
 
Connection Fee (Dollars Per Residential Dwelling Unit)
$28,063.00
 
The per acre connection fee shall be adjusted annually as of July 1 of each
year according to the annual adjustment in the ENR construction cost index as
provided in section
7-8C-14 of this article.
B.   Payment: The determination that a property is to be connected to the sewer
facilities shall occur, and the appropriate connection fee shall be paid prior
to issuance of a plumbing permit to connect to the sewer or connection to the
sewer, whichever occurs first. The connection fee may be paid in advance of
issuance of a plumbing permit or connection based on the applicable fee at the
time of payment and no additional connection fee is charged at the time of
issuance of a plumbing permit or connection to the sewer.
C.   Single-Family Residence: The connection fee shall be based on each single-
family residential dwelling unit. The fee paid shall be applicable only to that
single-family residential unit. Any division of an existing property that
results in the creation of additional single-family lots or the construction of
any additional single-family residences shall subject such additional lots or
residences to the payment of the appropriate connection fee.
D.   Effect Of Schedule: The above established connection fee schedule shall
remain in force and effect until such time that the City Council adopts an
ordinance to adjust the connection fees to be imposed within subsequent years
for the Dixie Acres Sanitary Sewer Connection Fee District. Nothing herein is
intended to restrict the City Council from appropriate adjustment of the
connection fee schedule to reflect future construction costs.
E.   Sewers Constructed: The City shall be responsible to design and construct
sewers within the Dixie Acres Sanitary Sewer Connection Fee District as
graphically depicted on exhibit A attached to the ordinance codified herein and
on file in the Office of the City Clerk. (Ord. 2103, 7-13-2015, eff. 9-1-2015)
ARTICLE D. PRIVATE SEWER SYSTEMS
SECTION:
7-8D-1: Private Sewage Disposal
7-8D-2: Connection to Private System
7-8D-3: Private Systems Abandoned
7-8D-4: Permit Required
7-8D-5: Compliance with State and County Rules
7-8D-6: Minimum Lot Area
7-8D-7: Inspection Required
7-8D-8: Disposal of Waste
7-8D-9: Maintenance of Facilities
7-8D-10: Additional Requirements
7-8D-1: PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL:
Except as otherwise provided in this Article, it shall be unlawful to construct
or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool or other facility
intended or used for the disposal of sewage. (1985 Code §3-3.0301)
7-8D-2: CONNECTION TO PRIVATE SYSTEM:
Where a public sanitary sewer is not available under the provisions of Section
7-8A-3, the building sewer shall be connected to a private sewage system
complying with the provisions of this Article. (1985 Code §3-3.0302)
7-8D-3: PRIVATE SYSTEMS ABANDONED:
At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a property served by a
private sewage disposal system, as provided in Section
7-8A-3, a direct connection shall be made to the public sewer in compliance
with this Article and any septic tanks, cesspools and similar private sewage
disposal facilities shall be abandoned and filled with suitable material. (1985
Code §3-3.0310)
7-8D-4: PERMIT REQUIRED:
Before commencing the construction of a private sewage disposal system, the
owner shall first obtain a permit from the Polk or Dallas County Department of
Health. A copy of the permit shall be filed with the Building Inspection
Department of the City. (1985 Code §3-3.0303; 1993 Code)
7-8D-5: COMPLIANCE WITH STATE AND COUNTY RULES:
The type, capacity, location and layout of a private sewage disposal system
shall comply with all recommendations of the State Department of Environmental
Quality and rules, regulations and requirements of the Polk or Dallas County
Health Department. (1985 Code §3-3.0305; 1993 Code)
7-8D-6: MINIMUM LOT AREA:
No permit shall be issued for any private sewage disposal system employing
subsurface soil absorption facilities where the area of the lot is less than
forty thousand (40,000) square feet. (1985 Code §3-3.0306)
7-8D-7: INSPECTION REQUIRED:
The inspection requirements for a private sewage disposal system shall be in
accordance with rules, regulations and requirements of the Polk or Dallas
County Department of Health. (1985 Code §3-3.0304; 1993 Code)
7-8D-8: DISPOSAL OF WASTE:
A.   Location of Waste Disposal: It shall be unlawful for any person to place
any effluent or waste from cesspools, septic tanks or privy vaults in any other
location in the City except in such location as may be designated by the
Director. The rate or charge for receiving such waste shall be determined by
resolution of the Council. (1985 Code §3-3.0311; 1993 Code)
B.   Discharge to Natural Outlets Prohibited: No septic tank or cesspool shall
be permitted to discharge to any natural outlet. (1985 Code §3-3.0307)
7-8D-9: MAINTENANCE OF FACILITIES:
The owner of private sewage disposal facilities shall operate and maintain the
facilities in a sanitary manner at all times and at no expense to the City.
(1985 Code §3-3.0308)
7-8D-10: ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS:
No statement contained in this Article shall be construed to interfere with any
additional requirements that may be imposed by any health officer acting in his
official capacity. (1985 Code §3-3.0309)
ARTICLE E. ILLICIT DISCHARGE TO STORM SEWER SYSTEM
SECTION:
7-8E-1: Purpose
7-8E-2: Definitions
7-8E-3: Allowable Nonstorm Water
7-8E-4: Discharges And Connections Prohibited
7-8E-5: Industrial Discharges
7-8E-6: Watercourse Protection
7-8E-7: Illicit Discharge Or Illegal Connection Detection, Reporting And
Inspection
7-8E-8: Abatement
7-8E-9: Penalty
7-8E-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this article is to provide for the health, safety, and general
welfare of the citizens of West Des Moines through the regulation of nonstorm
water discharges to the city of West Des Moines' separate storm sewer system to
the maximum extent practicable, as required by federal law. This article
establishes methods for controlling the introduction of pollutants into the
city of West Des Moines' separate storm sewer system in order to comply with
requirements of the national pollutant discharge elimination system (NPDES)
permit process. (Ord. 1657, 10-24-2005)
7-8E-2: DEFINITIONS:
The following terms are defined for use in this article, unless the context
specifically indicates otherwise:
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS: Any material, including any substance, waste, or
combination thereof, which because of its quantity, concentration, or physical,
chemical, or infectious characteristics may cause, or significantly contribute
to, a substantial present or potential hazard to human health, safety,
property, or the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported,
disposed of, or otherwise managed.
ILLEGAL CONNECTION: Either of the following:
A.   Any pipe, open channel, drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or
subsurface, which allows an illicit discharge to enter the storm drain system,
including, but not limited to, any conveyances which allow any nonstorm water
discharge including sewage, processed wastewater, and wash water to enter the
storm drain system, and any connections to the storm drain system from indoor
drains and sinks, regardless of whether said drain or connection had been
previously allowed, permitted, or approved by an authorized enforcement agency;
or
B.   Any drain or conveyance connected from a commercial or industrial land use
to the storm drain system which has not been documented in plans, maps, or
equivalent records and approved by an authorized enforcement agency.
ILLICIT DISCHARGE: Any direct or indirect nonstorm water discharge to the city
of West Des Moines' separate storm sewer system, except as exempted in section
7-8E-3 of this article.
INDUSTRIAL DISCHARGE: Discharges subject to NPDES industrial permits as defined
in 40 CFR, section 122.26(b)(14).
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4): Any facility designed or used for
collecting and/or conveying storm water, including inlets, catch basins, piped
storm drains, pumping facilities, structural storm water controls, or other
drainage structures which are owned or maintained by the city of West Des
Moines.
NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPDES) MUNICIPAL SEPARATE
STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) PERMIT: A permit issued by Iowa department of natural
resources (IDNR) that authorizes the discharge of pollutants to waters of the
United States, whether the permit is applicable on an individual, group, or
general areawide basis.
NONSTORM WATER DISCHARGE: Any discharge to the storm drain system that is not
composed entirely of storm water.
POLLUTANT: Anything that causes or contributes to pollution. Pollutants may
include, but are not limited to: paints, varnishes, and solvents; oil and other
automotive fluids; nonhazardous liquid and solid wastes and yard wastes;
refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter, or other discarded or abandoned objects or
accumulations, so that same may cause or contribute to pollution; floatables;
hazardous substances and wastes; sewage; wastes and residues that result from
constructing a building or structure; and noxious or offensive matter of any
kind.
POLLUTION: The contamination or other alteration of any water's physical,
chemical or biological properties, including change in color, turbidity, or
odor of such waters or the discharge of any liquid, gaseous, solid, or other
substance into any such waters as will or is likely to create a nuisance or
render such waters harmful, detrimental or injurious to the public health,
safety or welfare.
PREMISES: Any building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land whether
improved or unimproved including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips.
RESPONSIBLE PARTY: One or more persons that control or are in possession of or
own property. Responsible parties shall be jointly and severally responsible
for compliance with this article and jointly and severally liable for any
illicit discharge from the property controlled, possessed or owned. For
purposes of this article, "property" includes, but is not limited to, real
estate, fixtures, facilities and premises of any kind located upon, under or
above the real estate. The definition of responsible party does not include the
city when an illicit discharge is caused by a person on a public street or on
public property.
STORM WATER RUNOFF OR STORM WATER: Any surface flow, runoff, and drainage
consisting entirely of water from any form of natural precipitation, and
resulting from such precipitation.
STRUCTURAL STORM WATER CONTROL: A structural storm water management facility or
device that controls storm water runoff and changes the characteristics of that
runoff including, but not limited to, the quantity and quality, the period of
release or the velocity of flow. (Ord. 1657, 10-24-2005)
7-8E-3: ALLOWABLE NONSTORM WATER:
A.   Discharges from firefighting activities, fire hydrant flushing, potable
water sources, waterline flushing, uncontaminated ground water, foundation or
footing drains, springs, riparian habitats, wetlands, irrigation water, air
conditioning condensate, exterior building wash water when no detergents or
other surfactants are used and pavement wash waters where spills or leaks of
toxic or hazardous materials have not occurred and when no detergents or other
surfactants are used. (Ord. 1657, 10-24-2005)
7-8E-4: DISCHARGES AND CONNECTIONS PROHIBITED:
A.   Any discharge into the city's storm sewer system prohibited by the city's
NPDES permit, the terms of which are hereby incorporated by reference, shall be
deemed an illicit discharge in violation of this article.
B.   The construction, use, maintenance or continued existence of any illegal
connection shall constitute a violation of this article. This prohibition
expressly includes, without limitation, illegal connections made in the past,
regardless of whether the connection was permissible under law or practices
applicable or prevailing at the time of connection. (Ord. 1657, 10-24-2005)
7-8E-5: INDUSTRIAL DISCHARGES:
Any responsible party subject to an industrial NPDES discharge permit issued by
the IDNR shall comply with all provisions of such permit. (Ord. 1657, 10-24-
2005)
7-8E-6: WATERCOURSE PROTECTION:
Every responsible party owning property through which a watercourse passes, or
such responsible party's lessee, shall keep and maintain that part of the
watercourse within the property below the elevation of the 100-year flood free
of trash, debris, grass clippings or other organic wastes and other obstacles
that would pollute, contaminate, or significantly alter the quality of water
flowing through the watercourse. (Ord. 1657, 10-24-2005)
7-8E-7: ILLICIT DISCHARGE OR ILLEGAL CONNECTION DETECTION, REPORTING AND
INSPECTION:
A.   All detection activities permitted under this article shall be conducted
by the public works director, or his or her designee, hereinafter referred to
as the "inspector".
B.   The city shall not be responsible for any direct or indirect consequences
affecting responsible party or property as a result of an illicit discharge, or
circumstances which may cause an illicit discharge, whether detected or
undetected by the city.
C.   Every responsible party has an absolute duty to monitor conditions on
property owned or controlled by them, to prevent all illicit discharges, and to
report to the city any illicit discharges, which the responsible party knows or
should have known to occur. Failure to comply with any provision of this
article is a violation of this article.
D.   Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any responsible
party has information of any known or suspected illicit discharge, the
responsible party shall immediately take all necessary steps to ensure the
discovery, containment and cleanup of such discharge at the responsible party's
sole cost.
E.   If the illicit discharge consists of hazardous materials, the responsible
party shall also immediately notify emergency response agencies of the
occurrence via emergency dispatch services.
F.   If the illicit discharge emanates from a commercial or industrial
establishment, the owner or operator of such establishment shall also retain an
on site written record of the discharge and the actions taken to prevent its
recurrence. Such records shall be retained for at least three (3) years.
G.   A report of an illicit discharge shall be made in person or by phone or
facsimile or e-mail to the inspector immediately, but in any event within
twenty four (24) hours of the illicit discharge; notifications in person or by
phone shall be confirmed by written notice addressed and mailed or e-mailed to
the inspector within twenty four (24) hours of the personal or phone notice.
H.   Any responsible party shall also report to the city any circumstances
which such person or entity reasonably believes pose a risk of an illicit
discharge.
I.   Upon receiving a report pursuant to the previous sections or otherwise
coming into possession of information indicating an actual or imminent illicit
discharge or an illegal connection, the inspector shall conduct an inspection
of the site as soon as reasonably possible and, if an illicit discharge or
illegal connection is found, the inspector shall thereafter provide to the
responsible party(s) for such premises a written notice to abate conditions
which have already caused or may cause an illicit discharge or the presence of
an illegal connection. The responsible parties shall immediately commence
corrective action or remediation and shall complete such corrective action or
remediation within the time frame specified within the abatement notice.
J.   The inspector shall be permitted to enter and inspect any property subject
to regulation under this section as often as is necessary to determine
compliance with this section. If a responsible party owning, controlling or
possessing a property has security measures that require identification and
clearance before entry to its property, such responsible party shall make the
necessary arrangements to allow access by the inspector. By way of
specification, but not limitation:
1.   A responsible party shall allow the inspector ready access to all parts of
the property for purposes of inspection, sampling, examination and copying of
records related to a suspected, actual, or imminent illicit discharge, and for
the performance of any additional duties as defined by state and federal law.
2.   The inspector shall have the right to set up on any property such devices
as are necessary in the opinion of the inspector to conduct monitoring and/or
sampling related to a suspected, actual or imminent illicit discharge.
3.   Any temporary or permanent obstruction that obstructs the safe and easy
access to property to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by
the responsible party at the written or oral order of the inspector and shall
not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the
responsible party.
4.   An unreasonable delay in allowing the inspector access to a property is a
violation of this article.
5.   If the inspector has been refused access to any part of the property from
which an illegal connection and/or illicit discharge is occurring, suspected or
imminent, and is able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may
be a violation of this article, or that there is a need to inspect and/or
sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling program designed to verify
compliance with this article, or to protect the overall public health, safety,
and welfare of the community, then the inspector may seek issuance of a search
warrant from any court of competent jurisdiction. (Ord. 1657, 10-24-2005)
7-8E-8: ABATEMENT:
A.   Contents: The notice to abate shall contain:
1.   Description Of Illicit Discharge Or Illegal Connection: A description of
what constitutes the illicit discharge or illegal connection.
2.   Location Of Illicit Discharge Or Illegal Connection: The location of the
illicit discharge or illegal connection.
3.   Acts Necessary To Abate: A statement of the act or acts necessary to abate
the illicit discharge or illegal connection.
4.   Reasonable Time: A reasonable time within which to complete the abatement.
5.   Payment Of City's Costs: A statement that if the illicit discharge or
illegal connection is not abated as directed and no request for hearing is made
within the time prescribed, the city will abate it and invoice the costs to
such responsible party.
B.   Method Of Service Of Notice To Abate: The notice shall be sent by
certified mail to the property owner.
C.   Request For Hearing: Any responsible party ordered to abate an illicit
discharge or illegal connection or aggrieved by the decision of the city shall
have the right of appeal. The appeal shall follow the process set forth in
section
4-4-9 of this code.
D.   Failure To Abate: Any responsible party causing or maintaining an illicit
discharge or illegal connection who shall fail or refuse to abate or remove the
same within the reasonable time required and specified in the notice to abate
is in violation of this code.
E.   Abatement By City: If the responsible party notified to abate an illicit
discharge or illegal connection neglects or fails to abate as directed, the
city may perform the required action to abate, keeping an accurate account of
the expense incurred. The itemized expense account shall be filed with the
clerk who shall pay such expenses on behalf of the city.
F.   Collection Of Costs: If it is determined that an illicit discharge is
imminent or has occurred, the actual administrative costs incurred by the city
in the enforcement of this article shall be recovered from the responsible
party. The inspector shall submit an invoice to the responsible party
reflecting the actual costs and wages and all other expenses incurred by the
city for the enforcement activities undertaken. Failure to pay charges invoiced
under this article within thirty (30) days of billing shall constitute a
violation of this article.
G.   Abatement In Emergency: If it is determined that an emergency exists by
reason of the continuing maintenance of the illicit discharge or illegal
connection, the city may perform any action which may be required under this
article without prior notice. The city shall bill the costs as provided in
subsection F of this section.
H.   Abatement On A Public Street Or On Public Property: The person causing an
illicit discharge on a public street or on public property shall be responsible
for abatement, as directed by the city, or shall pay all costs of abatement
performed by the city. The city shall bill any costs incurred as provided in
subsection F of this section. In addition to paying the costs of abatement, any
person causing an illicit discharge on a public street or on public property
shall be subject to a civil penalty in accordance with this article. (Ord.
1657, 10-24-2005)
7-8E-9: PENALTY:
Unless another penalty is expressly provided by this article for any particular
provision or section, any responsible party violating any provision of this
article or any rule or regulation adopted herein by reference shall be subject
to the civil penalties set forth in section
4-4-7 of this code. Each day that a municipal infraction occurs and/or is
permitted to exist constitutes a separate offense. (Ord. 1657, 10-24-2005)
ARTICLE F. INDUSTRIAL WASTE
SECTION:
7-8F-1: Adoption
7-8F-1: ADOPTION:
Ordinance 2351, regulating industrial waste, is hereby adopted by reference and
on file in the City. (Ord. 2351, 3-18-2019; amd. Ord. 2542, 9-28-2022)
ARTICLE G. POSTCONSTRUCTION STORM WATER MANAGEMENT
SECTION:
7-8G-1: Findings And Purpose
7-8G-2: Procedure For Postconstruction
7-8G-3: Maintenance And Repair Of Storm Water Facilities
7-8G-4: Enforcement; Penalty
7-8G-1: FINDINGS AND PURPOSE:
A.   The U.S. EPA's national pollutant discharge elimination system ("NPDES")
permit program ("program") administered by the Iowa department of natural
resources ("IDNR") requires that cities meeting certain demographic and
environmental impact criteria obtain from the IDNR an NPDES permit for the
discharge of storm water from a municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4).
The city's MS4 permit is on file at the office of the city clerk and is
available for public inspection during regular office hours.
B.   As a condition of the city's MS4 permit, the city is obliged to develop,
implement, and enforce a program to address storm water runoff from new
construction and reconstruction projects for which state NPDES general permit
no. 2 storm water permit coverage is required by adopting a postconstruction
storm water management ordinance designed:
1.   To require water quality and quantity components be considered in the
design of new construction and implemented when practical; and
2.   To prohibit construction activities from commencing until the plans for
postconstruction runoff controls have been submitted to the city; and
3.   To allow the city to have the ability to access private property for the
purpose of enforcement procedures to promote compliance with the state NPDES
general permit no. 2 which require postconstruction compliance by applicants
("applicants").
C.   No state or federal funds have been made available to assist the city with
inspections, monitoring and/or enforcing the program. Accordingly, the city
shall fund its inspection, monitoring and enforcement responsibilities entirely
by fees imposed on the owners of properties which are made subject to the
program by virtue of state and federal law, and/or other sources of funding
established by a separate ordinance.
D.   Terms used in this article shall have the meanings specified as follows:
APPLICANT: Any person, firm, or entity applying for a permit to develop, grade,
or construct within the corporate limits of the city. (Ord. 1784, 10-8-2007)
7-8G-2: PROCEDURE FOR POSTCONSTRUCTION:
Each applicant who is required to have coverage under general permit no. 2 for
a site shall install postconstruction storm water management facilities as set
forth herein and as approved by the city during site plan, platting, or
construction plans.
A.   Each applicant or its successor person(s) or entity shall be responsible
for maintaining all storm water management facilities as approved by the city.
B.   For sites equal to or greater than one acre, each applicant must provide
to the city as built plans detailing dimensions and elevations as well as a
certification that storm water management facilities were built as part of the
approved development that includes the site. For sites less than one acre that
are part of a common plan of development and for which the applicant
establishes that storm water management facilities were or will be built to
address all properties (either collectively or individually) within the
development, each applicant must provide to the city a copy of the notice of
discontinuation for general permit no. 2 applicable to the property.
C.   Each applicant must include in their site design those storm water
management facilities that will convey drainage through the property to one or
more detention and/or treatment areas such that no development shall cause
downstream property owners, water courses, channels, or conduits to receive
storm water runoff from the proposed development site at a peak flow rate
greater than that allowed by the policy or standard in effect at the time of
approval of the development unless such requirements are waived by the city.
Nothing contained herein shall prohibit the city from changing the policies or
standards in the future, nor from requiring the site to comply with the new
requirements.
D.   Each applicant shall comply with all other applicable city, state or
federal permit requirements as they apply to the city or to the property.
E.   At the discretion of the city, the applicant may satisfy the
postconstruction storm water management requirements by ensuring the conveyance
of the storm water discharge from the property to a regional detention
facility. For purposes of this article, a "regional detention facility" shall
be wet or dry detention basins, which are designed to accept storm water runoff
from two (2) or more sites that are required to obtain a state NPDES general
permit no. 2 and that otherwise complies with all city, state or federal permit
requirements as they apply to storm water management requirements for those
sites. (Ord. 1784, 10-8-2007)
7-8G-3: MAINTENANCE AND REPAIR OF STORM WATER FACILITIES:
A.   Prior to the issuance of any permit that has a storm water management
facility as one of the requirements of the permit, the applicant or owner of
the site must execute a maintenance easement agreement that shall be binding on
all subsequent owners of land served by the storm water management facility.
The agreement shall provide for access to the facility at reasonable times for
periodic inspection by the city, or its contractor or agent, to ensure that the
facility is maintained in proper working condition to meet design standards and
any other provisions established by this article. The easement agreement shall
be recorded by the city in the land records.
B.   Maintenance of all storm water management facilities shall be ensured
through the creation of a formal maintenance covenant that must be approved by
the city and recorded into the land record at the time of final plat approval.
As part of the covenant, a schedule shall be developed for when and how often
maintenance will occur to ensure proper function of the storm water management
facility. The covenant shall also include plans for periodic inspections by the
applicant, owner, or assigns to ensure proper performance of the facility.
C.   Prior to the issuance of any permit that has a storm water management
facility as one of the requirements of the permit, the applicant or owner of
the site must execute a maintenance easement agreement that shall be binding on
all subsequent owners of land served by the storm water management facility.
The agreement shall provide for access to the facility at reasonable times for
periodic inspection by the city, or its contractor or agent, to ensure that the
facility is maintained in proper working condition to meet design standards and
any other provisions established by this article. The easement agreement shall
be recorded by the city in the land records.
D.   Maintenance of all storm water management facilities shall be ensured
through the creation of a formal maintenance covenant that must be approved by
the city and recorded into the land record at the time of final plat approval.
As part of the covenant, a schedule shall be developed for when and how often
maintenance will occur to ensure proper function of the storm water management
facility. The covenant shall also include plans for periodic inspections by the
applicant, owner, or assigns to ensure proper performance of the facility.
E.   The city shall be permitted to enter and inspect any property subject to
regulation under this section as often as is necessary to document maintenance
and repair needs and determine compliance with the requirements of this
article. If a responsible party owning, controlling or possessing a property
has security measures that require identification and clearance before entry to
its property, such responsible party shall make the necessary arrangements to
allow access by the city. By way of specification, but not limitation:
1.   A responsible party shall allow the city ready access to all parts of the
property for purposes of inspection, examination, and copying of records
related to compliance with this article.
2.   Any temporary or permanent obstruction that obstructs the safe and easy
access to property to be inspected shall be promptly removed by the responsible
party at the written or oral order of the city and shall not be replaced. The
costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the responsible party.
3.   An unreasonable delay in allowing the city access to a property is a
violation of this article.
F.   Parties responsible for the operation and maintenance of a storm water
management facility shall make records of the installation and of all
maintenance and repairs, and shall retain the records for at least three (3)
years. Copies of the as built plans and records of all self-inspections,
maintenance, and repairs shall be kept on site and shall be made available to
the city during inspection of the facility and at other reasonable times upon
request.
G.   In the event that a storm water management facility is found by the city
to be noncompliant with the plans as submitted and approved or is found to be
in need of maintenance, the responsible party will be notified in writing of
such deficiencies. Upon receipt of such notice, the responsible party shall
have fifteen (15) days to correct such deficiencies. After proper notice, and
if the responsible party fails to make the repairs or perform the maintenance,
the city may have such work performed and assess the owner(s) of the facility
for the cost of repair work and any penalties; and the cost of the work shall
be a lien on the property, or prorated against the beneficial users of the
property, and may be placed on the tax bill and collected as ordinary taxes by
the city. (Ord. 1784, 10-8-2007)
7-8G-4: ENFORCEMENT; PENALTY:
Unless another penalty is expressly provided by this article for any particular
provision or section, any responsible party violating any provision of this
article or any rule or regulation adopted herein by reference shall be subject
to the civil penalties set forth in section
1-4-1 of this code. Each day that a municipal infraction occurs and/or is
permitted to exist constitutes a separate offense. Violation of any provision
of this article may also be enforced by action for injunctive relief. (Ord.
1784, 10-8-2007)
ARTICLE H. MAJOR STORMWATER DRAINAGE FACILITIES CONNECTION FEE DISTRICTS
SECTION:
7-8H-1: Connection Fee Districts
7-8H-1-1: Sugar Creek Stormwater Connection Fee District
7-8H-1-2: Grand Avenue East Stormwater Connection Fee District
7-8H-1: CONNECTION FEE DISTRICTS:
A.   The city has determined the necessity of establishing a policy and a
procedure to be utilized to recover the cost of designing and constructing
certain major stormwater drainage facilities. In those instances where a
significant number of properties benefit by such facilities and are not
sufficiently developed to permit the recovery of those costs through the
special assessment process as provided in chapter 384, division IV of the Iowa
Code, the city hereby declares its intent to utilize connection fees, as herein
provided, to recover the cost of designing and constructing such major
stormwater drainage facilities from property owners who develop property within
the drainage basin where said improvements are located.
It is the intent of this section to set forth the method of recovery of
proportional cost shares from those property owners who develop property within
the drainage basin so that in the event all property, other than street and
road right of way and parks, which lies within the drainage basin as
established by a benefited connection fee district that those properties shall
bear in the aggregate up to one hundred percent (100%) of the cost of designing
and constructing such facilities, including legal and administrative expenses
associated therewith.
B.   Prior to the establishment of a connection fee district the city shall
conduct a public hearing as required in chapter 384 of the Iowa Code. At the
public hearing, the owners of property within the proposed benefited district
shall be heard and may offer comments or objections as follows:
1.   The necessity of the project;
2.   The calculation of the area benefited by the proposed major stormwater
drainage facilities;
3.   The estimated cost of the proposed facilities; and
4.   The proposed acre connection fee.
Upon concluding the hearing, the city council shall rule upon the objections
presented during the hearing and may consider the adoption of the proposed
connection fee ordinance. Upon consideration of the proposed connection fee
ordinance, the city council may:
1.   Adopt the ordinance as proposed;
2.   Delete elements or portions of the proposed major stormwater drainage
facilities from the proposed project and the property served thereby from the
benefited district proposed; or
3.   Amend the ordinance to revise the connection fee.
C.   The major stormwater drainage connection fee shall be in an amount equal
to the maximum area of contiguous property or fraction thereof within the
benefited district under common ownership subject to the provisions of this
section for determination of the applicable area for calculation of the
connection fee multiplied by the per acre connection fee established in the
connection fee ordinance for that benefited district. The connection fee shall
be adjusted on July 1 of each calendar year based on the change in the ENR
construction cost index for the one year period ending in April of the calendar
year in which the adjustment is made. The finance director shall determine the
applicable connection fees for each established connection fee district and the
development services department shall maintain on file the connection fees in
each connection fee district effective July 1 of each calendar year.
D.   The major stormwater drainage connection fee required by this section
shall be due and payable to the city treasurer.
1.   For property being platted the fee is due and payable before approval of
the final plat.
2.   For property subject to a site plan the fee is due and payable before
approval of the site plan.
3.   For all other property the fee is due and payable before issuance of a
building permit.
E.   The major stormwater drainage connection fee required by this section is
in addition to, and not in lieu of, any other fees required under other
provisions of this code.
F.   Major stormwater drainage facilities for purposes of the connection fees
established under this chapter shall be those located on major streets as set
forth in the city's approved major street plans. Major streets shall include
major arterials, minor arterials, major collectors and minor collectors. Major
stormwater drainage facilities do not include any drainage facility located on
a street other than those set forth in the approved major streets plan.
G.   Each individual connection fee district shall determine the minimum
drainage basin for major stormwater drainage facilities within that district,
but in no event shall the size of the drainage area be less than one hundred
sixty (160) acres. Stormwater drainage facilities on major streets with a
tributary drainage area less than the minimum set forth in the connection fee
district shall not be considered a major stormwater drainage facility.
H.   For each major stormwater drainage facility the maximum amount to be paid
by the connection fee shall not exceed the percentage of the total project cost
as set forth in the city's then current policy on special assessment of costs
for major streets.
I.   The following properties shall be exempt from, and not subject to, the
connection fee for major stormwater drainage facilities:
1.   Platted lots with a single-family residential dwelling unit constructed
before, or under construction on, the effective date of the ordinance.
2.   Single-family residential dwellings on unplatted property constructed
before, or under construction on, the effective date of the ordinance to a
maximum area of one acre.
3.   Platted property, developed or undeveloped, subject to an approved
development plan with the city on the effective date of the ordinance
establishing the connection fee district for the area where the property is
located.
4.   Nonresidential buildings on platted lots constructed before, or under
construction on, the effective date of the ordinance, provided any future
division of a parcel shall subject the nondeveloped portion of the parcel to
the applicable connection fee.
5.   Nonresidential development on an unplatted property constructed before, or
under construction on, the effective date of the ordinance to the extent of the
actual developed area including buildings, drives, parking lots and other
similar types of surface improvements.
J.   All property shall be subject to the major stormwater drainage connection
fee as follows:
1.   Newly Platted Property: The gross area of the plat less any street right
of way and area to be dedicated as public park.
2.   Site Plan: The gross area of the site plan less any street right of way,
area to be dedicated as public park and any area for which the connection fee
was previously paid.
3.   For Residential Development On A Previously Platted Area Of Less Than One
Acre: The gross area of the lot as proportioned to the per acre connection fee.
4.   For Residential Development On A Previously Platted Residential Parcel Of
More Than One Acre, Or Any Nonplatted Residential Parcel: One acre. The
property owner may designate the one acre single residence parcel and a
remainder parcel and the one acre single residence parcel shall be subject to
the connection fee. Any future development of said parcel shall necessitate a
revised application for connection and payment of the appropriate connection
fee.
K.   Each connection fee district may provide that the city may enter into an
agreement with a property owner for the property owner to construct a
designated major stormwater drainage facility. Such agreement may provide the
city will waive the applicable connection fee to the extent of documented
construction costs incurred by the property owner to construct said major
stormwater drainage facility. Said agreement may provide the city can reimburse
the property owner for cost of the major stormwater drainage facilities in
excess of the waived connection fee in an amount not to exceed the then
applicable statutory limit of the amount the city can pay to a private property
owner. Such agreement shall provide that the property owner waives and agrees
not to recover any additional costs incurred by the property owner above and
beyond the waiver of the applicable connection fee and payment as provided
herein.
L.   It is within the discretion of the city council when to construct a major
stormwater drainage facility as designated in a stormwater connection fee
district. The city shall not be obligated to construct a major stormwater
drainage facility in response to any request for said stormwater drainage
facility. If a property owner requests the city to construct a major stormwater
drainage facility the property owner, as a condition of that request, must
agree to provide all easements and access necessary for construction of the
stormwater drainage facility on property owned or controlled by the requesting
party at no cost to the city. (Ord. 2006, 10-14-2013)
7-8H-1-1: SUGAR CREEK STORMWATER CONNECTION FEE DISTRICT:
The Sugar Creek stormwater connection fee district is hereby established,
consisting of a tract of land located in sections 9, 10, 14, 15, 16, 17, 21, 22
and 27 Township 78 North, Range 26 West of the 5th Principal Meridian, Dallas
County, Iowa, more particularly described as follows:
Beginning at the point of intersection of the east line of section 27, township
78 north, range 26 west of the 5th principal meridian and the north railroad
right-of-way line;
Thence north along the east line of said section 27 to the northeast corner of
said section 27;
Thence westerly along the northerly line of the northeast quarter of said
section 27 to the northwest quarter of the northeast quarter of the northeast
quarter of said section 27;
Thence north along the west line of the southeast quarter of the southeast
quarter of section 22, township 78 north, range 26 west to the northeast corner
of the southwest quarter of the southeast quarter of said section 22;
Thence west along the south line of the northwest quarter of the southeast
quarter of said section 22 to the southeast corner of the west one-half of the
northwest quarter of the southeast quarter of said section 22;
Thence north along the east line of the west one-half of the northwest quarter
of the southeast quarter of said section 22 to the northeast corner of the west
one-half of the northwest quarter of the southeast quarter of said section 22;
Thence east along the north line of the northwest quarter of the southeast
quarter of said section 22 to the northeast corner of the northwest quarter of
the southeast quarter of said section 22;
Thence north along the west line of the southwest quarter of the southeast
quarter of the northeast quarter of said section 22 to the northwest corner of
the southwest quarter of the southeast quarter of the northeast quarter of said
section 22;
Thence east along the south line of the northwest quarter of the southeast
quarter of the northeast quarter of said section 22 to the southeast corner of
the northwest quarter of the southeast quarter of the northeast quarter of said
section 22;
Thence north along the east line of the northwest quarter of the southeast
quarter of the northeast quarter of said section 22 to the northeast corner of
the northwest quarter of the southeast quarter of the northeast quarter of said
section 22;
Thence north along the east line of the west one-half of the northeast quarter
of the northeast quarter of said section 22 to the northeast corner of the west
one-half of the northeast quarter of the northeast quarter of said section 22;
Thence east along the north line of said section 22 to the northeast corner of
said section 22;
Thence north along the west line of section 14, township 78 north, range 26
west to the northwest corner of the southwest quarter of the southwest quarter
of the southwest quarter of said section 14;
Thence east along the north line of the southwest quarter of the southwest
quarter of the southwest quarter of said section 14 to the northeast corner of
the southwest quarter of the southwest quarter of the southwest quarter of said
section 14;
Thence north along the east line of the northwest quarter of the southwest
quarter of the southwest quarter of said section 14 to the northeast corner of
the northwest quarter of the southwest quarter of the southwest quarter of said
section 14;
Thence north along the east line of the west one-half of the northwest quarter
of the southwest quarter of said section 14 to the northeast corner of the west
one-half of the northwest quarter of the southwest quarter of said section 14;
Thence north along the east line of the southwest quarter of the southwest
quarter of the northwest quarter of said section 14 to the northeast corner of
the southwest one- quarter of the southwest one-quarter of the northwest one-
quarter of said section 14;
Thence west along the north line of the southwest quarter of the southwest
quarter of the northwest quarter of said section 14 to the northwest corner of
the southwest quarter of the southwest quarter of the northwest quarter of said
section 14;
Thence north along the west line of the southwest quarter of the northwest
quarter of said section 14 to the northwest corner of the southwest quarter of
the northwest quarter of said section 14;
Thence north along the east line of the southeast quarter of the northeast
quarter of the northeast quarter of section 15, township 78 north, range 26
west to the northeast corner of the southeast quarter of the northeast quarter
of the northeast quarter of said section 15;
Thence west along the south line of the northeast quarter of the northeast
quarter of the northeast quarter of said section 15 to the southwest corner of
the northeast quarter of the northeast quarter of the northeast quarter of said
section 15;
Thence north along the west line of the northeast quarter of the northeast
quarter of the northeast quarter of said section 15 to the northwest corner of
the northeast quarter of the northeast quarter of the northeast quarter of said
section 15;
Thence north along the east line of the west one-half of the southeast quarter
of the southeast quarter of said section 10, township 78 north, range 26 west
to the northeast corner of the west one-half of the southeast quarter of the
southeast quarter of said section 10;
Thence north along the east line of the west one-half of the northeast quarter
of the southeast quarter of said section 10 to the northeast corner of the west
one-half of the northeast quarter of the southeast quarter of said section 10;
Thence west along the north line of the west one-half of the northeast quarter
of the southeast quarter of said section 10 to the southeast corner of the
southwest quarter of the northeast quarter of said section 10;
Thence north along the east line of the southeast quarter of the southwest
quarter of the northeast quarter of said section 10 to the northeast corner of
the southeast quarter of the southwest quarter of the northeast quarter of said
section 10;
Thence west along the north line of the southeast quarter of the southwest
quarter of the northeast quarter of said section 10 to the northwest corner of
the southeast quarter of the southwest quarter of the northeast quarter of said
section 10;
Thence north along the east line of the northwest quarter of the southwest
quarter of the northeast quarter of said section 10 to the northeast corner of
the northwest quarter of the southwest quarter of the northeast quarter of said
section 10;
Thence north along the east line of the west one-half of the northwest quarter
of the northeast quarter of said section 10 to the south right-of-way line of
Interstate Highway 80;
Commencing at the southeast corner of the southwest quarter of the northeast
quarter of section 10, township 78 north, range 26 west;
Thence north along the east line of the southeast quarter of the southwest
quarter of the northeast quarter of said section 10 to the northeast corner of
the southeast quarter of the southwest quarter of the northeast quarter of said
section 10;
Thence west along the north line of the southeast quarter of the southwest
quarter of the northeast quarter of said section 10 to the northwest corner of
the southeast quarter of the southwest quarter of the northeast quarter of said
section 10;
Thence north along the east line of the northwest quarter of the northwest
quarter of the northeast quarter of said section 10 to the northeast corner of
the northwest quarter of the southwest quarter of the northeast quarter of said
section 10;
Thence north along the east line of the west one-half of the northwest quarter
of the northeast quarter of said section 10 to the south right-of-way line of
Interstate Highway 80;
Thence southwesterly along the southerly right-of-way line of Interstate
Highway 80 to the point of intersection with the west line of the northeast
quarter of said section 10;
Thence south along the west line of the northeast quarter of said section 10 to
the southwest corner of the southwest quarter of the northeast quarter of said
section 10;
Thence east along the south line of the southwest quarter of the northeast
quarter of said section 10 to the point of beginning.
Thence southwesterly along the southerly right-of-way line of Interstate
Highway 80 to a point of intersection with the east line of the southwest
quarter of the southwest quarter of section 9, township 78 north, range 26
west;
Thence south along the east line of the southwest quarter of the southwest
quarter of said section 9 to the southeast corner of the southwest quarter of
the southwest quarter of said section 9;
Thence south along the east line of the northwest quarter of the northwest
quarter of said section 16, township 78 north, range 26 west to the southeast
quarter of the northwest quarter of the northwest quarter of said section 16;
Thence west along the south line of the northwest quarter of the northwest
quarter of said section 16 to the southwest corner of the northwest quarter of
the northwest quarter of said section 16;
Thence west along the north line of the south one-half of the northeast quarter
of said section 17, township 78 north, range 16 west to the northwest corner of
the south one-half of the northeast quarter of said section 17;
Thence south along the west line of the northeast quarter of said section 17 to
the center of said section 17;
Thence east along the north line of the northwest quarter of the northwest
quarter of the southeast quarter of said section 17 to the northeast quarter of
the northwest quarter of the northwest quarter of the southeast quarter of said
section 17;
Thence south along the east line of the northwest quarter of the northwest
quarter of the southeast quarter of said section 17 to the southeast corner of
the northwest quarter of the northwest quarter of the southeast quarter of said
section 17;
Thence east along the north line of the southeast quarter of the northwest
quarter of the southeast quarter of said section 17 to the northeast corner of
the southeast quarter of the northwest quarter of the southeast quarter of said
section 17;
Thence south along the east line of the northwest quarter of the southeast
quarter of said section 17 to the southeast corner of the northwest quarter of
the southeast quarter of said section 17;
Thence south along the west line of the north one-half of the southeast quarter
of the southeast quarter of said section 17 to the southwest corner of the
north one-half of the southeast quarter of the southeast quarter of said
section 17;
Thence east along the south line of the north one-half of the southeast quarter
of the southeast quarter of said section 17 to the southeast corner of the
north one-half of the southeast quarter of the southeast quarter of said
section 17;
Thence north along the east line of the north one-half of the southeast quarter
of the southeast quarter of said section 17 to the northeast corner of the
southeast quarter of the southeast quarter of said section 17;
Thence east along the north line of the southwest quarter of the southwest
quarter of said section 16, to the northeast corner of the southwest quarter of
the southwest quarter of said section 16;
Thence south along the west line of the north one-half of the southeast quarter
of the southwest quarter of said section 16 to the southwest corner of the
north one-half of the southeast quarter of the southwest quarter of said
section 16;
Thence east along the south line of the north one-half of the southeast quarter
of the southwest quarter of said section 16 to the southeast corner of the
north one-half of the southeast quarter of the southwest quarter of said
section 16;
Thence south along the east line of the southeast quarter of the southwest
quarter of said section 16 to the north quarter quarter of section 21, township
78 north, range 26 west;
Thence east along the north line of the northeast quarter of said section 21 to
the northeast corner of the west one-half of the northwest quarter of the
northeast quarter of said section 21;
Thence south along the east line of the west one-half of the northwest quarter
of the northeast quarter of said section 21 to the southeast corner of the west
one-half of the northwest quarter of the northeast quarter of said section 21;
Thence south along the east line of the northwest quarter of the southwest
quarter of the northeast quarter of said section 21 to the southwest corner of
the northeast quarter of the southwest quarter of the northeast quarter of said
section 21;
Thence east along the north line of the southeast quarter of the southwest
quarter of the northeast quarter of said section 21 to the northeast corner of
the southeast quarter of the southwest quarter of the northeast quarter of said
section 21;
Thence south along the east line of the southwest quarter of the northeast
quarter of said section 21 to the southeast corner of the southwest quarter of
the northeast quarter of said section 21;
Thence east along the north line of the northeast quarter of the southeast
quarter of said section 21 to the northeast corner of the west one-half of the
northeast quarter of the southeast quarter of said section 21;
Thence south along the east line of the west half of the northeast quarter of
the southeast quarter of said section 21 to the southeast corner of the west
one-half of the northeast quarter of the southeast quarter of said section 21;
Thence east along the south line of the northeast quarter of the southeast
quarter of said section 21 to the southeast corner of the northeast quarter of
the southeast quarter of said section 21;
Thence south along the east line of said section 21 to the southeast corner of
said section 21;
Thence south along the west line of the north one-half of the northwest quarter
of the northwest quarter of said section 27 to the southwest corner of the
north one-half of the northwest quarter of the northwest quarter of said
section 27;
Thence east along the south line of the north one-half of the northwest quarter
of the northwest quarter of said section 27 to the southeast corner of the
north one-half of the northwest quarter of the northwest quarter of said
section 17;
Thence south along the east line of the northwest quarter of the northwest
quarter of said section 27 to the southeast corner of the northwest quarter of
the northwest quarter of said section 27;
Thence south along the east line of the southwest quarter of the northwest
quarter of said section 27 to the point of intersection with the north line of
the railroad right-of- way;
Thence northeasterly along the northerly right-of-way line of the railroad to
the point of beginning.
(Ord. 2024, 4-7-2014; amd. Ord. 2117, 10-5-2015, eff. 10-9-2015)
Connection fees are hereby established and shall be imposed upon owners of
properties within the Sugar Creek stormwater connection fee district, pursuant
to ordinance 2006, as follows:
A.   Fee Schedule: From the effective date through June 30, 2014, a connection
fee of four thousand seven hundred ten dollars ($4,710.00) per acre of property
served by the major stormwater drainage facilities shall be imposed.
Thereafter, the connection fee shall be annually adjusted as of July 1 of each
year according to ordinance 2006.
B.   Fee Outside District: The above established connection fee schedule shall
also apply to any properties located outside of the defined boundary of the fee
district from which the stormwater or overland flow drainage flows into the
boundary of the district and would be conveyed by one or more of the major
stormwater drainage facilities within the connection fee district.
C.   Exception: The above established connection fee schedule shall not apply
to any properties within the defined boundary of the fee district from which
stormwater or overland flow drainage does not flow into the boundary of the
district in such a manner that such flow would utilize one or more of the major
stormwater drainage facilities constructed within the district.
D.   Payment: The major stormwater drainage connection fee required by this
section shall be due and payable to the city treasurer.
1.   For property being platted the fee is due and payable before approval of
the final plat.
2.   For property subject to a site plan the fee is due and payable before
approval of the site plan.
3.   For all other property the fee is due and payable before issuance of a
building permit.
E.   Exemptions: The following properties shall be exempt from and not subject
to the connection fee:
1.   Platted lots with a single-family residential dwelling unit constructed
before, or under construction on, the effective date hereof; a single-family
residential unit would be considered under construction if an application for a
building permit is filed by June 30, 2014.
2.   Single-family residential dwellings on unplatted property constructed
before, or under construction on, the effective date hereof to a maximum area
of one acre.
3.   Platted property, developed or undeveloped, subject to an approved
development plan with the city on the effective date hereof establishing the
connection fee district for the area where the property is located.
4.   Nonresidential buildings on platted lots constructed before, or under
construction on, the effective date hereof, provided any future division of a
parcel shall subject the nondeveloped portion of the parcel to the connection
fee.
5.   Nonresidential development on an unplatted property constructed before, or
under construction on, the effective date hereof to the extent of the actual
developed area including buildings, drives, parking lots and other similar
types of surface improvements.
F.   Area Included: All properties shall be subject to the connection fee
district as follows:
1.   Newly Platted Property: The gross area of the plat less any street right
of way and area to be dedicated as public park.
2.   Site Plan: The gross area of the site plan less any street right of way,
area to be dedicated as public park and any area for which the connection fee
was previously paid.
3.   For Residential Development On A Previously Platted Area Of Less Than One
Acre: The gross area of the lot as proportioned to the per acre connection fee.
4.   For Residential Development On A Previously Platted Residential Parcel Of
More Than One Acre, Or Any Nonplatted Residential Parcel: One acre. The
property owner may designate the one acre single residence parcel and a
remainder parcel and the one acre single residence parcel shall be subject to
the connection fee. Any future development of said parcel shall necessitate a
revised application for connection and payment of the connection fee.
G.   Effect Of Schedule: The above connection fee schedule shall remain in
force and effect until such time that the city council adopts an ordinance to
adjust the connection fees to be imposed in subsequent years for the Sugar
Creek stormwater connection fee district. Nothing herein is intended to
restrict the city council from appropriate adjustment of the connection fee
schedule to reflect future construction costs.
H.   Major Stormwater Drainage Facilities Constructed: The city shall be
responsible to design and construct major stormwater drainage facilities within
the Sugar Creek stormwater connection fee district as graphically depicted on
exhibit B attached to the ordinance codified herein and on file in the office
of the city clerk. Other major stormwater drainage facilities to provide
comprehensive stormwater drainage to the Sugar Creek stormwater connection fee
district shall not be the responsibility of the city to design and construct
under the provisions of the Sugar Creek stormwater connection fee district.
I.   Previously Constructed Major Stormwater Drainage Facilities: Property
owners or their successors in interest who have constructed major stormwater
drainage improvements within the district prior to the effective date hereof
will be exempt from the connection fee if the value of the improvements
constructed exceeds the amount of the connection fee for that property owner's
parcel or parcels. To qualify, the previously constructed improvements must be
major stormwater drainage facilities that would have been included in the
calculation of the connection fee if that improvement was not previously
constructed. The connection fee district for the exempted property will be
reallocated for purposes of calculating the connection fee. This provision
shall be applicable only to major stormwater drainage improvements constructed
prior to the effective date hereof. (Ord. 2024, 4-7-2014)
7-8H-1-2: GRAND AVENUE EAST STORMWATER CONNECTION FEE DISTRICT:
The Grand Avenue East stormwater connection fee district is hereby established,
consisting of a tract of land located in sections 2, 10 and 11, Township 78
North, Range 25 West of the 5th Principal Meridian, Polk County, Iowa, more
particularly described as follows:
Commencing at the northeast corner Lot 103 Clegg Park Plat 4 an official plat
in informing a part of the City of West Des Moines, Iowa;
Thence westerly along the northerly line of Clegg Park Plat 4 to the northwest
corner of Lot 101 Clegg Park Plat 4;
Thence westerly along the northerly line of Clegg Park Plat 3 to the northwest
corner of Lot 99 Clegg Park Plat 3;
Thence southerly along the westerly line of Lot 99 Clegg Park Plat 3 to the
southwest corner of Lot 99 Clegg Park Plat 3;
Thence westerly along the northerly right-of-way line of Clegg Road to the
point of intersection with the east right- of-way line of 8th Street;
Thence south along the east right-of-way line of 8th Street to the point of
intersection with the north right-of-way line of Ashworth Road;
Thence west along the north right-of-way line of Ashworth Road to a point
directly north of the northwest corner of Lot 28 Maryland Heights Plat 2;
Thence south to the northwest corner of Lot 28 Maryland Heights Plat 2;
Thence south along the west line of Lot 28 of Maryland Heights Plat 2 to the
southwest corner Lot 28 Maryland Heights Plat 2;
Thence south along the west line of Lot 33 Maryland Heights Plat 2 to the north
right-of-way line of Grand Avenue;
Thence diagonally southeasterly to the point of intersection of the south
right-of-way line of Grand Avenue and the west right-of-way line of 10th
Street;
Thence easterly along the southerly right-of-way line of Grand Avenue to the
northwest corner Lot 1 Maryland Heights;
Thence south along the west line of Lot 1 Maryland Heights to the southwest
corner of Lot 1 Maryland Heights;
Thence south a distance of 8 feet to the southwest corner of the north 8 feet
Lot 2 Maryland Heights;
Thence east to a point on the east line of Lot 2 Maryland Heights said point
being 8 feet south of the northeast corner of Lot 2 Maryland Heights;
Thence north to the northwest corner Lot 53 Clover Hills Place;
Thence east along the north line of Lot 53 Clover Hills Place to the northeast
corner of Lot 53 Clover Hills Place;
Thence east to the east right-of-way of 9th Street;
Thence south along the east right-of-way of 9th Street to the northwest corner
Lot 25 Clover Hills Place;
Thence east along the north line of Lot 25 Clover Hills Place to the northeast
corner of Lot 25 Clover Hills Place;
Thence south along the east line of Lots 25, 24, 23, 22, 21 and 20 to the north
right-of-way line of Prospect Avenue;
Thence east along the north right-of-way line of Prospect Avenue to the
southeast corner of Lot 19 Clover Hills Place;
Thence southeasterly to the point of intersection of the east right-of-way line
of 8th Street and the south line of Lot 33 West Des Moines Heights, said point
being located 2 feet east of the southwest corner of Lot 33 West Des Moines
Heights;
Thence south along the east right-of-way line of 8th Street to the point of
intersection of the east right-of-way line of 8th Street and the north right-
of-way line of Hillside Avenue;
Thence east along the north right-of-way line of Hillside Avenue to the
southwest corner of Lot 9 Sternagel Place;
Thence north along the west line of Lot 9 Sternagel Place to the northwest
corner of Lot 9 Sternagel Place;
Thence east along the north line of Lot 9 Sternagel Place to the northeast
corner of Lot 9 Sternagel Place;
Thence east along the north line of Lot 13 Murrowdale to the northwest corner
of Lot 1 Murrowdale Plat 4;
Thence east along the north line of Murrowdale Plat 4 to the northeast corner
of Lot 1 Murrowdale Plat 4;
Thence east along the north line of Lot 15 Murrowdale to the northeast corner
of Lot 15 Murrowdale;
Thence east to a point on the east right-of-way line of 5th Street;
Thence north along the west line of Lot 23 Murrow Heights to the northwest
corner of Lot 23 Murrow Heights;
Thence east along the north line of Lot 23 Murrow Heights to the northeast
corner Lot 23 Murrow Heights;
Thence east across the alley to the southwest corner Lot 35 Murrow Heights;
Thence north along the west line of Lot 35 Murrow Heights to the northwest
corner of Lot 35 Murrow Heights;
Thence north along the west line of Lot 36 Murrow Heights to the northwest
corner of Lot 36;
Thence east along the north line of Lot 36 Murrow Heights to the northeast
corner Lot 36 Murrow Heights;
Thence south along the east line of Lot 36 Murrow Heights to the southeast
corner Lot 36 Murrow Heights;
Thence south along the east line of Lot 35 Murrow Heights to a point on the
west right-of-way line of 4th Street directly west of the south right-of-way
line of Prospect Avenue;
Thence east across 4th Street to the northwest corner Lot 77 Linnwill;
Thence east along the south right-of-way of Prospect Avenue to the northeast
corner of Lot 64 Linnwill;
Thence easterly across Linnwill Place to the southwest corner Lot 2 Linnwill;
Thence east along the south line of Lot 2 Linnwill to the southeast corner Lot
2 Linnwill;
Thence north along the east line of Lot 2 Linnwill to the northeast corner Lot
2 Linnwill;
Thence north along the east line of Lot 1 Linnwill to the northeast corner Lot
1 Linnwill;
Thence east to the east corporate limits of the City of West Des Moines;
Thence north along the east corporate limits of the City of West Des Moines to
a point on the east corporate limit lines directly east of the southeast corner
of the levee easement on Lot 23 Ashworth;
Thence west to the point of intersection of the west right- of-way line of 1st
Street and the south line of the levee easement on Lot 23 Ashworth;
Thence northerly and westerly along the south line of the levee easement on Lot
23 Ashworth to the east right-of-way line of Hoak Drive;
Thence west across Hoak Drive to a point on the west right- of-way line of Hoak
Drive;
Thence northerly along the westerly right-of-way line of Hoak Drive to a point
on the westerly right-of-way line of Hoak Drive with said point being described
as "commencing at the intersection of the present centerline of Hoak Drive with
the centerline of Ashworth Road, said intersection being 239.39 feet west of
the south quarter corner of Section 2, Township 78 North, Range 24 West of the
Fifth Principal Meridian, thence north 25 degrees 25 minutes 23 seconds east
93.65 feet along the present centerline of Hoak Drive, thence north 15 degrees
33 minutes 16 seconds west 778.51 feet along the present centerline of Hoak
Drive, thence south 78 degrees 48 minutes 44 seconds west 68.21 feet to the
present westerly right-of-way line of Hoak Drive;"
Thence south 70 degrees 48 minutes 44 seconds west 302.99 feet to the easterly
right-of-way line of the railroad right-of-way;
Thence northerly along the easterly railroad right-of-way line to the southeast
corner of Lot 5 Colby's Factory Addition;
Thence west across the railroad right-of-way to the point of beginning.
Connection fees are hereby established and shall be imposed upon owners of
properties within the Grand Avenue East stormwater connection fee district,
pursuant to ordinance 2006, as follows:
A.   Fee Schedule: From the effective date through June 30, 2014, a connection
fee of fourteen thousand six hundred fifty four dollars ($14,654.00) per acre
of property served by the major stormwater drainage facilities shall be
imposed. Thereafter, the connection fee shall be annually adjusted as of July 1
of each year according to ordinance 2006.
B.   Fee Outside District: The above established connection fee schedule shall
also apply to any properties located outside of the defined boundary of the fee
district from which the stormwater or overland flow drainage flows into the
boundary of the district and would be conveyed by one or more of the major
stormwater drainage facilities within the connection fee district.
C.   Exception: The above established connection fee schedule shall not apply
to any properties within the defined boundary of the fee district from which
stormwater or overland flow drainage does not flow into the boundary of the
district in such a manner that such flow would utilize one or more of the major
stormwater drainage facilities constructed within the district.
D.   Payment: The major stormwater drainage connection fee required by this
section shall be due and payable to the city finance department.
1.   For property being platted the fee is due and payable before approval of
the final plat.
2.   For property subject to a site plan the fee is due and payable before
approval of the site plan.
3.   For all other property the fee is due and payable before issuance of a
building permit.
E.   Exemptions: The following properties shall be exempt from and not subject
to the connection fee:
1.   Platted lots with a single-family residential dwelling unit constructed
before, or under construction on the effective date hereof. A platted lot shall
be considered under construction on the effective date hereof if an application
for a building permit has been approved by June 30, 2014.
2.   Single-family residential dwellings on unplatted property constructed
before, or under construction on the effective date hereof to a maximum area of
one acre.
3.   Platted property, developed or undeveloped, subject to an approved
development plan with the city on the effective date hereof establishing the
connection fee district for the area where the property is located.
4.   Nonresidential buildings on platted lots constructed before, or under
construction on the effective date hereof, provided any future division of a
parcel shall subject the nondeveloped portion of the parcel to the connection
fee.
5.   Nonresidential development on an unplatted property constructed before, or
under construction on the effective date hereof to the extent of the actual
developed area, including buildings, drives, parking lots and other similar
types of surface improvements.
F.   Area Included: All properties shall be subject to the connection fee
district as follows:
1.   Newly Platted Property: The gross area of the plat less any street right
of way and area to be dedicated as public park.
2.   Site Plan: The gross area of the site plan less any street right of way
and area to be dedicated as public park, and any area for which the connection
fee was previously paid.
3.   For Residential Development On A Previously Platted Area Of Less Than One
Acre: The gross area of the lot as proportioned to the per acre connection fee.
4.   For Residential Development On A Previously Platted Residential Parcel Of
More Than One Acre, Or Any Nonplatted Residential Parcel: One acre. The
property owner may designate the one acre single residential parcel and a
remainder parcel, with the one acre single residential parcel subject to the
connection fee. Any future development of said parcel shall necessitate a
revised application for connection and payment of the connection fee.
G.   Effect Of Schedule: The above connection fee schedule shall remain in
force and effect until such time that the city council adopts an ordinance to
adjust the connection fees to be imposed in subsequent years for the Grand
Avenue East stormwater connection fee district. Nothing herein is intended to
restrict or prohibit the city council from appropriate adjustment of the
connection fee schedule to reflect future construction costs.
H.   Major Stormwater Drainage Facilities Constructed: The city shall be
responsible to design and construct major stormwater drainage facilities within
the Grand Avenue East stormwater connection fee district as graphically
depicted on exhibit B attached to the ordinance codified herein and on file in
the office of the city clerk. Other major stormwater drainage facilities to
provide comprehensive stormwater drainage to the Grand Avenue East stormwater
connection fee district shall not be the responsibility of the city to design
and construct under the provisions of the Grand Avenue East stormwater
connection fee district. (Ord. 2028, 4-21-2014)
CHAPTER 9
WATER SUPPLY PROTECTION
SECTION:
7-9-1: Purpose
7-9-2: Definitions
7-9-3: Protection for Publicly-Owned Shallow Wells
7-9-4: Protection for Publicly-Owned Deep Wells
7-9-5: Applicability of Provisions
7-9-6: Existing Structures and Facilities
7-9-1: PURPOSE:
It is the purpose of this Chapter to protect the public water supply of the
City by regulating the locations and types of construction of certain
structures or facilities which may be potential sources of contamination of the
publicly-owned water supply wells. (Ord. 944, 3-4-91)
7-9-2: DEFINITIONS:
The definitions of words used herein shall be those found in textbooks of Civil
Engineering, except a shallow well is a well located and constructed in such a
manner that there is not a continuous layer of low permeability soil or rock
(or equivalent retarding mechanism acceptable to the department) at least 5
feet thick, the top of which is located at least 25 feet below the normal
ground surface and above the aquifer from which water is to be drawn. (Ord.
944, 3-4-91; amd. Ord. 2406, 3-2-2020)
7-9-3: PROTECTION FOR PUBLICLY-OWNED SHALLOW WELLS:
No structure or facility shall be located within the distances as outlined in
the Iowa Administrative Code 567 Chapter 43 , from a publicly-owned shallow
well within the City. (Ord. 2406, 3-2-2020)
7-9-4: PROTECTION FOR PUBLICLY-OWNED DEEP WELLS:
No structure or facility shall be located within the distances as outlined in
the Iowa Administrative Code 567 Chapter 43, from a publicly-owned deep well
within the City. (Ord. 2406, 3-2-2020)
7-9-5: APPLICABILITY OF PROVISIONS:
The provisions of this Chapter shall apply to all publicly-owned wells existing
within the City, except former publicly-owned wells which have been abandoned
and from which the pumping equipment has been removed. (Ord. 944, 3-4-91)
7-9-6: EXISTING STRUCTURES AND FACILITIES:
The use of structures and facilities existing on the effective date hereof may
be continued even though such use may not conform with the regulations of this
Chapter. Such structure shall not be enlarged, extended, reconstructed or
substituted subsequent to the effective date hereof. (Ord. 944, 3-4-91)
CHAPTER 10
TREES AND SHRUBS
SECTION:
7-10-1: Purpose
7-10-2: Definitions
7-10-3: Authority Of The Code Enforcement Officer
7-10-4: Authority Of The City Forester
7-10-5: Duties Of The City Forester
7-10-6: Permit Required
7-10-7: General Standards
7-10-8: Unauthorized Interference With Public Trees And Shrubs
7-10-9: Insurance And Bond For Businesses Engaged In Working With Trees And
Shrubs
7-10-10: Violation Notice And Assessment
7-10-11: Appeal
7-10-12: Protection Of Trees
7-10-13: Interference With The City Forester, Code Enforcement Officer, Or City
Employees Enforcing This Chapter
7-10-14: Penalties
7-10-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to promote and protect the public health,
safety, and general welfare and to preserve the benefits provided by trees by
providing for the regulation of the planting, maintenance, and removal of trees
and shrubs within the city. (Ord. 2083, 2-23-2015)
7-10-2: DEFINITIONS:
For use in this chapter, the following terms are defined:
CITY FORESTER: The city manager or any person designated by the city manager of
the city of West Des Moines to enforce this chapter.
CLOSING: A closing exists any time the movement of pedestrian or vehicular
traffic shall be stopped on a public way, for reason of public safety, as a
result of any action covered by this chapter.
CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER: The city manager or any enforcement officer
designated by the city manager of the city of West Des Moines to enforce this
chapter.
NUISANCE: Whatever is injurious to health, public safety, indecent, or
offensive to the senses, or an obstruction to the free use of property so as to
unreasonably interfere with the enjoyment of life or property.
PERSONS: An individual, firm, partnership, domestic or foreign corporation,
company, association, trust, or legal entity.
PROPERTY OWNER: A person owning or responsible for private property in the
city.
PUBLIC PROPERTY: Any and all property not defined as public right of way (ROW)
located within the confines of the city and owned by the city of West Des
Moines, Iowa, or held in the name of the city by any of the departments,
commissions, or agencies within the city government.
PUBLIC RIGHT OF WAY (ROW): All the land lying between property lines on either
side of all public streets, alleys, and boulevards or parkways, including
public easements and grants to the city of West Des Moines, Iowa. The term used
herein shall include vertical directions above and below the ground surface
within the public right of way.
PUBLIC TREE OR SHRUB: Any perennial woody plant, shrub, or tree located on
public right of way or public property of the city of West Des Moines.
PUBLIC UTILITY COMPANY: Includes purveyors of electricity, natural gas, water,
telephone, communications services and cable television services, and storm and
sanitary sewer facilities, who are governmental agencies, who are performing
services related to city initiated public improvement projects, or who have a
valid franchise to operate within the city of West Des Moines.
SHRUB: Any woody perennial plant less than fifteen feet (15') tall at maturity,
multiple stemmed, and adaptable to shaping, trimming, and pruning without
injury.
TREE: Any woody perennial plant greater than fifteen feet (15') at maturity.
(Ord. 2083, 2-23-2015)
7-10-3: AUTHORITY OF THE CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER:
The code enforcement officer shall have the authority to enforce nuisance
abatement of trees and shrubs growing on private property which violate city
ordinances or policies. (Ord. 2083, 2-23-2015)
7-10-4: AUTHORITY OF THE CITY FORESTER:
The city forester shall have the authority to perform and to regulate the
planting, maintenance, and removal of public trees and shrubs. The city
forester shall manage public trees and shrubs in order to promote and protect
public health, safety, and general welfare and to preserve the benefits of city
tree resources. The city forester shall enforce nuisance abatement of trees and
shrubs growing on public property which violate city ordinances or policies.
(Ord. 2083, 2-23-2015)
7-10-5: DUTIES OF THE CITY FORESTER:
The city forester shall have and exercise the following duties pertaining to
public trees and shrubs:
A.   Pruning Or Removal: To prevent indiscriminate pruning or removal of public
trees and shrubs.
B.   New Plantings: To regulate and locate new plantings of public trees and
shrubs in accordance with the "City Forestry Standards Of Practice And
Specifications".
C.   Secure Compliance: To order persons to comply with the duties placed upon
them by this chapter.
D.   Advise: To assist and advise code enforcement officers and other city
employees regarding trees and shrubs on public and private property.
E.   Supervision: To supervise all activities by city employees and contractors
in the planting, maintenance, and removal of public trees and shrubs. To
supervise does not require the city forester to be physically present to
directly monitor such activities.
F.   Issue Permits: To issue all tree and shrub permits in accordance with
section
7-10-6 of this chapter.
G.   Conditions Of Permit: To affix reasonable conditions to the granting of a
permit hereunder and supervise work done under the permit.
H.   Replacement Of Public Trees And Shrubs For Public Improvement: If
replacement of public trees or shrubs is required, it shall occur within one
hundred twenty (120) calendar days after the public improvement has been
completed, or within the appropriate planting season at the discretion of the
city forester.
I.   Removal Of Trees Or Shrubs For Nuisance Abatement: To remove or require
removal of any public tree or shrub in whole or part that is so hazardous,
diseased, or insect ridden as to be deemed a nuisance.
J.   Notification Of Future Tree Or Shrub Removal On Public Property: To
provide written notification via certified mail with return receipt requested
and regular mail to the abutting property owner at least fourteen (14) calendar
days prior to any scheduled removal. Unclaimed or returned mail shall not
constitute improper notification. The notification shall provide that the
abutting property owner must contact the city within fourteen (14) calendar
days of the date of the mailing if the property owner has any questions or
concerns regarding the tree or shrub removal. Notification shall not be
required for the removal of a public tree or shrub in an emergency situation as
determined by the city forester. Notification shall also not be required if the
abutting property owner requested the removal of the public tree or shrub. No
right is conferred upon or provided to the abutting property owner due to
notification of removal. (Ord. 2083, 2-23-2015)
7-10-6: PERMIT REQUIRED:
No person shall plant, remove, treat, prune, cable, brace, or otherwise disturb
a public tree or shrub without first applying for and receiving a permit from
the city forester. Requests for permits must be made a minimum of forty eight
(48) business hours in advance of the time the work shall begin. A permit will
not be required to prune branches that are less than six inches (6") in
diameter. All work shall be performed in accordance with the "City Forestry
Standards Of Practice And Specifications". The city shall be exempt from
acquiring permits to perform necessary maintenance to public trees and shrubs
or to remove public trees and shrubs as part of a city initiated public
improvement project. Property owners shall be exempt from acquiring permits for
planting, removing, or otherwise disturbing a public tree or shrub if the work
is being performed as part of a development agreement approved by the city. If
being performed as part of a development agreement, the city forester shall be
notified a minimum of forty eight (48) business hours in advance of the time
the work shall begin.
A.   Required Permits And Ensuing Conditions Of Issuance: The following permits
with the ensuing conditions of issuance shall be obtained before any private
person or entity performs any work on public trees and shrubs:
1.   Planting: A permit shall be issued for planting within the public right of
way or on public property when the city forester finds that the new planting is
desirable and the method of workmanship will be satisfactory and that the new
planting(s) will conform to the "City Forestry Standards Of Practice And
Specifications". A permit shall be denied if the planting(s) will likely create
a future public nuisance or danger. Any tree planted within the public right of
way or on public property pursuant to this chapter shall become the property of
the city.
2.   Removal: A permit shall be issued for removal of a public tree or shrub,
including where the city forester finds the tree or shrub interferes with
performing improvements within the public right of way or on public property,
or the tree or shrub creates a public nuisance or danger. All public tree or
shrub removal shall conform to the "City Forestry Standards Of Practice And
Specifications".
No person shall close any street, alley, boulevard or parkway, highway,
sidewalk, or trail to remove a public tree or shrub or private tree, or any
portion thereof, without first obtaining the approval for such closing from the
city in writing.
3.   Treatment: A permit shall be issued for the treatment of any tree located
within the public right of way for disease or insect infestation. A permit will
only be issued when the tree has been designated by the city forester as a
candidate for possible treatment. When required by law, treatment shall be
performed by a commercial pesticide applicator licensed to perform work in the
state of Iowa and shall consist of chemical treatments approved by the city
forester.
B.   Permits; Contents Of Permit Application: The application shall be made on
a form supplied by the city. A fee may be assessed for the permit to cover the
cost of administration. Fees will be established by resolution of the city
council. Fees will not be required from public agencies or franchised utilities
that operate within the city. The applicant shall, at the time of making the
application, agree in writing to, in all respects, save the city harmless,
indemnify the city, and protect the city and the public at all times in
connection with work done under such permit.
C.   Inspection Of Location Designated By The Permit: The city forester shall
inspect the location designated by the permit, and if in his or her opinion it
will be desirable that such tree or shrub be planted, removed, treated, or
otherwise disturbed, the city forester shall issue a permit.
D.   Improper Planting: Trees and shrubs planted within the public right of way
or on public property without authorization or in accordance with an issued
permit, and public trees and shrubs found growing in violation of the "City
Forestry Standards Of Practice And Specifications", are subject to removal by
the city forester following the appropriate notification.
E.   Utility Requirements: All public utilities, their agents, employees, and
subcontractors shall operate under an annual permit to prune public trees and
shrubs for the purpose of eliminating potential hazards to public safety, to
maintain their facilities, and to install or replace existing utilities. The
annual permit requirement shall not apply to City initiated public improvement
projects. The utility company shall provide to the City Forester a copy of its
work specifications and work schedule a minimum of forty eight (48) business
hours prior to the commencement of any work. In cases of emergency,
notification shall be given a maximum of forty eight (48) hours after the
commencement of work. All work must comply with the "City Forestry Standards of
Practice and Specifications". (Ord. 2083, 2-23-2015)
7-10-7: GENERAL STANDARDS:
Any person growing a tree or shrub on private property, or growing a tree,
shrub, garden, or other vegetative growth, or installing landscaping,
structures, or other objects located within private property which encroaches
upon the public right- of-way or that interferes with the vision triangle as
provided in this Code, or any person growing a public tree or shrub, shall
comply with the following standards:
A.   Maintenance: Trees or shrubs planted within the public right- of-way that
extend over public streets or sidewalks, or that obstruct traffic signs or
public utilities, shall be maintained by the City. Trees or shrubs planted on
private property that extend over public streets or sidewalks, or obstruct
traffic signs or public utilities, shall be maintained by owners of abutting
property in accordance with this section and the "City Forestry Standards of
Practice and Specifications" at the cost of the property owner. Maintenance
includes, but is not limited to, watering, fertilizing, insect and disease
control, treatment, and pruning. The City reserves the right to perform
maintenance of private or public trees or shrubs that are planted or extend
into the public right-of-way without notice or compensation to the abutting
property owner if the City Forester determines that such maintenance is
necessary to promote and protect the public health, safety, and general
welfare.
B.   Pruning: Subject to the maintenance responsibility provisions cited above,
trees or shrubs shall be properly pruned for the purpose of preventing the
following potentially hazardous situations: the obstruction of traffic signs;
the obstruction of a clear view of street and alley intersections; the
obstruction of the proper lighting of public streets and places; and the
obstruction of public walks, trails, or streets. The minimum vertical clearance
of trees and shrubs shall be fourteen feet (14') between the surface of a
street and the lowest branch. The minimum vertical clearance shall be eight
feet (8') between the surface of a sidewalk, trail, or other pedestrian way and
the lowest branch. All pruning shall be done in accordance with the "City
Forestry Standards of Practice and Specifications".
C.   Avoid Damage Or Nuisance: The planting of trees, shrubs, gardens, or other
vegetative growth, or the installation of landscaping, structures, or other
objects on private property which would cause a public danger or nuisance shall
be prohibited.
D.   Street Or Alley Intersection: The planting of trees, shrubs, gardens, or
other vegetative growth, or the installation of landscaping, structures, or
other objects on corner lots or lots adjacent to an alley within the area
bounded by street or alley lines of such lots and a line joining points along
said street or alley lines twenty five feet (25') from the point of
intersection of the public right-of-way lines, defined in this Code as the
"vision triangle", shall be limited to trees, shrubs, gardens, and other
vegetative growth, and landscaping, structures, and other objects located
within this area that shall not exceed two feet (2') in height, and the lowest
branches of any trees planted outside of this area, but the branches of such
trees that extend within this area, must be a minimum of ten feet (10') in
height. Height shall be measured from the curb elevation and trees, shrubs,
gardens, and other vegetative growth must be pruned or maintained to comply
with these height restrictions to create an unobstructed view of the
intersection between heights of two feet (2') and ten feet (10') above the curb
elevation. Notwithstanding these height restrictions, no trees, shrubs,
gardens, or other vegetative growth shall be planted within the vision triangle
that create or constitute a vision obstruction to vehicular, bicycle, or
pedestrian traffic. Similarly, no landscaping, structures, or other objects
shall be placed within the vision triangle that create or constitute a vision
obstruction to vehicular, bicycle, or pedestrian traffic. The City shall have
sole discretion to determine whether a vision obstruction exists for vehicular,
bicycle, and pedestrian traffic. There shall be no compensation by the City to
the affected property owner for any damage to or removal of any trees, shrubs,
gardens, or other vegetative growth, or any damage to or removal of
landscaping, structures, or other objects, encroaching upon the public right-
of-way or that interferes with the "vision triangle" as defined in this Code.
E.   Dead, Diseased, Or Insect Ridden Trees Or Shrubs: Dead, diseased, or
insect ridden trees or shrubs shall be subject to the following conditions:
1.   Public Trees Or Shrubs: The City Forester shall coordinate treatment or
removal of any public tree or shrub which is so hazardous, diseased or insect
ridden as to be deemed a nuisance and constitutes a hazard to other trees or
shrubs or the public safety. Public trees that are at risk of becoming diseased
or insect ridden may be treated or preemptively removed by the City as part of
a management plan approved by the City Council. Trees in the public right-of-
way not identified for treatment by the City and not deemed a nuisance or a
hazard may be treated by the abutting property owner with an approved permit.
2.   Trees Or Shrubs Located Within Private Property: The Code Enforcement
Officer shall provide written notice to be served on a property owner by
personal service, or by certified mail with return receipt requested and
regular mail, requiring the treatment or removal within fourteen (14) calendar
days of notification of any trees or shrubs located within private property
which are dead, diseased or insect ridden so as to be deemed a nuisance and
constitute a hazard to public trees or shrubs, other trees or shrubs on private
property, or public safety. Such removal, pruning, or treatment as required by
provisions of this section shall be subject to the applicable "City Forestry
Standards of Practice and Specifications".
F.   Prohibited Trees: Trees prohibited from being planted within public
property shall be identified by the City Forester and included on an official
list. Copies of this list shall be made available at City offices and on the
City website.
G.   Appropriate Trees: Any tree planted in the public right-of-way must first
meet all requirements listed in the City's tree planting permit. Trees
appropriate to be planted within the public right-of-way are those listed in
the most recent edition of Iowa State University's extension bulletin Pm-1429e
"Street Trees" and Pm-1429d "Low-Growing Trees for Urban and Rural Iowa".
Copies of these lists are available at City offices and through the Polk County
Extension Office. Other trees or shrubs not listed within these publications,
but not prohibited, may be reviewed and approved at the discretion of the City
Forester. (Ord. 2192, 12-27-2016)
7-10-8: UNAUTHORIZED INTERFERENCE WITH PUBLIC TREES AND SHRUBS:
The following actions are prohibited on public trees and shrubs unless
authorized by the City Forester:
A.   Damage: Damaging, cutting, carving, transplanting, or removing any public
tree or shrub.
B.   Attachments: Attaching any rope, wire, nails, or other contrivance to any
public tree or shrub.
C.   Electric Wire: Causing or permitting any wire charged with electricity to
come in contact with any public tree or shrub.
D.   Harmful Substance: Allowing any gaseous, liquid, or solid substance which
is harmful to any public tree or shrub to come in contact with it or the soil
supporting the sustenance of any public tree or shrub.
E.   Fire: Setting fire or permitting any fire to burn when such fire or the
heat thereof will injure any portion of any public tree or shrub.
F.   Exception: Fastening holiday or ornamental lighting from November 1 to
January 15 is allowed. (Ord. 2083, 2-23-2015)
7-10-9: INSURANCE AND BOND FOR BUSINESSES ENGAGED IN WORKING WITH TREES AND
SHRUBS:
A.   Insurance: Any person or entity engaging in the business of trimming,
pruning, spraying, or otherwise treating trees or shrubs on private property
within the City shall be sufficiently insured and bonded at all times the
person or entity performs these services. Any person or entity engaging in the
business of trimming, pruning, spraying, or otherwise treating trees or shrubs
on public property within the City shall acquire, and continuously maintain
during the period in which the person or entity is performing services, and
shall provide the City with acceptable proof of liability insurance coverage
that satisfies the City's requirements.
For the trimming, pruning, spraying, or otherwise treating trees or shrubs on
public property by others, the City shall be named as an additional insured by
endorsement to the liability insurance policy. Certificates of insurance
evidencing that the person or entity has secured the required liability
insurance must be provided to the City prior to the commencement of any work. A
minimum of thirty (30) calendar days' notice to the City prior to the
cancellation of or change in any such insurance shall be endorsed on each
policy and noted on each certificate.
B.   Bond: A bond or cash deposit in the amount of five thousand dollars
($5,000.00) shall be deposited with the City to assure adequate cleanup of
activities. (Ord. 2083, 2-23-2015)
7-10-10: VIOLATION NOTICE AND ASSESSMENT:
If a person or property owner is in violation of any regulations of this
chapter, the Code Enforcement Officer or City Forester may serve written notice
on the responsible person by personal service, or by certified mail with return
receipt requested and regular mail; or if the certified mail is returned
undelivered, then by posting a copy of said notice at the address of the
responsible person. The notice shall include a sufficiently detailed
description of the violation and shall allow a reasonable time for the
performance of any required remedial actions or order to cease and desist all
work regulated by this chapter. If the responsible person or property owner
fails to undertake the remedial actions specified in the notice within the
allowable time, the Code Enforcement Officer or City Forester may take steps to
effect compliance with the violation, to revoke any applicable permit, to
perform the required action, and to assess the reasonable costs to the
responsible person or property owner and against the private property for
collection in the same manner as Property Tax. (Ord. 2083, 2-23-2015)
7-10-11: APPEAL:
A.   Any appeal of a decision of the Code Enforcement Officer or City Forester
shall be submitted in writing to the Code Enforcement Officer or City Forester
within ten (10) calendar days of the date the City personally served or mailed
the notice. Fees for appeal shall be established by resolution of the City
Council. The subject matter of an appeal may be the issuance of permits under
this chapter, the concurrence of the City Forester in permits required under
other ordinances or policies, violation notices issued by the Code Enforcement
Officer or City Forester, or other relevant matters involving the
interpretation and enforcement of this chapter.
B.   The appeal shall be considered by the City Manager or designee within
thirty (30) calendar days of receiving the appeal. Action by the Code
Enforcement Officer or City Forester shall be stayed until the decision of the
City Manager or designee is rendered, unless the Code Enforcement Officer or
City Forester certifies to the City Manager or designee, after notice of appeal
shall have been filed with him or her, that by reason of the facts stated in
the petition, a stay would, in his or her opinion, cause imminent peril to life
or property. In such a case, proceedings shall not be stayed unless an
injunction has been obtained from a court of record.
C.   The City Manager or designee may reverse, affirm, modify, or waive, wholly
or partially, any decision of the Code Enforcement Officer or City Forester, or
the City Manager or designee may grant, deny, or revoke any permit or license.
The decision of the City Manager or designee shall be final. (Ord. 2083, 2-23-
2015)
7-10-12: PROTECTION OF TREES:
All public trees and shrubs deemed to be saved during construction or
reconstruction activities shall be protected by the developer or property owner
from damages or disturbances, including their root systems. Protective fences
shall be placed and maintained at or beyond the drip line of public trees and
shrubs that are unaffected by approved excavation or construction activities,
but are subject to damage during said activities. Any disturbance of any kind
within the fenced area shall be prohibited. Cutting, boring, and filling soil
within the drip line of a public tree or shrub to be preserved shall be
prohibited unless otherwise approved by the City Forester. Soil compaction
caused by any type of equipment shall not be allowed to occur over the
protected area of the root zone of any public tree or shrub unless approved by
the City Forester. (Ord. 2083, 2-23-2015)
7-10-13: INTERFERENCE WITH THE CITY FORESTER, CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER, OR CITY
EMPLOYEES ENFORCING THIS CHAPTER:
It is unlawful for any person or property owner to hinder, obstruct, or
otherwise interfere with the City Forester, Code Enforcement Officer, or
employees of the City while engaged in carrying out the provisions of this
chapter. (Ord. 2083, 2-23-2015)
7-10-14: PENALTIES:
The following penalties shall be imposed upon any person or property owner who
violates any provision of this chapter:
A.   Any person or property owner who violates the provisions of this chapter,
upon conviction, shall be punished as set forth in title 1, chapter 4 of this
Code.
B.   In addition to the penalties provided above, any person or property owner
found guilty of violating the provisions of this chapter may be required to pay
the cost of repair or replacement of such public tree or shrub. The replacement
costs shall be determined in accordance with the latest version of "A Guide for
Plant Appraisal" as published by the International Society of Arboriculture and
authored by the Council of Tree and Landscape Appraisers.
C.   The City reserves the right to collect costs in addition to penalties. The
imposition of any penalty of a violation of this chapter shall not be construed
as a waiver of the right of the City to collect the costs of removal or
treatment of any tree or shrub in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter.
D.   Public utilities may be held responsible for the replacement of any public
tree or shrub which has been severely damaged or died in the opinion of the
City Forester as a result of the maintenance or new installation of utilities.
The City Forester shall coordinate with the public utility appropriate and
reasonable replacement of said severely damaged or dead public tree or shrub in
accordance with the "City Forestry Standards of Practice and Specifications".
E.   Property owners abutting the area on which the public tree or shrub is
located shall be notified by the utility company forty eight (48) hours prior
to the commencement of any utility repair, maintenance, or replacement
activities which will affect or harm the public tree or shrub. In cases of
emergency repair, the City Forester shall have the option to waive said
notification. (Ord. 2083, 2-23-2015)
CHAPTER 11
PARK REGULATIONS
SECTION:
7-11-1: Purpose
7-11-2: Rules And Regulations
7-11-3: Penalty
7-11-1: PURPOSE:
The city council has adopted certain park rules governing the use of and
conduct in city parks. The term “city park(s)” as used herein refers to the
city parks, park facilities within city parks, and trails within city parks
located within or without the corporation limits of the city. The term “parks
and recreation facility” as used herein refers to a facility owned or operated
by the City of West Des Moines including, but not limited to, Raccoon River
Park Nature Lodge, Valley Junction Activity Center, Raccoon River Park Softball
Complex, Holiday Park Baseball Complex, MidAmerican Energy RecPlex, Raccoon
River Park Boathouse, and Jamie Hurd Amphitheater. The term “greenways” as used
herein refers to designated open spaces, typically located along a natural
corridor, that are preserved for environmental protection or recreational use
such as street-separated recreational trails. (Ord. 1355, 3-22-1999; amd. Ord.
2438, 9-8-2020; Ord. 2649, 1-21-2025)
7-11-2: RULES AND REGULATIONS:
The following rules and regulations are established concerning the conduct and
use of city parks and parks and recreation facilities, also regulating traffic
and parking automobiles and vehicles. Persons and vehicles authorized for
activities related to public safety or maintenance are exempt from the
regulations:
A.   Use Of Roadways: No person shall ride or drive any automobile, motorcycle,
moped, snowmobile or any other motorized vehicle in any city park or parks and
recreation facility except on the established roads or designated areas.
B.   Speed: No person shall ride or drive any automobile or other vehicle in a
city park or parks and recreation facility at a speed in excess of fifteen (15)
miles per hour.
C.   Parking: Vehicles shall be parked in designated parking lots and marked
stalls only, unless the parks and recreation director or designee has
specifically authorized parking on the grass or outside designated parking
lots. No vehicle shall be parked or allowed to remain within any city park or
parks and recreation facility overnight or outside posted hours unless
specifically authorized by the parks and recreation director or designee. No
person(s) shall obstruct or impede the normal flow of traffic within a city
park or parks and recreation facility.
D.   Hitching Animals: No person shall ride a horse or other animal or operate
any type of horse or animal drawn conveyance in a city park or parks and
recreation facility except by permission of the director of parks and
recreation or designee.
E.   Destruction Of Natural Environment: No person shall in any manner deface,
injure or remove any tree, shrub, or plant standing or growing in a city park
or parks and recreation facility or pick or destroy flowers or seeds growing
therein, or remove nests or wildlife/wildfowl.
F.   Fires: No fires shall be lighted or made in any city park or parks and
recreation facility except with the permission of the director of parks and
recreation or designee, provided that this subsection does not apply to fires
in stoves, ovens, grills, fire rings or fireplaces provided in any city park or
parks and recreation facility for use in picnic cooking. Fires may be
prohibited entirely during posted periods.
G.   Firearms, Weapons, Or Explosives: No person shall use firearms,
explosives, weapons, firecrackers or fireworks in any city park or parks and
recreation facility except as otherwise provided by any other section of this
code. Fireworks displays may be allowed by permission of the director of parks
and recreation and the fire chief.
H.   Litter: No person shall deposit upon or litter the ground with any form of
waste material in any city park or parks and recreation facility. All waste
shall be deposited in receptacles provided for such purposes.
I.   Use Of Tobacco: No person, at any time, shall use tobacco of any kind
while present on any city park or parks and recreation facility property.
Tobacco includes any product made or derived from tobacco that is intended for
human use, including any component, part, or accessory of a tobacco product.
This includes, but is not limited to, cigarettes, electronic smoking devices,
cigarette tobacco, roll your own tobacco, smokeless tobacco, and dissolvable
tobacco. "Electronic smoking devices" means any device that can be used to
deliver an aerosolized solution that may or may not contain nicotine to the
person inhaling from the device, including, but not limited to, an e-cigarette,
e-cigar, e-pipe, vape pen, e-hookah, or other simulated smoking device.
Nicotine products approved by the United States food and drug administration
for tobacco cessation shall be allowed within city parks.
J.   Defacing Of Public Property: No person shall write, mark or draw
characters on or deface, injure or destroy any building, or part thereof, or
improvement, apparatus or fixture, wall or fence, drain or sewer located on or
in any city park or parks and recreation facility.
K.   Posted Notices: (Rep. by Ord. 1197, 9-9-1996)
L.   Control Of Animals: The parks and recreation department may establish
policies for parks and recreation facilities regarding animals. All animals in
a city park or where allowed in a parks and recreation facility must be under
the control of a person competent to restrain and control the animal, either by
leash, cord, chain, or other similar restraint not more than ten feet (10') in
length, or properly restrained within a motor vehicle. The owner or person in
charge of an animal shall clean up and/or remove as soon as possible any
excrement or droppings deposited by the animal on city park or parks and
recreation facility property.
The requirement of a restraint on an animal shall not apply to animals
registered to use a designated off-leash area of a city park while in said off-
leash area and while abiding by all the rules and regulations of such
designated off leash area.
M.   Hours: No person shall be in any city park, between the hours of ten
thirty o’clock (10:30) P.M. to six o’clock (6:00) A.M. or at any time duly
posted and designated by the director of parks and recreation.
Exceptions: Authorized users of Raccoon River Park Nature Lodge and Raccoon
River Park Softball Complex are exempt from the hours restriction when using
their respective parks and recreation facility.
N.   Safety: (Rep. by Ord. 1197, 9-9-1996)
O.   Compliance With Rules: All persons shall abide by rules established by
city ordinance or by the parks and recreation department and posted in city
parks and parks and recreation facilities.
P.   Posting: No person shall post, fasten, paint or affix any placard, bill,
notice or sign upon any structure, tree, stone, directional sign, fence or
enclosure along or within any city park or parks and recreation facility except
by permission of the director of parks and recreation.
Q.   Moving Fixtures: (Rep. by Ord. 1197, 9-9-1996)
R.   Grounds Alteration: No person shall cut or remove any wood, turf, grass,
soil, rock, sand or gravel from any city park or parks and recreation facility
without written permission from the director of parks and recreation.
S.   Consumption of Alcohol: The department of parks and recreation may
establish facility use policies regarding alcoholic beverage possession,
consumption, and sales within parks and recreation facilities. No person shall
consume an alcoholic beverage as defined by Iowa Code (2020) while present upon
Holiday Aquatic Center premises, Valley View Aquatic Center premises, the
designated beach and swimming area at Raccoon River Park, Crossroads Park,
Western Hills Park, Brookview Park, Woodland Hills Park, Maple Grove Park, or
on any trail, parking lot, driveway, or road within a city park or parking lot
providing parking for any parks and recreation facility. However, beer, high
alcohol content beer, wine, and canned cocktails as defined by the Iowa Code
(2020) may be possessed and consumed in any other city park owned or leased by
the city, provided it is within individual cans not exceeding sixteen (16)
ounces in size. Dispensing from kegs shall be permitted only with written
permission of the director under the policy adopted by the department for the
park and recreation facility or during activities held pursuant to a city
special event permit. Signs prohibiting the consumption or possession of
alcoholic beverages shall be posted where appropriate.
T.   Responsibility Of Adults: (Rep. by Ord. 1197, 9-9-1996)
U.   Park Roads: No city park road shall be used as a through street by any
vehicle where posted.
V.   Golfing: No person shall play or practice golf in any city park or parks
and recreation facility, except during supervised activities approved by the
director of parks and recreation.
W.   Prohibited Activities: The following activities are specifically
prohibited in any city park or parks and recreation facility:
1   Disposing Of Material: No person shall place, store or dump any organic or
inorganic materials including raked leaves, grass clippings, compost,
construction material, firewood, paint, trash, debris, junk or any similar
materials in city dumpsters or on city park or parks and recreation facility
property.
2   Private Improvements: No person shall garden, mow or plant trees without
written permission from the department of parks and recreation. No person shall
install other private improvements such as fences, play equipment, irrigation
systems, or similar encroachments on city park.
3   Miscellaneous: No person shall remove or deposit snow on city park or parks
and recreation facility property. No person shall bury animals on city park or
parks and recreation facility property. No glass bottles shall be allowed in
city parks or where prohibited by parks and recreation facility policy.
The parks and recreation department is authorized to monitor and enforce such
rules and regulations. Enforcement procedures shall follow city code procedures
for either administrative abatement or municipal infraction as determined in
the best interest of the city.
X.   Swimming/Beach Use: Swimming shall be allowed in posted areas only, except
for organized activities approved by the director of parks and recreation. No
swimming shall be allowed from boats. Inner tubes, air mattresses, or other
beach toy type items shall be allowed in posted areas only.
Y.   Ice Skating: Ice skating shall be allowed in posted areas only. Ice
skating shall only be allowed when posted as safe.
Z.   Boating: A boat equipped with any size motor may be operated at a no wake
speed on Blue Heron Lake, except for in areas designated as "Non-Motorized And
Electric Motors Only" zones. All other regulations under the code of Iowa,
chapter 462A, shall apply. All sailboats with a mast height measuring thirty-
six feet (36') or greater above the water surface are prohibited on the Blue
Heron Lake. Additionally, all sailboats are prohibited on Blue Heron Lake when
the lake water level reaches an elevation of one foot (1') above the concrete
dock at the boat ramp.
AA.   Fishing: Fishing activities in parks shall comply with the code of Iowa,
chapter 481A.
BB.   Sales In Parks: No sales activities or admissions shall be allowed in any
city park except with approval of the director of parks and recreation or in
accordance with parks and recreation facility policies.
CC.   Hunting: It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in any hunting
activity on city park or parks and recreation facility property using a rifle,
shotgun, bow and arrow or any other means on land or in the water unless
approved by official action of the park and recreation advisory board and the
city council.
DD.   Trapping; Exceptions: It shall be unlawful for any person to place,
locate, set, use or attempt to use on city park or parks and recreation
facility property, any type of claw, spring or metal trap of any nature on land
or in the water, or to set, use or maintain any snare, pitfall, deadfall,
spring gun, set gun or device of similar character or purpose.
Exceptions: The city or its authorized agents are exempt from the above and may
control or manage animals, birds, or insects pursuant to established policies
that have been approved by the city council.
EE.   Camping: All overnight camping in city parks or parks and recreation
facilities is prohibited unless written authorization is received from the
director of parks and recreation. (Ord. 1355, 3-22-1999; amd. Ord. 1360, 5-3-
1999; Ord. 1566, 1-5-2004; Ord. 2022, 2-24-2014; Ord. 2104, 7-13-2015; Ord.
2140, 3-21-2016; Ord. 2438, 9-8-2020; Ord. 2649, 1-21-2025)
7-11-3: PENALTY:
Violations of this chapter are declared to be municipal infractions and may be
punished as provided in title 1, chapter 4 of this code. For violations of
subsections
7-11-2I, "Use Of Tobacco",
7-11-2S, "Consumption of Alcohol", and
7-11-2X, "Swimming/Beach Use", of this chapter, police officers or designees
shall enforce and be authorized to issue citation-complaints. Before issuing a
citation-complaint, the police officer or designee shall verify that the
offender has previously received a warning against engaging in such conduct, or
the offender has refused to discontinue engaging in such conduct after the
police officer or designee has advised the offender that such conduct must
cease. A one hundred dollar ($100.00) civil penalty shall be imposed for each
violation where a citation-complaint has been issued. For violations of
subsection
7-11-2C, "Parking", of this chapter, police officers or designees shall be
authorized to issue parking tickets as specified in title 6, "Motor Vehicles
And Traffic", of this code. (Ord. 2140, 3-21-2016; Ord. 2438, 9-8-2020)
CHAPTER 12
LIBRARY REGULATIONS
SECTION:
7-12-1: Purpose
7-12-2: Rules And Regulations
7-12-3: Violation; Penalty
7-12-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to adopt certain library rules governing the
conduct of patrons of the library of the City. The term "library" as used
herein refers to the City Library Building located at 4000 Mills Civic Parkway,
West Des Moines, Iowa. (Ord. 1363, 5-17-1999)
7-12-2: RULES AND REGULATIONS:
The following rules and regulations are established concerning the conduct of
patrons and use of library facilities, as follows:
A.   Library patrons are expected to be engaged in the productive use of the
library's resources. This includes reading, studying, researching, attending
programs and utilizing library material. Patrons have the right to use the
library undisturbed and library employees have the right to work without undue
interference. Please note: Adult patrons in the children's or teen areas who
are not retrieving children's or teen materials nor are caregivers for a child
or teen may be asked to relocate to other areas of the library.
B.   The library will not tolerate bullying in any library space, gathering, or
program and staff will do all they reasonably can to create a safe space for
all library users, regardless of an individual's actual or perceived age,
color, creed/denomination, national origin, race, religion, marital status,
sex, sexual orientation, gender identity, physical attributes/appearance,
physical or mental ability or disability, ancestry, political party preference,
political belief, socioeconomic status, or familial status. Bullying is defined
as the unwanted, aggressive use of physical, social, or mental/intellectual
power to control, harm, or humiliate another person in a repetitive or
pervasive manner. All library users and employees should be free of any threat
of harm, invasion of property, or gross indignity.
C.   No person shall engage in any conduct which disturbs or interferes with
the legitimate use of the library, including - but not restricted to - the
following:
1.   Refuse to follow reasonable directives or instructions from a library
staff member.
2.   Willfully annoy, bully, harass, or threaten another person.
3.   Behave in a disorderly, loud, or boisterous manner, including loud
conversations.
4.   Interfere with another person's passage within the library or on library
grounds.
5.   Consume or possess alcoholic beverages unless the Library Board of
Trustees has approved of an event or function at the library where alcoholic
beverages will be provided. The consumption or possession of alcoholic
beverages shall be limited to that provided to those in attendance at the
approved library event or function, and shall be confined to a designated area
within the library during the event or function.
6.   Deface or destroy library property.
7.   Eat or drink(unless eating or drinking is specifically allowed in an area
or at a particular activity).
8.   Use tobacco or smoke in the library, including the use of electronic
cigarettes or vaping devices.
9.   Sleep in the library, or exhibit the appearance of sleep.
10.   Remain in the library after regular closing hours.
11.   Interfere with patrons' use of the library through poor bodily hygiene
which is so offensive as to constitute a nuisance, or through excessive use of
perfume, cologne, or alcohol.
12.   Bring animals into the library with the exception of service animals or
service-animals-in-training as defined by Title II and Title III of The
Americans with Disabilities Act and/or Iowa Code 216C.1A.
13.   Use sports equipment, skates, or a skateboard in the library.
14.   Use any audio, personal communication, or computing device in a manner
that is disturbing to other patrons. Cellphone ringers should be set to silent
or vibrate and device speakers muted or headphones used.
15.   Campaign, leaflet, petition, interview, or survey patrons or staff in a
manner that is disruptive to library activities.
16.   Willfully expose patrons and staff to offensive images or language.
17.   Engage in lengthy conversations (including conversations on cellphones)
in areas intended for quiet study.
18.   Interfere with the library's right to maintain a clean, pleasant, and
safe facility.
19.   Relocate or rearrange furniture beyond repositioning existing seating
around tables.
20.   Be in any state of inappropriate undress.
21.   Engage in sexual activity of any kind, including inappropriate displays
of romantic affection.
22.   Bring luggage, bedrolls, or large bags into the library.
23.   Leave packages, backpacks, or personal belongings unattended. Personal
property must be within sight of the owner. The library assumes no
responsibility for belongings left unattended.
24.   Use bathrooms for unreasonable or unintended purposes, such as bathing or
laundering.
D.   Patrons violating any of the above policies will have the matter called to
their attention once. Should the behavior continue, they will be asked to leave
the library facility and grounds. Should they refuse to leave, library staff
will contact the Director and the West Des Moines Police Department and the
patron(s) will be escorted from the premises. A refusal to leave after being
asked to leave by staff will be grounds for suspension of library privileges.
For minors, a suspension of privileges will be accompanied by an attempt-by
phone, email, or mail-to notify a parent or guardian. At the discretion of the
Library Director or Head of Youth Services, an attempt may be made to contact
the student and/or their caregiver via West Des Moines Community Schools. (Ord.
2321, 7-23-2018; amd. Ord. 2524, 6-20-2022)
7-12-3: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
Any person who violates the provisions of this chapter, upon conviction, shall
be punished not in excess of a one hundred dollar ($100.00) fine or in excess
of thirty (30) days' imprisonment. (Ord. 1363, 5-17-1999)
CHAPTER 13
SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS FOR STREETS
SECTION:
7-13-1: Purpose
7-13-2: Scope
7-13-3: Procedure
7-13-4: Payment Of Assessments
7-13-5: Agricultural Deferment
7-13-6: Deficiency Assessments
7-13-7: Assessment Methods
7-13-8: Benefits
7-13-9: Modified Flint Formula
7-13-10: Area (District) Assessment Method
7-13-11: Boundaries Of Assessment Districts For Area (District) Assessment
7-13-12: Methodology
7-13-1: PURPOSE:
A.   The purpose of this Chapter is to provide general guidance to staff and
notice to citizens concerning the processes utilized to establish special
assessments for street improvements which will be levied upon private property
in West Des Moines. Whenever the word "assessment" or words "special
assessment" are used in this Chapter, the word or words refer only to special
assessments for street improvement projects, including construction, paving,
reconstruction, resurfacing or repair measures.
B.   It is realized that special situations will arise which cannot be
anticipated in a general policy but which will need to be addressed in a
reasonable manner once they arise. While this Chapter cannot be literally
applied to every such exceptional situation, it is nonetheless the directive of
the City Council that the concepts reflected in this Chapter be fairly and
equitably applied in a reasonable fashion to all street assessments. (Ord.
1389, 10-4-1999)
7-13-2: SCOPE:
A.   Policy: It is the policy of the City to eventually have all streets within
the City paved or widened to the extent suitable to their intended or actual
use. All street improvement projects shall be assessed in accord with this
Chapter (as limited by the purpose) to the extent such improvement benefits
property in a definable benefited property district or area.
B.   Other Finance Mechanisms: The City Council recognizes that not all streets
are improved through use of a special assessment and that developers and others
may finance the improvement of streets through the use of other mechanisms.
Where such alternative mechanisms have effectively shifted costs to benefited
property owners, even when not formally assessed, such property owners shall be
treated as if their property had been previously assessed. The City will not
ordinarily place the same tract of land in more than one benefited property
district for assessment purposes.
C.   Street Width; Special Benefit: The amount assessed for any street
improvement project shall normally be equivalent to constructing, paving,
repairing, or widening a local street in accordance with the current Urban
Design Policy Standards Manual and the Urban Specifications for Construction of
Public Improvements (the "design standards") as adopted or amended by the City.
In so limiting the amount of assessment, it is the intent of the Council to
assess only for the special benefit derived from a street improvement project;
provided, however, that the City Council may in its discretion assess up to the
width of the classification of the street being improved, as provided in the
design standards.
D.   General Benefits: All general benefits from a street improvement project
in excess of the above standard shall be paid from other City funds and shall
not be assessed. Subject to final determination by the Council, the percentage
of general benefit to the City shall be determined in accordance with the
schedule set forth in subsection
7-13-3F of this Chapter.
E.   Assessable Items: Assessable items, to the extent special benefits are
conferred, shall include:
1.   All related storm sewer for the project (but not all storm sewer costs and
oversizing of drains necessitated by anticipated future expansion shall be
assessed).
2.   All required grading for the project.
3.   All utility relocations required due to the project.
4.   All driveways, sidewalks, and trails required due to the project.
5.   All surface restoration required by the project.
6.   All right of way required due to the project up to sixty feet (60').
7.   All the engineering fees associated with the design and construction of
the project.
8.   All legal fees associated with the project.
9.   All appraisal fees associated with the project.
10.   Pro rata share of administrative costs.
11.   Paving costs.
12.   Traffic signals where a special local benefit is conferred.
13.   All other miscellaneous costs and contingency costs directly related to
the project.
F.   Design Standards: All standards and details of design for proposed
assessment projects shall be in accordance with the design standards as amended
and the Comprehensive Plan as amended.
G.   Street Improvements: In addition to constructing new streets, the City may
assess for street widening, reconstruction, repair or resurfacing when such
improvement is found to confer special benefits. Such assessment will
ordinarily occur only in a manner consistent with this general statement, and
only to the extent that the property has not been assessed or owners have not
otherwise previously participated directly in the cost of such construction.
(Ord. 1389, 10-4-1999)
7-13-3: PROCEDURE:
A.   Procedural Steps: The City will generally endeavor to follow the
procedural steps set out in this Section.
B.   Identification Of Streets: City staff shall, during the budget process or
as part of the citizens Capital Improvement Program, and at other times as
directed by the City Council, identify streets which in the opinion of staff
should be considered for improvement. The City Manager shall review such
recommendations and report to the Mayor and City Council his or her findings as
to the need for improvement. The City Council shall act upon such
recommendations as part of its annual budgetary process, either through
consideration of capital improvement projects or at such times as may seem
proper in the circumstances.
C.   Petition By Property Owners: As an alternative, assessments for street
improvement projects may be initiated by petition of all property owners to be
assessed for the cost subject to Council approval. Such projects, however,
shall normally be considered in light of the regular budgetary process.
D.   Project Determination: After the initial considerations and discussions
set forth above, the City Council shall decide whether it wishes to consider a
street improvement project and whether that project should be specially
assessed. As part of such decision, the City Council shall direct the
appropriate eminent domain notice be issued, and may employ consulting
engineers, bond counsel and such other consultants as may be necessary.
E.   Preliminary Plat And Schedule Of Assessments: As part of the consideration
of whether to levy special assessment for a project, the City Council shall
direct the engineer to prepare a preliminary plat and schedule of assessments,
estimate the costs, and preliminary plans and specifications, and to furnish
necessary data to bond counsel needed to prepare legal proceedings. The
engineer shall present a preliminary draft of the plat and schedule to the City
staff which shall review the documents and make recommendations to the City
Council.
F.   Arterial Or Collector Streets: All streets classified in the then current
Comprehensive Plan as arterial or collector shall be considered to generally
benefit the community as well as specially benefited properties in the
benefited property district. Therefore, any reduction in the special assessment
shall generally be applied to the specially affected parcel within one hundred
fifty feet (150') of the street improvement project in accordance with the
following schedule:
 
Street Classification Amount Of Reduction
                      
Major arterial        40 percent
Minor arterial        20 percent
Major collector       10 percent
Minor collector       5 percent
 
The distance of one hundred fifty feet (150') on each side of the street shall
generally be applied to create an area similar to the area established by
application of the Flint Formula, as further set forth in Section
7-13-9 of this Chapter. The final determination of any reduction, however,
shall be established by the City Council.
G.   Property Valuation: The City Council shall determine the valuation of the
property to be specially assessed. The valuations for property within the
proposed assessment district shall not exceed the fair market value of the
property with the proposed public improvement in place. The City Council shall
retain the services of an MAI appraiser to advise the City Council as to its
findings regarding the valuation of each lot and parcel within the benefited
property district with the street improvement in place.
H.   Project Information Meeting: As part of the consideration of whether to
levy a special assessment for a street improvement project, the City Council
shall either conduct a project information meeting or direct staff to conduct a
project information meeting. Benefited property owners shall be notified by
letter with details concerning the proposed project and the time, location and
place of the meeting. Staff shall arrange for the delivery of the notification
at least ten (10) days prior to the meeting.
I.   Informational Pamphlet: Staff shall provide an informational pamphlet
describing the project, assessment procedure, and pertinent deadlines along
with a copy of this Chapter to those attending the project information meeting
and to others upon request. No official action shall be taken by the City
Council on the assessment proceeding within a thirty (30) day period following
the project information meeting to permit affected property owners to petition
for or against the project.
J.   Preliminary Plans And Specifications: At the completion of the above
process, the preliminary plans and specifications, preliminary plat, schedule
of assessments, and estimate of costs shall be officially filed in the office
of the City Clerk.
K.   Council Resolutions: After the filing of the preliminary plans and
specifications, preliminary plat, schedule of assessments, and estimate of
costs, the City Council shall meet to consider the preliminary resolution for
the street improvement project, resolution fixing value of lots, resolution
adopting preliminary plat and schedule, estimate of costs, and preliminary
plans and specifications. If the City Council adopts the foregoing, it shall
then consider a proposed resolution of necessity for the project and set a date
and time for public hearing on the proposed resolution of necessity.
L.   Notice To Property Owners; Publication: Notice shall then be given to the
affected property owners that the proposed resolution of necessity will be
considered by the City Council. The notice shall be published as required by
law.
M.   Resolution Of Necessity: The City Council shall hold a public hearing on
the resolution of necessity. The City Council shall hear all objections and
endorsements and consider all filed and written objections. The City Council
shall then officially continue or close the public hearing. After closing the
public hearing, the City Council may reject, adopt, or amend and adopt, the
proposed resolution of necessity, or the City Council may defer action until a
subsequent meeting.
N.   Required Vote: Passage of the resolution of necessity shall require the
affirmative vote of three-quarters (3/4) of the City Council; provided,
however, if written remonstrances signed by the owners of seventy five percent
(75%) of the amount of the proposed assessments on property subject to
assessment have been timely filed with the City Clerk, the resolution of
necessity will require the unanimous affirmative vote of the City Council for
passage.
O.   Plans And Specifications; Contract: If the resolution of necessity is
adopted either as proposed or as amended, the City Council shall then adopt
resolutions directing the preparation of detailed plans and specifications, and
the form of contract and notice to bidders.
P.   Court Decree: Following the adoption of either the original or amended
resolution of necessity when more than sixty percent (60%) of the amount of the
proposed assessments on property subject to assessment have petitioned against
the project, the City Council may direct bond counsel or other legal counsel to
file in District Court a petition requesting the Court to review and confirm
the proposed street improvement by decree. The City Council, at its own
discretion, retains the option of having other assessments for street projects
confirmed by the same process.
Q.   Detailed Plans And Specifications: Detailed plans and specifications and
the form of contract and notice to bidders shall officially be placed on file
in the City Clerk's office.
R.   Resolution Ordering Bids; Approving Plans: The City Council shall, either
at the meeting at which the resolution of necessity is adopted, or thereafter,
adopt a resolution ordering bids, approving plans, specifications and form of
contract, and notice to bidder; fixing amount of bid security; ordering City
Clerk to publish notice, fix a date for reviewing bids; and for a public
hearing on plans, specifications, form of contract and estimate of costs. The
notice to bidder shall then be published as required by law.
S.   Filing With County Treasurer: The resolution of necessity and preliminary
plat and schedule of assessments shall be filed in the county treasurer's
office as required by State law. The City Clerk shall also execute a
certificate with regard to the amount of agricultural deferment requests timely
filed by property owners pursuant to Section
7-13-5 of this Chapter.
T.   Public Hearing; Resolution Awarding Contract: The City Council shall hold
a public hearing on the plans, specifications, and form of contract as required
by the published notice. After the public hearing is complete, the Council may
adopt the resolution adopting plans, specifications, form of contract, and
estimated cost. Bids which have been received for the street improvement
project shall be evaluated by City staff and, where appropriate, consulting
engineers and legal counsel. If satisfactory bids have been received, the City
Council may adopt a resolution awarding a contract, or the City Council may
defer action, or for proper reasons reject all bids.
U.   Review Of Completed Work: After completion or substantial completion and
in accordance with law, the engineer shall review the completed work and file
certificates of completion and final estimates of costs with the City Clerk.
The total project cost and the total assessable cost of the project shall be
summarized by category with a full description of costs, including unit
quantities, available to the public on request.
V.   Resolution Accepting Work; Levy Of Final Assessments: The City Council
shall then adopt a resolution accepting the work and ordering preparation of
the final plat and schedule of assessments. The final plat and schedule of
assessment shall be filed by the engineer in the City Clerk's office. The
resolution adopting and levying the final assessments and providing for the
payment thereof shall then be adopted by the City Council. In no case may the
final assessments be greater than the preliminary assessment. Notice of filing
of the final plat and schedule shall be given as required by law.
W.   Final Plat And Schedule Filed With County Treasurer; Notice To Property
Owner: The City Clerk shall file a certificate of levy and copy of the final
plat and schedule in the office of the county treasurer and the Building Permit
Official's office. Notice of such filing shall be published for two (2)
consecutive weeks with the first publication not more than fifteen (15) days
from the date of filing the final plat and schedule with the county officials.
On or before the date of the second publication of notice, the Clerk shall
send, by ordinary and certified mail, a copy of the notice to each property
owner. (Ord. 1389, 10-4-1999)
7-13-4: PAYMENT OF ASSESSMENTS:
A.   Any assessment levied under this Chapter may be paid in full or in part
without interest within thirty (30) days after the date of certification.
B.   Except as to assessments of less than one hundred dollars ($100.00), which
must be paid in full before the next July 1, assessments may be paid, with
interest, in installments with real estate taxes over a period of ten (10)
years. (Ord. 1389, 10-4-1999)
7-13-5: AGRICULTURAL DEFERMENT:
A.   Persons having a tract of land, either alone or as an integral part of a
larger tract, which is both used and assessed for agricultural purposes, and
which would otherwise be subject to assessment, may apply for an agricultural
deferment as provided by State law.
B.   Any property owner who seeks deferment of an assessment shall file a
written request for deferment with the City Clerk at the time of the hearing on
the resolution of necessity or within ten (10) days following the date of the
closing of the public hearing. The request shall identify those lots subject to
the proposed assessment which the property owner claims are entitled to
agricultural deferment.
C.   It shall be the responsibility of the property owner to make such
additional annual filings as are required by law for the continuation of an
agricultural deferment. (Ord. 1389, 10-4-1999)
7-13-6: DEFICIENCY ASSESSMENTS:
A.   If the proposed assessment is greater than twenty five percent (25%) of
the value of any tract with the improvement in place, the Council shall provide
by resolution that the portion of the assessment which exceeds twenty five
percent (25%) of the value of the tract with the improvement in place shall be
certified to the county treasurer as a deficiency.
B.   The amount of the deficiency shall amortize over a period of ten (10)
years and after ten (10) years no part of the deficiency may be assessed;
provided, however, that if a private improvement is constructed on a lot
subject to deficiency during the period of amortization, the pro-rata
deficiency on the lot which has not been amortized shall be assessed to the
extent that it is assessable. (Ord. 1389, 10-4-1999)
7-13-7: ASSESSMENT METHODS:
A.   The City Council has elected to use formulas as a guide to the exercise of
its legislative power to determine the proper amount to be assessed against
property which receives a special benefit from a street improvement project.
Depending upon the character of the street to be improved, the City will
utilize a method of assessment which assures that the assessable costs of a
street improvement project are fairly spread among benefited properties and
that no property is assessed an amount greater than the special benefit
received.
B.   In its sole legislative discretion, the City Council shall determine
whether the application and use of a formula to guide it in establishing the
amount of individual assessments meet the criteria established by this Chapter
and the law. (Ord. 1389, 10-4-1999)
7-13-8: BENEFITS:
A.   Benefit Conferred: It is the policy of the City not to assess any amount
for street improvements in excess of the benefit conferred on a lot or parcel.
Benefits resulting from street improvements which inure to property owners
within the assessment area will depend upon the circumstances of each project.
B.   Nature And Extent Of Benefits: As a result of street improvement projects,
property owners often benefit from enhanced access, an improved environment
because of dust and drainage control, enhancement of aesthetic qualities in the
area, a decrease in the cost of automobile and other vehicle maintenance, an
improvement in the ability of police, fire, ambulance and other public safety
organizations to respond, an increase in the value of property, and an
improvement in the ability of property owners to market their property either
for present uses or possibly new uses. Moreover, the nature and extent of
benefits may vary depending upon conditions in the area of the improvement
including such factors as topography, the level of economic activity, and the
level or nature of economic development.
C.   Not Exhaustive Discussion: Any discussion in this Chapter of specific
special benefits is not to be construed as exhaustive or illustrative of all
benefits which may in any particular project inure to the benefit of property
owners; and this Chapter is neither intended to be, nor to be construed as a
complete or definitive discussion of the special benefits to be derived from
street improvement projects. (Ord. 1389, 10-4-1999)
7-13-9: MODIFIED FLINT FORMULA:
A.   In areas of the City laid out in a traditional grid or similar pattern, a
modified Flint Formula shall be used to determine assessments. Streets to be
assessed by this method shall be largely those commonly known as infill
streets. All property within three hundred feet (300') of the right of way or
one-half (1/2) the distance to the next parallel street (whichever distance is
less) shall be assessed benefit calculated upon a curve which applies
incrementally less benefit to parcels of property located a greater distance
from the proposed improvements.
B.   A depth factor chart and proximity curve, as adopted by the City Council
and on file with the City Clerk's office, shall be used in calculating
assessments levied under this method. The curve may, however, be modified by
the City Council for any street improvement project where reason or
circumstances require such modification. Moreover, the Council may modify any
proposed assessment which results from the application of the curve where
reason or circumstances make such modification reasonable or just. All
modifications, however, shall be limited to the extent necessary to reflect
actual special benefit conferred on the lot or parcel. (Ord. 1389, 10-4-1999)
7-13-10: AREA (DISTRICT) ASSESSMENT METHOD:
A.   The area (district) assessment method shall be used for the assessment of
all streets which confer local benefit outside the traditional grid pattern as
set forth in Section
 7-13-9 of this Chapter. It is the intent of the Council that all property
served outside the traditional grid pattern be assessed for the street
improvement which provides access and other special benefits in accord with
City street and development plans, but that no parcel shall generally be
assessed more than once for such improved street.
B.   The area (district) assessment method may be combined with any other
method of assessment if the Council finds such combination is necessary in
order to properly determine special benefits in an area. (Ord. 1389, 10-4-1999)
7-13-11: BOUNDARIES OF ASSESSMENT DISTRICTS FOR AREA (DISTRICT) ASSESSMENT:
A.   The boundaries of an area to be assessed in an area (district) assessment
shall be established in accord with this Section and shall include the
benefited land on both sides of the street to be improved. The line demarcating
the boundaries shall commence at the intersecting streets at the terminus of
the street improvements and bisect the land area to be served by the public
improvement and the intersecting streets so as to divide the service area of
the streets. Where actual bisection is inappropriate because of street
patterns, land divisions, natural or other barriers, adjustments will be made
to accommodate such patterns, barriers or divisions. The assessment district
shall be established based upon the area served or otherwise benefited by the
street improvement.
B.   In determining actual boundaries, all property which reasonably receives a
special benefit shall be included in the district. To establish district
boundaries, consideration shall be given to topography, land division lines,
planning and development criteria regarding land use in the district, actual
and present land use, the need to plan for and provide access to adjacent
areas, the need to coordinate access to adjacent areas, plans for the use and
the actual use of adjacent areas, actual and projected street and
transportation patterns, and the relationship of the street improvement project
to other planned, projected, or existing public improvements. Where possible
all land within one subdivision should be included within a single area
assessment district. In establishing boundaries, all lots on a street which
provide access to the street being improved should be included in the same
district.
C.   The City Council shall make the final determination of the boundaries of
the district after holding a public hearing pursuant to subsection
7-13-3M of this Chapter, giving consideration to the provisions of this
Chapter, the advice and judgment of engineers and other consultants, and such
other considerations as it deems appropriate to its determination. (Ord. 1389,
10-4-1999)
7-13-12: METHODOLOGY:
A.   Special Benefit Conferred: In the application of the area assessment
method, the City shall generally follow the method set out below, reserving,
however, to the City Council the right to vary, amend, or otherwise change the
formula or method or the application of either, where such modification is
necessary in order to properly reflect in the assessment the special benefit
conferred by a street improvement project.
B.   Area Distribution: After the benefited area has been preliminarily
determined, the assessment shall be distributed over the entire area based upon
the area of each lot included in the district. The resulting calculation shall
constitute the base assessment rate for the public improvement project. For
purposes of assessment, a lot shall be defined consistent with the definition
in Iowa Code section 384.37.10 (1999) as an actual platted lot or any other
tract of land under common ownership.
C.   Direct Access Lots: Lots within an area of depth up to one hundred fifty
feet (150') which have, or could reasonably have, direct vehicular access by
driveway, or otherwise, onto the public improvement shall be assessed at a rate
of two (2) times the base assessment rate in the area. Any portion of a lot
with direct access within an area of depth greater than one hundred fifty feet
(150') shall be assessed at the base assessment rate.
D.   Abutting Lots: Abutting lots shall be defined consistent with the
definition in Iowa Code section 384.37.1 (1999) as lots which abut or join the
street in which the public improvement is located or which abut the right of
way of the public improvement. Lots within an area of depth up to one hundred
fifty feet (150') which abut the public improvement, but which lack direct
access by driveway or otherwise, shall be assessed at a rate of one and one-
half (11/2) times the base assessment to reflect the special benefit of
proximity to the street improvement project. Any portion of abutting lots
within an area of depth greater than one hundred fifty feet (150') shall be
assessed at the base assessment rate.
E.   Adjacent Lots: Adjacent lots shall be defined consistent with the
definition of Iowa Code section 384.37.2 (1999) as lots within the district
which do not abut upon the street or right of way of the public improvement.
Adjacent lots within an area of depth up to one hundred fifty feet (150') shall
be assessed at a rate of one and one-half (11/2) times the base assessment rate
to reflect the special benefit of proximity to the street improvement project.
Any portion of adjacent lots within an area of depth greater than one hundred
fifty feet (150') shall be assessed at the base assessment rate in the area.
F.   Subdivided Lots; Preliminary Plat; Development Agreement: Parcels which
abut the street improvement, but have not been subdivided into residential lots
at the time of the preliminary schedule of assessments, even though such lots
could be divided into residential lots, shall be considered to have direct
access to the public improvement and shall be assessed to a depth of one
hundred fifty feet (150') at a rate of two (2) times the base rate of
assessment in the area; provided, however, that if a preliminary plat is filed
and approved, or a development agreement is executed with the City, prior to
the passage of the resolution of necessity, the lots shown by such plat or
agreement shall be used to determine the rate of assessment. Any development
agreement executed pursuant to this subsection shall be recorded.
G.   City Council Final Determination: The City Council shall make the final
determination by reviewing the formula results, and may adjust the formula, or
the results as to the entire area, individual lots or both, in order to achieve
a fair and just distribution of any assessment in accord with the special
benefit conferred by the improvement project to lots in the assessment
district. (Ord. 1389, 10-4-1999)
CHAPTER 14
UTILITY SYSTEMS
SECTION:
7-14-1: Subject To City Approval
7-14-2: Placement Underground
7-14-3: Placement Aboveground
7-14-4: Violation
7-14-1: SUBJECT TO CITY APPROVAL:
A.   All installation, replacement or upgrade of cables, wires and conduits in
connection with any utility system shall require submission of detailed plans
to the city, of detailed plans clearly indicating proposed work and all
applicable city permits shall be approved by the city before proposed utility
work commences.
B.   All utility work shall comply with the city's current design standards and
standard construction specifications. (Ord. 1432, 1-8-2001, eff. 1-8-2001)
7-14-2: PLACEMENT UNDERGROUND:
A.   Underground: All cables, wires and conduits in connection with any utility
system shall be placed underground, except as provided in subsection B of this
section.
B.   Exceptions: Underground installation shall not be required in the
following situations:
1.   Electric lines of nominal voltage in excess of fifteen thousand (15,000)
volts.
2.   Where aboveground connection to building or other location is reasonably
necessary, as determined by the public works director.
3.   Where another section of this code specifically allows aboveground
placement.
4.   Replacement or upgrade of aboveground cables and wires where the length of
replacement or upgrade does not exceed three hundred feet (300').
5.   Electric transformers, telephone and cable TV pedestals, and any other
appurtenances in connection with any utility system, as approved by the public
works director.
6.   Replacement of support poles, for aboveground cables, when the segment of
pole replacement does not exceed three hundred feet (300').
7.   When the public works director deems an exception to be in the best
interest of the city.
C.   Upgrade And Replacement Of Existing Systems: The provisions of subsection
A of this section shall apply to any system upgrade, including replacement or
relocation of existing utility cables, wires or conduits.
D.   All Parts Of City: The application of this chapter shall apply to all
areas of the city and shall not be limited to public ways, property, and
easements. (Ord. 1432, 1-8-2001, eff. 1-8-2001)
7-14-3: PLACEMENT ABOVEGROUND:
A.   Structures within city street right of way:
1.   Structures associated with any cables, wires or conduits in connection
with any utility system shall not be placed within the street "clear zone", as
defined in the city's current design standards and standard construction
specifications, except as directed by city council. Should, after city council
approval, said structures be placed within the street "clear zone", as defined
herein, it will be the responsibility of the utility company to provide, at no
cost to the city, all barricades, safety measures, etc., as deemed necessary by
the public works director, for any structure in connection with any utility
system that is placed within the said street "clear zone", defined herein.
2.   All aboveground structures associated with any cables, wires or conduits
in connection with any utility system shall be maintained by the respective
utility so as to be plumb, secured to prevent unauthorized entrance and
finished, where appropriate, to be aesthetically attractive. (Ord. 1432, 1-8-
2001, eff. 1-8-2001)
7-14-4: VIOLATION:
Any person who violates the provisions of this chapter, upon conviction, shall
be subject to civil penalty of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for
each violation or, if the infraction is a repeat offense, a civil penalty not
to exceed seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each repeat offense. (Ord.
1432, 1-8-2001, eff. 1-8-2001)
CHAPTER 15
PUBLIC ARTS
SECTION:
7-15-1: Purpose; Policy
7-15-2: Definitions
7-15-3: Funding
7-15-4: Ineligible Expenditures
7-15-5: Exclusions; Additions
7-15-6: Approval
7-15-7: Other Agencies
7-15-8: Management
7-15-9: Placement
7-15-1: PURPOSE; POLICY:
A.   The purposes of this chapter are to promote the cultural heritage and
artistic development of the city, to enhance the city's character and identity,
to contribute to economic development and tourism, to add warmth, dignity,
beauty, and accessibility to public spaces and to expand the experience and
participation of citizens with visual arts, by directing the inclusion of
public arts in appropriate city capital improvement program projects.
B.   The city council recognizes the importance of the creation, support, and
maintenance of public arts. The city council shall fund the public arts program
with a portion of hotel/motel funds as determined annually in the adoption of
the final budget. The funds shall be used for artist design services and for
the selection, acquisition, display, and maintenance of artworks. (Ord. 1903,
1-24-2011)
7-15-2: DEFINITIONS:
The following definitions shall apply to this chapter and any policies,
guidelines, and procedures that may be developed to implement the public arts
program plan:
ARTIST: Any practitioner in the visual and design arts, generally recognized by
critics and peers as a professional in the field as evidenced by his or her
education, experience, exhibition record, and artwork production.
ARTWORKS: Works in a variety of media produced by professional artists; works
may be permanent, temporary, or functional, and may be stand alone or
integrated into the architecture or landscaping, if such are designed by an
"artist" as defined herein, and should encompass the broadest range of
expression, media, and materials. The term "artworks", does not include
ineligible expenditures as described in section
7-15-4 of this chapter.
"Artworks" include:
A.   "Sculpture": Sculptures may be made of any material or combination of
materials; they may be freestanding, wall supported, or suspended, kinetic,
electronic, or mechanical.
B.   "Murals" Or "Paintings": Murals or paintings may be made of any materials
or combination of materials with or without collage; they may be made by
traditional or nontraditional means.
C.   "Other": Earthworks, neon, glass, organic materials (fiber, clay, wood,
etc.), mosaics, photographs, prints, literary expression, calligraphy, any
combination of forms of media, including audio, video, film, CD-ROM, DVD,
holographic, or computer generated technologies or new genres.
"Artworks" as defined herein may be permanent, fixed, temporary, or portable,
they may be an integral part of a building, facility, or structure, and may be
integrated with the work of other design professionals.
CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT PROGRAM (CIP): The city's program for capital development.
COMMISSION: The city's public arts advisory commission that advises the city
council on expenditures from the public arts fund.
ELIGIBLE CONSTRUCTION PROJECT: Any permanent public improvement project paid
for wholly or in part by the city, for the construction or renovation of any
building, park, highway, road or street, streetscape or road beautification,
bridge, transit or aviation facility, trail or bikeway, decorative or
commemorative structure, viaduct or pedestrian overpass/underpass, parking
facility, abovegrade utility, or any portion thereof, to which the public has
access or which is visible from a public right of way.
ELIGIBLE PROJECT COSTS: The total project appropriation, less real property
acquisition, demolition, environmental remediation, legal and accounting fees,
and interest charges. It shall also exclude funding from any outside source, if
such funds are not permitted to be used for artworks.
PUBLIC ARTS COLLECTION: The artworks owned by the city, regardless of whether
they were accumulated before or after the effective date of this chapter.
PUBLIC ARTS FUND (FUND): A separate account into which all monies generated
under this chapter or derived from gifts or donations for public arts shall be
deposited.
PUBLIC PLACE: An area on public or private property that is legally accessible
and visible to the general public.
RENOVATION: Any major redesign of a facility or system or portion thereof which
is included in eligible construction projects, including expanding or upgrading
the capacity of the facility or system, or enlarging the facility or creating a
new use for the facility. It does not include repairs, maintenance, or
installation of replacement mechanical equipment or modifications required
solely for the purposes of code compliance. (Ord. 1903, 1-24-2011)
7-15-3: FUNDING:
A.   Each year, the city council shall budget discretionary funds from the
hotel/motel fund to be appropriated and expended for acquisition or
commissioning of artworks in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
Appropriations for purposes of acquiring artworks in order to carry out the
provisions of this chapter shall be made in accordance with law and the
budgeting procedures of the city. Development and placement of artworks shall
be approved by the city council.
B.   Appropriations and expenditures for artworks may include, but are not
limited to, the costs and expenses incurred in the process of designing,
fabricating, installing, and maintaining artworks in public buildings or
grounds.
C.   Any monies collected or designated in accordance with this chapter shall
be deposited into the public arts fund by the finance director. The finance
director shall establish accounting records sufficient to identify and control
these funds. The account containing these funds shall earn interest and the
earned interest shall be deposited in the city's general fund according to the
code of Iowa. The public arts fund shall be authorized to accept gifts, grants,
and donations made to the city for artworks. The public arts fund shall be
self-perpetuating from year to year. Subfunds will be established as the
finance director deems necessary to maintain compliance with public and private
requirements.
D.   Funds authorized or appropriated pursuant to this chapter may be expended
for artworks in association with any current city projects or in existing
public facilities and spaces which are owned by the city, if legally
permissible.
E.   In the case of any eligible construction project which involves the use of
grant funds, or the proceeds of any bonds issued, amounts for artworks shall be
used for projects and purposes consistent with state and federal laws, and the
resolutions or policies approved by the voters or the city council, as
applicable.
F.   Unless any monies collected for the public arts fund are designated for a
specific purpose or project, the monies shall be pooled into this fund.
G.   An amount equal to fifteen percent (15%) of the public arts allocation for
each project shall be set aside in a separate account to be used for the public
arts program administration and community participation activities, including
artist selection, design/proposal/maquette costs, consultant fees, project
documentation, publicity, community education activities, interpretive plaques,
and other purposes as may be deemed appropriate by the commission for the
administration of the program. Funds in the program administration account not
expended at the close of any fiscal year shall be carried forward into the next
fiscal year.
H.   An amount equal to ten percent (10%) of the public arts allocation for
each project shall be set aside in a separate account for curatorial services
and the preservation and maintenance of artworks in the public art collection.
Funds in the maintenance and conservation account not expended at the close of
any fiscal year shall be carried forward into the next fiscal year.
I.   The public arts fund shall be used to provide sites for artworks in public
places, but shall not be used for the purchase of any easement. Public artworks
may be placed on public display, integral or attached to a public building or
structure, detached within or outside a public building or structure, within or
as a part of the landscape of a public park, square, or other outdoor public
site or lands, part of a portable exhibition or collection, part of a temporary
exhibition, or loaned or exhibited in other public facilities. (Ord. 1903, 1-
24-2011)
7-15-4: INELIGIBLE EXPENDITURES:
Expenditures that would not be eligible include, but are not limited to:
A.   Reproductions of original artworks by mechanical or other means; however,
limited editions controlled by the artist, or original prints, cast sculpture,
photographs, etc., may be included;
B.   Decorative, ornamental, or functional elements that are not designed by an
artist selected through an approved selection process;
C.   Those elements generally considered to be components of the landscape
architectural design, vegetative materials, pool(s), paths, benches,
receptacles, fixtures, planters, etc., designed by the architect, landscape
architect, or other design professional engaged by the primary designer;
D.   Art objects which are mass produced or of a standard design, such as
playground sculpture or fountains;
E.   Directional or other functional elements, such as signage, color coding,
maps, etc., not designed by an artist selected through the commission approved
process;
F.   Purchase of existing artworks without the selection process as provided
for in the adopted public arts program guidelines and principles;
G.   Representations of historical figures or events, or historical plaques,
not designed by an artist through the commission approved process;
H.   Notwithstanding maintenance of the artworks, continuing operating expenses
or maintenance of architectural elements on or in which the artworks are
placed, or sites where artworks are located; and
I.   Notwithstanding architectural elements on or in which the artworks are
placed or affixed or mechanical elements and utilities needed to activate the
artworks, which would be eligible expenditures, each installation will be
reviewed individually to determine eligible expenditures. (Ord. 1903, 1-24-
2011)
7-15-5: EXCLUSIONS; ADDITIONS:
A.   Prior to submission of the city's proposed annual capital improvement
program budget to the city council, the city manager in concert with parks and
recreation staff, shall notify the commission of:
1.   Capital improvement program projects in said budget that are eligible for
public arts, as defined in "eligible construction project" in section
7-15-2 of this chapter. The funding source for each project shall be identified
and the city manager shall indicate whether or not the funds can legally be
used to provide artworks at the project site and if the funds can legally be
pooled with other monies in the public arts fund for use at a different site;
2.   Proposed capital improvement program projects in said budget which are not
appropriate for public arts, due to low anticipated public visibility or public
usage. The funding source for each project shall be identified and the city
manager shall indicate if the funds can legally be pooled with other monies in
the public arts fund for use at a different site; and
3.   Proposed additional or discretionary funds added to the public arts fund.
B.   In conjunction with the approval of the city's annual capital improvement
program budget, the city council shall consider the commission's
recommendations and may:
1.   Determine that the funds for certain capital improvement program projects
can be pooled, and therefore be deposited into the public arts fund;
2.   Determine that the funds for certain capital improvement projects cannot
legally be pooled and therefore cannot be deposited in the public arts fund;
3.   Designate additional funds to be added to the public arts fund, and said
additional funds may be utilized to place artworks in or outside existing
public buildings which do not otherwise qualify as eligible; the amount of said
additional funds shall be discretionary; and
4.   Designate more funds to the public arts fund, as it deems fit. (Ord. 1903,
1-24-2011)
7-15-6: APPROVAL:
Contracts for development of artworks or for other purposes authorized by this
chapter shall be in accordance with federal or state law and the city's
purchasing policies. (Ord. 1903, 1-24-2011)
7-15-7: OTHER AGENCIES:
If the city enters into an agreement with another public agency, whereby city
monies are transferred to such agency for the purpose of performing a capital
improvement program project, which would otherwise be deemed an eligible
construction project under this chapter, such agreement shall provide, whenever
it is lawful, that the recipient or its successor in interest shall take
appropriate measures to ensure that monies are expended for development of arts
within this program. (Ord. 1903, 1-24-2011)
7-15-8: MANAGEMENT:
A.   Public arts funds shall be appropriated and expended by the city council
with the advice of the commission. The public arts program guidelines and
principles are hereby adopted to provide guidance in the appropriation and
expenditures of the public arts fund and in accordance with this chapter. These
guidelines and principles may be amended only after a public hearing by the
commission and adoption of a resolution by the city council.
B.   The commission shall function in accordance with the adopted public arts
program guidelines and policies and the ordinance establishing the commission.
C.   Once a project has been included in the approved public arts work plan,
the commission shall be responsible for the selection of artists, the
commissioning of artworks, and the purchase of artworks. Projects recommended
by the commission shall be presented to the city council for review and
approval at the mock up or maquette stage, prior to the fabrication and
installation of the artworks. All contracts or purchases shall be in accordance
with the city's purchasing policies. Over time, the commission should aim to
achieve an appropriate balance among local, regional, and national artists in
the public arts program. The enduring quality of the artworks should be a
primary consideration during artist selection.
D.   The commission shall require that all artworks needing operations or
maintenance be reviewed by the appropriate city department staff prior to the
acquisition of that artwork. At least once every five (5) years, the commission
shall be responsible for conducting a maintenance survey of the public arts
collection. This survey shall include a condition report on each artwork,
prioritized recommendations for the restoration, repair, or maintenance of
artworks, and estimated costs. It shall be the responsibility of the various
city departments to provide for the routine maintenance of artworks under their
jurisdiction. Such routine maintenance shall be in accordance with approved
plans submitted by each project artist. The commission shall monitor any
nonroutine maintenance.
E.   The commission may encourage and help obtain additional grants and gifts
of public arts from outside sources.
F.   Day to day management of the public arts program shall be provided by the
city's parks and recreation department staff. (Ord. 1903, 1-24-2011)
7-15-9: PLACEMENT:
A.   Artworks selected and implemented pursuant to the provisions of this
chapter and any resolution thereto, may be placed in, on, or about eligible
construction projects. The artworks may be attached or detached, within or
about such property, and may be either temporary or permanent. City officials
responsible for the design and construction of such projects shall make
appropriate spaces available for the placement of artworks unless prohibited by
federal or state law.
B.   Placement of artworks shall be followed, within a reasonable time frame,
by interpretative plaques on or near the artwork, indicating the artist, the
year created and dedicated, and a description of the artwork or its reason for
installation, as appropriate. Plaque placement shall be determined by the
city's parks and recreation department staff in consultation with the artist.
(Ord. 1903, 1-24-2011)
TITLE 8
BUILDING REGULATIONS
Building Numbering   1
Building Codes   2
Building Code   2A
Electrical Code (Rep. by Ord. 2025, 4-7-2014)   2B
Plumbing Code (Rep. by Ord. 2025, 4-7-2014)   2C
Mechanical Code (Rep. by Ord. 2025, 4-7-2014)   2D
Property Maintenance Code (Rep. by Ord. 2025, 4-7-2014)   2E
Municipal Code Appeals Board   2F
Cross Connection Control; Containment Provisions   2G
Signs1. See title 9, chapter 18 of this Code.1 (Rep. by Ord. 1247, 6-16-
1997)   3
Swimming Pools (Rep. by Ord. 1354, 3-22-1999)   4
Site Grading Regulations   5
Construction Site Erosion And Sediment Control   6
Conversions   7
Floodplain Management   8
CHAPTER 1
BUILDING NUMBERING
SECTION:
8-1-1: Definitions
8-1-2: Owner Requirements
8-1-3: Building Numbering Map
8-1-1: DEFINITIONS:
For use in this chapter, the following terms shall be defined:
OWNER: The owner of the principal building.
PRINCIPAL BUILDING: The main building on any lot or subdivision thereof. (Ord.
1999, 8-19-2013)
8-1-2: OWNER REQUIREMENTS:
Every owner shall comply with the following numbering requirements:
A.   Obtain Building Number: Owner shall obtain the assigned number to his
principal building from the city addressing administrator.
B.   Display Building Number: Owner shall place or cause to be installed and
maintain on the principal building the assigned number in a conspicuous place
to the street in figures not less than two and one-fourth inches (21/4") in
height and of a contrasting color with their background or in accordance with
adopted fire codes, whichever results in a larger and more prominent address
display.
C.   Failure To Comply: If an owner refuses to number a building as herein
provided, or fails to do so for a period of thirty (30) days after being
notified in writing by the city to do so, the city may proceed to place the
assigned number on the principal building and assess the costs against the
property for collection in the same manner as a property tax. (Ord. 1999, 8-19-
2013)
8-1-3: BUILDING NUMBERING MAP:
The city addressing administrator shall be responsible for preparing and
maintaining a building numbering map. (Ord. 1999, 8-19-2013)
CHAPTER 2
BUILDING CODES
ARTICLE A. BUILDING CODE
SECTION:
8-2A-1: Adoption Of Building Codes
8-2A-2: Amendments, Additions And Deletions
8-2A-3: Scope and Administration (Chapter 1 of the IBC and IRC)
8-2A-4: Occupancy Classification and Use (Chapter 3 of the IBC)
8-2A-5: Special Requirements Based on Occupancy and Use (Chapter 4 of the IBC)
8-2A-6: General Building Height And Area (Chapter 5 Of The IBC)
8-2A-7: Fire and Smoke Protection Features (Chapter 7 of the IBC)
8-2A-8: Means of Egress (Chapter 10 of the IBC)
8-2A-9: Structural Design (Chapter 16 of the IBC)
8-2A-10: Soils and Foundations (Chapter 18 of the IBC)
8-2A-11: Special Construction (Chapter 31 of the IBC)
8-2A-12: Building Planning (Chapter 3 of the IRC)
8-2A-13: Foundations (Chapter 4 of the IRC)
8-2A-14: Floors (Chapter 5 of the IRC)
8-2A-15: Roof-Ceiling Construction (Chapter 8 of the IRC)
8-2A-16: Rental Housing
8-2A-17: Appeals
8-2A-18: Liability for Damages
8-2A-19: Repealer
8-2A-20: Savings Clause
8-2A-21: Violations and Penalties
8-2A-22: Other Remedies
8-2A-23: Effective Date
8-2A-1: ADOPTION OF BUILDING CODES:
This Article shall consist of the 2021 Edition of the International Building
Code (IBC) and the 2021 Edition of the International Residential Code (IRC), as
published by the International Code Council (ICC), and together known commonly
as the Building Code, with provisions that include the 2021 Edition of the
International Property Maintenance Code (IPMC) and the 2021 Edition of the
International Existing Building Code (IEBC), as published by ICC, and including
the State mandated 2021 Edition of the International Mechanical Code (IMC) and
2012 Edition of the International Energy Conservation Code (IECC), as published
by the ICC, and including the State mandated 2021 Edition of the Uniform
Plumbing Code (UPC), as published by the International Association of Plumbing
and Mechanical Officials (IAPMO), and including the State mandated 2020 Edition
of the National Electric Code (NEC), as published by the National Fire
Protection Association (NFPA), and which volumes are incorporated herein by
this reference as fully as though set forth herein in their entirety, excepting
only such portions as are hereinafter stated to be deleted therefrom; and such
additional or amended provisions as are hereinafter set forth.
This Article, and all provisions incorporated herein by reference or otherwise,
shall be known as the Building Code, may be cited as such, and will be referred
to herein as such and as "this Code". (Ord. 2439, 9-8-2020; amd. Ord. 2576, 7-
17-2023)
8-2A-2: AMENDMENTS, ADDITIONS AND DELETIONS:
The remaining sections in this Article represent amendments, additions and
deletions to the requirements contained in the International Building Code
(IBC) or the International Residential Code (IRC), and where their requirements
conflict with those of the IBC or the IRC, the requirements of this Chapter
shall prevail.
Further references made herein to chapters will be to chapters of the IBC or
the IRC. References to section numbers not proceeded by "8-2A" will be sections
in the IBC or the IRC.
(Ord. 2439, 9-8-2020; amd. Ord. 2576, 7-17-2023)
8-2A-3: SCOPE AND ADMINISTRATION (CHAPTER 1 OF THE IBC AND IRC):
Amend Section 101.1 of the IBC and R101.1 of the IRC (Title) by replacing "Name
of Jurisdiction" with the following:
City of West Des Moines.
Amend Section 101.2 of the IBC (Scope) by revising the last phrase of the
Exception to read as follows:
Shall comply with this code or the International Residential Building Code as
amended.
Amend Section 101.2.1 of the IBC (Appendices) and Section R102.5 of the IRC
(Appendices) by adding the following:
The appendices may be utilized to determine basic guidelines or acceptable
solutions towards meeting the intent of code requirements (determination to be
made by the Building Official).
Amend Section 101.4 of the IBC (Referenced Codes) and Section R102.4 of the IRC
(Referenced Codes and Standards) by adding the following:
1.   The provisions adopted by the State of Iowa (Iowa Department of Public
Safety) including but not limited to the current edition and amendments of the
International Energy Conservation Code (IECC) and the current edition and
amendments of the National Electrical Code (NEC), shall be considered part of
the requirements of this code.
2.   The provisions adopted by the State of Iowa (previously the Iowa
Department of Public Health) including but not limited to the current edition
and amendments of the International Mechanical Code (IMC) and the current
edition and amendments of the Uniform Plumbing Code (UPC), shall be considered
part of the requirements of this code, with the following modification:
Only Corrugated Stainless Steel (CSST) with an Arc Resistant Jacket or Covering
System listed in accordance with ANSI LC-1 (Optional Section 5.16)/CSA 6.26-
2016 shall be installed in accordance with the terms of its approval, the
conditions of listing, the manufactures instructions, and this code including
electrical bonding requirements. CSST shall not be used for through wall
penetrations from the point of delivery of the gas supply to the inside of the
structure. CSST shall not be installed in locations where subject to physical
damage unless protected in an approved manner.
3.   Administrative Policies established by the Building Official will be
considered part of the requirements of this code to the extent that the
provisions are written documentation established to enable consistent
enforcement of a code interpretation.
Amend Section 101.4.4 of the IBC (Property Maintenance) by adding the
following:
1.   The 2021 Edition of the International Property Maintenance Code (IPMC)
shall only be considered part of the requirements of this code to the extent
that the provisions are utilized as a mechanism to address property maintenance
concerns and are not considered a mandate for enforcement action on existing
properties. If any provisions of the IPMC conflict with the amended provisions
of this ordinance, the provisions of this ordinance shall apply.
2.   The Building Security provisions found in Section 304.18 of the
International Property Maintenance Code (IPMC) and Section 8-2A-15 (Rental
Housing) of this ordinance shall apply to new residential rental projects.
Documentation for compliance with these requirements shall be provided prior to
project approval.
Amend Section 101.4.7 of the IBC (Existing Buildings) by deleting the existing
language and replacing it with the following:
The provisions of the 2021 Edition of the International Existing Building Code
(IEBC), upon submittal of the required documentation by a design professional,
may apply to matters governing the repair, alteration, change of occupancy,
addition to and relocation of existing buildings.
In Section 103.1 of the IBC and Section R103.1 of the IRC (Creation of
Enforcement Agency) the Department of Building Safety shall mean Building
Division (a Division of Development Services).
Amend Section 104.4 of the IBC and R104.4 of the IRC (Inspections) by adding
the following provision:
Personnel currently employed by the City of West Des Moines that are actively
working in the Building Division as a Building Inspector, Plans Examiner,
Rental Inspector, Building Official, or any similar position as determined by
the City, are hereby deemed as qualified, certified, licensed, or otherwise
authorized to review plans and permit application documents, and to perform all
required inspections for commercial or residential projects, and to perform
rental housing inspections, and to perform any similar duties necessary to
enable compliance with the adopted code provisions of the City, and to fulfill
the duties and responsibilities specifically listed in the job descriptions of
said personnel.
Amend Section 105.2 of the IBC and Section R105.2 of the IRC (Work Exempt from
Per-mit) as follows:
1.   No. 1 shall read as follows: One story detached accessory structures,
provided the floor area does not exceed 200 square feet and the structure does
not utilize a permanent foundation.
2.   Delete No. 2, Fences not over 7 feet high.
3.   Delete No. 10 in the IBC: Shade cloth structures for nursery or
agriculture purposes.
Amend Section 105.6 of the IBC and Section R105.6 of the IRC (Suspension or
Revocation) by adding the following conditions:   
It is the responsibility of the permit holder to schedule the required
inspections and obtain final approval. Failure to schedule the required
inspections and receive approval of work authorized by the permit before
covering said work or at completion shall result in revocation of the permit
and void any associated approvals granted by the City. This failure shall also
equate to working without a permit in violation of City ordinance and no future
permits shall be issued to any person or company who has outstanding violations
of this code or any other laws or ordinances of the City. Failure to contact
the City for any inspection or follow-up within 180 days of permit approval
shall also be deemed a violation of this code section, and the approved permit
may be voided or revoked.
Anytime work is suspended or abandoned for more than 30 days, the Building
Official may determine to suspend or revoke the permit due to neglect if the
site is not properly secured, including:
1.   Removal of all construction debris, materials, weeds, etc. that make the
area unsightly and create a public nuisance.
2.   Excavations, including open basement foundations, shall be protected by a
fence to help prevent an attractive nuisance in an occupied neighborhood.
3.   Ground cover, silt fencing, and similar erosion prevention measures shall
be provided to prevent erosion, damage, and nuisance to surrounding properties,
including public right-of-ways, sidewalks, streets, etc.
Amend Section 107 of the IBC (Submittal Documents) and Section R106 of the IRC
(Construction Documents) by adding the following paragraph:
Compliance with the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) and any associated
floodplain management regulations established by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency (FEMA) or the Iowa Department of Natural Resources (IDNR)
shall be met through enforcement of all associated Flood Plain Ordinances
adopted by the City of West Des Moines. All provisions of Chapter 1 of the IBC
and Chapter 1 of the IRC (Scope and Administration) and all administrative,
appeals, and liability provisions of this ordinance shall apply to the
application of all associated Flood Plain Ordinances adopted by the City of
West Des Moines.
Amend Section 109 of the IBC and Section R108 of the IRC by adding the
following:
1.   All fees due the City for permits, as determined by City Council
Resolution, shall be collected by the Building Division/Development Services,
and forwarded to the City Finance Department.
2.   No building permits or rental certificates shall be issued to any person
or company who has fees outstanding or has outstanding violations of this code
or any other laws or ordinances of the City.
3.   If within 180 days of the date of issuance, the holder of a permit decides
not to commence the work described in said permit, they may upon application to
the Building Division, be refunded up to 80% of the paid fees.
4.   Work commencing before permit issuance shall be subject to an
investigation fee, which shall be equal to and in addition to the calculated
"building permit" fee (this does not include plan check fees, sewer fees, storm
water fees, etc.)
Amend Section 109.3 of the IBC and Section R108.3 of the IRC, Building Permit
Valuations, by adding the following:
Building valuation for the calculation of permit fees will be the construction
cost for the total work submitted by the contractor, however it shall not be
less than the valuation derived from the most current Building Valuation Data
published by the International Code Council (ICC). This published data is
utilized by the Building Official to maintain consistency and fairness for
building permit fee calculation only and is not intended to reflect actual
taxable value. (Ord. 2439, 9-8-2020; amd. Ord. 2576, 7-17-2023)
8-2A-4: OCCUPANCY CLASSIFICATION AND USE (CHAPTER 3 OF THE IBC):
Amend Section 305.2.3 and 308.5.4 of the IBC (Five or fewer persons receiving
care in a dwelling unit) by deleting the current title and language, and
replacing it with the following:
305.2.3 and 308.5.4 (Eight or fewer persons receiving care in a dwelling unit).
A facility such as the above within a dwelling unit and having eight or fewer
persons receiving custodial care shall be classified as a Group R-3 occupancy
or shall comply with the International Residential Code as amended.
Exception: Day Care facilities that provide custodial care for 16 or fewer
persons for less than 24-hours per day in a single-family dwelling, and where
registered with the State of Iowa Department of Human Services as a child
development home on or before January 1, 2017, are permitted to comply with the
International Residential Code as amended.
Amend Section 310.4.1 of the IBC (Care facilities within a dwelling) by
deleting the current language and replace it with the following:
Section 310.4.1 of the IBC (Care facilities within a dwelling) refer to amended
Code Section 308.5.4 of the IBC. (Ord. 2439, 9-8-2020; amd. Ord. 2576, 7-17-
2023)
8-2A-5: SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS BASED ON OCCUPANCY AND USE (CHAPTER 4 OF THE IBC):
Amend Section 423.5 of the IBC (Group E Occupancy) and Chapter 11 (Additions)
Section 1106.1 of the International Existing Building Code (Group E Occupancy)
by deleting the current language and replacing it with the following:
In areas where the shelter design wind speed for tornadoes is 250 mph in
accordance with Figure 304.2(1) of ICC 500, all Group E occupancies with an
occupant load of 50 or more shall have a storm shelter constructed in
accordance with Chapters 1 through 5 & Chapter 8 of ICC 500. (Ord. 2439, 9-8-
2020; amd. Ord. 2576, 7-17-2023)
8-2A-6: GENERAL BUILDING HEIGHT AND AREA (CHAPTER 5 OF THE IBC):
Amend Section 508.5 of the IBC (Live/Work Units) by adding the following
Exception:
Exception 2: Detached one- and two-family dwelling and townhouses that include
an office that is less than 20 percent of the area of the dwelling unit and
constructed in accordance with the International Residential Code, as amended.
Amend Section 508.5.1 of the IBC (Limitations) by deleting Exception 3, and
replacing it with the following:
The nonresidential area function shall be limited to floors of the live/work
unit with exiting at the first story or a basement walkout.
Amend Section 508.5.2 of the IBC (Occupancies) by adding the following
Exception:
Exception 2: Live/work units located within detached one- and two-family
dwellings and townhouses may be constructed in accordance with the
International Residential Code, as amended. (Ord. 2576, 7-17-2023)
8-2A-7: FIRE AND SMOKE PROTECTION FEATURES (CHAPTER 7 OF THE IBC):
Amend Section 707.5 of the IBC (Continuity) by adding the following Exception:
Exception 3: 2-hour shafts constructed of concrete or masonry and having walls
that are not required to be fire rated per section 707.4 shall be permitted to
be constructed of materials permitted by the building type of construction so
long as a complete non-combustible separation of 2 hours is provided between
the shaft and adjoining structure, and the provisions of section 1023.7 are
met. (Ord. 2439, 9-8-2020; amd. Ord. 2576, 7-17-2023)
8-2A-8: MEANS OF EGRESS (CHAPTER 10 OF THE IBC):
Amend Section 1010.1 of the IBC (Doors) by adding the following provision:
New multifamily apartments, rental condominium and rental townhouse projects
shall provide the following security measures:
1.   Latch plates for door locks and deadbolts shall be installed with lag
screws, or similar, at least 3 inches in length, and capable of attaching
through the door frame at least 1 ½ inches into the stud wall framing.
2.   Sliding patio doors at grade level shall have foot bolt locks, or similar
locks.
3.   View ports capable of 180 degree viewing angle shall be installed in all
entry doors.
Amend Section 1010.1.5 of the IBC (Landings at Doors) by adding the following
sentence to the end of the provision:
Exterior landings required by Section 1010.1.4 to be at the same elevation as
the interior door shall be provided with frost protection.
Amend Section 1014.4 of the IBC (Continuity) by adding the following Exception:
Exception 6: Handrails within a dwelling unit or serving an individual dwelling
unit of groups R-2 or R-3 shall be permitted to be interrupted at one location
in a straight stair when the rail terminates into a wall or ledge and is offset
and immediately continues.
Amend Section 1015.9 of the IBC (Walking Surfaces) by adding the following:
A guard (guardrail) shall be provided along retaining walls where a finished
walking surface such as a sidewalk, patio, driveway, or parking lot is located
within 72 inches of the top side of a retaining wall, and the retaining wall is
30 inches or more above grade (measured horizontally at any point within 36
inches of the open side). (Ord. 2439, 9-8-2020; amd. Ord. 2576, 7-17-2023)
8-2A-9: STRUCTURAL DESIGN (CHAPTER 16 OF THE IBC):
Amend Section 1601 of the IBC (General) by adding the following:
The climatic and geographic design criteria utilized in Chapter 16 of the IBC
shall be the following local jurisdiction criteria:
Ground Snow Load:        30lb.
Roof Snow Load:          24lb.
Wind Speed:              105/115/120 mph. based on building risk category
Seismic Zone:            A
Weathering:              Severe
Frost line depth:        42 inches
Termite Condition:       Moderate to Heavy
Winter Design Temp:      -5 degrees
Ice Barrier Required:    Yes
Flood Hazard:            FEMA approved NFIP since 11-01-79
100-year rainfall rate:  3.4 inches per hour
Air freezing index:      1833
Mean annual temperature: 48.6 degrees
 
Amend Section 1608.2 of the IBC (Ground Snow Loads) by deleting the current
language and replacing with the following:
The ground snow load to be used in determining the design snow load for roofs
is hereby established at 30 pounds per square foot. Subsequent increases or
decreases shall be allowed as otherwise provided by code, except that the
minimum allowable flat roof snow load may be reduced to not less than 80
percent of the ground snow load.
Amend Section 1612 of the IBC (Flood Loads) by adding the following paragraph:
Compliance with the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) and any associated
floodplain management regulations established by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency (FEMA) or the Iowa Department of Natural Resources (IDNR)
shall be met through enforcement of all associated Flood Plain Ordinances
adopted by the City of West Des Moines. All provisions of Chapter 1 of the IBC
and Chapter 1 of the IRC (Scope and Administration) and all administrative,
appeals, and liability provisions of this ordinance shall apply to the
application of all associated Flood Plain Ordinances adopted by the City of
West Des Moines. (Ord. 2439, 9-8-2020; amd. Ord. 2576, 7-17-2023)
8-2A-10: SOILS AND FOUNDATIONS (CHAPTER 18 OF THE IBC):
Amend Section 1807.2 of the IBC (Retaining Walls) by adding the following:
Retaining walls shall be setback from property lines utilizing a "one to one"
ratio (the setback distance from the property line shall equal the height of
the retaining wall above grade).
Amend Section 1807.2 of the IBC (Retaining Walls) by adding the following:
A guard (guardrail) shall be provided along retaining walls where a finished
walking surface such as a sidewalk, patio, driveway, or parking area is located
within 72 inches of the top side of a retaining wall, and the retaining wall is
30 inches or more above grade (measured horizontally at any point within 36
inches of the open side). (Ord. 2439, 9-8-2020; amd. Ord. 2576, 7-17-2023)
8-2A-11: SPECIAL CONSTRUCTION (CHAPTER 31 OF THE IBC):
Amend Section 3109 of the IBC (Swimming Pools, Spas and Hot Tubs) by deleting
the following provision referred to in Section 305.1 (General) of the 2021
International Swimming Pool and Spa Code:
Swimming pools equipped with a powered safety cover that complies with ASTM
F1346 shall not be required to comply with Sections 305.2 through 305.7
(Barrier or fence requirements for height, type, openings, setbacks, gates, and
other design criteria). (Ord. 2439, 9-8-2020; amd. Ord. 2576, 7-17-2023)
8-2A-12: BUILDING PLANNING (CHAPTER 3 OF THE IRC):
Amend Table R301.2 of the IRC (Climatic and Geographic Design Criteria) by
completing the table with the following local jurisdiction criteria:
Ground Snow Load:        30lb.
Roof Snow Load:          24lb.
Wind Speed:              105/115/120 mph. based on building risk category
Seismic Zone:            A
Weathering:              Severe
Frost line depth:        42 inches
Termite Condition:       Moderate to Heavy
Winter Design Temp:      -5 degrees
Ice Barrier Required:    Yes
Flood Hazard:            FEMA approved NFIP since 11-01-79
100-year rainfall rate:  3.4 inches per hour
Air freezing index:      1833
Mean annual temperature: 48.6 degrees
 
Amend Section R302.2 of the IRC (Townhouses) by including "and Two-family
dwellings" in the title.
Delete Section R302.3 of the IRC (Two-family dwellings)
Amend Section R302.6 of the IRC (Dwelling-Garage Fire Separation) and Table
R302.6 of the IRC (Dwelling-Garage Separation) by deleting the allowance for ½"
gypsum board and replacing it with 5/8" Type X gypsum board.
Delete Code Section: R302.13 of the IRC (Fire Protection of Floors).
Amend Section R303.3 of the IRC (Bathrooms) by deleting the current language
and replacing it with the following:
Bathrooms shall be provided with a mechanical ventilation system. The minimum
ventilation rates shall be 50 cfm for intermittent ventilation or 20 cfm for
continuous ventilation. Ventilation air from the space shall be exhausted
directly to the outside.
Amend Section R305.1.1 of the IRC (Basements) by replacing the Exception with
the following:
Exception: Existing basements not having a height as specified in this section
are allowed to be finished with a ceiling height that is not decreased more
than the minimal measurement created by applying a finished ceiling of gypsum
board or acoustical ceiling tiles.
Amend Section R310.1 of the IRC (Emergency Escape and Rescue Openings) by
adding the following provisions:
Basement finish projects on existing basements that do not have sleeping rooms
shall provide smoke detectors in each area or room.
Amend Section R310.2.3 of the IRC (Maximum Height from Floor) by adding the
following Exception:
Exception: A landing may be provided to meet the maximum sill height of forty-
four (44) inches above the floor. The landing shall not be less than thirty-six
(36) inches wide, not less than twelve (12) inches out from the exterior wall,
and not more than twenty-four (24) inches in height. The landing shall be
permanently affixed to the floor below or the wall under the window it serves.
Amend Section R310.4 of the IRC (Area Wells) by adding the following to the
section:
Window wells that are utilized to meet minimum protected opening elevations
established on the approved plat or site plan shall be a solid structure of
concrete, metal, plastic, or similar impermeable product, and it shall be
sealed against the foundation. Landscape timbers or similar products shall not
be utilized without an exterior water-proof membrane and prior design approval
from the Building Official.
Amend Section R311.3 of the IRC (Floors and Landings at Exterior Doors) by
adding the following:
Landings for all exterior exit doors that swing out in the direction of travel
and landings where storm doors have less than a 4-inch clearance above the
landing, shall be provided with frost protection.
Amend Section R311.3.2 of the IRC (Floor elevation at other exterior doors) by
deleting the exception and replacing it with the following:
Exception: A top landing is not required where a stairway of not more than four
risers is located on the exterior side of a door, provided the door does not
swing over the stairway.
Amend Section R311.7.5.1 of the IRC (Risers) by adding the following Exception:
Exception 3: The dimension of the top and bottom riser of a stair may vary up
to 1-inch from the stairway riser dimension; however, in no case shall the
riser height exceed 7 ¾ inches.
Amend Section R311.7.8.4 of the IRC (Continuity) by adding the following
Exception:
Exception 3: Handrails within a dwelling unit or serving an individual dwelling
unit shall be permitted to be interrupted at one location in a straight stair
when the rail terminates into a wall or ledge and is offset and immediately
continues.
Amend Section R312.1.3 of the IRC (Opening Limitations) by adding the following
paragraph:
Guards that utilize cables or similar materials which require constant tension
to maintain the integrity of the system, shall be spaced a maximum of 3 ½
inches on center, with perpendicular cable spacers/support posts located a
maximum of 4 feet on-center.
Amend Section: R313.1 of the IRC (Townhouse automatic fire sprinkler systems)
by deleting the current title and replacing it with the following:
(Townhouse and Two-family dwelling automatic fire sprinkler systems)
Further Amend Section: R313.1 of the IRC (Townhouse and Two-family dwelling
automatic fire sprinkler systems) by adding the following Exception:
Exception 2: An automatic residential fire sprinkler system shall not be
required in Townhomes and Two-family dwellings where the total square footage
of a multiple unit building is less than 12,000 square feet, and each unit
extends from foundation to roof with an open yard or public way on at least two
sides, and the common walls between units is not less than two 1-hour fire
resistance rated wall assemblies or a 2-hour fire resistance rated wall
assembly.
Amend Section R313.2 of the IRC (One- and two-family dwellings automatic fire
sprinkler systems) by deleting the title and replacing it with the following:
(Single Family dwellings automatic fire sprinkler systems)
Further Amend Section R313.2 of the IRC (Single family dwellings automatic fire
sprinkler systems) by adding the following Exception:
Exception 2: An automatic residential fire sprinkler system shall not be
required for single family dwellings containing less than eight thousand
(8,000) square feet of floor space, including the garage, covered decks,
covered porches and similar covered areas. Documentation of square footage
totals meeting the 8,000 square foot exception shall be provided on the plans
by the designer.
Amend Section R314.3 of the IRC (Location) by adding the following required
location:
Residential movie theatre and similar entertainment rooms equipped with
lighting, seating, and sound packages designed specifically for movie/sports/
entertainment viewing where occupants are isolated from the safety levels
provided by typical smoke alarm installation locations.
Amend Section R322.1 of the IRC (General) by adding the following paragraph:
Compliance with the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) and any associated
floodplain management regulations established by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency (FEMA) or the Iowa Department of Natural Resources (IDNR)
shall be met through enforcement of all associated Flood Plain Ordinances
adopted by the City of West Des Moines. All provisions of Chapter 1 of the IBC
and Chapter 1 of the IRC (Scope and Administration) and all administrative,
appeals, and liability provisions of this ordinance shall apply to the
application of all associated Flood Plain Ordinances adopted by the City of
West Des Moines.
Amend Section R327 of the IRC (Swimming Pools, Spas and Hot Tubs) by deleting
the following provision referred to in Section 305.1 (General) of the 2021
International Swimming Pool and Spa Code:
Swimming pools equipped with a powered safety cover that complies with ASTM
F1346 shall not be required to comply with Sections 305.2 through 305.7
(Barrier or fence requirements for height, type, openings, setbacks, gates, and
other design criteria). (Ord. 2439, 9-8-2020; amd. Ord. 2576, 7-17-2023)
8-2A-13: FOUNDATIONS (CHAPTER 4 OF THE IRC):
Amend Section R403.1.1 of the IRC (Minimum size) and the applicable Tables by
adding the following adjusted footing dimensions based on soil bearing
pressure:
Residential Conventional Footing Dimensions: Assuming 2,000 P.S.F. is required
for the footing, the following adjusted footing dimensions may be used for the
soil conditions specified in the table below, unless specific engineering
problems exist:
 
SOIL BEARING PRESSURE CONVENTIONAL FOOTING & REINFORCEMENT
2,000 P.S.F.          8" x 16" with two #4 reinforcement bars
1,850 P.S.F.          9" x 20" with two #4 reinforcement bars
1,500 P.S.F.          10" x 20" with two #5 or three #4 reinforcement bars
1,250 P.S.F.          11" x 28" with three #5 reinforcement bars
1,000 P.S.F.          12" x 32" with three #5 reinforcement bars
 
The dimensions specified in this table are typically accepted dimensions for
conventionally designed single family dwelling structures of one or two stories
in height, which are intended to be constructed on undisturbed, non-expansive
soils.
Amend Section R403.1.4.1 of the IRC (Frost Protection) by deleting the first
exception and replacing it with the following:
Exception 1: Frost protection is not required for detached accessory structures
of light frame wood construction when all the following conditions are met:
1.   The square foot area of the floating slab for a light-frame construction
building is less than 1024 square feet.
2.   The structure is located more than 10 feet from a dwelling or attached
garage.
3.   The eve height is less than 10 feet.
4.   The perimeter of the thickened slab area shall be twelve (12) by twelve
(12) inches with one (1) number four (4) bar placed near the top and bottom of
the edge.
5.   The slab floor shall be not less than four (4) inches thick with one (1)
number four (4) bar placed every two (2) feet on center or in a 6 by 6 mesh.
6.   The slab pour shall be continuous.
7.   Garage floor areas shall have all sod and/or debris removed.
Amend Section R403 of the IRC (Footings), and Section R404 of the IRC
(Foundation and Retaining Walls) by adding the following criteria for decks,
seasonal rooms, and additions:   
On residential occupancies, seasonal rooms, and additions less than 400 sq. ft.
may be constructed on an isolated column foundation (post and beam) consisting
of a minimum 6-inch x 6-inch wood posts rated for ground contact and located
under all roof bearing points on a minimum 24 inch by 10-inch-thick frost
footing extending 42 inches below grade. Seasonal rooms and additions that
exceed 400 sq. ft. shall utilize a design professional for the proposed plan.
Amend Section R404 of the IRC (Foundation and Retaining Walls) and the
applicable Tables, with the following reinforcement criteria for cast-in-place
concrete walls:
1.   (8' walls) Requirements include: three horizontal #4 rods, with 1'-0"
overlap, located at 1'-0", 4'-0", and 7'-0" from the bottom of the wall. The
rods shall be continuous (overlapping) at corners.
2.   (9' and 10' walls) Requirements include: five horizontal #4 rods, with 1'-
0" overlap, located at 24" on center. Vertical #4 rods shall be placed at 20"
on center. The steel shall be ASTM grade 40, and the concrete 3,000 psf
minimum.
3.   Step ups, at garages and similar, shall not have a span of more than 4'-
0".
4.   Forms shall have proper bearing on footings.
5.   Cold weather pouring temperature shall be above 20 degrees
6.   Anchor bolts or straps shall be spaced not more than 6 feet on center, or
per manufacturers listing, and not more than 1 foot from the end. They shall be
½ inch minimum size and embedded 7 inches minimum into the concrete.
Amend Section R404.4 of the IRC (Retaining Walls) by adding the following:
Retaining walls shall be setback from property lines utilizing a "one to one"
ratio (the setback distance from the property line shall equal the height of
the retaining wall above grade).
Further Amend Section R404.4 of the IRC (Retaining Walls) by adding the
following:
A guard (guardrail) shall be provided along retaining walls where a finished
walking surface such as a sidewalk, patio, driveway, or parking area is located
within 72 inches of the top side of a retaining wall, and the retaining wall is
30 inches or more above grade (measured horizontally at any point within 36
inches of the open side)
Amend Section R405 of the IRC (Foundation Drainage) by adding the following:
Subsoil foundation drainage shall be into a sump basket with a sealed cover,
and mechanically discharged into the City's storm sewer system by means of a
sump pump.
Exception: Connection is not required where the City storm sewer is not located
within 400 feet of the property line, and where storm sewer will not be
available within two years.
Amend Section R405.1 of the IRC (Concrete or masonry foundations) by deleting
the Exception, which provided criteria for not requiring foundation drainage.
(Ord. 2439, 9-8-2020; amd. Ord. 2576, 7-17-2023)
8-2A-14: FLOORS (CHAPTER 5 OF THE IRC):
Amend Section R502.11.4 of the IRC (Truss Design Drawings) by deleting "shall
be submitted to the Building Official and approved prior to installation" and
inserting the following:
Shall be available on site for review. (Ord. 2439, 9-8-2020; amd. Ord. 2576, 7-
17-2023)
8-2A-15: ROOF-CEILING CONSTRUCTION (CHAPTER 8 OF THE IRC):
Amend Section R802.10.1 of the IRC (Truss Design Drawings) by deleting "Shall
be submitted to the Building Official and approved prior to installation" and
inserting the following:
Shall be available on site for review. (Ord. 2439, 9-8-2020; amd. Ord. 2576, 7-
17-2023)
8-2A-16: RENTAL HOUSING:
A.   Rental Inspection Certificate Required: No person shall rent, lease, let,
operate, or otherwise allow the occupancy of any dwelling or dwelling unit or
any portion of any dwelling or dwelling unit (including single rooms) on a
short- or long-term basis unless they hold a valid rental inspection
certificate. The preceding language does not preclude relatives, or similar
persons from occupying a portion of an owner-occupied single family dwelling
unit, which complies with the single-family rental housing criteria listed in
this section.
B.   Failure to Acquire or Renew Rental Certificate: The City is not involved
in, or a party to, property sales, changes in ownership, or rental agreements.
Therefore, it is the responsibility of the property owner/agent to ensure that
their rental properties have valid rental inspection certificates. Failure to
acquire or renew the required rental certificate may result in notice being
sent to the property owner that the specified address is an illegal rental.
This action may include posting notice on the property as an illegal rental
with door hangers, yard signage or similar signs, and providing notice to the
tenant that the property they occupy has not been approved by the City as a
legal rental property. This action may also include issuance of a Rent
Abatement Notice.
C.   Rent Abatement: The Building Official may order rent abated when it is
determined that the owner has, after issuance of a notice of violation of this
chapter:
1   Failed to provide an essential service (water, sewer, electricity, heat);
or
2   Failed to remedy a condition that poses a substantial risk to the health or
safety of the tenant; or
3   Rented a dwelling unit without a current rental certificate.
Rent abatement means that the owner may not recover rent from the tenant. Rent
shall be abated until the condition for which rent abatement was ordered has,
in the judgment of the Chief Building Official, been remedied.
The Building Official will forward the rent abatement order to the owner by
email and to the tenant by posting on the entrance door to the dwelling unit.
Follow up documentation shall be provided to the owner at the address on the
rental permit and to the tenant at the unit address by U.S. mail. Notice of
termination of the rent abatement order will be given in the same manner.
D.   New Units: New construction projects, which have received final inspection
approval and have been issued a Certificate of Occupancy, shall be considered,
in compliance with rental inspection certificate and fee requirements for a
period of two (2) years from the issue date. Required Owner/Agent Information:
Owners of residential rental property in the City, who reside in Polk or Dallas
County, Iowa, or any county contiguous thereto, shall provide the Building
Division with a rental application that includes their contact information
including but not limited to: Mailing addresses, telephone numbers, and e-mail
addresses. Owners of residential rental property in the City who reside in any
area other than described above, shall provide the Building Division with the
name, physical address, and contact information of an individual over the age
of eighteen (18) who shall reside in Polk, Dallas, Warren, or Madison County,
Iowa, or any county contiguous thereto, and who shall be designated as agent
for scheduling inspections, receiving notice, and service of process. A new
owner shall provide the information required in this subsection within five (5)
days from the date of any change of ownership. Failure to give said notice will
render the rental certificate null and void. Re-inspection and the associated
fees shall be required to re-instate the rental certificate. The previous owner
shall disclose this requirement to the new owner.
E.   Rental Inspection Schedule: The Building Division shall seek to inspect
every residential rental dwelling within the corporate limits of the City every
two years. As part of the inspection process, the City may determine to extend
or shorten the timeframe to the next scheduled inspection. Factors that may
influence the City to inspect more or less frequently include, but are not
limited to the following:
1   Age and condition of dwelling.
2   Inspection history.
3   Tenant / management complaints.
4   Compliance with smoke and carbon dioxide detector requirements as
stipulated by the Iowa Administrative Code.
5   Natural disasters such as flooding.
6   Timely inspection scheduling, follow-up, and fee payment by the owner.
7   In-house maintenance program by the owner that includes specific life/
safety provisions.
8   Maintain the "Crime-Free Multi-Housing" designation through the Police
Department.
9   Unforeseen factors that may affect the ability to inspect (COVID or similar
community health situations, staffing levels, etc.)
It is the responsibility of the property owner/agent to ensure that their
rental properties have a valid rental inspection certificate. However, the City
may schedule inspection appointments with the owner or agent of the property by
regular mail, e-mail, phone, or through an on-line portal (if available) a
minimum of thirty (30) days in advance of the inspection. It shall be the owner
or agent's responsibility to notify all tenants of the inspection date and
time, in accordance with Iowa law.
F.   Property Status: Given a situation where the property is not occupied by
the owner of record. However, it is being sold on contract and the sales
transaction has not been recorded or documented by the County assessor's
Office. It shall be the property owner's responsibility to record the
transaction and provide written documentation to the City that the non-owner-
occupied property is not a rental. Acquiring homestead exemption status will be
part of the determination criteria. If the property is held by a Trust, it is
the resident's responsibility to provide written documentation to the City that
will confirm that the property is not a rental.
G.   Inspection Procedures: Inspections shall not be conducted with a minor as
the sole representative of the owner or tenant. Inspections shall not be
conducted against the will of the tenant without the building owner or agent
present. Inspections shall not be conducted without prior notice to the tenant,
as required by State law. The property owner, or their agent, shall be present
for all inspections. The agent shall not be the tenant.
H.   Rental Housing Complaints: When receiving or responding to complaints from
rental property tenants, the City will typically intervene only if the tenant
has presented their concerns in writing (email is acceptable) to the
management/owner with a seven (7) day notice to respond, and the management/
owner has failed to respond.
Exception: Life/safety issues such as smoke detectors, blocked exits, exposed
wiring, no heat in the winter, or similar.
I.   Denial or Revocation of Rental Certificate for Violations: Issuance or
renewal of a rental certificate may be denied or revoked if the applicant, or a
subsidiary firm, partnership, or corporation owns one (1) or more properties
within the City in which the applicant or owner has been notified of violations
of City Code but has not corrected said violations prior to City enforcement or
abatement, including but not limited to failure to have current rental
certificates. Violations of the International Property Maintenance Code (IPMC)
shall be deemed violations of the City Code. Specifically, three (3) or more
nuisance violations that occur within a twelve (12) month period may cause the
issuance or renewal of a rental certificate to be denied or revoked. The West
Des Moines Police Department or Community Compliance should notify the Building
Official or their designee when three (3) or more nuisance violations have
occurred within a twelve (12) month period. The Building Official may then
determine to deny or revoke the issuance or renewal of one, some, or all rental
certificates in the name of the applicant or owner for unabated violations of
the City Code whether-or-not the violations occurred on each property owned by
that person or entity.
J.   Fees: All fees due the City for permits or rental housing certificates, as
determined by City Council Resolution, shall be collected in the Building
Division, and forwarded to the City Finance Department. Rental inspection fees
are due within thirty (30) days of the inspection or billing date.
Investigation fees, as described in the City Council Fee Resolution as equal to
and in addition to the calculated inspection fee, shall apply for failure to
pay rental inspection fees within thirty (30) days, or for failure to have a
current rental certificate.
K.   Issuance, Duration, and Validation: If the premises are found to comply
with the requirements of this Code and the fees are paid, a rental inspection
certificate shall be issued and valid for two (2) years from initial in-
spection, or from the listed expiration.
L.   Expiration Date: Every certificate shall expire at the end of two years
following its date of issuance, or from the listed expiration date, unless
suspended or revoked as hereinafter provided.
M.   Review Requirement: Every rental inspection certificate issued under the
authority of this chapter shall be made available by the owner, for a tenant to
review, before any dwelling unit may be rented, leased, or otherwise occupied.
N.   Single Family Housing Criteria: The West Des Moines Zoning Ordinance and
Official Zoning Map currently designate where single family (one family)
dwelling units, two-family dwelling units, and multiple dwelling units may be
located within the city. Definitions found in Title 9 (Zoning),
Chapter 2 (Zoning Rules and Definitions) of City Code are utilized to establish
whether a dwelling unit meets current zoning and rental housing criteria along
with the following definitions:
1   Family: Any number of individuals living together as a single housekeeping
unit and doing their cooking on the premises, as distinguished from a group
occupying a boarding or rooming house.
2   One Family Dwelling: A detached building, on an individual lot, designed
for and used exclusively for residential purposes by one family and containing
one dwelling unit.
3   Dwelling Unit: One or more habitable rooms occupied, or are intended and
designed to be occupied, by one family with facilities for living, sleeping,
cooking, and eating.
4   Kitchen: Any room or portion of a building used, intended, or designed to
be used for cooking and preparation of food, including any room having a sink
and provisions for either a gas or electric stove.
In addition to the definitions, the following criteria shall be utilized to
determine if the intent of the zoning requirements have been met for single-
family (one-family) dwelling units: There shall not be more than one lease
between the property owner and the tenant (tenants) for each single-family
zoned property address. Sub-leases between tenants are a private issue and
shall not be subject to City scrutiny, provided all other criteria have been
met.
Exception: Additional sinks, wet-bars, or kitchen areas will not be considered
an additional kitchen provided walls, floors, and locking doors, as specified
below, do not separate the dwelling into multiple tenant use.
1   There shall not be more than one electric meter, gas meter, or water meter
for each single-family zoned property address unless documentation can be
provided that the additional meter installations have received City approval.
2   There shall not be any walls or floor/ceiling assemblies in any single-
family zoned property address, which separate the one-family dwelling into more
than one unit.
Determining factors shall include locked or locking interior doors, and
separate entrances which make portions of the unit inaccessible to all "family"
members.
O.   Exterior Property Areas: Owners and/or tenants of single-family dwellings
shall remove snow and ice from the sidewalks associated with the property they
own or occupy within a reasonable time but in no case more than twenty-four
(24) hours following the weather event by which the snow and ice was deposited.
Owners of multi-family dwellings shall remove snow and ice from the sidewalks
associated with the property they own within a reasonable time but in no case
more than twenty-four (24) hours following the weather event by which the snow
and ice was deposited.
P.   Guards or (Guardrails) located in common areas of multifamily units
constructed prior to July 1992 shall not be less than thirty-six (36) inches in
height and shall not have openings which allow passage of a sphere six (6)
inches in diameter.
Q.   Insect Screens shall be provided April 15th to October 15th.
R.   Heat Supply shall be available September 1st through May 30th.
S.   Receptacle Outlets: All receptacle outlets in bathroom areas, basements,
kitchens within six (6) feet of the sink, garages, and exterior locations,
shall be GFCI protected.
T.   Smoke Detectors: Smoke detectors are required in every bedroom, on every
floor, and as further stipulated by the State of Iowa Administrative Code.
U.   Carbon Monoxide Detectors: At least one carbon monoxide detector is
required in the immediate vicinity of sleeping rooms. Additional locations may
be required as stipulated by the State of Iowa Administrative Code. (Ord. 2439,
9-8-2020; amd. Ord. 2560, 4-3-2023; Ord. 2576, 7-17-2023)
8-2A-17: APPEALS:
Amend Section 113 of the IBC and Section R112 of the IRC (Board of Appeals) by
deleting the current provisions and in lieu thereof the following criteria
shall apply:
Appeals Procedure:
Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Building Official may appeal the
decision to the Municipal Code Hearing Officer as set out in Title 4, Chapter
4,
Section 10 , of the City Code. The appeal shall be completed by filing a
written notice of appeal accompanied by a $100.00 filing fee for administrative
and publication costs with the City Clerk within seven (7) calendar days from
the date of issue of the written decision by the Building Official. For appeal
purposes, the date of issue shall be the date the Building Official signs,
dates, and mails the written decision. Failure to file a timely notice of
appeal as required herein shall constitute a waiver of the right to appeal and
the decision of the Building Official shall be final.
The notice of appeal shall clearly set forth with specificity each and every
ground that serves as the basis for the appeal, and it shall be accompanied by
copies of plans, specifications, or any pertinent information which may be
required to adequately evaluate the appeal. Any matter not specifically raised
in the notice of appeal shall be deemed to be final and shall not be reviewed
by the Municipal Code Appeals Officer.
Hearing Procedure:
The procedures provided in Title 4, Chapter 4,
Section 10  of the City Code shall apply to hearings held under this Chapter.
In addition, the following shall apply:
In the event that an ambiguity arises as to an interpretation of the code, the
Municipal Code Hearing Officer may interpret the code as applied to the
specific instance presented. Such decisions shall be on a case-by-case basis
and shall not be binding in future case.
The Municipal Code Appeals Officer shall not waive any requirements of the code
unless the Municipal Code Appeals Officer concludes that the provision(s) is
unduly burdensome or impracticable under the circumstances. Such decisions will
also be on a case-by-case basis and shall not be binding in future cases.
The cost of the administrative hearing shall be the responsibility of the
losing party, including, but not limited to, the cost of the administrative
hearing officer. (Ord. 2439, 9-8-2020; amd. Ord. 2576, 7-17-2023)
8-2A-18: LIABILITY FOR DAMAGES:
A.   This Code is enacted only for the purpose of securing to individuals the
enjoyment of rights and privileges to which they are entitled as members of the
public, rather than for the purpose of protecting any individual from harm.
B.   Issuance of a permit or certificate of occupancy shall not be construed as
approval of a violation of the provisions of this code, other ordinances of the
jurisdiction, or of any State or Federal mandates regarding energy,
accessibility, or similar provisions. Certificates presuming to give authority
to violate or cancel the provisions of this code, other ordinances of the
jurisdiction, or any State or Federal mandates shall not be valid.
C.   The City, its officers, employees or agents make no representations or
warranties of any kind whatsoever, expressed or implied, with respect to the
completeness or thoroughness of the inspections and examinations performed
under this Code but said inspections are made solely to assist the owner of any
building, structure, equip-ment and premises to meet certain minimum
requirements of this Code and to compel, if necessary, the owner to meet the
minimum requirements for the protection of the health, welfare and safety of
persons and property. Nothing herein contained in this Code shall alleviate the
owner of any building, structure, equipment, and premises to make an
independent inspection in order to fulfill the requirements of this Code nor
shall this Code be construed to relieve or lessen the responsibility of any
person owning, operating, or controlling any building, structure, equipment or
premises regulated herein from any damages to any person or property caused by
defects or code violation. The City, its officers, employees, or agents shall
not be held as assuming any liability for damages to any person or property by
reason of any inspections authorized by this Code or investigations, or any
approvals issued herein, or for any act or failure to act in the enforcement of
this Code. (Ord. 2439, 9-8-2020; amd. Ord. 2576, 7-17-2023)
8-2A-19: REPEALER:
All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with the provision of this
chapter are hereby repealed. (Ord. 2439, 9-8-2020; amd. Ord. 2576, 7-17-2023)
8-2A-20: SAVINGS CLAUSE:
If any section, provision, sentence, clause, phrase, or part of the Ordinance
shall be adjudged invalid or unconstitutional, such adjudication shall not
affect the validity of the Ordinance as a whole or any provision, section,
subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, or part hereof not adjudged invalid or
unconstitutional.(Ord. 2439, 9-8-2020; amd. Ord. 2576, 7-17-2023)
8-2A-21: VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES:
Any person who violates the provisions of this chapter upon conviction shall be
punished as set forth in Title 1, Chapter 4,
Section 1 of the City Code of the City of West Des Moines, Iowa. (Ord. 2439, 9-
8-2020; amd. Ord. 2576, 7-17-2023)
8-2A-22: OTHER REMEDIES:
In addition to the provisions set out in the Violations and Penalties Section
herein, the City may proceed in law or equity against any person, firm, or
corporation for violation of any section or subsection of this chapter. (Ord.
2439, 9-8-2020; amd. Ord. 2576, 7-17-2023)
8-2A-23: EFFECTIVE DATE:
This chapter shall be in full force and effect after its passage, approval, and
publication as provided by law. (Ord. 2439, 9-8-2020; amd. Ord. 2576, 7-17-
2023)
ARTICLE B. ELECTRICAL CODE
(Rep. by Ord. 2025, 4-7-2014)
ARTICLE C. PLUMBING CODE
(Rep. by Ord. 2025, 4-7-2014)
ARTICLE D. MECHANICAL CODE
(Rep. by Ord. 2025, 4-7-2014)
ARTICLE E. PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE
(Rep. by Ord. 2025, 4-7-2014)
ARTICLE F. MUNICIPAL CODE APPEALS BOARD
SECTION:
8-2F-1: Definitions
8-2F-2: Appointment; Terms; Rules of Procedure
8-2F-3: Powers of the Board
8-2F-4: Appeal Procedure; Time for Hearing
8-2F-5: Hearing Procedure
8-2F-6: Recommendation of the Board After Hearing
8-2F-7: Recommendation to City Council
8-2F-1: DEFINITIONS:
BOARD or BOARD OF APPEALS: The Municipal Code Appeals Board.
BUILDING OFFICIAL: The code enforcement officer or the designee of the officer.
CITY COUNCIL: The City Council of the City of West Des Moines, Iowa.
CODES or THE CODE:1. See Articles A through E of this Chapter.1 The duly
adopted Uniform Building Code, Uniform Fire Code, Uniform Housing Code, Uniform
Electrical Code, Uniform Plumbing Code and the Uniform Mechanical Code
including any additions or amendments to the said Codes adopted by the City
Council. The term shall also include provisions of the City Code which grant
appeals to the Appeal Board.
PERSON: An individual, firm, corporation, partnership, receiver, trustee,
administrator or an executor.
PETITIONER: Any person who is aggrieved by a decision of the Building Official
and files a written petition of appeal with the Appeals Board recording
secretary. (Ord. 1012, 7-6-92)
8-2F-2: APPOINTMENT; TERMS; RULES OF PROCEDURE:
The Board of Appeals shall be appointed by the Mayor, subject to City Council
approval, as allowed by subsection
1-6A-3H of this Code. The Board shall consist of seven (7) members, five (5) of
which shall be individuals knowledgeable by training and/or education in the
construction industry or the fire service and two (2) members shall be citizens
appointed at-large. Members of the Board shall be appointed for a term of five
(5) years, except when the Board shall first be created two (2) members shall
be appointed for a term of five (5) years, two (2) members for a term of four
(4) years, one member for the term of three (3) years, one member for the term
of two (2) years, one member for the term of one year. All terms shall expire
on June 30 of the appropriate year. A quorum shall consist of four (4) members.
All members of the Board shall reside in the City. The Board shall adopt rules
of procedure for conducting its business. The Board shall conduct all business
at public hearings unless otherwise exempt by State or Municipal law. (Ord.
1012, 7-6-92)
8-2F-3: POWERS OF THE BOARD:
The Board shall have the power to hear and determine the suitability of
alternate materials, types of construction, and to provide reasonable
interpretation to the provisions of the Codes.
The Board is empowered to hear and determine City Code appeals where Code
provisions provide for appeals to the Appeal Board. (Ord. 1012, 7-6-92)
8-2F-4: APPEAL PROCEDURE; TIME FOR HEARING:
A.   Filing Petition for Appeal; Fee: Any person aggrieved by any decision made
by the Building Official regarding the Codes may appeal to the Board. The
appeal shall be perfected by filing with the Appeals Board recording secretary
within ten (10) days from the date of the decision by the Building Official, a
written petition requesting a hearing of the appeal setting forth the
particular section of the Code involved and a detailed statement of the grounds
and reasons why the decision made should be modified or vacated. A one hundred
dollar ($100.00) filing fee shall be filed with the petition for appeal to
cover the administrative cost and publication cost and shall be made payable to
the City and directed to the Appeals Board recording secretary. The City
Council shall have the option to waive the filing fee, for cause.
Failure to file a timely written petition as required herein shall constitute a
waiver of the right to appeal and the decision of the Building Official shall
constitute a final determination.
B.   Schedule of Hearing: Upon receipt of a timely filed written petition with
the Appeals Board recording secretary, and the appropriate filing fee, the
recording secretary shall promptly notify the chairperson of the Board and the
Building Official of the appeal. The recording secretary shall arrange a time
and place for hearing on the appeal. Written notification of the time, place
and nature of the hearing shall be given to the petitioner and the Board
members within ten (10) days after the petition is filed with the recording
secretary.
Hearing shall be scheduled no later than thirty (30) days after the date on
which the petition was filed and may be extended for a reasonable period by the
chairperson upon written request of the petitioner or Building Officials, for
good cause shown.
The failure of a petitioner to appear at a scheduled hearing of an appeal, the
Board may proceed with the hearing and make a decision in the absence of the
petitioner. (Ord. 1012, 7-6-92)
8-2F-5: HEARING PROCEDURE:
A.   The hearing shall be open to the public and shall be recorded either by
mechanical or manual means. Opportunity shall be afforded all parties to
respond and present evidence and argument on all issued involved. Parties may
represent themselves or may be represented by legal counsel.
B.   Irrelevant, immaterial or unduly repetitious evidence may be excluded. A
finding shall be based upon the kind of evidence on which reasonable prudent
persons are accustomed to rely for the conduct of their serious affairs, and
may be based upon such evidence even if it would be inadmissible in a court of
law. The Appeals Board shall give effect to the rules of privilege recognized
by law. Objections to the evidentiary offers may be made and shall be noted in
the record. Subject to these requirements, when a hearing will be expedited and
the interest of the parties will not be prejudiced substantially, any part of
the evidence may be required to be submitted in verified written form.
C.   Documentary evidence may be received in the form of copies or excerpts, if
the original is not readily available. Upon request, parties shall be given an
opportunity to compare the copy with the original, if available.
D.   Witnesses at the hearing, or available persons whose testimony has been
submitted in written form, shall be subject to cross-examination by any party
as necessary for a full and true disclosure of the facts.
E.   The Board's experience, technical competence and specialized knowledge may
be utilized in the evaluation of the evidence.
F.   The chairperson of the Board or his or her designee shall conduct the
hearing and have power to administer oaths. The Board may cause subpoenas to be
issued for such witnesses and the production of such books and papers as either
party may designate. The subpoenas may be signed by the chairperson of the
Board.
G.   No hearing shall be valid unless a majority of the Board is present and no
decision at the hearing shall be valid and binding unless reached by a majority
of all members of the Board. (Ord. 1012, 7-6-92)
8-2F-6: RECOMMENDATION OF THE BOARD AFTER HEARING:
Upon submission of all evidence and at the conclusion of the hearing, the Board
shall make a recommendation to the City Council based upon the record made.
This recommendation may be made immediately after the conclusion of the hearing
or within a reasonable time thereafter. The Board's recommendation may affirm,
modify or reverse any action or interpretation of the Building Official which
has been issued in connection with the enforcement of an ordinance. The
recommendation shall include findings of fact and conclusions of law separately
stated. Following the recommendations of the Board, all parties shall be
notified of the recommendations by personal service or by certified mail,
return receipt requested. (Ord. 1012, 7-6-92)
8-2F-7: RECOMMENDATION TO CITY COUNCIL:
The Board shall file its recommendation with the Appeals Board recording
secretary. The recommendations, along with the proceedings based upon the
record made before the Board, shall be presented to the City Council for
review. The City Council shall establish a public hearing granting each
affected party an opportunity to appear and present arguments to the City
Council on the relief sought. After hearing before the City Council, the City
Council may affirm, modify or reverse the Board's recommendation by a majority
vote of the members of the City Council. Appeal of the City Council's decision
shall be by judicial review by the Polk County or Dallas County District and
shall be filed within twenty (20) days from the date of the City Council's
decision. (Ord. 1012, 7-6-92)
ARTICLE G. CROSS-CONNECTION CONTROL; CONTAINMENT PROVISIONS
SECTION:
8-2G-1: Adoption Of Cross-Connection Control; Containment Provisions
8-2G-2: License And Permit Requirements
8-2G-3: Definitions
8-2G-4: Administrative Authority
8-2G-5: New Water Service
8-2G-6: Existing Water Services
8-2G-7: Customer Responsibilities
8-2G-8: Requirements For Backflow Prevention Assemblies
8-2G-9: Board Of Appeals
8-2G-10: Liability For Damages
8-2G-11: Saving Clause
8-2G-12: Violation
8-2G-13: Effective Date
8-2G-1: ADOPTION OF CROSS-CONNECTION CONTROL; CONTAINMENT PROVISIONS:
This Article shall consist of the Cross-Connection Control; Containment
Provisions as established by the West Des Moines Water Works. (Ord. 1297, 5-4-
1998)
8-2G-2: LICENSE AND PERMIT REQUIREMENTS:
All license and permit requirements for work on backflow prevention assemblies
shall be as established for plumbing work in the Plumbing Code Ordinance1. See
Article C of this Chapter.1 adopted by the City, and established requirements
utilized by the West Des Moines Water Works. (Ord. 1297, 5-4-1998)
8-2G-3: DEFINITIONS:
Where terms, phrases and words are not defined, they shall have their ordinary
accepted meanings within the context with which they are used. The following
definitions shall be applicable to this Article:
ADMINISTRATIVE AUTHORITY: The administrative authority shall be the West Des
Moines Water Works and Building Division of the Community Development
Department.
APPROVED BACKFLOW PREVENTION ASSEMBLY FOR CONTAINMENT: A backflow prevention
assembly which is listed by the University of Southern California - Foundation
for Cross-Connection Control and Hydraulic Research as having met the
requirements ANSI-AWWA Standard C510-89, "Double Check Valve Backflow-
Prevention Assemblies", or ANSI-AWWA Standard C511-89, "Reduced-Pressure
Principle Backflow-Prevention Assemblies" for containment. The listing shall
include the limitations of use based on the degree of hazard. The backflow
prevention assembly must also be listed by the International Association of
Plumbing and Mechanical Officials.
APPROVED BACKFLOW PREVENTION ASSEMBLY FOR CONTAINMENT IN A FIRE PROTECTION
SYSTEM: A backflow prevention assembly to be used in a fire protection system
which meets the requirements of Factory Mutual Research Corporation (FM) and
Underwriters Laboratory (UL), and the requirement to the Fire Code and the
Building Code of the City of West Des Moines, in addition to the requirements
of the "administrative authority" as defined in this Section. Devices sized
smaller than two and one-half inches (21/2") which have not been listed by
Underwriters Laboratory (UL) and tested by Factory Mutual Research Corporation
(FM) may be allowed if approved by the Fire Marshal and the Building Official.
AUXILIARY WATER SUPPLY: Any water supply on or available to the premises other
than the water purveyor's approved public water supply such as, but not limited
to, a private well, pond or river.
CONTAINMENT: A method of backflow prevention which requires the installation of
a backflow prevention assembly at the water service entrance.
CROSS-CONNECTION: Any actual or potential connection or arrangement, physical
or otherwise, between a potable water supply system and any plumbing fixture or
tank, receptacle, equipment or device, through which it may be possible for
nonpotable, used, unclean, polluted and contaminated water, or other substance,
to enter into any part of such potable water system under any condition.
CUSTOMER: The owner, operator, occupant of a building or property which has a
water service from a public water system, or the owner or operator of a private
water system which has a water service from a public water system.
DEGREE OF HAZARD: The rating of a cross-connection or water service which
indicates if it has the potential to cause contamination or pollution.
DOUBLE CHECK VALVE BACKFLOW PREVENTION ASSEMBLY: A backflow prevention device
consisting of two (2) independently acting internally loaded check valves, four
(4) properly located test cocks, and two (2) isolation valves.
HIGH HAZARD CROSS-CONNECTION: A cross-connection which may cause an impairment
of the quality of the potable water by creating an actual hazard to the public
health, through poisoning or through the spread of disease by sewage,
industrial fluids or waste.
ISOLATION: A method of backflow prevention in which a backflow prevention
assembly is located at the cross-connection rather than at the water service
entrance.
LOW HAZARD CROSS-CONNECTION: A cross-connection which may cause an impairment
of the quality of potable water to a degree which does not create a hazard to
the public health, but which does adversely and unreasonably affect the
aesthetic qualities of such potable waters for domestic use.
REDUCED PRESSURE PRINCIPLE BACKFLOW PREVENTION ASSEMBLY: A backflow prevention
device consisting of two (2) independently acting internally loaded check
valves, a different pressure relief valve, four (4) properly located test
cocks, and two (2) isolation valves.
REGISTERED BACKFLOW PREVENTION ASSEMBLY TECHNICIAN: A person who is registered
by the State of Iowa to test or repair backflow prevention assemblies and
report on the condition of those assemblies.
THERMAL EXPANSION: Volumetric increase of water due to heating resulting in
increased pressure in a closed system.
WATER SERVICE: Depending on the context, water service is the physical
connection between a public water system and a customer's building, property or
private water system, or the act of providing potable water to a customer.
WATER WORKS: For the purposes of this Article, Water Works shall mean the West
Des Moines Water Works. (Ord. 1297, 5-4-1998)
8-2G-4: ADMINISTRATIVE AUTHORITY:
A.   Water Works, and the Building Division shall have the right to enter, with
the consent of the customer or upon the basis of a suitable warrant issued by a
court of appropriate jurisdiction, any property to inspect for possible cross-
connections.
B.   Water Works shall maintain records of cross-connection hazard surveys, and
the installation, testing and repair of all backflow prevention assemblies
installed for containment purposes. (Ord. 1297, 5-4-1998)
8-2G-5: NEW WATER SERVICE:
A.   Plans shall be submitted to the Water Works for review on all new water
services in order to determine the degree of hazard.
B.   The Water Works shall determine the type of backflow prevention assembly
required for containment based on the degree of hazard.
C.   The Building Division shall require the installation of the appropriate
backflow prevention assembly for containment before the initiation of water
service. (Ord. 1297, 5-4-1998)
8-2G-6: EXISTING WATER SERVICES:
A.   Upgrades of existing water services shall be treated as new water
services.
B.   The Water Works shall publish and make available to each customer a copy
of the standards used to determine the degree of hazard.
C.   The Water Works shall, in writing, notify customers whose premises are
classified as single-family residential of the provisions of this Article and
shall require compliance therewith.
D.   Customers whose premises are not classified as single- family residential
shall complete and return to the Water Works a cross-connection hazard survey
to be used to determine the type of containment device.
E.   The Water Works shall, on the basis of information received from customers
or gathered through on-premises investigations or surveys, determine the type
of backflow prevention assembly required for containment based on the degree of
hazard.
F.   Within the time frame specified in writing by the Water Works, the
customer shall install a backflow prevention assembly for containment required
by the Water Works.
G.   For existing water services, the Water Works may inspect the premises to
determine the degree of hazard. When high hazard cross-connections are found,
the Water Works shall, at its sole discretion: 1) develop a schedule of
compliance which the customer shall follow; or 2) terminate the water service
until a backflow prevention assembly for containment required by the Water
Works has been installed.
H.   Failure of the Water Works to notify a customer that they are believed to
have a high hazard cross-connection and that they shall install backflow
prevention assemblies for containment in no way relieves a customer of the
responsibility to comply with all requirements of this Article. (Ord. 1297, 5-
4-1998)
8-2G-7: CUSTOMER RESPONSIBILITIES:
A.   The customer shall be responsible for ensuring that no cross-connections
exist without approved backflow protection within his premises starting at the
point of service from the public potable water system.
B.   The customer shall, at his own expense, cause installation, operation,
testing and maintenance of the backflow prevention assemblies required by the
Water Works.
C.   The customer shall ensure that the Water Works is provided with copies of
records of the installation and of all tests and repairs made to the backflow
prevention assembly on the approved form within fifteen (15) days after testing
and/or repairs are completed.
D.   In the event of a backflow incident, the customer shall immediately notify
the Water Works of the incident and take steps to confine the contamination or
pollution. (Ord. 1297, 5-4-1998)
8-2G-8: REQUIREMENTS FOR BACKFLOW PREVENTION ASSEMBLIES:
A.   Required Backflow Prevention Assemblies For Containment; Water Services:
1.   An air gap or an approved reduced pressure principle backflow prevention
assembly is required for water services having one or more cross-connections
which the Water Works classified as high hazard.
2.   An approved double check valve assembly is required for water services
having no high hazard cross-connections but having one or more cross-
connections which the Water Works has classified as low hazard.
B.   Required Backflow Prevention Assemblies For Containment; Fire Protection
Systems:
1.   A reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly shall be
installed on all new and existing fire protection systems which the Water Works
determined to have any of the following:
a.   Direct connections from public water mains with an auxiliary water supply
on or available to the premises for pumper connection.
b.   Interconnections with auxiliary supplies such as reservoirs, rivers,
ponds, wells, mills or other industrial water systems.
c.   Use of antifreezes or other additives in the fire protection system.
d.   Combined industrial and fire protection systems supplied from the public
water mains only, with or without gravity storage or pump suction tanks.
e.   Any other facility, connection or condition which may cause contamination.
2.   A double check valve assembly will be required for all other fire
protection systems. The double check valve shall be required on all new systems
at the time of installation and on existing systems at the time that they are
upgraded.
C.   Backflow Prevention Assembly Technicians: A backflow prevention assembly
technician registered by the State of Iowa shall include his registration
number on all correspondence and forms required by or associated with this
Article.
D.   Registered Backflow Prevention Assembly Technician Noncompliance:
Noncompliance with any of the following by a registered technician shall be
grounds for reporting said individual to the State Health Department:
1.   Improper testing or repair of backflow prevention assemblies.
2.   Improper reporting of the results of testing or of repairs made to
backflow prevention assemblies.
3.   Failure to meet registration requirements.
4.   Related unethical practices.
E.   Installation Of Backflow Prevention Assemblies:
1.   The required backflow prevention assemblies for containment shall be
installed in horizontal plumbing immediately following the meter or as close to
that location as deemed practical by the Water Works. In any case, it shall be
located upstream from any branch piping. Installation at this point does not
eliminate the responsibility of the customer to protect the water supply system
from containment or pollution between the backflow prevention assembly and the
water main.
2.   Reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assemblies shall be
installed so as to be protected from flooding.
3.   Reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assemblies shall not be
installed in underground vaults or pits.
4.   All backflow prevention assemblies shall be protected from freezing.
5.   If hot water is used within the water system, thermal expansion shall be
provided for when installing a backflow prevention assembly for containment.
6.   Provisions shall be made to convey the discharge of water from reduced
pressure principle backflow prevention assemblies to a suitable drain.
7.   No backflow prevention assemblies shall be installed in a place where it
would create a safety hazard, such as, but not limited to, over an electrical
panel, or above ceiling level.
8.   If interruption of water service during testing and repair of backflow
prevention assemblies for containment is unacceptable, another backflow
prevention assembly, sized to handle the temporary water flow need during the
time of test or repair, should be installed in parallel piping.
9.   All backflow prevention assemblies shall be installed so that they are
accessible for testing as stated in section 1003.
10.   All shut-off valves shall conform with the current edition of the Manual
of Cross-Connection Control (University of Southern California) requirements
for either ball or resilient seat gate valves at the time of installation. Ball
valves shall be used on assemblies installed in piping two inches (2") and
smaller and resilient seat gate valves on assemblies installed in piping larger
than two inches (2").
11.   Location and protection of the assembly shall be approved by the Water
Works and Department of Community Development prior to installation.
F.   Testing Of Backflow Prevention Assemblies:
1.   Testing of backflow prevention assemblies shall be performed by a
registered backflow prevention assembly technician. The costs of tests required
in subsection F2 through F5 of this Section, shall be the responsibility of the
owner.
2.   Backflow prevention assemblies shall be tested upon installation and
tested and inspected at least annually.
3.   Backflow prevention assemblies which are in place, but have been out of
operation for more than three (3) months, shall be tested before being put back
into operation. Backflow prevention assemblies used in seasonal applications
shall be tested before being put into operation each season.
4.   Any backflow prevention assembly which fails a periodic test shall be
repaired or replaced. When water service has been terminated for noncompliance,
the backflow prevention assembly shall be repaired or replaced prior to the
resumption of water service. Backflow prevention assemblies shall be retested
by a registered backflow prevention assembly technician immediately after
repair or replacement.
5.   Water Works may require backflow prevention assemblies to be tested at any
time in addition to the annual testing requirement.
6.   The registered backflow prevention assembly technician shall report the
successful test of a backflow prevention assembly to the customer and to the
Water Works on the form provided by the Water Works within fifteen (15) days of
the test.
7.   Water Works may require, at its own cost, additional tests of individual
backflow prevention assemblies as it shall deem necessary to verify test
procedures and results.
G.   Repair Of Backflow Prevention Assemblies:
1.   All repairs to backflow prevention assemblies shall be performed by
registered backflow prevention assembly technicians.
2.   The registered backflow prevention assembly technician shall not change
the design, material or operational characteristics of a backflow prevention
assembly during repair or maintenance, and shall use only original manufacturer
replacement parts.
3.   The registered backflow prevention assembly technician shall report the
repair of a backflow prevention assembly to the customer and to the Water Works
on the form provided by the Water Works within fifteen (15) days of the repair.
The report shall include the list of materials or replacement parts used.
H.   Customer Noncompliance: The water service may be discontinued in the case
of noncompliance with section 1003A. Noncompliance includes, but is not limited
to, the following:
1.   Refusal to allow the Water Works and/or the Building Inspection Division
personnel access to the property to inspect for cross-connections.
2.   Removal of a backflow prevention assembly which has been required by the
Water Works.
3.   Bypassing of a backflow prevention assembly which has been required by the
Water Works.
4.   Providing inadequate backflow prevention when cross- connections exist.
5.   Failure to install a backflow prevention assembly which has been required
by the Water Works.
6.   Failure to test and/or properly repair a backflow prevention assembly as
required by the Water Works.
7.   Failure to comply with the requirements of this Article. (Ord. 1297, 5-4-
1998)
8-2G-9: BOARD OF APPEALS:
Any person aggrieved by any decision by the Water Works Department regarding
this Article may appeal to the Water Works Board utilizing their procedures and
guidelines.
A.   Appeals Procedure: Any person aggrieved by any decision made by the
Building Official regarding this Article may file an appeal to the Mayor and
City Council. The appeal shall be completed by filing with the City Clerk
within ten (10) days from the date of the written decision of the Building
Official, a notice of appeal requesting a hearing based on a claim that the
true intent of this Article, or the rules legally adopted thereunder have been
incorrectly interpreted.
However, in serving as the Board of Appeals, the Mayor and City Council shall
have no authority relative to interpretation of the administrative provisions
of this Article, nor shall they be empowered to waive requirements of this
Article.
Failure to file a timely written petition as required herein shall constitute a
waiver of the right to appeal and the decision of the Building Official shall
constitute a final determination.
The application shall be accompanied by copies of plans, specifications, or any
pertinent information which may be required to adequately evaluate the appeal.
Said appeals shall also be accompanied by a one hundred dollar ($100.00) filing
fee for administrative and publication costs.
Upon receipt of a timely filed written petition to the Mayor and City Council,
the City Clerk shall place the appeal on the next regular City Council agenda.
Written notification of the time, place and nature of the hearing shall be
given to the petitioner within five (5) working days after the written petition
is filed with the City Clerk.
The hearing shall be scheduled no later than twenty (20) working days after the
date on which the written petition was filed and may be extended for a
reasonable period by the Mayor's discretion, or upon written request from the
petitioner or the Building Official, for good cause shown. The public shall be
noticed of the hearing by use of the media as is typical for other City public
hearings.
Due to the failure of a petitioner to appear at a scheduled hearing of an
appeal, the Mayor and City Council may proceed with the hearing and make a
decision in the absence of the petitioner.
B.   Hearing Procedure:
1.   The hearing shall be open to the public and shall be recorded, transcribed
and maintained. Opportunity shall be afforded all parties to respond and
present evidence and arguments on all issues involved. Parties may represent
themselves or may be represented by legal counsel, or other individuals of
their choosing.
2.   Documentary evidence may be received in the form of copies or excerpts if
the original is not readily available. Upon request, parties shall be given an
opportunity to compare the copy with the original, if available.
3.   Witnesses at the hearing, or available persons whose testimony has been
submitted in written form, shall be subject to cross-examination by any party
as necessary for a full and true disclosure of the facts.
4.   The Mayor shall conduct the hearing and have the power to administer
oaths. The Mayor and City Council may cause subpoenas to be issued for such
witnesses and the production of such written articles as either party may
designate. The subpoenas may be signed by the Mayor and City Council.
5.   When five (5) City Councilmembers are not present to hear an appeal,
either the appellant or the appellant's representative shall have the right to
request a postponement of the hearing.
6.   The City Council shall modify or reverse the decision of the Building
Official by a concurring vote of three (3) members.
7.   The decision of the City Council shall be by resolution. Certified copies
shall be furnished to the appellant and to the Building Official.
8.   The Building Official shall take immediate action in accordance with the
City Council decision.
9.   Any person, whether or not a previous party of the appeal, shall have the
right to apply to the appropriate court for a writ of certiorari to correct
errors of law. Application for review shall be made in the manner and time
required by law following the decision.
10.   Other remedies to the decision of the City Council shall be by judicial
review by the appropriate County District Court and shall be filed within
twenty (20) days of the decision. (Ord. 1297, 5-4-1998)
8-2G-10: LIABILITY FOR DAMAGES:
A.   This Article is enacted only for the purpose of securing to individuals
the enjoyment of rights and privileges to which they are entitled as members of
the public, rather than for the purpose of protecting any individual from harm.
B.   The City, its officers, employees or agents make no representations or
warranties of any kind whatsoever, expressed or implied, with respect to the
completeness or thoroughness of the inspections and examinations performed
under this Article but said inspections are made solely to assist the owner of
any building, structure, equipment and premises to meet certain minimum
requirements of this Article and to compel, if necessary, the owner to meet the
minimum requirements for the protection of the health, welfare and safety of
persons and property. Nothing herein contained in this Article shall alleviate
the owner of any building, structure, equipment and premises to make an
independent inspection in order to fulfill the requirements of this Article nor
shall this Article be construed to relieve or lessen the responsibility of any
person owning, operating or controlling any building, structure, equipment or
premises regulated herein from any damages to any person or property caused by
defects. The City, its officers, employees or agents shall not be held as
assuming any liability for damages to any person or property by reason of the
inspections authorized by this Article, or any approvals issued herein, or for
any act or failure to act in the enforcement of this Article. (Ord. 1297, 5-4-
1998)
8-2G-11: SAVING CLAUSE:
If any section, provision, sentence, clause, phrase or part of this Article
shall be adjudged invalid or unconstitutional, such adjudication shall not
affect the validity of the Article as a whole or any provision, section,
subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or part hereof not adjudged invalid or
unconstitutional. (Ord. 1297, 5-4-1998)
8-2G-12: VIOLATION:
Any person who violates the provisions of this Article upon conviction shall be
punished as set forth in Section
1-4-1 of this City Code. (Ord. 1297, 5-4-1998)
8-2G-13: EFFECTIVE DATE:
This Article shall be in full force and effect from and after its passage,
approval and publication as provided by law. (Ord. 1297, 5-4-1998)
CHAPTER 3
SIGNS
(Rep. by Ord. 1247, 6-16-1997)
CHAPTER 4
SWIMMING POOLS
(Rep. by Ord. 1354, 3-22-1999)
CHAPTER 5
SITE GRADING REGULATIONS
SECTION:
8-5-1: Purpose
8-5-2: Applicability
8-5-3: Exempted Work
8-5-4: Procedures And Requirements
8-5-5: Limitations
8-5-6: Grading Standards
8-5-7: Drainage Standards
8-5-1: PURPOSE:
This chapter sets forth rules and regulations to control excavation, grading,
and earthwork construction, including fills and embankments as well as removal
of trees and shrubs; establishes the administrative procedure for issuance and
review of permits; and provides for approval of plans and inspection of grading
construction. (Ord. 1130, 5-22-1995)
8-5-2: APPLICABILITY:
A grading permit shall be obtained from the City Engineer prior to commencement
of any of the following:
A.   Any activity that changes the physical conditions of landform, vegetation
and hydrology, creates bare soil, or otherwise may cause erosion or
sedimentation. Such activities include, but are not limited to, clearing,
removal of vegetation, stripping, grading, grubbing, excavating, filling,
logging and storing of materials. No grading, unless specifically exempted by
this chapter, shall occur on the subject property prior to obtaining a grading
permit.
B.   Grading on property which is part of a development project subject to site
plan review, or subdivision on which grading occurs prior to approval of the
development. Any grading permit issued prior to approval of the site plan
development permit is at the applicant's own risk. Final grades will need to
comply with any changes necessary for the site development approval. (Ord.
2275, 2-5-2018)
8-5-3: EXEMPTED WORK:
A.   If the grading activity threatens or impedes the ability of the City to
meet its own permit requirements under the National Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System (NPDES), the City Engineer may terminate any exemption and
require the applicant to obtain a grading permit in full compliance with
chapter 6 of this title.
B.   A grading permit will not be required for any of the following work which
is carried out on an individual tract or on a single lot within a subdivision:
1.   Property which is part of a development project subject to site plan or
subdivision which has been approved by the City, except that no grading, unless
specifically exempted by this chapter, shall occur on the subject property
prior to obtaining approval of the development plan.
2.   An excavation below finished grade for basements and footings of a
building, retaining wall or other structure authorized by a valid building
permit. This shall not exempt any fill made with the material from such
excavation or exempt any excavation having an unsupported height greater than
five feet (5') after the completion of such structure.
3.   Cemetery graves.
4.   Excavations for wells, tunnels or utilities as part of an approved utility
installation in accordance with title 7, chapter 14 of this Code or street
excavation in accordance with title 7, chapter 1, article B of this Code.
5.   Excavating or stockpiling of rock, sand, gravel, aggregate or clay where
established and provided for by law, provided such operations do not affect a
lateral support or increase the stresses upon any adjacent or contiguous
property.
6.   Gardening and agricultural production.
7.   Exploratory excavations under the direction of soil engineers, engineering
geologists or in connection with an environmental, archaeological, or
paleontological investigation, or mitigation.
8.   Grading activities that cumulatively disturb less than one acre and are
not part of a larger common plan of development which disturbs a cumulative
area of one acre or more, involves excavation or fill of less than three feet
(3') in height at any location, contains less than fifty (50) cubic yards, does
not create a slope in excess of three feet (3') horizontal to one foot (1')
vertical, and does not obstruct a drainage way.
9.   Emergency work to correct or remedy situations that pose an immediate
danger to life or property or substantial flood or fire hazards.
10.   Any City, County, State or Federal improvement project.
11.   Agricultural use including farm ponds. (Ord. 2275, 2-5-2018)
8-5-4: PROCEDURES AND REQUIREMENTS:
A.   Procedure: No person shall perform any grading or excavation on property
that is not part of an approved development project until they have obtained
grading review approval and received a grading permit. The applicant shall
submit the appropriate filing fee and application for a grading permit on forms
provided by the City. All grading permits are subject to review by the City
Engineer.
B.   Requirements: All site grading work and grading permit requirements shall
be in accordance with the Iowa Department of Natural Resources general permit
no. 2, the City's current design standards and standard construction
specifications, stormwater management provisions, the floodplain ordinance, and
the Building Code. Should there be a conflict between any of these ordinances
or standards the most restrictive provision shall be followed. (Ord. 2275, 2-5-
2018)
8-5-5: LIMITATIONS:
A.   Construction of permanent utilities or structures shall not be allowed as
part of an approved grading permit. Temporary drainage structures to meet the
requirements of a stormwater management plan or stormwater pollution prevention
plan associated with the application are allowed.
B.   All permits are subject to existing Federal laws and regulations, State
Statutes and regulations, City policies and ordinances, and applicable laws and
regulations of other political subdivisions of the State.
C.   Approval of a grading permit shall be valid for one year. Grading not
completed within this period shall require review and approval of a new permit.
D.   Any grading permit issued prior to approval of the site plan development
permit is at the applicant's own risk. Final grades will need to comply with
any changes necessary for the site development approval. (Ord. 2275, 2-5-2018)
8-5-6: GRADING STANDARDS:
A.   Grading plans shall, to the greatest extent possible, maintain the natural
gradient and contours of the site and include measures to preserve natural
features including, but not limited to, trees, natural swales, and rock
outcrops. Manufactured slopes shall be rounded and shaped to simulate the
natural terrain. No manufactured slope shall have a slope steeper than three
horizontal to one vertical (3:1). Shallower slope angles may be required if
detailed soils and geologic investigations indicate such.
B.   No filling will be allowed on lands which lie either wholly or in part
within a waters of the State or the floodplain of a river, stream, creek or
lake unless such fill is approved under the terms of a permit granted by the
applicable Federal, State or County agency or the City.
C.   Trees and shrubs within the proposed subdivision or property to be graded
shall be saved whenever feasible as determined by the City. Protective fences
shall be placed and maintained around the driplines of trees or other measures
instituted so as to protect trees and shrubs including their root systems
during period of excavation or construction activities. Cutting and filling
soil within the dripline of a tree shall be prohibited. Soil compaction caused
by any type of equipment shall not be allowed to occur over the root zone of
trees to be saved.
D.   Temporary erosion control measures in accordance with City, State, and
Federal regulations, shall be installed prior to any vegetation disturbance
with approved permanent erosion control measures to follow immediately
thereafter. Temporary and permanent erosion control measures shall be
maintained at all times.
E.   In order to minimize a "stair step" effect on streetscapes, the
transitional slope areas along the side lot lines in the front yards shall be
softened by reducing the slope or by contouring the top and toe of the slope
into the front yards of each lot. (Ord. 2275, 2-5-2018)
8-5-7: DRAINAGE STANDARDS:
A.   In general, property shall be graded so that it drains to an approved
piping or drainage system or street approved by the City Engineer. Alternative
drainage will only be allowed where, due to existing topography, street
drainage would be very difficult to achieve and would not be feasible as
determined by the City.
B.   All proposed developments shall be graded so that stormwater runoff is
directed away from proposed building sites to an approved piping system, to
swales in drainage easements along property lines, to public rights-of-way, or
to another approved drainage course as determined by the City Engineer.
C.   No stormwater runoff from a development shall flow onto other adjacent
lands in a higher volume, with greater velocity or in a different location than
under natural conditions if so doing may cause damage to the adjacent land.
D.   The property owner shall design for overland flow of stormwater from
adjacent properties where the existing off site land slopes to the site.
E.   To the maximum feasible extent, all natural drainage courses serving major
drainage areas and containing significant vegetation which may constitute a
significant wildlife habitat, as determined by the City, should remain in their
natural state. Alterations to the above drainage courses may be allowed if the
application of this section will result in upstream or downstream flooding
hazards for which there is no other feasible means of mitigation consistent
with the findings.
F.   All grading work in drainage facilities shall be in accordance with the
City's design standards.
G.   The overall drainage system shall be completed and made operational at the
earliest possible time during construction or shall otherwise be provided for
in a manner acceptable to the City. If a development is to be phased, the
approved drainage facilities will be completed or otherwise provided for in a
manner acceptable to the City before the completion of the first phase.
H.   A stormwater management plan may be required as part of any formal
application for development under these regulations. The City Engineer shall
review these submissions for completeness, adequacy and conformance with
applicable standards. (Ord. 2275, 2-5-2018)
CHAPTER 6
CONSTRUCTION SITE EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL
SECTION:
8-6-1: Purpose
8-6-2: Procedure For Compliance
8-6-3: Site Visit Procedures
8-6-4: Monitoring Procedures
8-6-5: Enforcement By Legal Or Administrative Action
8-6-6: Enforcement By Order To Terminate Further Activities
8-6-7: Appeal
8-6-1: PURPOSE:
A.   The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency's national pollutant discharge
elimination system ("NPDES") permit program (program) administered by the Iowa
Department of Natural Resources ("IDNR") requires that due to certain
demographic and environmental impact criteria, the City of West Des Moines
obtain from the IDNR an NPDES permit for the discharge of storm water from a
Municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4). The City's MS4 permit is on file
in the Office of the City Clerk and is available for public inspection during
regular office hours.
B.   Individuals or entities ("applicant") engaged in construction activities
are required to submit an application to the IDNR for a State NPDES general
permit no. 2. Notwithstanding any provision of this chapter, every applicant
bears final and complete responsibility for compliance with a State NPDES
general permit no. 2 and any other requirement of State or Federal law or
administrative rule.
C.   In conjunction with the City's MS4 permit requirements, the City will
perform periodic monitoring and primary enforcement of the program through this
construction site erosion and sediment control ordinance (COSESCO).
D.   No State or Federal funds have been made available to assist the City with
monitoring and/or enforcing the program. Accordingly, the City shall fund its
monitoring and enforcement responsibilities entirely by fees imposed on the
owners of properties which are made subject to the program by virtue of State
and Federal law, and/or other sources of funding established by separate
ordinance.
E.   Terms used in this chapter shall have the meanings specified in the
program. (Ord. 1710, 10-23-2006; amd. Ord. 2380, 8-19-2019)
8-6-2: PROCEDURE FOR COMPLIANCE:
A.   Any person, firm, sole proprietorship, partnership, corporation, State
agency or political subdivision ("applicant") required by law or administrative
rule to apply to the IDNR for a State NPDES general permit no. 2 is subject to
the terms of this chapter.
B.   Prior to the issuance of any permit by the City for construction
activities undertaken by applicant on a site, an applicant shall:
1   Submit to the City a copy of the site plan prepared by the applicant to
meet the requirements of the State NPDES general permit no. 2. The site plan
shall show Best Management Practice ("BMP") control measures and a stormwater
pollution prevention plan ("SWPPP") applicable to the site per the NPDES
general permit no. 2 requirements.
2   Submit a copy of the applicant's authorization issued pursuant to
applicant's State NPDES general permit no. 2, including a copy of the permit
issued by the IDNR for the site.
3   The contact listed on the Notice of Intent (IDNR form 542-1415) shall be
considered the responsible party and will receive all correspondence from the
City regarding compliance with this section until such time the authorization
is discontinued or the physical area is covered in its entirety by subsequent
NPDES general permit no. 2 authorizations.
C.   Every SWPPP submitted to the City shall:
1   Comply with all existing requirements for a SWPPP promulgated by the IDNR
in connection with issuance of a State NPDES general permit no. 2; and
2   If the applicant is required by law to file a joint application form
"Protecting Iowa Waters, Iowa Department of Natural Resources and U.S. Army
Corps of Engineers", the applicant shall comply with all mandatory minimum
requirements pertaining to such application; and
3   Comply with all other applicable State or Federal permit requirements in
existence at the time of application regarding, but not limited to, waste at
construction sites that may cause adverse impact to water quality such as
building materials, concrete truck washout, chemicals, solid waste and sanitary
waste.
D.   All construction sites shall be furnished with a stabilized construction
site entrance to handle the type and frequency of the traffic entering and
exiting the site or make use of some other method of ingress/egress designed to
prevent off site tracking. Any soils tracked off site shall be cleaned and/or
removed by the applicant at the end of each day or before sediments enter the
public storm sewer or waters of the State. Any soils entering public storm
sewer or waters of the State will be considered a violation of this chapter.
(Ord. 1710, 10-23-2006; amd. Ord. 2275, 2-5-2018; Ord. 2380, 8-19-2019)
8-6-3: SITE VISIT PROCEDURES:
A.   All site visits under this chapter shall be conducted by a representative
of the City hereinafter referred to as the "Enforcement Officer".
B.   Any applicant that is subject to the terms of COSESCO shall allow the
City, or an authorized representative of the City, to enter upon applicant's
private property for site visits. Any representative of the City shall present
credentials if so required at the time of entry.
C.   The City may conduct site visits at any time.
1.   In any calendar year, the City will visit the site the minimum number of
times outlined in the City's NPDES MS4 permit and in addition shall visit the
site upon the receipt of a complaint. The City will charge the applicant an
upfront fee in the amount set in the schedule of fees the City Council has
adopted by resolution to cover quarterly site visit fees until such time as the
NPDES general permit no. 2 is terminated by the IDNR. All fees are due prior to
approval of a preliminary plat, site plan, or modification to a site plan.
2.   In addition to the required site visits set forth in subsection C1 of this
section, the City may conduct additional site visits at any time at the expense
of the City.
D.   In the event a site visit identifies an area or incident of noncompliance,
the City may, at its discretion, provide the applicant with a list of
deficiencies that identifies the area or incident of noncompliance. Prior to an
enforcement action being taken, a list of deficiencies must be provided to the
applicant. Upon providing a list of deficiencies, the applicant shall
immediately commence corrective action and shall complete corrective action
within the timeframe designated by the City on the list of deficiencies.
Failure to take corrective action in a timely manner shall constitute a
violation of this chapter.
E.   The City shall not be responsible for the direct or indirect consequences
to the applicant or to a third party or parties for noncompliant conditions
undetected by the site visit. (Ord. 1710, 10-23-2006; amd. Ord. 2275, 2-5-2018;
Ord. 2380, 8-19-2019; Ord. 2577, 7-5-2023)
8-6-4: MONITORING PROCEDURES:
A.   It shall be the applicant's duty to monitor the site daily to ensure
compliance with the SWPPP and general permit no. 2.
B.   It shall be applicant's duty to notify the City of any changes,
alterations, transfers of coverage or sales of any property in the same manner,
to the same extent and at the same time as such notification is provided to the
Iowa Department of Natural Resources pursuant to the requirements of the State
NPDES general permit no. 2. In the event the applicant completes a transfer of
responsibility in accordance with IAC 567-64.6(6) the contact listed on the
original Notice of Intent shall remain the primary point of contact for all
correspondence from the City, including any enforcement action and invoices for
the services, outlined in this code, for the entire permitted area until such
time the authorization is discontinued or the physical area is covered in its
entirety by subsequent NPDES general permit no. 2 authorizations.
C.   It shall be the applicant's duty to notify the City when all conditions of
the NPDES general permit no. 2 have been satisfied and the permit has been
terminated. (Ord. 1710, 10-23-2006; amd. Ord. 2275, 2-5-2018; Ord. 2380, 8-19-
2019)
8-6-5: ENFORCEMENT BY LEGAL OR ADMINISTRATIVE ACTION:
A.   Violation of any provision of this chapter may be enforced by civil legal
action, including, but not limited to, an action for injunctive relief.
B.   Violation of any provision of this chapter may also be enforced as a
Municipal infraction within the meaning of Iowa Code section 364.22, pursuant
to section 1-4-1 of this Code, or enforced in the manner of an administrative
abatement pursuant to section
4-4-5 of this Code.
C.   Enforcement pursuant to this section shall be undertaken by the
Enforcement Officer upon the advice and consent of the City Attorney. (Ord.
1710, 10-23-2006)
8-6-6: ENFORCEMENT BY ORDER TO TERMINATE FURTHER ACTIVITIES:
A.   As an alternative to enforcement by legal or administrative action, an
Enforcement Officer may issue an order to terminate further activities at the
site under the following conditions:
1.   The order to terminate may be issued for failure to implement or maintain
pollution control Best Management Practices.
B.   Prior to commencing further activity at the site, the applicant shall
establish correction of the deficiency by providing to the Office of the
Enforcement Officer a written statement signed under oath that the deficiency
has been corrected with a description, including photographs when appropriate,
of the action taken to correct the deficiency.
C.   If the deficiency is not corrected, the City may commence a legal or
administrative action against the applicant as set forth in section
8-6-5 of this chapter. (Ord. 1710, 10-23-2006)
8-6-7: APPEAL:
A.   Appeal of a decision pursuant to a civil legal action, including
injunctive relief, shall be made in the manner prescribed by the Iowa Rules of
Civil Procedure. Appeal of a decision pursuant to a Municipal infraction
violation shall be made in the manner prescribed by Iowa Code section 364.22
(10) or succeeding legislation.
B.   Appeal of a "notice to abate" issued pursuant to section
4-4-5 of this Code shall be made in the manner prescribed by section
4-4-9 of this Code. (Ord. 1710, 10-23-2006)
CHAPTER 7
CONVERSIONS
SECTION:
8-7-1: Intent
8-7-2: Requirements
8-7-3: Building Code Compliance
8-7-4: On Site Parking; Stormwater Management
8-7-5: Waterworks
8-7-6: Certification Of Inspection
8-7-7: Zoning Requirements
8-7-8: Compliance
8-7-1: INTENT:
It is the intent of the city council of the city of West Des Moines, by this
chapter, to provide for the health, safety and welfare of its citizens and to
provide for the orderly development of the city by establishing standards for
property which is to be subjected to residential horizontal property regimes
(condominiums) and multiple housing cooperatives. It is the intent of the city
council to assure that all property to be used for residential purposes must at
the time a horizontal property regime or multiple housing cooperative is
established meet current building code standards and requirements. It is the
intent of the city council in regard to the conversion of structures to
horizontal property regimes (condominiums) or the conversion of structures to
multiple housing cooperatives that such change should provide the residents
living in such structures adequate protection by meeting the current health,
safety and welfare standards of the city. This chapter is in part enacted to
assure residents that such standards herein provided will be maintained. This
chapter is to be liberally construed to meet the purposes and intent of the
city council as herein stated. (Ord. 1864, 4-19-2010)
8-7-2: REQUIREMENTS:
A.   After April 25, 2000, an existing structure shall not be converted to a
horizontal property regime unless the converted structure meets building code
requirements in effect on the date of conversion. After April 19, 2010, an
existing structure shall not be converted to a multiple housing cooperative
unless the converted structure meets building code requirements in effect on
the date of conversion.
B.   At least sixty (60) days prior to filing a declaration of horizontal
property regime as provided in Iowa Code chapter 499B or articles of
incorporation for a multiple housing cooperative as provided in Iowa Code
chapter 499A which converts an existing structure within the city of West Des
Moines, the owner shall file a copy of the declaration of the horizontal
property regime or the articles of incorporation of the multiple housing
cooperative with the city of West Des Moines chief building official to enable
the city to establish that the converted structure meets appropriate building
code requirements. (Ord. 1864, 4-19-2010)
8-7-3: BUILDING CODE COMPLIANCE:
Any person or entity seeking to establish a horizontal property regime
(condominiums) or multiple housing cooperative for residential purposes,
including a person or entity seeking to convert an existing structure to
condominiums or a multiple housing cooperative by establishing a horizontal
property regime pursuant to Iowa Code chapter 499B or by establishing a
multiple housing cooperative pursuant to Iowa Code chapter 499A shall establish
and document compliance with all building code requirements of the city
applicable upon the date the city receives the declaration of the horizontal
property regime or articles of incorporation of the multiple housing
cooperative. Such compliance shall include documentation of the following:
A.   That all materials, manner and means of construction in the building
proposed meet current building codes for new residential construction including
current fire, building, plumbing, electrical and mechanical codes.
B.   That all plumbing in the building proposed meets current standards for
water conservation including low flow toilets and similar devices.
C.   That the building proposed have fire sprinklers and all other life safety
systems required for new construction.
D.   That the building proposed meet all state and federal requirements for
handicapped accessibility that would be required of new construction.
E.   That the building proposed meet all state energy efficiency standards that
would be required for new construction.
F.   That the building proposed meet any and all other requirements of the city
of West Des Moines building code and subdivision code. (Ord. 1864, 4-19-2010)
8-7-4: ON SITE PARKING; STORMWATER MANAGEMENT:
Any person or entity seeking to convert an existing structure to condominiums
by establishing a horizontal property regime pursuant to Iowa Code chapter 499B
or seeking to convert an existing structure to a multiple housing cooperative
pursuant to Iowa Code chapter 499A shall comply with all current provisions for
on site parking and stormwater management that would be required for new
construction. (Ord. 1864, 4-19-2010)
8-7-5: WATERWORKS:
Any person or entity seeking to convert an existing structure to condominiums
by establishing a horizontal property regime pursuant to Iowa Code chapter 499B
or seeking to convert an existing structure to a multiple housing cooperative
pursuant to Iowa Code chapter 499A shall comply with all requirements of the
West Des Moines waterworks concerning such structures. (Ord. 1864, 4-19-2010)
8-7-6: CERTIFICATION OF INSPECTION:
Any person or entity seeking to convert an existing structure to condominiums
by establishing a horizontal property regime pursuant to Iowa Code section
499B.3 or seeking to convert an existing structure to a multiple housing
cooperative pursuant to Iowa Code chapter 499A shall at least sixty (60) days
before filing any declaration or article of incorporation submit to the city
clerk, the development services director and the public works director a
written analysis by a licensed professional engineer(s) or other appropriate
licensed professional, based upon personal inspection of the building sought to
be converted. The written analysis shall certify that the building meets all
current city building codes that would be required for new construction. The
certification shall separately itemize and describe in a manner sufficient to
show the factual basis of any certification that the fire, life safety,
structural, plumbing, electrical and mechanical systems meet current city
standards. The certification shall further certify compliance with current on
site parking and stormwater management requirements and separately certify the
building meets current standards for materials and that acceptable means and
methods of construction were used that would be required for new construction.
Appropriate city staff will review the certification and report to the chief
building official whether said certification is sufficient to meet the
requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 1864, 4-19-2010)
8-7-7: ZONING REQUIREMENTS:
Any person or entity seeking to convert an existing structure to condominiums
by establishing a horizontal property regime pursuant to Iowa Code chapter 499B
or seeking to convert an existing structure to a multiple housing cooperative
pursuant to Iowa Code chapter 499A shall comply with all requirements of title
9 of this code prior to conversion in the same manner as an applicant for new
construction including, but not limited to, filing a site plan for review which
shall show compliance with all setback, parking, open space and all other
requirements that would be required for new construction. (Ord. 1864, 4-19-
2010)
8-7-8: COMPLIANCE:
No conversion of property to a horizontal property regime under Iowa Code
chapter 499B and no conversion of property to a multiple housing cooperative
under Iowa Code chapter 499A shall be complete nor shall a declaration or
articles of incorporation be filed until there has been full compliance with
this chapter. Upon showing of full compliance with this chapter, the chief
building official shall by written notice so inform the county recorder of the
county in which any property subject to this chapter is located and state in
said written notice that the property meets the requirements of the Iowa Code.
(Ord. 1864, 4-19-2010)
CHAPTER 8
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT
SECTION:
8-8-1: Constitutional And Statutory Authority, Findings Of Fact And Purpose
8-8-2: Definitions
8-8-3: General Provisions
8-8-4: Establishment Of Zoning (Overlay) Districts
8-8-5: Floodway (Overlay) District FW
8-8-6: Floodway Fringe (Overlay) District FF
8-8-7: General Floodplain (Overlay) District FP
8-8-8: Administration
8-8-9: Nonconforming Uses
8-8-10: Violations And Penalties
8-8-11: Amendments
8-8-1: CONSTITUTIONAL AND STATUTORY AUTHORITY, FINDINGS OF FACT AND PURPOSE:
A.   Authority: This chapter is enacted pursuant to the powers and duties
maintained by the City of West Des Moines as expressed in State of Iowa Code
chapter 364 and the statutory authority established by State of Iowa Code
chapter 414 to preserve the rights, privileges and property of the City and of
its residents and to enact regulations to promote the health, safety, morals
and general welfare.
B.   Findings Of Fact:
1.   The flood hazard areas of the City of West Des Moines are subject to
periodic inundation which can result in loss of life and property, health and
safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary
public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax
base all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general
welfare of the community.
2.   These flood losses, hazards, and related adverse effects are caused by: a)
the occupancy of flood hazard areas by uses vulnerable to flood damages which
create hazardous conditions as a result of being inadequately elevated or
otherwise protected from flooding and b) the cumulative effect of obstructions
on the floodplain causing increases in flood heights and velocities.
3.   This chapter relies upon engineering methodology for analyzing flood
hazards which is consistent with the standards established by the Department of
Natural Resources.
C.   Statement Of Purpose: It is the purpose of this chapter to protect and
preserve the rights, privileges and property of the City of West Des Moines and
its residents and to preserve and improve the peace, safety, health, welfare,
and comfort and convenience of its residents by minimizing those flood losses
described in subsection B1 of this section with provisions designed to:
1.   Reserve sufficient floodplain area for the conveyance of flood flows so
that flood heights and velocities will not be increased substantially.
2.   Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety or
property in times of flood or which cause excessive increases in flood heights
or velocities.
3.   Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including public facilities which
serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction or substantial improvement.
4.   Protect individuals from buying lands which may not be suited for intended
purposes because of flood hazard.
5.   Assure that eligibility is maintained for property owners in the community
to purchase flood insurance through the National Flood Insurance Program. (Ord.
2340, 1-21-2019)
8-8-2: DEFINITIONS:
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter shall
be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to
give this chapter its most reasonable application.
APPURTENANT STRUCTURE: A structure which is on the same parcel of the property
as the principal structure to be insured and the use of which is incidental to
the use of the principal structure.
BASE FLOOD: The flood having one percent (1%) chance of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year.
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE): The elevation flood waters would reach at a
particular site during the occurrence of a base flood event.
BASEMENT: Any enclosed area of a building which has its floor or lowest level
below ground level (subgrade) on all sides. Also see definition of "lowest
floor".
DEVELOPMENT: Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate,
including but not limited to building or other structures, mining, dredging,
filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations. "Development" does
not include "minor projects" or "routine maintenance of existing buildings and
facilities" as defined in this section. It also does not include gardening,
plowing, and similar practices that do not involve filling or grading.
DWELLING OR DWELLING UNIT: A building, a portion of a building or one or more
habitable rooms providing living facilities including permanent provisions for
living, sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation, but does not include hotels,
motels, and nursing or convalescent homes.
ENCLOSED AREA BELOW LOWEST FLOOR: The floor of the lowest enclosed area in a
building when all the following criteria are met:
A.   The enclosed area is designed to flood to equalize hydrostatic pressure
during flood events with walls or openings that satisfy the provisions of
subsection
8-8-6B4a of this chapter, and
B.   The enclosed area is unfinished (not carpeted, dry walled, etc.) and used
solely for low damage potential uses such as building access, parking or
storage, and
C.   Machinery and service facilities (e.g., hot water heater, furnace,
electrical service) contained in the enclosed area are located at least one
foot (1') above the base flood elevation, and
D.   The enclosed area is not a "basement" as defined in this section.
EXISTING CONSTRUCTION: Any structure for which the "start of construction"
commenced before the effective date of the City's Flood Insurance Rate Map. May
also be referred to as "existing structure".
EXISTING FACTORY-BUILT HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: A factory-built home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the factory-built homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective date
of the floodplain management regulations adopted by the community.
EXPANSION OF EXISTING FACTORY-BUILT HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: The preparation
of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the factory-built homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
FACTORY BUILT OR MODULAR STRUCTURE: A structure which is wholly or in
substantial part made, fabricated, formed or assembled in manufacturing
facilities for installation or assembly and installation on a building site.
For the purpose of this chapter, a factory built or modular structure would not
include a manufactured or mobile home constructed under the authority of 42 USC
section 5403 (United States Code - Manufactured Home Construction and Safety
Standards).
500-YEAR FLOOD: A flood, the magnitude of which has a two-tenths percent (0.2%)
chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year or which, on average,
will be equaled or exceeded at least once every five hundred (500) years.
FLOOD: A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of
normally dry land areas resulting from the overflow of streams or rivers or
from the unusual and rapid runoff of surface waters from any source.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM): The official map prepared as part of (but
published separately from) the Flood Insurance Study which delineates both the
flood hazard areas and the risk premium zones applicable to the community.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS): A report published by FEMA for a community issued
along with the community's Flood Insurance Rate Map(s). The study contains such
background data as the base flood discharge and water surface elevations that
were used to prepare the FIRM.
FLOODPLAIN: Any land area susceptible to being inundated by water as a result
of a flood.
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT: An overall program of corrective and preventive measures
for reducing flood damages and promoting the wise use of floodplains, including
but not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood control works,
floodproofing and floodplain management regulations.
FLOODPROOFING: Any combination of structural and nonstructural additions,
changes, or adjustments to structures, including utility and sanitary
facilities, which will reduce or eliminate flood damage to such structures.
FLOODWAY: The channel of a river or stream and those portions of the
floodplains adjoining the channel, which are reasonably required to carry and
discharge flood waters or flood flows so that confinement of flood flows to the
floodway area will not cumulatively increase the water surface elevation of the
base flood by more than one foot (1').
FLOODWAY FRINGE: Those portions of the special flood hazard area outside the
floodway.
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE: The highest natural elevation of the ground surface
prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE: Any structure that is:
A.   Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places,
maintained by the Department of Interior, or preliminarily determined by the
Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing of
the National Register;
B.   Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as
contributing to the historical significance of a registered Historic District
or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a
registered Historic District;
C.   Individually listed on a State Inventory of Historic Places in states with
historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the
Interior; or,
D.   Individually listed on a Local Inventory of Historic Places in communities
with historic preservation programs that have been certified by either: 1) an
approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior or 2)
directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs.
LOWEST FLOOR: The floor of the lowest enclosed area in a building including a
basement except when the criteria listed in the definition of enclosed area
below lowest floor are met.
MANUFACTURED OR MOBILE HOME: A structure which is manufactured or constructed
under the authority of 42 USC section 5403 (United States Code - Manufactured
Home Construction and Safety Standards) and is intended to be long term living
quarters, permitted and taxed as real property. It is not constructed or
equipped with a permanent hitch or other device allowing it to be moved other
than for the purpose of moving to a permanent site, and which does not have
permanently attached to its body or frame any wheels or axles. A manufactured
or mobile home must be on a permanent foundation with permanent connections to
utility services. Mobile homes constructed prior to 1976 shall be considered
this type of structure.
MANUFACTURED OR MOBILE HOME PARK: A parcel or contiguous parcels of land under
common ownership upon which two (2) or more manufactured or mobile homes reside
as a land-leased community. A manufactured or mobile home park does not include
manufactured or mobile homes or park homes placed on a temporary basis due to a
disaster emergency.
MAXIMUM DAMAGE POTENTIAL USES: City facilities including public services,
emergency services, and similar structures that are critical to maintaining
City functions in an emergency; other facilities that the City has determined
would serve as an emergency shelter or support location for reparations;
hospitals and like institutions; buildings or building complexes containing
documents, data, or instruments of great public value; buildings or building
complexes containing materials dangerous to the public or fuel storage
facilities; power installations needed in emergency or other buildings or
building complexes similar in nature or use.
MINOR PROJECTS: Small development activities (except for filling, grading and
excavating) valued at less than five hundred dollars ($500.00).
NEW CONSTRUCTION (New Buildings, Factory-Built Home Parks): Those structures or
development for which the start of construction commenced on or after the
effective date of the Flood Insurance Rate Map.
NEW FACTORY-BUILT HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: A factory-built home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the factory-built homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective
date of the floodplain management regulations adopted by the community.
PARK HOME OR PARK MODEL: A trailer which is four hundred (400) or less square
feet in gross trailer area, certified by the manufacturer as complying with the
ANSI A119.5 Standard for Recreational Park Trailers or constructed to comply
with 2018 International Residential Code, appendix V, and is intended for long
term placement of temporary living quarters for recreational, camping or
seasonal use purposes only, permitted and taxed as a trailer. A park home may
have wheels and is not placed on a permanent foundation, however must be
anchored to the ground to resist code designated wind forces. Park homes will
not have permanent connections to utility services.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE: A single chassis trailer or motor vehicle which is four
hundred (400) or less square feet when measured at the largest horizontal
projection and is designed to be self- propelled or permanently towable,
permitted and taxed as a trailer or motor vehicle. Recreational vehicles are
designed to provide temporary living quarters for recreational or camping,
travel or seasonal use purposes only. Recreational vehicles will not have
permanent connections to utility services.
ROUTINE MAINTENANCE OF EXISTING BUILDINGS AND FACILITIES: Repairs necessary to
keep a structure in a safe and habitable condition that do not trigger a
building permit, provided they are not associated with a general improvement of
the structure or repair of a damaged structure. Such repairs include:
A.   Normal maintenance of structures such as re-roofing, replacing roofing
tiles and replacing siding;
B.   Exterior and interior painting, papering, tiling, carpeting, cabinets,
counter tops and similar finish work;
C.   Basement sealing;
D.   Repairing or replacing damaged or broken window panes;
E.   Repairing plumbing systems, electrical systems, heating or air
conditioning systems and repairing wells or septic systems.
SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA: The land within a community subject to the "base
flood". This land is identified as Zone A, A1-A30, AE, AH, AO, AR and/or A99 on
the City's Flood Insurance Rate Map.
START OF CONSTRUCTION: Includes substantial improvement and means the date the
development permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction,
repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other
improvement was within one hundred eighty (180) days of the permit date. The
actual start means either the first placement or permanent construction of a
structure on a site, such as pouring of a slab or footings, the installation of
pile, the construction of columns or any work beyond the stage of excavation;
or the placement of a factory- built home on a foundation. Permanent
construction does not include land preparation such as clearing, grading and
filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor
does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or
the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the
property of accessory buildings such as garages or sheds not occupied as
dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial
improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any
wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of the building, whether or not
that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.
STRUCTURE: Anything constructed or erected on the ground or attached to the
ground, including, but not limited to, buildings, factories, sheds, cabins,
factory-built homes, storage tanks, grain storage facilities and other similar
uses.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE: Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the
cost of restoring the structure to the before damage condition would equal or
exceed fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the structure before the
damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT: Any improvement to a structure which satisfies either
of the following criteria:
A.   Any repair, reconstruction, or improvement of a structure, the cost of
which equals or exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the
structure either: 1) before the "start of construction" of the improvement, or
2) if the structure has been "substantially damaged" and is being restored,
before the damage occurred. The term does not however include any project for
improvement of a structure to comply with existing State or local Health,
Sanitary, or Safety Code specifications which are solely necessary to assure
safe conditions for the existing use. The term also does not include any
alteration of an "historic structure" provided the alteration will not preclude
the structure's designation as an "historic structure".
B.   Any addition which increases the original floor area of a building by
twenty five percent (25%) or more. All additions constructed after February 16,
2006 shall be added to any proposed addition in determining whether the total
increase in original floor space would exceed twenty five percent (25%).
TINY HOME: A structure which is four hundred (400) or less square feet in floor
area excluding any lofts, constructed to comply with the 2018 International
Residential Code, appendix V and is intended to be a single-family dwelling,
permitted and taxed as real property. A tiny home must be on a permanent
foundation with permanent connections to utility services. A structure of four
hundred (400) or less square feet in floor area excluding any lofts that has
any wheels or axles attached to its body or frame would be defined as a park
home.
TRAILER: Any structure used for temporary human habitation, business or storage
purposes, having no permanent foundation, but is supported by wheels, blocks,
or jacks, and which is or was equipped with wheels or other devices for
transporting the structure from place to place.
VARIANCE: A grant of relief by a community from the terms of the floodplain
management regulations.
VIOLATION: The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. (Ord. 2340,
1-21-2019)
8-8-3: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
A.   Lands To Which Chapter Apply: The provisions of this chapter shall apply
to all lands within the jurisdiction of the City of West Des Moines shown on
the Official Floodplain Zoning Map as being within the boundaries of the
Floodway, Floodway Fringe, and General Floodplain (Overlay) Districts, as
established in section
8-8-4 of this chapter.
B.   Establishment Of Official Floodplain Zoning Map: The Flood Insurance Rate
Map(s) prepared as part of the Flood Insurance Study for Polk County and
incorporated areas, City of West Des Moines, panels 19153C0295F, 0305F, 0310F,
0315F, 0320F, 0326F, 0327F, 0328F, 0329F, 0340F, 0457F, 0476F dated February 1,
2019, is hereby adopted by reference and declared to be the Official Floodplain
Zoning Map. The flood profiles and all explanatory material contained with the
Flood Insurance Study are also declared to be a part of this chapter.
C.   Rules For Interpretation Of District Boundaries: The boundaries of the
zoning district areas shall be determined by scaling distances on the Official
Floodplain Zoning Map. When an interpretation is needed as to the exact
location of a boundary, the Community Development Director shall make the
necessary interpretation. The Board of Adjustment shall hear and decide appeals
when it is alleged that there is an error in any requirement, decision or
determination made by the Community Development Director in the enforcement or
administration of this chapter.
D.   Compliance: No structure or land shall hereafter be used and no structure
shall be located, extended, converted or structurally altered without full
compliance with the terms of this chapter and other applicable regulations
which apply to uses within the jurisdiction of this chapter.
E.   Abrogation And Greater Restrictions: It is not intended by this chapter to
repeal, abrogate or impair any existing easements, covenants or deed
restrictions. However, where this chapter imposes greater restrictions, the
provision of this chapter shall prevail. All other ordinances inconsistent with
this chapter are hereby repealed to the extent of the inconsistency only.
F.   Interpretation: In their interpretation and application, the provisions of
this chapter shall be held to be minimum requirements and shall be liberally
construed in favor of the Governing Body and shall not be deemed a limitation
or repeal of any other powers granted by State Statutes.
G.   Warning And Disclaimer Of Liability: The standards required by this
chapter are considered reasonable for regulatory purposes. This chapter does
not imply that areas outside the designated Floodplain (Overlay) District areas
will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not create
liability on the part of the City of West Des Moines or any officer or employee
thereof for any flood damages that occur from reliance on this chapter or any
administrative decision lawfully made thereunder.
H.   Severability: If any section, clause, provision or portion of this chapter
is adjudged unconstitutional or invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction,
the remainder of this chapter shall not be affected thereby. (Ord. 2340, 1-21-
2019)
8-8-4: ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONING (OVERLAY) DISTRICTS:
The floodplain areas within the jurisdiction of this chapter are hereby divided
into the following districts:
Floodway District FW
Floodway Fringe District FF
General Floodplain District FP
The boundaries shall be as shown on the Official Floodplain Zoning Map. Within
these districts all uses not allowed as permitted uses or permissible as
conditional uses are prohibited unless a variance to the terms of this chapter
is granted after due consideration by the Board of Adjustment. (Ord. 2340, 1-
21-2019)
8-8-5: FLOODWAY (OVERLAY) DISTRICT FW:
A.   Permitted Uses: The following uses shall be permitted within the Floodway
District to the extent they are not prohibited by any other ordinance (or
underlying zoning district) and provided they do not include placement of
structures, factory-built homes, fill or other obstruction, the storage of
material or equipment, or the excavation or alteration of a watercourse.
Agricultural uses such as general farming, pasture, grazing, outdoor plant
nurseries, horticulture, viticulture, truck farming, forestry, sod farming and
wild crop harvesting.
Industrial-commercial uses such as loading areas, parking areas, airport
landing strips.
Private and public recreational uses such as golf courses, tennis courts,
driving ranges, archery ranges, picnic grounds, boat launching ramps, swimming
areas, parks, wildlife and nature preserves, game farms, fish hatcheries,
shooting preserves, target ranges, trap and skeet ranges, hunting and fishing
areas, hiking and horseback riding trails.
Residential uses such as lawns, gardens, parking areas and play areas.
Such other open-space uses similar in nature to the above uses.
B.   Conditional Uses: The following uses which involve structures (temporary
or permanent), fill, storage of materials or equipment, excavation or
alteration of a watercourse may be permitted only upon issuance of a
conditional use permit by the Board of Adjustment as provided in subsection
8-8-8C of this chapter. Such uses must also meet the applicable provisions of
the Floodway District Performance Standards.
Circuses, carnivals, and similar transient amusement enterprises.
Drive-in theaters, new and used car lots, roadside stands, signs and
billboards.
Extraction of sands, gravel and other materials.
Marinas, boat rentals, docks, piers and wharves.
Uses or structures accessory to open-space uses.
Utility transmission lines and underground pipelines.
Other uses similar in nature to uses described in subsection A or B of this
section which are consistent with the provisions of this section and the
general spirit and purpose of this chapter.
C.   Performance Standards: All Floodway District uses allowed as a permitted
or conditional use shall meet the following standards.
1.   No use shall be permitted in the Floodway District that would result in
any increase in the base flood elevation. Consideration of the effects of any
development on flood levels shall be based upon the assumption that an equal
degree of development would be allowed for similarly situated lands.
2.   All uses within the Floodway District shall:
a.   Be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage.
b.   Use construction methods and practices that will minimize flood damage.
c.   Use construction materials and utility equipment that are resistant to
flood damage.
3.   No use shall affect the capacity or conveyance of the channel or floodway
of any tributary to the main stream, drainage ditch or any other drainage
facility or system.
4.   Structures, buildings and sanitary and utility systems, if permitted,
shall meet the applicable performance standards of the Floodway Fringe District
and shall be constructed or aligned to present the minimum possible resistance
to flood flows.
5.   Buildings, if permitted, shall have a low flood damage potential and shall
not be for human habitation.
6.   Storage of materials or equipment that are buoyant, flammable, explosive
or injurious to human, animal or plant life is prohibited. Storage of other
material may be allowed if readily removable from the Floodway District within
the time available after flood warning.
7.   Watercourse alterations or relocations (channel changes and modifications)
must be designed to maintain the flood carrying capacity within the altered or
relocated portion. In addition, such alterations or relocations must be
approved by the Department of Natural Resources.
8.   Any fill allowed in the floodway must be shown to have some beneficial
purpose and shall be limited to the minimum amount necessary.
9.   Pipeline river or stream crossings shall be buried in the streambed and
banks or otherwise sufficiently protected to prevent rupture due to channel
degradation and meandering or due to the action of flood flows. (Ord. 2340, 1-
21-2019)
8-8-6: FLOODWAY FRINGE (OVERLAY) DISTRICT FF:
A.   Permitted Uses: All uses within the Floodway Fringe District shall be
permitted to the extent that they are not prohibited by any other ordinance (or
underlying zoning district) and provided they meet applicable performance
standards of the Floodway Fringe District.
B.   Performance Standards: All uses must be consistent with the need to
minimize flood damage and meet the following applicable performance standards.
1.   All Structures: All structures shall:
a.   Be adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement
of the structure.
b.   Use construction methods and practices that will minimize flood damage.
c.   Use construction materials and utility equipment that are resistant to
flood damage.
2.   Residential Structures: All new or substantially improved residential
structures shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated a minimum
of one foot (1') above the base flood elevation. Construction shall be upon
compacted fill which shall, at all points, be no lower than 1.0 foot above the
base flood elevation and extend at such elevation at least eighteen feet (18')
beyond the limits of any structure erected thereon. Alternate methods of
elevating (such as piers) may be allowed subject to favorable consideration by
the Board of Adjustment, where existing topography, street grades, or other
factors preclude elevating by fill. In such cases, the methods used must be
adequate to support the structure as well as withstand the various forces and
hazards associated with flooding.
All new residential structures shall be provided with a means of access which
will be passable by wheeled vehicles during the base flood.
3.   Non-Residential Structures: All new or substantially improved non-
residential structures shall have the lowest floor (including basement)
elevated a minimum of one foot (1') above the base flood elevation, or together
with attendant utility and sanitary systems, be floodproofed to such a level.
When floodproofing is utilized, a professional engineer registered in the State
of Iowa shall certify that the floodproofing methods used are adequate to
withstand the flood depths, pressures, velocities, impact and uplift forces and
other factors associated with the base flood; and that the structure, below the
base flood elevation is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the
passage of water. A record of the certification indicating the specific
elevation (in relation to North American Vertical Datum, 1988) to which any
structures are floodproofed shall be maintained by the Administrator.
4.   All New And Substantially Improved Structures:
a.   Fully enclosed areas below the "lowest floor" (not including basements)
that are subject to flooding shall be designed to automatically equalize
hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit
of flood waters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified
by a registered professional engineer or meet or exceed the following minimum
criteria:
(1)   A minimum of two (2) openings having a total net area of not less than
one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding
shall be provided.
(2)   The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot (1') above
grade.
(3)   Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other
coverings or devices provided they permit the automatic entry and exit of flood
waters.
Such areas shall be used solely for parking of vehicles, building access and
low damage potential storage.
b.   New and substantially improved structures must be designed (or modified)
and adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of
the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the
effects of buoyancy.
c.   New and substantially improved structures shall be constructed with
electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and
other service facilities (including ductwork) elevated or floodproofed to a
minimum of one foot (1') above the base flood elevation.
5.   Factory-Built Homes:
a.   All new and substantially improved factory-built homes, including those
placed in existing factory-built home parks or subdivisions, shall be elevated
on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the structure is a
minimum of one foot (1') above the base flood elevation.
b.   All new and substantially improved factory-built homes, including those
placed in existing factory-built home parks or subdivisions, shall be anchored
to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may
include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground
anchors as required by the State Building Code.
6.   Utility And Sanitary Systems:
a.   On-site waste disposal and water supply systems shall be located or
designed to avoid impairment to the system or contamination from the system
during flooding.
b.   All new and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system as well as
the discharge of effluent into flood waters. Wastewater treatment facilities
(other than on-site systems) shall be provided with a level of flood protection
equal to or greater than one foot (1') above the base flood elevation.
c.   New or replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or
eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system. Water supply treatment
facilities (other than on-site systems) shall be provided with a level of
protection equal to or greater than one foot (1') above the base flood
elevation.
d.   Utilities such as gas or electrical systems shall be located and
constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage to the system and the risk
associated with such flood damaged or impaired systems.
7.   Storage: Storage of materials and equipment that are flammable, explosive
or injurious to human, animal or plant life is prohibited unless elevated a
minimum of one foot (1') above the base flood elevation. Other material and
equipment must either be similarly elevated or: a) not be subject to major
flood damage and be anchored to prevent movement due to flood waters or b) be
readily removable from the area within the time available after flood warning.
8.   Structural Works: Flood control structural works such as levees, flood
walls, etc., shall provide, at a minimum, protection from a base flood with a
minimum of three feet (3') of design freeboard and shall provide for adequate
interior drainage. In addition, the Department of Natural Resources shall
approve structural flood control works.
9.   Watercourse Alterations Or Relocations: Watercourse alterations or
relocations must be designed to maintain the flood carrying capacity within the
altered or relocated portion. In addition, the Department of Natural Resources
must approve such alterations or relocations.
10.   Subdivisions: Subdivisions (including factory-built home parks and
subdivisions) shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damages and
shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood damage.
Development associated with subdivision proposals (including the installation
of public utilities) shall meet the applicable performance standards of this
chapter. Subdivision proposals intended for residential use shall provide all
lots with a means of access which will be passable by wheeled vehicles during
the 100-year flood. Proposals for subdivisions greater than five (5) acres or
fifty (50) lots (whichever is less) shall include base flood elevation data for
those areas located within the Floodplain (Overlay) District.
11.   Accessory Structures To Residential Uses:
a.   Detached garages, sheds, and similar structures that are incidental to a
residential use are exempt from the base flood elevation requirements where the
following criteria are satisfied.
(1)   The structure shall not be used for human habitation. The structure shall
be used solely for low flood damage potential purposes such as vehicle parking
and limited storage.
(2)   The structure shall be designed to have low flood damage potential. Its
size shall not exceed six hundred (600) square feet. Those portions of the
structure located less than one foot (1') above the BFE must be constructed of
flood-resistant materials.
(3)   The structure shall be constructed and placed on the building site so as
to offer minimum resistance to the flow of flood waters.
(4)   The structure shall be firmly anchored to resist flotation, collapse and
lateral movement which may result in damage to other structures.
(5)   The structure's service facilities such as electrical and heating
equipment shall be elevated or floodproofed to at least one foot (1') above the
base flood elevation.
(6)   The structure's walls shall include openings that satisfy the provisions
of subsection B4a of this section.
b.   Exemption from the base flood elevation requirements for such a structure
may result in increased premium rates for flood insurance coverage of the
structure and its contents.
12.   Recreational Vehicles:
a.   Recreational vehicles are exempt from the requirements of subsection B5 of
this section regarding anchoring and elevation of factory-built homes when the
following criteria are satisfied.
(1)   The recreational vehicle shall be located on the site for less than one
hundred eighty (180) consecutive days, and,
(2)   The recreational vehicle must be fully licensed and ready for highway
use. A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or
jacking system and is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type
utilities and security devices and has no permanently attached additions.
b.   Recreational vehicles that are located on the site for more than one
hundred eighty (180) consecutive days or are not ready for highway use must
satisfy requirements of subsection B5 of this section regarding anchoring and
elevation of factory-built homes.
13.   River And Stream Crossings: Pipeline river and stream crossings shall be
buried in the streambed and banks, or otherwise sufficiently protected to
prevent rupture due to channel degradation and meandering.
14.   Maximum Damage Potential Uses (See Definitions): All new or substantially
improved maximum damage potential uses shall have the lowest floor (including
basement) elevated a minimum of one foot (1') above the elevation of the 500-
year flood, or together with attendant utility and sanitary systems be
floodproofed to such a level. When floodproofing is utilized, a professional
engineer registered in the State of Iowa shall certify that the floodproofing
methods used are adequate to withstand the flood depths, pressures, velocities,
impact and uplift forces and other factors associated with the 0.2 percent
annual chance flood; and that the structure, below the 0.2 percent annual
chance flood elevation, is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to
the passage of water. A record of the certification must indicate the specific
elevation (in relation to North American Vertical Datum 1988). (Ord. 2340, 1-
21-2019)
8-8-7: GENERAL FLOODPLAIN (OVERLAY) DISTRICT FP:
A.   Permitted Uses: The following uses shall be permitted within the General
Floodplain District to the extent they are not prohibited by any other
ordinance (or underlying zoning district) and provided they do not include
placement of structures, factory-built homes, fill or other obstructions, the
storage of materials or equipment, or the excavation or alteration of a
watercourse.
Agricultural uses such as general farming, pasture, grazing, outdoor plant
nurseries, horticulture, viticulture, truck farming, forestry, sod farming and
wild crop harvesting.
Industrial-commercial uses such as loading areas, parking areas, airport
landing strips.
Private and public recreational uses such as golf courses, tennis courts,
driving ranges, archery ranges, picnic grounds, boat launching ramps, swimming
areas, parks, wildlife and nature preserves, game farms, fish hatcheries,
shooting preserves, target ranges, trap and skeet ranges, hunting and fishing
areas, hiking and horseback riding trails.
Residential uses such as lawns, gardens, parking areas and play areas.
B.   Conditional Uses: Any uses which involve placement of structures, factory-
built homes, fill or other obstructions, storage of materials or equipment,
excavation or alteration of a watercourse may be allowed only upon issuance of
a conditional use permit by the Board of Adjustment as provided for in
subsection
8-8-8C of this chapter. All such uses shall be reviewed by the Department of
Natural Resources to determine: 1) whether the land involved is either wholly
or partly within the floodway or floodway fringe and 2) the base flood
elevation. The applicant shall be responsible for providing the Department of
Natural Resources with sufficient technical information to make the
determination.
C.   Performance Standards:
1.   All conditional uses, or portions thereof, to be located in the floodway
as determined by the Department of Natural Resources shall meet the applicable
provisions and standards of the Floodway (Overlay) District (section
8-8-5 of this chapter).
2.   All conditional uses, or portions thereof, to be located in the floodway
fringe as determined by the Department of Natural Resources shall meet the
applicable provisions and standards of the Floodway Fringe (Overlay) District
(section
8-8-6 of this chapter). (Ord. 2340, 1-21-2019)
8-8-8: ADMINISTRATION:
A.   Appointment, Duties And Responsibilities Of Zoning Administrator:
1.   The building official is hereby appointed to implement and administer the
provisions of this chapter and will herein be referred to as the Administrator.
2.   Duties and responsibilities of the Administrator shall include, but not
necessarily be limited to the following:
a.   Review all floodplain development permit applications to assure that the
provisions of this chapter will be satisfied.
b.   Review floodplain development applications to assure that all necessary
permits have been obtained from Federal, State and local governmental agencies
including approval when required from the Department of Natural Resources for
floodplain construction.
c.   Record and maintain a record of: 1) the elevation (in relation to North
American Vertical Datum, 1988) of the lowest floor (including basement) of all
new or substantially improved structures or 2) the elevation to which new or
substantially improved structures have been floodproofed.
d.   Notify adjacent communities/counties and the Department of Natural
Resources prior to any proposed alteration or relocation of a watercourse and
submit evidence of such notifications to the Federal Emergency Management
Agency.
e.   Keep a record of all permits, appeals and such other transactions and
correspondence pertaining to the administration of this chapter.
f.   Submit to the Federal Insurance Administrator an annual report concerning
the community's participation, utilizing the annual report form supplied by the
Federal Insurance Administrator.
g.   Notify the Federal Insurance Administration of any annexations or
modifications to the community's boundaries.
h.   Review subdivision proposals to insure such proposals are consistent with
the purpose of this chapter and advise the City Council of potential conflict.
i.   Maintain the accuracy of the community's Flood Insurance Rate Maps when:
(1)   Development placed within the Floodway (Overlay) District results in any
of the following:
(A)   An increase in the base flood elevations, or
(B)   Alteration to the floodway boundary;
(2)   Development placed in Zones A, AE, AH, and A1-30 that does not include a
designated floodway that will cause a rise of more than one foot (1') in the
base elevation; or
(3)   Development relocates or alters the channel.
Within six (6) months of the completion of the development, the applicant shall
submit to FEMA all scientific and technical data necessary for a Letter of Map
Revision.
j.   Perform site inspections to ensure compliance with the standards of this
chapter.
k.   Forward all requests for variances to the Board of Adjustment for
consideration. Ensure all requests include the information ordinarily submitted
with applications as well as any additional information deemed necessary to the
Board of Adjustment.
B.   Floodplain Development Permit:
1.   Permit Required: A floodplain development permit issued by the
Administrator shall be secured prior to any floodplain development (any man-
made change to improved and unimproved real estate, including but not limited
to buildings or other structures, mining, filling, grading, paving, excavation
or drilling operations), including the placement of factory-built homes.
2.   Application For Permit: Application shall be made on forms furnished by
the Administrator and shall include the following:
a.   Description of the work to be covered by the permit for which application
is to be made.
b.   Description of the land on which the proposed work is to be done (i.e.,
lot, block, track, street address or similar description) that will readily
identify and locate the work to be done.
c.   Indication of the use or occupancy for which the proposed work is
intended.
d.   Base flood elevation.
e.   Elevation (in relation to North American Vertical Datum, 1988) of the
lowest floor (including basement) of buildings or of the level to which a
building is to be floodproofed.
f.   For buildings being improved or rebuilt, the estimated cost of
improvements and market value of the building prior to the improvements.
g.   Location and dimensions of all buildings and building additions.
h.   Such other information as the Administrator deems reasonably necessary
(e.g., drawings or a site plan) for the purpose of this chapter.
3.   Action On Permit Application: The Administrator shall, within a reasonable
period of time, make a determination as to whether the proposed floodplain
development meets the applicable standards of this chapter and shall approve or
disapprove the application. For disapprovals, the applicant shall be informed
in writing of the specific reasons for the disapproval. The Administrator shall
not issue permits for variances except as directed by the City Board of
Adjustment.
4.   Construction And Use To Be As Provided In The Application And Plans:
Floodplain development permits based on approved plans and applications
authorize only the use, arrangement, and construction set forth in such
approved plans and applications and no other use, arrangement or construction.
Any use, arrangement, or construction without authorization shall be deemed a
violation of this chapter. The applicant shall be required to submit
certification by a professional engineer or land surveyor, as appropriate,
registered in the State of Iowa, that the finished fill, building floor
elevations, floodproofing, or other flood protection measures were accomplished
in compliance with the provisions of this chapter, prior to the use or
occupancy of any structure.
C.   Conditional Uses, Appeals And Variances:
1.   Duties Of The Board Of Adjustment: The Board of Adjustment shall hear and
decide: a) applications for conditional uses upon which the Board is authorized
to pass under this chapter; b) appeals; and c) requests for variances to the
provisions of this chapter and shall take any other action which is required of
the Board.
2.   Conditional Uses: Requests for conditional uses shall be submitted to the
Administrator, who shall forward such to the Board of Adjustment for
consideration. Such requests shall include information ordinarily submitted
with applications as well as any additional information deemed necessary to the
Board of Adjustment.
3.   Appeals: Where it is alleged there is any error in any order, requirement,
decision, or determination made by an administrative official in the
enforcement of this chapter, the aggrieved party may appeal such action. The
notice of appeal shall be filed with the Board of Adjustment and with the
official from whom the appeal is taken and shall set forth the specific reason
for the appeal. The official from whom the appeal is taken shall transmit to
the Board of Adjustment all the documents constituting the record upon which
the action appealed from was taken.
4.   Variance: The Board of Adjustment may authorize upon request in specific
cases such variances from the terms of this chapter that will not be contrary
to the public interest where, owing to special conditions, a literal
enforcement of the provisions of this chapter will result in unnecessary
hardship. Variances granted must meet the following applicable standards.
a.   Variances shall only be granted upon: 1) a showing of good and sufficient
cause; 2) a determination that failure to grant the variance would result in
exceptional hardship to the applicant; and 3) a determination that the granting
of the variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats
to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud
on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local codes or
ordinances.
b.   Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any
increase in flood levels during the 100-year flood would result. Consideration
of the effects of any development on flood levels shall be based upon the
assumption that an equal degree of development would be allowed for similarly
situated lands.
c.   Variances shall only be granted upon a determination that the variance is
the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief.
d.   In cases where the variance involves a lower level of flood protection for
buildings than what is ordinarily required by this chapter, the applicant shall
be notified in writing over the signature of the Administrator that: 1) the
issuance of a variance may or will result in increased premium rates for flood
insurance; and 2) such construction may increase the risk to life and property.
e.   All variances granted shall have the concurrence or approval of the
Department of Natural Resources.
5.   Hearings And Decisions Of The Board Of Adjustment:
a.   Hearings: Upon the filing with the Board of Adjustment of an appeal, an
application for a conditional use or a request for a variance, the Board shall
hold a public hearing. The Board shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing
and give public notice thereof, as well as due notice to parties in interest.
At the hearing, any party may appear in person or by agent or attorney and
present written or oral evidence. The Board may require the appellant or
applicant to provide such information as is reasonably deemed necessary and may
request the technical assistance and/or evaluation of a professional engineer
or other expert person or agency, including the Department of Natural
Resources.
b.   Decisions: The Board shall arrive at a decision on an appeal, conditional
use or variance within a reasonable time. In passing upon an appeal, the Board
may, as long as such action is in conformity with the provisions of this
chapter, reverse or affirm, wholly or in part, or modify the order,
requirement, decision or determination appealed from, and it shall make its
decision in writing setting forth the findings of fact and the reasons for its
decision. In granting a conditional use or variance, the Board shall consider
such factors as contained in this section and all other relevant sections of
this chapter and may prescribe such conditions as contained in subsection C5b
(2) of this section.
(1)   Factors Upon Which The Decision Of The Board Of Adjustment Shall Be
Based: In passing upon applications for variances, the Board shall consider all
relevant factors specified in other sections of this chapter and:
(A)   The danger to life and property due to increased flood heights or
velocities caused by encroachments.
(B)   The danger that materials may be swept onto other land or downstream to
the injury of others.
(C)   The proposed water supply and sanitation systems and the ability of these
systems to prevent disease, contamination and unsanitary conditions.
(D)   The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood
damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner.
(E)   The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the
City.
(F)   The requirements of the facility for a floodplain location.
(G)   The availability of alternative locations not subject to flooding for the
proposed use.
(H)   The compatibility of the proposed use with existing development and
development anticipated in the foreseeable future.
(I)   The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and
floodplain management program for the area.
(J)   The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and
emergency vehicles.
(K)   The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment
transport of the flood water expected at the site.
(L)   The cost of providing governmental services during and after flood
conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities (sewer, gas,
electrical and water systems), facilities, streets and bridges.
(M)   Such other factors which are relevant to the purpose of this chapter.
(2)   Conditions Attached To Variances: Upon consideration of the factors
listed above, the Board of Adjustment may attach such conditions to the
granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purpose of this
chapter. Such conditions may include, but not necessarily be limited to:
(A)   Modification of waste disposal and water supply facilities.
(B)   Limitation of periods of use and operation.
(C)   Imposition of operational controls, sureties, and deed restrictions.
(D)   Requirements for construction of channel modifications, dikes, levees,
and other protective measures, provided such are approved by the Department of
Natural Resources and are deemed the only practical alternative to achieving
the purpose of this chapter.
(E)   Floodproofing measures shall be designed consistent with the flood
protection elevation for the particular area, flood velocities, duration, rate
of rise, hydrostatic and hydrodynamic forces, and other factors associated with
the regulatory flood. The Board of Adjustment shall require that the applicant
submit a plan or document certified by a registered professional engineer that
the floodproofing measures are consistent with the regulatory flood protection
elevation and associated flood factors for the particular area.
6.   Appeals To The Court: Any person or persons, jointly or severally,
aggrieved by any decision of the Board of Adjustment may present to a court of
record a petition, duly verified, setting forth that such decision is illegal,
in whole or in part, specifying the grounds of the illegality. Such petition
shall be presented to the court within thirty (30) days after the filing of the
decision in the Office of the Board. (Ord. 2340, 1-21-2019)
8-8-9: NONCONFORMING USES:
A.   A structure or the use of a structure or premises which was lawful before
the passage or amendment of this chapter, but which is not in conformity with
the provisions of this chapter, may be continued subject to the following
conditions:
1.   If such use is discontinued for twelve (12) consecutive months, any future
use of the building premises shall conform to this chapter.
2.   Uses or adjuncts thereof that are or become nuisances shall not be
entitled to continue as nonconforming uses.
3.   If any nonconforming use or structure is destroyed by any means, including
flood, it shall not be reconstructed if the cost is more than fifty percent
(50%) of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred, unless
it is reconstructed in conformity with the provisions of this chapter.
B.   Except as provided in subsection A2 of this section, any use which has
been permitted as a conditional use or variance shall be considered a
conforming use. (Ord. 2340, 1-21-2019)
8-8-10: VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES:
Violations of the provisions of this chapter or failure to comply with any of
the requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards established
in connection with grants of conditional uses or variances) shall constitute a
Municipal infraction as provided by title 1, chapter 4 of this Code. Any person
who violates this chapter or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall
be subject to the maximum civil penalty as provided by title 1, chapter 4 of
this Code and State law. Each day such violation continues shall be considered
a separate offense. Nothing herein contained prevents the City of West Des
Moines from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or
remedy violation. (Ord. 2340, 1-21-2019)
8-8-11: AMENDMENTS:
The regulations and standards set forth in this chapter may from time to time
be amended, supplemented, changed, or repealed. No amendment, supplement,
change, or modification shall be undertaken without prior approval of the
Department of Natural Resources. (Ord. 2340, 1-21-2019)
TITLE 9
ZONING
Entitlements; Process And Procedures   1
Zoning Rules And Definitions   2
General Zoning Provisions   3
Zoning Districts And Map   4
Agricultural/Open Space And Residential Zoning District   5
Commercial, Office And Industrial Zoning District   6
Setback And Bulk Density Regulations   7
Home Occupation   8
Planned Unit Development District   9
Performance Standards   10
PCP Professional Commerce Park District   11
Reserved   12
Airport Hazard And Height (Overlay) Zones   13
Accessory Structures   14
Off-Street Parking And Loading   15
Temporary Use Permits   16
Adult Entertainment Facilities   17
Signs   18
Landscaping   19
Medical Cannabidiol   20
CHAPTER 1
ENTITLEMENTS - PROCESS AND PROCEDURES
SECTION:
9-1-1: Title
9-1-2: Policy
9-1-3: Purposes
9-1-4: Authority
9-1-5: Jurisdiction
9-1-6: Interpretations And Conflict
9-1-7: Public Purpose
9-1-8: Entitlements
9-1-9: Filing And Processing Of Application Requests
9-1-10: Notice And Hearing Procedures
9-1-11: Modification, Suspension And Revocation For Cause
9-1-12: Effect Of Change Of Zoning Regulations
9-1-13: Flood Plain Development Permit
9-1-14: Amendments
9-1-15: Enforcement
9-1-16: Penalties
9-1-1: TITLE:
These regulations shall be officially known, cited, referred to as the zoning
regulations of the City of West Des Moines, Iowa (hereinafter "these
regulations"). (Ord. 1190, 6-17-1996)
9-1-2: POLICY:
A.   It is declared to be the policy of the City to consider the development of
land as subject to the control of the City pursuant to the official
Comprehensive Plan of the City for the orderly, planned, efficient, and
economical development of the City.
B.   Land to be developed shall be of such character that it can be used safely
for building purposes without danger to health or peril from fire, flood, or
other menace, and land shall not be developed until adequate public facilities
and improvements exist and proper provisions have been made for drainage,
water, sewerage, and capital improvements such as schools, parks, recreational
facilities, transportation facilities, and improvements.
C.   The existing and proposed public improvements shall conform to and be
properly related to the proposals shown in the Comprehensive Plan, Official
Map, and the capital budget and program of the City, and it is intended that
these regulations shall supplement and facilitate the enforcement of the
provisions and standards contained in building and housing codes, subdivision
ordinances, the Comprehensive Plan, Official Map and land use plan, and the
capital budget and program of the City.
D.   Land that has been developed prior to the effective date of these
regulations shall, whenever possible, be brought within the scope of these
regulations to further the purposes of regulation(s) identified in Section
9-1-3 of this Chapter.
E.   An entitlement to construct a structure on any land shall only be issued
for a legal lot of record. (Ord. 1190, 6-17-1996)
9-1-3: PURPOSES:
A.   These regulations are adopted for the following purposes:
1.   To guide the future growth and development of the City in accordance with
the Comprehensive Plan.
2.   To protect and provide for the public health, safety, and general welfare
of the City.
3.   To provide for adequate light, air, and privacy, to secure safety from
fire, flood, and other danger, and to prevent undue congestion of population
and overcrowding of the land.
4.   To protect the character and the social and economic stability of all
parts of the City and to encourage the orderly and beneficial development of
the community through appropriate growth management techniques by assuring the
timing and sequencing of development, promoting infill development in existing
neighborhoods and nonresidential areas with adequate public facilities,
assuring proper urban form and open space separation of urban areas, and
protecting environmentally critical areas from premature urban development.
5.   To protect and conserve the value of land throughout the City and the
value of buildings and improvements upon the land, and to minimize the
conflicts among the uses of land and buildings.
6.   To guide public and private policy and action in order to provide adequate
and efficient transportation, water, sewerage, schools, parks, playgrounds,
recreation, and other public requirements and facilities.
7.   To provide the most beneficial relationship between the uses of land and
buildings and the circulation of traffic throughout the City, having particular
regard to the avoidance of congestion in the streets and highways and the
pedestrian traffic movements appropriate to the various uses of land and
buildings, and to provide for the proper location and width of streets and
building lines.
8.   To establish reasonable standards of design and procedures for development
and redevelopment in order to further the orderly layout and use of land.
9.   To ensure that public facilities and services are available concurrent
with development and will have a sufficient capacity to serve the proposed
development and that the community will be required to bear no more than its
fair share of the cost of providing the facilities and services through
requiring the developer to pay fees, furnish land, or establish mitigation
measures to ensure that the development provides its fair share of needed
capital facilities generated by the development.
10.   To prevent the pollution of air, streams, and ponds; to assure the
adequacy of drainage facilities; to safeguard the water table; and to encourage
the wise use and management of natural resources throughout the Municipality in
order to preserve the integrity, stability, and beauty of the community and the
value of the land.
11.   To preserve the natural beauty and topography of the City and to ensure
appropriate development with regard to these natural features.
12.   To provide for open spaces through the most efficient design and layout
of the land, including the use of average density in providing for minimum
width and area of lots, while preserving the density of development as
established in the zoning ordinance of the City.
13.   To ensure that the overall land is developed in a logical fashion and
that "leapfrog" development does not occur.
14.   To remedy the problems associated with inappropriately developed land,
including premature development, excess development, partial or incomplete
development, leapfrog and low grade development. (Ord. 1190, 6-17-1996)
9-1-4: AUTHORITY:
A.   Upon receiving a recommendation from the West Des Moines Planning and
Zoning Commission (hereinafter "commission"), the City Council of the City of
West Des Moines, Iowa (hereinafter "City Council") may approve, deny or modify,
wholly or partly, any application for the development of land, including, but
not limited to, comprehensive plan amendments, zone changes, site plan
development permits, and major modification of the above. The City Council may
impose such conditions and limitations as it deems necessary to assure that the
general purpose and intent of this title and all other ordinances or policies
enacted or followed by the City Council will be observed, and that the public
interest, health, safety, convenience and welfare will be served.
B.   All conditions and restrictions approved by the City Council which are not
appealed in a timely manner, shall restrict the use of the subject property or
structure until further action is taken by the City Council to modify or
eliminate the restriction.
C.   The City Council may grant a waiver, modify to a lesser restriction, or
defer enforcement of any provision or requirements not expressly reserved to
the Board of Adjustment by the Iowa Code or this Code.
D.   The Board of Adjustment of the City of West Des Moines, Iowa (hereinafter
"Board") may approve, deny or modify, wholly or partly, any application for the
use of land, including, permitted conditional use permits (Pc), which may also
be subject to consideration of a site plan development permit. The Planning and
Zoning Commission shall, by written resolution, provide a recommendation to the
City Council for their consideration in making the final decision on the site
plan development permit. The Board may impose such conditions and limitations
on the use as it deems necessary to assure that the general purpose and intent
of this title and all other ordinances or policies enacted or followed by the
Board will be observed, and that the public interest, health, safety,
convenience and welfare will be served. Conditions placed by the Board shall be
enforced by the Planning and Zoning Commission and City Council as part of site
plan development permit approval process. No site plan development permit shall
be approved if conditions placed by the Board have not been appropriately
accommodated in the development of the site. Conditions placed by the Board as
part of the permitted conditional use permit approval may only be modified or
removed by the Board. The Planning and Zoning Commission and City Council shall
not have authority to modify, waive, or remove conditions placed by the Board.
E.   All conditions and restrictions approved by the Board which are not
appealed in a timely manner, shall restrict the use of the subject property or
structure until further action is taken by the Board to modify or eliminate the
restriction.
F.   The Board may grant a waiver, modify to a lesser restriction, or defer
enforcement of any provision or requirements not expressly reserved to the City
Council by the Iowa Code or this Code. (Ord. 1257, 6-30-1997; amd. Ord. 1454,
9-17-2001; Ord. 2274, 2-5-2018; Ord. 2527, 7-5-2022)
9-1-5: JURISDICTION:
A.   These regulations apply to development of any parcel of land located
within the corporate limits of the City or outside the corporate limits of the
City as provided by law.
B.   No building permit or certificate of occupancy shall be issued for any
parcel of land or development after the effective date of and not in
substantial conformity with the provisions of these regulations. No excavation
of land or construction of any public or private improvements shall take place
or be commenced except in conformity with these regulations. (Ord. 1190, 6-17-
1996)
9-1-6: INTERPRETATION AND CONFLICT:
A.   Interpretation: In their interpretation and application, the provisions of
these regulations shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the
promotion of the public health, safety, and general welfare. These regulations
shall be constructed broadly to promote the purposes for which they are
adopted.
1.   Public Provisions: These regulations are not intended to interfere with,
abrogate, or annul any other ordinance, rule or regulation, statute, or other
provision of law except as provided in these regulations. If a conflict between
requirements appears within this title; the most restrictive requirement shall
prevail.
2.   Misinformation: Information erroneously presented by any official or
employee of the City does not negate or diminish the provisions of this title
pertaining thereto.
3.   Quantity: The singular includes the plural, and the plural includes the
singular.
4.   Gender: The masculine includes the feminine, and the feminine includes the
masculine.
5.   Number Of Days: Whenever a number of days is specified in this title, or
in any permit, condition of approval or notice issued or given as set forth in
this title, such number of days shall be deemed to be consecutive calendar
days, unless otherwise specified.
6.   Or: The word "or" shall also mean "and/or".
7.   Shall, Must, And May: "Shall" imposes a duty, "must" states a requirement,
and "may" confers a power.
8.   Rounding Of Quantities: Whenever application of this title results in
required parking spaces or other standards being expressed in fractions of
whole numbers, such fractions are to be rounded to the next higher whole
number, except that quantities expressing units per acre shall not be rounded.
9.   Density: All references to density in this title are based on gross site
area unless otherwise specified. (Ord. 1190, 6-17-1996)
10.   Procedural Requirements: No action of the City, its City Council,
Planning and Zoning Commission, Board of Adjustment, the Director of Community
Development or other official body of the City shall be deemed invalid by
reason of failure to comply with or conform to the provisions of this title,
provided that the procedural requirements of all State laws, including the Code
of Iowa, have been met.
11.   Measurement Of Setbacks: Whenever this title refers to setback distances,
except for those parcels where the City Council or the Board of Adjustment has
granted exceptions, the setback standard shall be measured from the ultimate
right-of- way width as shown in the adopted Comprehensive Plan. (Ord. 1454, 9-
17-2001)
9-1-7: PUBLIC PURPOSE:
Regulation of the development of land and the attachment of reasonable
conditions to the development of land is an exercise of valid police power
delegated by the State to this City. The developer has the duty of compliance
with conditions laid down by the City for design, dedication, improvement, and
restrictive use of the land to conform to the physical and economic development
of the City for the health, safety, and general welfare of the community at
large. (Ord. 1190, 6-17-1996)
9-1-8: ENTITLEMENTS:
A.   An "entitlement" shall mean the authority acquired by an applicant after
receiving approval of an application from the Board of Adjustment, City
Council, Director of Development Services or designee, City Engineer or
designee, or other official body of the City. The following subsections define
and indicate applicability for all entitlements required by this title:
1   Structures Not Requiring A Permit: A building located in any single family
residential district which is less than one hundred twenty (120) square feet in
area and not placed on a permanent foundation does not require a permit.
Structures not requiring a permit also include dog houses, dog runs/pens, play
houses or play equipment. Any temporary structures such as tents or canopies
having an area less than two hundred (200) square feet in area or used
exclusively for camping do not require a permit, although an event utilizing
temporary structures may require a temporary use or sound permit. These
structures must meet the same setback and height restrictions as all accessory
structures.
2   Site Plan Development Permit:
a   Purpose: The site plan development permit provides a method whereby land
may be designed and developed as a unit by taking advantage of modern site
planning techniques; and to produce an environment of stable, desirable
character which will be in harmony with the existing or potential development
of the surrounding neighborhood; and to ensure development which meets
standards of environmental quality, public health and safety, and efficient use
of the City's resources.
b   General Provisions:
(1)   Unless otherwise modified below, a site plan development permit shall be
required prior to site development and construction for:
(A)   New construction of any structure or site improvements associated with
any use identified as either permitted (P) or permitted conditionally (Pc)
within the use matrix for a zoning district.
(B)   Expansion of existing structures, site improvements, use, or operations
associated with any use identified as either permitted (P) or permitted
conditionally (Pc) within the use matrix for a zoning district.
(C)   Any use, based upon a determination of the Director of Development
Services or their designee that is a more intense use than the preceding
approved use which would result in a potential for a significant impact upon
its surroundings.
(2)   A site plan development permit shall not be required for:
(A)   Single-family residential dwellings except that, detached townhomes on
footprint lots or a common lot in all zoning district shall be required to
submit and receive a site plan development permit, including approval of
building architecture.
(B)   On properties considered being primarily agricultural in nature and
operating as such, agricultural structures which are associated with
agricultural production - crops (SIC 01) except greenhouses (SIC 018) and which
is permitted (P) within the use matrix for the zoning district.
(3)   For projects requiring a site plan development permit, no building or
grading permit of any kind shall be issued for any such development until the
site plan development permit has been approved, except as herein provided:
(A)   Grading permits may be issued prior to approval of a development permit
by the City Engineer or designee, subject to all applicable site grading
regulations and application procedures of title 8, chapter 5 of this Code, and
(B)   Determination by the Director of Development Services or a designee that
the site development plan is in substantial conformance with all applicable
zoning regulations.
Any grading permit issued prior to approval of the site plan development permit
is at the applicant's own risk and final grades will need to comply with any
changes necessary for the site development approval. Structures not required to
obtain a site plan development permit shall be required to obtain the
appropriate building and grading permits prior to construction of the
structure.
c   Required Permit Findings: Site plan development permits shall only be
granted if all of the following findings are made; or if conditions and
limitations, as the City Council deems necessary, are imposed to allow it to
make said findings. It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to prove to
the satisfaction of the City Council that the following findings can be made:
(1)   That the proposed development or use is consistent with the West Des
Moines Comprehensive Plan and any applicable subarea plan.
(2)   That the proposed development or use does assure compatibility of
property uses within the zone and general area.
(3)   That all applicable standards and conditions have been imposed which
protect the public health, safety and welfare.
(4)   That there is adequate on site and off site public infrastructure to
support the proposed development.
(5)   That the proposed development or use has met all the requirements
contained in this Code.
(6)   That the proposed development or use will be in keeping with the scale
and nature of the surrounding neighborhood.
d   Duration: Upon use inauguration any site plan development permit is
considered to run with the land, unless its duration is conditioned at the time
the site plan development permit is granted.
3   Permitted Conditional Use Permit (Pc):
a   Purpose: "Permitted conditional use permit (Pc)" shall mean a zoning
instrument used primarily to review the locations or conduct of certain land
uses. These are uses which may have a distinct impact on the area in which they
are located, or are capable of creating special problems for bordering
properties unless given special attention.
The Board of Adjustment may grant a permitted conditional use permit (Pc) if
the proposed use is found to be in compliance with the required findings from
title 2, chapter 2 of this Code; or if conditions and limitations, as the Board
of Adjustment deems necessary, are imposed to allow it to make said findings.
The permitted conditional use permit (Pc) may also be subject to consideration
of a site plan development permit.
b   General Provisions: A permitted conditional use permit (Pc) shall be
required for those uses as noted in the Agricultural/Open Space and Residential
Zoning District and Commercial, Office and Industrial Zoning District matrices,
and as specified elsewhere within this title.
c   Duration: Upon vesting of entitlement any permitted conditional use permit
(Pc) use may continue until such time the use is discontinued for a period of
one year or a different use is inaugurated on the site. The duration for any Pc
use may be conditioned at the time the permitted conditional use permit (Pc) is
granted.
4   Major Modifications To Site Development Entitlements:
a   Purpose: The modification procedure is intended to provide a method whereby
changes may be made to an existing, approved site plan entitlement. This
procedure may allow an applicant to process changes that affect only a portion
of a previously approved entitlement.
b   General Provisions: A major modification is generally applicable when
additional city input is necessary due to a request for substantial changes,
including, but not limited to, parking requirements, building bulk or area,
landscaping plans, site design, architecture or other improvements. A
modification shall not be applied for in place of a variance.
All such applications for a major modification shall reopen the review of the
entire entitlement and its conditions at the discretion of the approving body.
c   Required Permit Findings: Site plan development permits shall only be
granted if all of the following findings are made; or if conditions and
limitations, as the City Council deems necessary, are imposed to allow it to
make said findings. It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to prove to
the satisfaction of the City Council that the following findings can be made:
(1)   That the proposed development or use is consistent with the West Des
Moines Comprehensive Plan and any applicable subarea plan.
(2)   That the proposed development or use does assure compatibility of
property uses within the zone and general area.
(3)   That all applicable standards and conditions have been imposed which
protect the public health, safety and welfare.
(4)   That there is adequate on-site and off-site public infrastructure to
support the proposed development.
(5)   That the proposed development or use has met all the requirements
contained in this Code.
(6)   That the proposed development or use will be in keeping with the scale
and nature of the surrounding neighborhood.
d   Required Permit Findings: Findings for modifications shall be the same as
those required for the original site plan development permit. Any modification
to a previously approved site plan for a permitted conditional (Pc) use permit
shall be subject to consideration by the Planning and Zoning Commission with
recommendation by written resolution to and final decision by the City Council.
Any expansion of a permitted conditional use on the property shall require
approval by the Board of Adjustment.
e   Expiration Date: Any major modification granted pursuant to this section
shall not affect the expiration date of the original approved permit.
5   Minor Modifications To Site Development Entitlements:
a   Purpose: Level 1 and level 2 minor modifications are changes to an approved
site plan through a process that allows for a less formal review of projects
that encompass minor changes that do not generate substantial impacts and do
not warrant city input.
b   General Provisions:
(1)   The Director of Development Services or designee may grant a level 1 or a
level 2 minor modification to an approved site plan permit. The modification
may govern only the following measurable design/site considerations, which in
no case results in a reduction from any minimum standard outlined in this title
or the previous directives of the City Council or Board of Adjustment.
(A)   A level 1 minor modification may be allowed for the following:
(i)   Modifications to on site circulation drives, parking, and loading or
service areas that do not increase the net impervious surface area more than
two thousand (2,000) square feet and that do not affect existing topography or
drainage;
(ii)   Placement or changes to walls, fences, and retaining walls;
(iii)   Modifications to landscaping that do not affect existing topography or
drainage;
(iv)   Modifications to wall facades, reconfiguration and/or addition of
architectural features, colors, or finish materials that do not compromise the
established theme or otherwise make the structure inconsistent with the
architectural design, color, or materials of other structures within the same
development or surrounding area;
(v)    Entry vestibules necessary to meet Energy Code requirements and which
are no larger than necessary to accommodate accessibility standards;
(vi)    Collocation of communication antennas on existing structures and
related accessory buildings up to two thousand (2,000) square feet;
(vii)    Installation of trash enclosures and associated screening;
(viii)   Installation of backup generators and associated screening; and
(ix)    Additions of or expansions of decks and patios for permitted uses.
(B)    A level 2 minor modification may be allowed for the following:
(i)   Modifications to on site circulation drives, parking, and loading or
service areas which increase the net impervious surface area more than two
thousand (2,000) square feet;
(ii)   New freestanding accessory buildings for permitted uses of not more than
a total of two thousand (2,000) square feet;
(iii)    New or expansions of patios or building expansions of an existing
facility for permitted uses up to fifty percent (50%) of the existing square
footage and not more than a total of two thousand (2,000) square feet;
(iv)    Installation of water, storm sewer, and sanitary utilities on the site.
Installation of public utilities may be proposed through the minor modification
level 2 process, but will be subject to the approval and acceptance of the City
Council;
(v)    Changes in residential density to either decrease the total number of
units or to increase the number of units as long as:
(a)    The density does not exceed the maximum allowed per the designated
zoning of the property; and
(b)    The additional density does not warrant a structural addition or new
structure which exceeds two thousand (2,000) square feet of gross floor area;
(vi)    Changes to topography or drainage that do not affect the ground
elevations of sidewalks or buildings.
(2)   Any level 1 minor modification request which exceeds the prescribed
limitations outlined in this section shall instead file a level 2 minor
modification request or a major modification site plan permit request. A site
may have an unlimited number of level 1 minor modifications.
(3)   Any level 2 minor modification request which exceeds the prescribed
limitations outlined in this section or a site which has been the subject of
two (2) previous level 2 minor modifications shall instead file a major
modification site plan permit request.
(4)   Any modification to a previously approved site plan for a permitted
conditional (Pc) use permit approval that does not qualify for the level 1 or
the level 2 minor modification process shall be subject to consideration by the
Planning and Zoning Commission with recommendation by written resolution to and
final decision by the City Council. Any expansion of a permitted conditional
use on the property shall require approval of the expansion of the use by the
Board of Adjustment.
(5)   Any level 1 or level 2 minor modification to a previously approved site
plan that is for a site which has nonconforming attributes, e.g., setbacks,
open space percentage, landscaping, parking, and which proposes to increase the
scope of any nonconforming attribute shall not be granted approval, except in
those cases where a variance is obtained from the Board of Adjustment.
(6)   Any level 1 or level 2 minor modification to a previously approved site
plan that increases the net impervious area by two thousand (2,000) square feet
or more, or changes topography that affects drainage patterns within the site,
or changes existing detention facilities within or serving the site, including
changes to the capacity of a detention facility within or serving the site, or
properties that are identified to contribute to known downstream flooding
issues will be required to study the effects of the proposal and provide either
a revised stormwater management plan or letter of general conformance to an
approved stormwater management plan signed by an Iowa licensed engineer.
(7)   Any level 1 or level 2 minor modification to a previously approved site
plan that increases the square footage of the usable area of the building,
e.g., expansion of the building or addition or expansion of a patio, or which
modifies driveways or internal circulation to the extent that the change would
affect traffic on the public street system may require a traffic impact study.
(8)   The Director of Development Services or designee shall have the
discretion to refer any level 1 or level 2 minor modification request to the
Plan and Zoning Commission and City Council for permitted uses or permitted
conditional uses.
c   Application: The level 1 or level 2 minor modification shall require the
approval of the Director of Development Services or designee. The Director of
Development Services or designee may establish conditions of approval to
further the intent of this section or other City Code regulations.
d   Required Permit Findings: Level 1 and level 2 minor modifications shall
only be granted if all of the following findings are made. It shall be the
responsibility of the applicant to prove that the following findings can be
made:
(1)   That the proposed development or use is consistent with the West Des
Moines Comprehensive Plan and any applicable subarea plan;
(2)   That the proposed development or use does assure compatibility of
property uses within the zone and general area;
(3)   That all applicable standards and conditions have been imposed which
protect the public health, safety and welfare;
(4)   That there is adequate on site and off site public infrastructure to
support the proposed development; and
(5)   That the proposed development or use has met all the requirements
contained in this Code.
6   Overlay District Site Plan Permit:
a   Purpose: The overlay district site plan development permit procedure
provides a method whereby land within an overlay district area may be designed
and developed as a unit by taking advantage of modern site planning techniques;
and to produce an environment of stable, desirable character which will be in
harmony with the existing or potential development of the surrounding
neighborhood; and to ensure development which meets standards of environmental
quality, public health and safety, and efficient use of the City's resources.
b   General Provisions:
(1)   An overlay district site plan development permit shall be required for:
(A)   All uses within the Town Center Overlay District, except for single-
family detached residential, when new construction or expansion of existing
structures or area of use or operation is proposed.
(B)   Any use, based upon a determination of the Director of Development
Services that is a more intense use than the preceding approved use which would
result in a potential for a significant impact upon its surroundings.
(2)   For projects requiring a site plan development permit, no building or
grading permit of any kind shall be issued for any such development until the
site plan development permit has been approved, except as herein provided.
(A)   Grading permits may be issued prior to approval of a development permit
by the City Engineer or designee, subject to all applicable site grading
regulations and application procedures of title 8,
chapter 5  of this Code, and
(B)    Determination by the Director of Development Services or a designee that
the site development plan is in substantial conformance with all applicable
zoning regulations.
Any grading permit issued prior to approval of the site plan development permit
is at the applicant's own risk and final grades will need to comply with any
changes necessary for the site development approval. Structures not required to
obtain a site plan development permit shall be required to obtain the
appropriate building and grading permits prior to construction of the
structure.
(3)   The Director of Development Services or designee may deem an overlay
district site plan as preliminarily approved by staff, and then send the
application materials to the Mayor, City Council, and Planning and Zoning
Commission for their individual review. If two (2) or more members of the City
Council and Planning and Zoning Commission inform the Director of Development
Services or designee of their hesitation in recommending approval of the
application request or desire for additional information, the request is then
placed on the next available agenda for consideration by the Planning and
Zoning Commission. The Planning and Zoning Commission's written resolution of
recommendation is then forwarded to the next available City Council agenda for
final decision. If, however, there are less than two (2) objections from the
City Council and Planning and Zoning Commission, the application may be
approved administratively by the Director of Development Services at an
administrative hearing that has been advertised by posting a notice in the
designated area forty-eight (48) hours before the hearing.
(4)   The Director of Development Services or their designee shall have the
discretion to refer any overlay district site plan request to the next
available agenda for consideration by the commission, whose recommendation will
be forwarded to the next available Council agenda for final action.
d   Required Permit Findings: Overlay district site plan development permits
shall only be granted if all of the following findings are made; or if
conditions and limitations, as the Development Services Director deems
necessary, are imposed to allow it to make said findings. It shall be the
responsibility of the applicant to prove to the satisfaction of the Director of
Development Services that the following findings can be made:
(1)   That the proposed development or use is consistent with the West Des
Moines comprehensive plan, overlay district guidelines, and applicable specific
plan.
(2)   That the proposed development or use does assure compatibility of
property uses within the zone and general area.
(3)   That all applicable standards and conditions have been imposed which
protect the public health, safety and welfare.
(4)   That there is adequate on site and off site public infrastructure to
support the proposed development.
(5)   That the proposed development or use has met all the requirements
contained in this Code.
(6)   That the proposed development or use be in keeping with the scale and
nature of the surrounding neighborhood.
e   Duration: Upon use inauguration any overlay district site plan development
permit is considered to run with the land, unless its duration is conditioned
at the time the site plan development permit is granted.
7   Extension Of Entitlement:
a   Purpose: The extension of entitlement procedure is intended to provide a
method to extend the time originally allowed for inauguration of a previously
approved project that has not expired.
b   General Provisions:
(1)   Entitlements Except Permitted Conditional Use Permits: The City Council
may grant time extensions for any entitlement in this title as provided herein
except permitted conditional use permit entitlements, unless stated otherwise
in the conditions of approval. The time limits for any extension of an
entitlement shall be at the discretion of the City Council and shall be
determined on a case by case basis.
(2)   Permitted Conditional Use Permit Entitlements: The Board of Adjustment
may grant time extensions for permitted conditional use permit entitlement in
this title, unless stated otherwise in the conditions of approval. The time
limits for any extension of an entitlement shall be at the discretion of the
Board of Adjustment and shall be determined on a case by case basis.
c   Applications: Such extensions shall be requested on or before the date of
expiration of the entitlement.
d   Required Findings: The City Council, Board of Adjustment, or Director may
grant the extension only after finding that:
(1)   There have been no changes to the provisions of the Comprehensive Plan or
zoning regulations applicable to the project since the approval of the
entitlement; and
(2)   There have been no changes in the character of the site or its
surroundings which affect how the standards of the Comprehensive Plan or zoning
regulations apply to the project; and
(3)   There have been no changes in the character of the site or its
surroundings which detrimentally affect the environment; and
(4)   That substantial site work could not be completed because of
circumstances beyond the control of the applicant. (This finding is not
applicable to time extensions for a continuation of a use of a previously
approved entitlement that as part of its approval allowed the filing of a time
extension at a specified time or intervals of time.)
e   Continuance Of A Permit During Application Renewal Process: Unless
otherwise provided in the conditions of the permit, permits being processed for
renewal (time extensions) shall remain in full force and effect until the
renewal request is acted on and all administrative appeals have been exhausted.
All the terms and conditions of the original permit must be followed at all
times.
(Ord. 1190, 6-17-1996; amd. Ord. 1454, 9-17-2001; Ord. 1709, 9-25-2006; Ord.
1918, 5-2-2011; Ord. 2078, 12-29-2014; Ord. 2137, 1-26-2016; Ord. 2248, 9-18-
2017; Ord. 2274, 2-5-2018; Ord. 2275, 2-5-2018; Ord. 2303, 5-29-2018; Ord.
2527, 7-5-2022; Ord. 2570, 7-5-2023; Ord. 2662, 7-7-2025)
9-1-9: FILING AND PROCESSING OF APPLICATION REQUESTS:
A.   Application requests shall be filed with the Development Services
Department.
B.   Applications Deemed Withdrawn: Any application received shall be deemed
withdrawn if it has been held in abeyance, awaiting the submittal of additional
requested information from the applicant, and/or if the applicant has not
communicated in writing with the City and/or made reasonable progress within
ninety (90) days from the last written notification communication from the City
to the applicant. Upon initiation of the application review process as signaled
by distribution of the project plans to other departments and/or outside
agencies, all application fees are nonrefundable. Any application deemed
withdrawn shall require submission of a new application and fees to begin the
review and approval process.
2   Vesting Of Entitlement: An entitlement shall remain in effect so long as:
a   Substantial Site Work Defined: "Substantial site work" shall be defined as
the point at which the site work has progressed beyond grading and completion
of structural foundations and twenty five percent (25%) of the total building
area has occurred above grade within twenty four (24) months of the effective
date of the approval, or a greater time period authorized by the original
entitlement, or by approval of an extension of the original entitlement.
b   Nonbuilding Projects: The project is completed as set forth in subsection
A4 of this section, project completion, within twelve (12) months or greater
period authorized by an entitlement or approval of an extension of entitlement.
c   Resource Extraction Operations: In the case of a resource extraction
operation, the vesting of the entitlement shall occur when extraction
operations authorized by the entitlement have been commenced.
3   Lapse Of Entitlement: In the event that any of the circumstances listed in
subsection A3a(1) or A3a(2) of this section occur, an entitlement shall be
deemed to have lapsed. No use of land or structure, the entitlement for which
has lapsed pursuant to this subsection, shall be reactivated, reestablished, or
used unless a new entitlement is first obtained.
a   Completed Projects: When a project has been completed or an authorized use
not involving construction has been established, subsection A4, "Project
Completion", of this section, the entitlement which authorized the project
shall remain valid and in force, including any conditions of approval adopted
in connection therewith, unless:
(1)   An existing legally approved use or structure is removed from the site,
and the site remains vacant for a period exceeding six (6) consecutive months,
in which case the right shall lapse; or
(2)   A use or structure authorized through an entitlement approval remains
vacant and unused for its authorized purpose, or is abandoned or discontinued
for a period greater than twelve (12) consecutive months, the entitlement shall
lapse.
b   Partially Completed Projects: Until development rights have been vested, an
entitlement shall remain valid so long as the building permit remains valid.
4   Project Completion: A development project is considered completed when the
following conditions are met based on the project scope:
a   All structures have passed final inspections, and site improvements or off
site works have been completed and any bonds guaranteeing improvements have
been released or continued at the discretion of the City and final certificates
of occupancy have been issued.
b   When the Director of Development Services or designee verifies that a use
or activity, not involving a building or grading permit, has occurred on the
subject site in accordance with all applicable provisions of this title and any
adopted conditions.
5   Occupancy Or Use Of Partially Completed Projects: Multiple building
projects, including, but not limited to, apartments or office complexes or
shopping centers, may be granted certificates of occupancy for individual
completed buildings in advance of the completion of the entire project when:
a   Individual buildings, but not necessarily all buildings, are completed
pursuant to subsection A4 of this section; and
b   The Director of Community Development determines that the completed
structures are capable of functioning independently from structures and site
improvements remaining to be completed; and
c   Occupancy of individual structures will not inhibit the completion of the
total project; and
d   Partial occupancy during completion will not have a potential adverse
effect on persons in the area or nearby properties. (Ord. 1190, 6-17-1996; amd.
Ord. 1454, 9-17-2001; Ord. 2274, 2-5-2018; Ord. 2357, 5-6-2019; Ord. 2527, 7-5-
2022; Ord. 2570, 7-5-2023)
9-1-10: NOTICE AND HEARING PROCEDURES:
A.   Notice For Public Hearings: Whenever a public hearing is required under
the Code of Iowa or this title, before the application can be acted upon, the
city shall set a date, time and place for the matter to be heard. In accordance
with the Code of Iowa, the city shall give notice of said hearing to the owner
(s) of the property involved, and to the owner(s) of the property situated
within a radius of three hundred seventy feet (370'), including public right of
way, of the exterior boundaries of the parcel(s) on which the proposed use or
project is to be located. Ownership information as provided in the County
Assessor's online data on the date that notice information is prepared for the
project property owners (s) and of properties within 370' shall be used.
B.   Hearing Procedures: The decision making authority(s) or the advisory body
shall hold at least one hearing on any duly filed application that requires a
discretionary decision. All public hearings as defined in this title shall be
conducted in accordance with the Iowa Code and this title.
C.   Referrals: A decision making authority may refer a matter back to the
preceding hearing body for a further report, information or study.
D.   Continued Matters: If it is necessary to continue the hearing or decision
on any matter before the decision making authority, the person presiding at the
hearing shall, before adjournment thereof, publicly announce the date, time and
place to which the matter will be continued. No further notice need be given.
If no date is set for a continued hearing, then new hearing notice is required.
E.   Decisions:
1   Decision Options: The Board of Adjustment or the City Council, as the case
may be, hearing a discretionary matter may approve, deny or modify, wholly or
partly, the request being reviewed. The Director of Development Services may
administratively approve development permits as presented for which approval
authority has been specifically granted. The approval body may impose such
conditions and limitations as it deems necessary to assure that the general
purpose and intent of this title and its various chapters will be observed, and
that the public interest, health, safety, convenience and welfare will be
served. In absence of any provision to the contrary in a decision granting a
request, said request is granted as set forth in the application. All
conditions and restrictions applied to a decision on a project not appealed
shall automatically continue to govern and limit the subject use or structure
for the duration of the entitlement.
2   Finality Of Decision: An administrative decision of the Director of
Development Services, as well as decisions of the Board of Adjustment or the
City Council, shall become final at the expiration of the decision's appeal
period unless, prior to the expiration of said period of appeal, a written
appeal with the appropriate fees is duly filed with the Development Services
Department. The filing of an appeal to the Board of Adjustment or City Council
as allowed by this code shall automatically stay all proceedings in furtherance
of the subject application request. Neither the applicant nor any enforcement
agency may rely on an authority's decision until the expiration of the
decision's appeal period or until the appeal has been resolved, whichever
period expires later. Appeals to District Court as allowed by this code or the
Code of Iowa shall not automatically stay any proceeding in furtherance of the
subject application request.
3   Implementation: The director of community development shall be responsible
for reviewing the decisions mentioned in this chapter and any other paper or
document required by the commission, the board of adjustment, or the city
council in order to discharge his duties and responsibilities under this title
and chapter. It shall be the responsibility of the permittee to ensure that all
conditions placed on a permit are met.
F.   Reapplication: An application request may be denied with prejudice. If
such denial is not appealed, then no further application for the denied request
shall be filed in whole or in part for the ensuing eighteen (18) months except
as otherwise specified at the time of denial. An application request may be
denied with prejudice on the grounds that two (2) or more similar application
requests have been denied in the past two (2) years, or that other good cause
exists for limiting the filing of an application with respect to the property.
(Ord. 1190, 6-17-1996; amd. Ord. 1454, 9-17-2001; Ord. 1607, 10-25-2004; Ord.
2527, 7-5-2022; Ord. 2570, 7-5-2023)
9-1-11: MODIFICATION, SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION FOR CAUSE:
A.   Modification, Suspension And Revocation: Any permit or variance heretofore
or hereafter granted may be modified or revoked, or its use suspended by the
decision making authority through the public hearing process for any of the
following reasons:
1.   That the term(s) or condition(s) of the permit or variance has not been
complied with;
2.   That the property subject to the permit or variance, or any portion
thereof, is used or maintained in violation of any statute, ordinance, law or
regulation;
3.   That the use for which the variance or permit was granted has been
exercised for at least twelve (12) consecutive months or has ceased to exist,
or has been abandoned;
4.   That the use for which the permit or variance was granted has been
exercised as to be detrimental to the public health, safety, morals or general
welfare or as to constitute a nuisance;
5.   That changes in technology, or in the type or amount of development in the
vicinity of the use, or other good cause warrants modification of conditions of
operation or imposition of additional conditions of operation to assure that
the use remains compatible with existing and potential uses of other property
within the general area in which the use is located.
B.   Nonwaiver: The failure of the Director of Development Services, the Board
of Adjustment, or the City Council to revoke a variance or permit or suspend
its use whenever cause therefor exists or occurs does not constitute a waiver
of such right with respect to any subsequent cause for revocation or suspension
of the use.
C.   Prohibition: No person shall carry on any of the operations authorized to
be performed under the terms of any permit during any period of suspension
thereof, or after the revocation thereof, or pending a judgment of court upon
any application for writ taken to review the decision order of the final appeal
body in the City in suspending or revoking such permit; provided, however, that
nothing herein contained shall be construed to prevent the performance of such
operations as may be necessary in connection with a diligent and bona fide
effort to cure and remedy the default, noncompliance or violation, for which a
suspension of the permit was ordered by the City, or such operations as may be
required by other laws and regulations for the safety of persons and protection
and preservation of property. (Ord. 1190, 6-17-1996; amd. Ord. 1454, 9-17-2001;
Ord. 2527, 7-5-2022)
9-1-12: EFFECT OF CHANGE OF ZONING REGULATIONS:
A.   Uses Requiring Entitlements: Any construction, expansion or alteration of
a use of land or structures and any approved entitlement on the date of
adoption of an ordinance amendment may be completed as authorized in the
entitlement and in accordance with this title.
B.   Due Only To Changes In The Type Of Permit Required: Whenever adoption of
this title or an amendment thereto results only in a requirement for a
different permit for the same existing use, the property being used shall be
governed by the following provisions:
1.   If the use affected is existing lawfully as a permitted use of any kind,
the existing use is hereby conforming without any further action. Any
modification or expansions of the use, change of use, terms of use, or
additional use shall conform to this title as it may be modified, including
requirements for a new type of entitlement.
2.   If the use affected is under an entitlement that has an expiration date or
clause and the new regulation requires a different entitlement, the use may
continue until the expiration date or clause specified in the entitlement, at
which time one of the following actions shall occur:
a.   The applicant may file for the required entitlement or renewal under this
title;
b.   The entitlement expires and the use shall terminate. (Ord. 1190, 6-17-
1996)
9-1-13: FLOODPLAIN DEVELOPMENT PERMIT:
Requirements for floodplain development permits, and all associated
information, provisions, and stipulations shall be as described in the
floodplain management ordinance adopted in its entirety in title 8, chapter 8,
"Floodplain Management", of this Code. (Ord. 2340, 1-21-2019)
9-1-14: AMENDMENTS:
A.   Authority: The City Council may, from time to time on its own action or on
petition, after public notice and hearing as provided by law and after
receiving a written recommendation by the Planning and Zoning Commission,
amend, supplement or change the boundaries or regulations herein or
subsequently established, and such amendment shall not become effective except
by the favorable vote of a majority of all the members of the City Council.
B.   Amendment Disapproval Or Protest: In case the proposed amendment,
supplement or change be recommended for denial by the Planning and Zoning
Commission, or a protest be presented duly signed by the owners of twenty
percent (20%) or more either of the area of the lots included in such proposed
change, or of those immediately adjacent in the rear thereof, extending the
depth of one lot or not to exceed two hundred feet (200') therefrom, or of
those directly opposite thereto, extending the depth of one lot nor not to
exceed two hundred feet (200') from the street frontage of such opposite lots,
such amendments shall not become effective except by the favorable vote of at
least three-fourths (3/4) of all the members of the City Council. Whenever any
petition for an amendment, supplement or change of the zoning or regulations
herein contained or subsequently established shall have been denied by the City
Council, then no new petition covering the same property to the same property
or the same property and additional property shall be filed with or considered
by the City Council until one year shall have elapsed from the date of action
by the City Council on the first petition. In the event the applicant withdraws
the petition for rezoning prior to final decision by the City Council, no new
petition covering the same property or the same property and additional
property shall be filed with or considered by the City Council until six (6)
months shall have elapsed from the date of withdrawal. (Ord. 1190, 6-17-1996;
amd. Ord. 2255, 10-16-2017; Ord. 2527, 7-5-2022; Ord. 2570, 7-5-2023)
9-1-15: ENFORCEMENT:
The Director of Community Development is hereby designated and ordered to
enforce this title. In case any building or structure is erected, constructed,
reconstructed, altered, repaired, converted or maintained, or any building,
structure or land is used in violation of this title, the Director of Community
Development, in addition to other remedies, shall institute any proper action
or proceedings in the name of the City to prevent such unlawful erection,
construction, reconstruction, alteration, repair, conversion, maintenance or
use, to restrain, correct or abate such violation, to prevent the occupancy of
said building, structure or land or to prevent any illegal act, conduct,
business or use in or about said premises. (Ord. 1190, 6-17-1996)
9-1-16: PENALTIES:
Any person who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to comply with or
who resists the enforcement of any of the provisions of this title, upon
conviction, shall be subject to the general penalty provisions stated in this
code, title 1, chapter 4, Municipal Infractions. If the City seeks court
intervention for violation of any provision of this title, the City may seek
reimbursement for reasonable attorney fees and administrative costs. Each day
that a violation occurs shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 1190, 6-17-
1996; amd. Ord. 2493, 10-4-2021)
CHAPTER 2
ZONING RULES AND DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
9-2-1: Rules Of Word Construction
9-2-2: Definitions
9-2-1: RULES OF WORD CONSTRUCTION:
A.   The present tense includes the future tense, the singular number includes
plural, and the plural number includes the singular.
B.   The word shall is mandatory, the word may is permissive.
C.   The words "used" or "occupied" include the words intended, designed, or
arranged to be used or occupied.
D.   The word "lot" includes the words "plot" or "parcel", and all other words
or phrases used to denote an individual site which complies with the minimum
provisions of this title. (Ord. 430, 8-11-1969)
9-2-2: DEFINITIONS:
ACCESSORY: A structure or building containing a use or serving a purpose
customarily incidental or subordinate to and facilitating the implementation of
or operation of the primary use of the principal building or principal use on
the lot.
ACCESSORY BUILDING, ATTACHED: A building that serves an accessory use or
purpose to the primary building or use on a parcel and which is constructed as
part of the principal building, or connected to the principal building by a
breezeway or similar structure, or is constructed closer to the principal
building than the minimum required building separation distance as identified
in Setback and Bulk Density Regulations. Attached accessory buildings that
include a roof (such as a covered porch, screen room, sunroom and garage) will
be considered part of the primary building.
ACCESSORY BUILDING, DETACHED: A free-standing building that serves an accessory
use or purpose to the principal building or use on a parcel, including but not
limited to garages, sheds, and utility buildings. Detached buildings must
exceed the minimum building separation distance to other structures as
identified in Setback and Bulk Density Regulations.
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE: An independent free-standing structure that does not meet
the definition of a building and which meets or exceeds the minimum separation
distance from the principal building for the zoning district as noted in
chapter 7 of this title. Detached accessory structures include but are not
limited to enclosures for mechanical equipment and trash receptacles, fences,
pools, and gazebos.
ACCESSORY USE: A use subordinate to or serving a purpose customarily incidental
to the primary use.
AGRICULTURE: The use of land for agricultural purposes, including animal
husbandry, apiculture, dairying, farming, floriculture, forestry, groves,
horticulture, orchards, poultry husbandry, ranching, viticulture, and the
necessary accessory uses for packing, treating or sorting the produce; however,
the operation of the accessory uses shall be subordinate to that of the normal
agricultural activities.
AGRICULTURAL PRODUCTION ANIMALS, COMMERCIAL: Any livestock animal as defined by
Code of Iowa, Sec. 717.1 or included under Standard Industrial Classification
(SIC) 02: Agricultural Production - Livestock and Animal Specialties which is
raised to provide a service such as labor, breeding purposes with offspring
sold or provided to another individual or business, or production of
commodities such as, but not limited to meat, eggs, milk, fur, leather and wool
primarily for sale to individuals or businesses not located within the property
upon which the livestock animal(s) is raised, with little to no personal
consumption or use. Roosters shall be considered agricultural production
animals, commercial.
AGRICULTURAL PRODUCTION ANIMALS, PERSONAL: Any livestock animal as defined by
Code of Iowa, Sec. 717.1 or included under Standard Industrial Classification
(SIC) 02: Agricultural Production - Livestock and Animal Specialties which is
housed or primarily lives outside of the residence and raised for or can be
raised for production of commodities such as, but not limited to meat, eggs,
fur, milk, leather, and wool for personal consumption or use. Roosters are
considered agricultural production animals, commercial. See Homesteader Farm as
defined in this title.
AGRICULTURE PRODUCTION, CROPS: An establishment (farms, orchards, greenhouses,
nurseries) primarily engaged in the production of crops (grains, fruits, and
vegetables), plants, vines, and trees for sale or for the production of other
products. Commercial production shall not be allowed in residential districts
except as a legally established non-conforming use.
AGRITOURISM: The act of visiting a working farm or any horticultural or
agricultural operation for the purpose of enjoyment, education, or active
involvement in the activities of the farm or operation that also adds to the
economic viability of the site.
AIRPORT: The Des Moines Municipal Airport.
AIRPORT ELEVATION: The reference point of an airport’s usable landing area
measured in feet above mean sea level, which elevation is established to be
nine hundred fifty eight feet (958') mean sea level (MSL).
AIRPORT HAZARD: Any structure or tree or use of land which would exceed the
Federal obstruction standards as contained in 14 Code of Federal Regulations
sections 77.21, 77.23, and 77.25 as revised March 4, 1972, and which obstruct
the air space required for the flight of aircraft and landing or takeoff at an
airport or is otherwise hazardous to such landing or taking off of an aircraft.
AIRPORT PRIMARY SURFACE: A surface longitudinally centered on a runway. When
the runway has a specially prepared hard surface, the primary surface extends
two hundred feet (200') beyond each end of that runway. The width of the
primary surface of a runway will be that width prescribed in part 77 of the
Federal Aviation Regulations (FAR) for the most precise approach existing or
planned for either end of that runway. The elevation of any point on the
primary surface is the same as the elevation of the nearest point on the runway
centerline.
AIRSPACE HEIGHT: For the purpose of determining the height limits in all zones
set forth in
chapter 13 of this title and shown on the airport hazard and height (overlay)
zoning map, the datum shall be mean sea level elevation unless otherwise
specified.
ALLEY: Any public space or thoroughfare less than twenty feet (20') but no less
than ten feet (10') in width which has been dedicated or deeded to the public
for public use.
AMENDMENT: A change in the wording, context or substance of this title, or a
change in the zoning or district boundaries of the “official zoning map”, a
part of this title, when adopted by ordinance passed by the proper
authoritative body in the manner prescribed by law.
ANTIQUE STORE: Antiques are items belonging to the past. The items sold, to
include collectibles, are items that are collected or desirable because of
craftsmanship, age, rarity, personal emotion connection, or other unique
features, may be part of a group of similar items and generally are more
valuable than their original worth. Stores typically are organized to provide
for one point of sale, even if individual stalls are rented. For this
definition these stores do not include flea markets, secondhand stores or used
merchandise stores as defined elsewhere in this section. This definition does
not include a business which primarily engages in selling new merchandise,
parts, or services.
APARTMENT HOUSE OR BUILDING: Any building, or portion thereof, which is
designed, built, rented, leased, let or hired out to be occupied, or which is
occupied as the home or residence of three (3) or more families living
independently of each other and doing their own cooking in the said building,
and shall include flats and apartments.
AUTOMATED TELLER MACHINE (ATM): An automated device that performs banking or
financial functions at a location remote from the controlling financial
institution.
AUTOMOBILE WRECKING: The dismantling or wrecking of motor vehicles or trailers,
or the storage, sale or dumping of dismantled or wrecked vehicles or their
parts. The presence on any lot, parcel or tract of land, of five (5) or more
vehicles which for a period exceeding thirty (30) days have not been capable of
operating under their own power, and from which parts have been removed or are
to be removed for reuse, salvage, or sale, shall constitute prima facie
evidence of an automobile wrecking yard.
BAR OR DRINKING PLACE (SIC 5813): An establishment primarily engaged in the
retail sale of alcoholic drinks, such as beer, ale, wine, and liquor for
consumption on the premises where the selling of food does not occur.
BAR/RESTAURANT: Establishment engaged in the retail sale of food and where the
sale of alcoholic drinks, such as beer, ale, wine, and liquor also occur. Food
and alcoholic drinks are primarily consumed on the premises where sold;
however, the take-out of food & drink may occur. For the purposes of
determining if Class 1 or Class 2, a Bar/Restaurant shall be categorized in
accordance with Flow Chart 6.1 in Section
9-6-4, “Specific Use Regulations.”
BASEMENT: A story having more than one-half (½) of its height below grade. A
basement shall not be counted as a story for the purpose of height regulation,
providing the finished floor level directly above is not more than six feet
(6') above grade (see definitions of basement walkout, cellar, and story).
BASEMENT WALKOUT: A basement having a portion of its finished floor not more
than four feet (4') below the finished yard grade at any of its exterior walls
and having not less than two-thirds (2/3) of the vertical height of an exterior
wall, which has a ground level exit to the outside, above ground. A walkout
basement shall be considered the ground floor level of the building and shall
be counted as a story (see definitions of basement, cellar, and story).
BEER PARLOR (TAPROOM): An area within a brewery devoted to the sale and
consumption of a limited variety of malt beverages typically brewed on site
(SIC 58 taprooms and beer parlors and SIC 2082 manufacturing of malt
beverages). This definition only applies to taprooms that are ancillary to and
included in a brewery, with the brewery being the primary use. Any other
establishment for the sale and consumption of beer will be considered a bar for
the purposes of this definition.
BILLBOARD: All structures, regardless of the base or materials used in
construction of the same, that are erected, maintained or used for public
display of posters, painted signs, wall signs, whether the structure be placed
on the wall or painted on the wall itself, pictures or other pictorial reading
matter which advertises a business or attraction which is not carried on or
manufactured in or upon the premises upon which said signs or billboards are
located.
BLOCK: All that property frontage along one thoroughfare lying between the two
(2) nearest intersecting or intercepting streets, railroad right-of-way,
waterway, golf course, campus, park or other similar open space.
BOARD: The Board of Adjustment 1 .
BOUNDARY OF DISTRICT: The centerline of a street or right-of-way or the
centerline of the alleyway, between the rear or side property lines or, where
no alley or passageway exists, the rear or side property lines of all lots
bordering on any district limits or any district boundary shown on the maps
adopted by this title.
BREWERY: A business that produces brews, ales, beer, meads and/or similar
beverages on site (SIC 2082 manufacturing of malt beverages).
BRING YOUR OWN BEVERAGE (BYOB) ESTABLISHMENT: Establishment that allows guests
to bring in and consume their own alcoholic beverages, wine or beer, but does
not engage in the retail sale of alcoholic beverages, wine or beer.
BUILDING: A building is any structure enclosed by walls and having a roof used
or intended for sheltering any use or occupancy.
BUILDING, HEIGHT OF: The vertical distance from the average finished ground
grade at the building line to the highest point of the coping of a flat roof,
or to the deck line of a mansard roof, or to the mean height level between
eaves and ridge for gable, hip, and gambrel roofs.
BUILDING LINE: The extreme overall dimensions of a building as determined from
its exterior walls or any part of a primary structural support or component,
which is nearest to the property line. Horizontally projecting roof overhangs
and chimneys into the setback up to two feet (2') shall be permitted, provided
no part of a side of a building for residential occupancy which is not attached
to another building shall be closer than five feet (5') to a lot line or within
ten feet (10') of another building.
BUILDING PROJECTION: Any building element such as roof eaves and overhangs,
fireplaces, window bays and deck or floor cantilevers that project past the
foundation line of the building or structure.
BUILDING SITE: The ground area of one lot; or the ground area of two (2) or
more lots which have been combined for the use of one building or permitted
group of buildings, together with all open spaces required by this title (see
definition of lot).
BULK STATIONS: Distributing stations, commonly known as bulk or tank stations,
used for the storage and distribution of flammable liquids or liquefied
petroleum products, where the aggregate capacity of all storage tanks is more
than twelve thousand (12,000) gallons.
BUSINESS: See definition of place of business.
CAMPGROUND (SPORTING AND RECREATIONAL CAMPS): Permanent buildings, temporary
buildings or vehicles including, but not limited to, cabins, tents, camp
trailers, travel trailers, motor homes, or similar movable or temporary
sleeping quarters of any kind established or maintained as a temporary living
quarter for recreation, religious, education or vacation purposes.
CAR WASH: A building or area that provides facilities used principally for the
cleaning, washing, polishing or waxing of motor vehicles.
CARPORT: An accessory structure serving as a covered parking area for motor
vehicles. When a carport has wall enclosures on more than two (2) sides that
keep out the elements, it ceases to be a carport and will be considered a
garage and must comply with fire separation requirements based on its proximity
from the primary structure.
CELLAR: That portion of a building between floor and ceiling which is wholly or
partly below grade (as defined in this title) and so located that the vertical
distance from grade to the floor below is equal to or greater than the vertical
distance from grade to ceiling (see definition of story).
CEMETERY: Land used or intended to be used for the burial of the dead,
including mausoleums and columbariums when operated in conjunction with and
within the boundary of such cemetery.
CENTERLINE, PUBLIC THOROUGHFARE: The line running parallel with the
thoroughfare right-of-way which is half the distance between the extreme edges
of the official right-of-way width.
CERTIFIED SURVEY: A sketch, plan, map, or other exhibit bearing a written
statement of its accuracy or conformity to specified standards which is signed
and sealed by a registered surveyor.
CHANNEL: Any natural or artificial watercourse exhibiting definite banks,
boundaries, and beds, and which contains visible evidence of flow or occurrence
of water.
CHANNEL FLOW: That water and material discharge which moves within the limits
of the defined channel.
CHURCH: Any building or site whose primary use is public religious worship.
CLUB: An association or persons for some common nonprofit purpose, but not
including groups organized primarily to render a service which is customarily
carried on as a business.
CLUSTER DEVELOPMENT: A planned development that limits the developed area to
protect sensitive areas and unique features within the development. The area of
the parcel not developed must be legally restricted from further development
and is in addition to any required open space for the developed area.
COFFEE SHOP: An establishment primarily selling coffee and tea products; the
business has a limited menu within which nothing is considered a meal; there is
little or no table service; the products are for consumption on or off
premises; and it is characterized by a large carryout clientele. The sale of
other food, beverages, or merchandise is incidental to the sale of the
specialty beverage. Patrons generally order at a cash register and pay before
they eat. This establishment is not a stand alone facility, but is generally
located within small shopping centers.
COMMERCIAL USE: The barter, exchange, sale, service or trade of goods,
materials, or services, either tangible or intangible for financial, material
or monetary gain.
COMMISSION: The Planning and Zoning Commission 2 .
COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT: All references to the “Community Development
Department”, “Department of Community Development”, or any other variation of
these terms in this Code shall mean “Department of Development Services”. All
references to the “Director of Community Development”, “Community Development
Director”, and “Director of Development Services”, “Development Services
Director”, or any variation of these terms in this Code shall mean “Development
Planning and Inspection Manager or his/her designee”.
CONDITIONAL PERMIT: A permit issued in view of specified conditions,
limitations or restrictions, and which is subject to review or cancellation by
the issuing department.
CONVENIENCE STORES: A retail establishment that offers for sale convenience
goods such as prepackaged food products, limited on site prepared food or fresh
food, beer and alcohol, tobacco, periodicals, and miscellaneous household goods
and automobile accessories. Convenience stores may have extended hours.
Convenience stores may or may not sell automobile fuel. Convenience stores as
defined here do not include any type of automobile repair or parts sales and
are not considered to be grocery stores.
COUNCIL: The City Council of West Des Moines.
COURT: A space, open and unobstructed to the sky, located at or above grade
level on a lot and bounded on three (3) or more sides by walls of a building.
CROWN OF ROAD: The grade at the centerline of the pavement within a public
thoroughfare, or where no pavement exists, grade at the right-of-way
centerline.
DECK: A permanent uncovered outdoor living area elevated above grade. A deck is
considered a porch if it is covered by a roof.
DELAYED DEPOSIT SERVICES BUSINESS: A person or individual, group of
individuals, partnership, association, corporation, or any other business unit
or legal entity who for a fee does either of the following: A. Accepts a check,
draft, share draft, or other instrument for the payment of money dated
subsequent to the date it was written. B. Accepts a check, draft, share draft,
or other instrument for the payment of money dated on the date it was written
and holds it for a period of time prior to deposit or presentment pursuant to
an agreement with, or any representation made to, the maker of the check,
draft, or other instrument whether express or implied.
DETACHED TOWNHOME: A detached multifamily dwelling unit, individually owned and
not part of two (2) or more units in the same building. There is community
ownership and maintenance of grounds, streets, and other areas of common
interest by a master property owners’ association. Each dwelling unit may or
may not be constructed on separate lots, but all have street frontage and
separate entrances.
DEVELOPMENT: Any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate,
including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging,
filling, grading, paving, excavation, or drilling operations.
DISTILLERY: A business that produces an alcoholic product by the process of
distillation.
DISTRICT: A section or sections of land area, depicted on the official zoning
map, within which the regulations governing the use of buildings and premises
or the area of buildings and premises are uniform.
DOG KENNEL: Any premises on which five (5) or more dogs, six (6) months old or
older, are kept or raised solely for the bona fide purpose of sale and which
are kept under constant restraint.
DRIVE-IN/DRIVE-THROUGH FACILITY: Any portion of a building or structure from
which business is transacted, or is capable of being transacted, directly with
customers located in a motor vehicle during such business transactions.
DRIVE-IN THEATER, SEASONAL: A defined area within a site where motion pictures
are presented outdoors and intended to be viewed from within personal
automotive vehicles or other designated outdoor viewing areas on a seasonal,
occasional basis under a temporary use permit.
DUMP: A premises used for the disposal of “clean” type fill or refuse such as
dirt, rocks, cans, tree branches and similar materials, but not including
organic matter of any type such as garbage or dead animals or portions thereof.
DWELLING, MULTI-FAMILY:
A.   A building containing two (2) or more dwelling units located in a
multifamily zoning district.
B.   A detached townhome.
DWELLING OR DWELLING UNIT: A building, a portion of a building or one or more
habitable rooms providing living facilities including permanent provisions for
living, sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation, but do not include hotels,
motels, and nursing or convalescent homes.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY: A building containing one dwelling unit that has land
associated with the building meeting the requirements in section
9-7-4, tables 7.1 and 7.2 of this title for its respective zoning district.
EATING PLACES: See definition of restaurant.
ELECTRIC VEHICLE CHARGING STATION: A machine that is considered a fuel pump
providing electrical power, solely for charging electric vehicles on site.
ELECTRIC VEHICLE CHARGING STATION - RENEWABLE ENERGY: An electric vehicle
charging station that generates the majority of the electrical power it
provides by wind or solar generation.
ENCROACHMENT LINE OR LIMIT: The boundary line which delineates the floodway and
designates the width of the channel and minimum width of overbank areas needed
for conveying the regulatory flood.
EVENT VENUE: A commercial facility not part of a restaurant or bar/restaurant
for hosting functions with the option of having food or drink regardless of
whether such is provided during the event, including, but not limited to,
weddings, receptions, banquets, anniversaries, and similar celebrations. May
also be used for meeting space, conferences, or other assembly uses. A
commercial facility is one that charges a fee to use the space, charges an
entry fee or cover charge to attend the event, or charges money for food and/or
beverages.
FIRM: See definition of flood insurance rate map (FIRM).
FACTORY BUILT OR MODULAR STRUCTURE: A structure, which is wholly or in
substantial part, made, fabricated, formed or assembled in manufacturing
facilities for installation or assembly and installation, on a building site.
For the purpose of this title, a factory built or modular structure would not
include a manufactured or mobile home constructed under the authority of 42 USC
section 5403 (United States Code - Manufactured Home Construction and Safety
Standards).
FAMILY:
A.   Individuals who live together as a single housekeeping unit and do their
cooking on the premises. The definition of “family” does not include the
following:
1.   More than eight (8) people who are:
a.   Residents of a “family home” as defined in section 414.22, 414.30 and
414.31 of the Iowa Code and this section; or
b.   “Handicapped” as defined in the Fair Housing Act, 42 USC section 3602(h).
This definition does not include those persons currently illegally using or
addicted to a “controlled substance” as defined in the Controlled Substances
Act, 21 USC section 802(6).
2.   Any society, club, fraternity, sorority, association, lodge, combine,
federation, coterie, or like organization;
3.   Substance abuse rehabilitation facility; and
4.   Any group of individuals who are in a group living arrangement as a result
of criminal offenses.
FAMILY HOME: A community based residential home which is licensed as a
residential care facility under chapter 135C of the Iowa Code or as a child
foster care facility under chapter 237 of the Iowa Code to provide room and
board, personal care, habilitation services, and supervision in a family
environment exclusively for not more than eight (8) persons with a
developmental disability or brain injury and any necessary support personnel.
However, family home does not mean an individual foster care family home
licensed under chapter 237 of the Iowa Code.
FARM: An area comprising ten (10) acres or more which is used for agriculture.
FILLING STATION: See definition of gas station.
FLAG: Any fabric, banner, or bunting containing distinctive colors, lettering,
patterns, or symbols.
FLAGPOLE: A ground mounted independent structure, used to display a flag.
FLEA MARKET: A market for secondhand articles where sellers or vendors
typically have individual stalls with their own point of sale. A fee to enter
the market may or may not be charged.
FLOOD: Any rise in channel flow which results in water or material exceeding
channel banks, overflowing, and inundating areas adjacent to the channel not
ordinarily covered by flow.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM): The map produced by the Federal Insurance
Administration showing, within the City of West Des Moines, expected flood
areas, and such other notations as are necessary to establish actuarial rates
for the sale of flood insurance within the community.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY: A study initiated, funded and published by the Federal
Insurance Administration for the purpose of evaluating in detail the existence
and severity of flood hazards; providing the City with the necessary
information for adopting a floodplain management program; and establishing
actuarial flood insurance rates.
FLOOD PROFILE: A graph showing longitudinal sections of a designed waterway and
the relationship of the water surface elevation of a flood event to any
location along the watercourse.
FLOOD STAGE: The height or elevation of a flood as referred to mean sea level
(MSL) datum (0.00 City datum equals 773.84 MSL).
FLOODPLAIN, GENERAL: Any area adjoining a river, stream, watercourse, lake or
quarry which has been or hereafter may be covered by floodwaters. The
floodplain shall be composed of the floodway and the floodway fringe.
FLOODPROOFING: Any structural or nonstructural feature, addition, change, or
adjustment to buildings, structures and properties primarily for the reduction
or elimination of flood damage to land, water, sanitary facilities, buildings,
structures, and contents of buildings. Such measures shall be designated
consistent with the flood protection elevation for the particular area, flood
velocities, durations, rates of rise, hydrostatic and hydrodynamic forces, and
other factors associated with the regulatory flood. Floodproofing measures may
include, but not be limited to, the following:
A.   Anchorage to resist flotation.
B.   Installation of watertight doors, bulkheads and shutters.
C.   Reinforcement of walls to resist water pressures.
D.   Use of paints, membranes, or mortars to reduce seepage of water through
walls.
E.   Addition of mass or weight to structures to resist flotation.
F.   Cutoff valves on sewer lines or elimination of gravity flow basement
drains.
G.   Construction to resist rupture or collapse caused by water pressure or
floating debris; construction of any type so as to prevent the entrance of
floodwaters.
H.   Pumping facilities for subsurface external foundation walls and basement
floor pressures, or installation of pumps to lower water levels inside
structures.
FLOODWAY: The channel of any watercourse and the adjacent portion of the
floodplain that must be reserved in order to discharge the 100-year flood
without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a
specified height at any point assuming equal conveyance reduction outside the
channel from the two (2) sides of the floodplain.
FLOODWAY BOUNDARY AND FLOODWAY MAP: The map produced by the Federal Insurance
Administration showing under the 100-year flood conditions, boundaries of the
floodway, floodway fringe, and floodplain for watercourses in the community.
FLOODWAY FRINGE: That portion of the floodplain landward of the encroachment
limit which shall from time to time be inundated by floodwaters. Flooding in
the fringe area is generally characterized by shallower and slower moving
floodwaters.
FREEBOARD: A safety factor indicating the height above a projected flood
occurrence level to which a levee or floodwall is constructed.
FRONTAGE: The distance of a front lot line as measured along the public
thoroughfare (see definition of lot lines: front).
FUEL PUMP: A machine that is used to dispense fuel.
GARAGE, COMMUNITY: A structure, or a series of structures under one roof, and
under one ownership, used primarily for storage of vehicles by three (3) or
more owners or occupants of property in the vicinity.
GARAGE, MECHANICAL: A structure in which major mechanical repair or rebuilding
of motor powered vehicles is performed for commercial gain and in which the
storage, care and minor servicing is an accessory use.
GARAGE, PRIVATE: A building, or a portion of a building, not more than one
thousand (1,000) square feet in area, in which only motor vehicles used by the
tenants of the building or buildings on the premises are stored or kept.
GARAGE, PUBLIC: Any garage other than a private garage.
GARDEN, COMMERCIAL: See definition of agriculture production, crops.
GARDEN, COMMUNITY: A piece of ground on public or private property where
vegetables, fruits, herbs or ornamental plants are cultivated for the use of
others in addition to the owner or tenant, but not intended for commercial
production.
GARDEN, RECREATIONAL: A piece of ground on private property where vegetables,
fruits, herbs or ornamental plants are cultivated for the personal use of the
owner or tenant.
GAS STATION: A structure designed or used for the retail sale or supply of
fuels, lubricants, air, water and other operating commodities or accessories
for motor vehicles and including the customary space and facilities for the
installation of such commodities or accessories on or in such vehicles, but not
including space or facilities for the storage, painting, repair, refinishing,
bodywork or other major servicing of motor vehicles.
GRADE: The average of the finished ground level at the center of all walls of a
building. In case walls are parallel to and within five feet (5') of a
sidewalk, alley or other public way, the aboveground level shall be measured at
the elevation of the sidewalk, alley or public way.
GREENHOUSE: A building or accessory structure constructed chiefly of glass or
other hard translucent material, which is devoted to the protection or
cultivation of flowers or other tender plants. Greenhouses constructed of light
weight translucent materials such as fabric or plastic are hoop houses and are
considered seasonal in nature.
HALF STORY: A story with at least two (2) of its opposite sides situated in a
sloping roof, the floor area of which does not exceed two-thirds (2/3) of the
floor area of the floor immediately below it.
HEIGHT OF BUILDING: See definition of building, height of.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE: Any structure that is:
A.   Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing
maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the
Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on
the National Register;
B.   Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as
contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district
or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a
registered historic district;
C.   Individually listed on a State Inventory of Historic Places in states with
historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the
Interior; or
D.   Individually listed on a local Inventory of Historic Places in communities
with historic preservation programs that have been certified either:
1.   By an approved State program as determined by the Secretary of the
Interior; or
2.   Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved
programs.
HOME OCCUPATION: Any occupation or profession conducted solely by the resident
occupants at their place of residence, involving primarily service and limited
sale of commodities upon the premises.
HOMESTEADER FARM: A type of Agricultural Production Animals, Personal, for the
raising of a limited number of animals as defined by Code of Iowa, Sec. 717.1,
or included under Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) 02: Agricultural
Production - Livestock and Animal Specialties, for the primary purpose of self-
sufficiency. The number of animal(s) sold commercially versus consumed by the
operator(s) of a Homesteader Farm shall be limited to a maximum of 50% of the
total number of animals raised within the growing period for the specific
animal(s). Homesteader Farm can also include the growing of crops, including
horticultural specialties (e.g., flowers). Any retail sale of crops or
horticultural specialties from the property upon which they are grown shall
only occur as a city approved produce stand (aka roadside stand) as provided
elsewhere in this title.
HOOP HOUSE: A building or accessory structure constructed of a framework of
hoops or bows and covered by light weight translucent materials, which is
devoted only to the protection or cultivation of flowers or other tender plants
and are considered seasonal in nature (in service up to 180 days). Hoop houses
cannot be utilized for the storage of items or vehicles. Semi-opaque or opaque
material cannot be utilized as a covering material.
HOSPITAL: An institution specializing in giving clinical, temporary and
emergency service of a medical or surgical nature to injured persons and
patients, other than persons suffering from a lingering mental sickness,
disease, disorder or ailment.
HOTEL: Any commercial building containing six (6) or more guestrooms intended
or designed to be used or which are used, rented or hired out to be occupied by
transient persons, or which are occupied for sleeping purposes by guests. These
facilities customarily provide maid service, upkeep of furniture and bed linens
and a twenty four (24) hour staffed front desk service.
IMPROVEMENT, SUBSTANTIAL: Any repair, reconstruction or improvement of a
structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the
market value of the structure either: a) before the improvement or repair is
started, or b) if the structure has been damaged, and is being restored, before
the damage occurred. For the purposes of this definition, “substantial
improvement” is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall,
ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences, whether or
not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the structure. The term
does not, however, include either: a) any project for improvement of a
structure to comply with existing State or local Health, Sanitary, or Safety
Code specifications which are solely necessary to assure safe living
conditions, or b) any alteration of a structure listed on the National Register
of Historic Places or a State Inventory of Historic Places.
INTERIOR VEHICULAR ROADWAYS: Public or private paths within a development or
lot’s boundary which provides vehicular access to the associated parking areas
for any business, multi-family dwelling, or public use area: or which provides
vehicular access to individual private driveways for single family dwellings.
JUNK: Old and dilapidated automobiles, trucks, tractors and other such vehicles
and parts thereof, wagons and other kinds of vehicles and parts thereof, scrap,
used building material, scrap contractor’s equipment, tanks, casks, cans,
barrels, boxes, drums, piping, bottles, glass, old iron, machinery, rags, paper
excelsior, hair, mattresses, beds or bedding, or any other kind of scrap or
waste material which is stored, kept, handled or displayed for barter, resale,
reuse, salvage, stripping, or trade (see also definition of trash).
JUNKYARD: Any area where junk is bought, sold, exchanged, baled or packed,
disassembled or handled, including house wrecking yards, used lumber yards and
places or yards for storage of salvaged house wrecking or structural steel
material and equipment; but not including areas where such uses are conducted
entirely within a completely enclosed building, and not including the
processing of used, discarded or salvaged materials necessary as a part of
manufacturing operations.
KENNEL: See definition of dog kennel.
KITCHEN: Any room or portion of a building used, intended or designed to be
used for cooking and other preparation of food, including any room having a
sink and provisions for either a gas or electric stove.
LEAN-TO: A structure which has been added to an existing building, sharing at
least one wall with the building which may also be providing structural
support. A lean-to can be enclosed on up to two (2) sides, including the wall
common to the existing building. Lean-to structures are intended for the
storage or protection of things, and do not include structures that function as
a carport or outdoor living area. Lean-to structures must meet the design and
bulk regulations of the building they are attached to.
LOADING SPACE: Any off street space or berth on the same lot with a building or
contiguous to a group of buildings, for the temporary parking (less than 24
hours) of a commercial vehicle while loading or unloading merchandise or
materials.
LOT: A portion of a subdivision or other parcel of land intended for the
purpose, whether immediate or future, of transfer of ownership or for building
development.
LOT LINES:
A.   Front: The line separating the front of the lot from the street.
B.   Rear: The rear lot line is that boundary which is opposite and most
distant from the front lot line. In case of an interior triangular or gore
shaped lot, it shall mean a straight line ten feet (10') in length which:
1.   Is parallel to the front lot line or its chord.
2.   Intersects the two (2) other lot lines at points most distant from the
front lot line.
C.   Side: Any lot boundary line not a front lot line or a rear lot line.
LOT MEASUREMENTS:
A.   Area: The gross area, exclusive of streets or other public rights-of-way,
within the boundary lines of a lot.
B.   Depth: The mean horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines
as measured perpendicular to the midpoint of the mean front lot line. In the
case of an interior triangular or gore shaped lot, the depth shall be the
horizontal distance between the midpoints at the front and rear lot lines.
C.   Width: The horizontal distance between the side lot lines as measured
perpendicular to the line compromising the lot depth at its point of
intersection with the required minimum front setback. Where the lot width is
decreasing from front to rear, the horizontal distance between the side lot
lines as described above shall be measured at its point of intersection with
the required minimum rear setback.
LOT OF RECORD: A lot which is part of a subdivision, the deed of which is
recorded in the Office of the County Recorder, or a lot or parcel described by
metes and bounds, the description of which has been so recorded.
LOT TYPES:
A.   Corner Lot: A lot located at the intersection(s) of two (2) or more
streets, and having the street right-of-way abut the front and one or more side
lines of the lot.
B.   Double Frontage Lot: A lot other than a corner lot with frontage on more
than one street or public thoroughfare which do not intersect one another.
C.   Flag Lot: A lot with access provided to the bulk of the lot by means of a
narrow corridor.
D.   Interior Lot: A lot, other than a corner lot, having frontage on but one
street or public thoroughfare.
E.   Key Lot: A lot so subdivided as to have its side lines coincide with the
rear lot lines of adjacent lots on either or both sides of the aforesaid key
lots.
F.   Reversed Frontage Lot: A corner lot, the side street line of which is
substantially a continuation of the front lot line of the first interior lot to
its rear.
LOWEST FLOOR: The floor of the lowest enclosed area in a building including a
basement except when all the following criteria are met:
A.   The enclosed area is designed to flood to equalize hydrostatic pressure
during floods with walls or openings that satisfy the provisions of subsection
8-8-6B4a of this Code; and
B.   The enclosed area is unfinished (not carpeted, drywalled, etc.) and used
solely for low damage potential uses such as building access, parking or
storage; and
C.   Machinery and service facilities (e.g., hot water heater, furnace,
electrical service) contained in the enclosed area are located at least one
foot (1') above the 100-year flood level; and
D.   The enclosed area is not a “basement” as defined in this section. In cases
where the lowest enclosed area satisfies subsections A, B, C and D of this
definition, the lowest floor is the floor of the next highest enclosed area
that does not satisfy the criteria above.
MAIL BOX: A public or private box for U.S. mail purposes. This definition does
not include courier services (SIC 4215).
MANUFACTURED OR MOBILE HOME: A structure which is manufactured or constructed
under the authority of 42 USC section 5403 (United States Code - Manufactured
Home Construction and Safety Standards) and is intended to be long term living
quarters, permitted and taxed as real property. It is not constructed or
equipped with a permanent hitch or other device allowing it to be moved other
than for the purpose of moving to a permanent site, and which does not have
permanently attached to its body or frame any wheels or axles. A manufactured
or mobile home must be on a permanent foundation with permanent connections to
utility services. Mobile homes constructed prior to 1976 shall be considered
this type of structure.
MANUFACTURED OR MOBILE HOME PARK: A parcel or contiguous parcels of land under
common ownership upon which two (2) or more manufactured or mobile homes reside
as a land-leased community. A manufactured or mobile home park does not include
manufactured or mobile homes or park homes placed on a temporary basis due to a
disaster emergency.
MARIJUANA: The plant Cannabis Sativa L. or Cannabis Indica or any other plant
that contains tetrahydrocannabinol.
MEMBRANE STRUCTURE: A building or accessory structure constructed partially or
completely with a fabric membrane supported by air, cables, structural frames
or tensile frames, which is devoted to the protection of bulk materials such as
gravel, road stone, roadway salt, sand, soil, etc., and is considered permanent
in nature (in service greater than 180 days). A tent or hoop house, as defined
elsewhere in this title, shall not be considered a membrane structure. See
chapter 10 of this title for specific requirements for membrane structures.
MENTAL INSTITUTION, HOSPITAL OR HOME: An institution specializing in giving
clinical and psychiatric aid and treatment to and in conjunction with the
housing of persons and patients suffering from a temporary or lingering mental
ailment, disorder or sickness.
MOTEL OR MOTOR HOTEL: A commercial building or group of two (2) or more
buildings designed to provide sleeping accommodation for transient persons or
overnight guests, with garage attached or parking facilities conveniently
located to each such unit. These facilities customarily provide maid service,
upkeep of furniture and bed linens and a twenty four (24) hour staffed front
desk service.
NIGHTCLUB: A place of business (SIC 5813) other than an event venue located
within any building or establishment, established and operated for the purpose
of supplying entertainment, live or recorded music for dancing, or both. The
establishment may or may not serve food or alcoholic beverages, such as beer,
ale, wine or liquor for consumption on the premises. A nightclub which operates
as a Bring Your Own Beverage (BYOB) Establishment shall be considered a bar for
regulation purposes.
NONCONFORMING USE: The use of a building or a land or any portion thereof,
which was lawfully established and maintained but which, because of the
application of this title to it, no longer conforms to the use regulations of
the zone in which it is located.
NONPROFIT INSTITUTION: A nonprofit establishment maintained and operated by a
society, corporation, individual, foundation or public agency for the purpose
of providing charitable, social, educational or similar services to the public,
groups or individuals. Cooperative nonprofit associations, performing a service
normally associated with retail sales or trade such as cooperative groceries,
granaries, equipment sales, etc., shall not be considered a nonprofit
institution under this title.
NURSING OR CONVALESCENT HOME: A building or structure having accommodations and
where care is provided for invalid, infirm, aged, convalescent, or physically
disabled persons, not including insane or other mental cases, inebriated or
contagious cases.
OBSTRUCTION: Any dam, dike, embankment, structure, building, wall, wharf, pile,
abutment, projection, levee, excavation, channel rectification, bridge,
conduit, culvert, wire, fence, refuse, fill, or matter in, along, across, or
projecting into any channel, watercourse, or floodplain area which may impede,
retard, or change the direction of the flow of water, either in itself or by
catching or collecting debris carried by such water or that is placed where the
flow of water might carry the same downstream, to the damage of life or
property.
OFF STREET PARKING: A land surface or facility located off of a street or alley
constructed to provide vehicle parking and loading area for day to day use by
owners, tenants, patrons and employees of office, commercial or industrial
establishments; and residents, owners, and visitors of residential developments
and apartment complexes; and driveways or private garages associated with
individual homes. Said “off street parking” area shall include parking spaces,
vehicle and pedestrian aisles, access drives and any required landscape islands
and pods.
OPEN SPACE: A specific percentage of the site unencumbered by buildings, off
street parking areas and vehicle use areas.
OUTDOOR LIVING AREA: An improved outdoor area adjoining a residential dwelling
intended to provide a useable space for the enjoyment of the occupant or to
promote interaction and connection within the neighborhood such as a patio,
deck or porch.
OUTDOOR SERVICE AREA: A portion of a restaurant or bar/restaurant service area
that is located outside.
OUTDOOR STORAGE YARD: That portion of a site used or intended for the storage,
stockpiling, safekeeping and loading and unloading of materials, operable
vehicles or equipment necessary to achieve the purpose of the primary use and
which are not being specifically displayed as merchandise or for the purpose of
outdoor display and marketing of goods associated with retail establishments
(see definition of outside display areas).
OUTSIDE DISPLAY AREAS: A defined area generally outside of a primary enclosed
structure but located upon the same lot which is used for the placement of
equipment for sale or lease or the advertising of merchandise or goods vended
within the contiguous business or organization. Bulk storage of retail
merchandise being sold within an establishment such as, but not limited to,
bagged mulch and soil products through a garden center associated with a home
improvement store, shall be interpreted to be an allowable component of outside
display areas.
OVERLAY DISTRICT: A district which overlays and acts in conjunction with the
underlying zoning district or districts.
PARK HOME OR PARK MODEL: A trailer which is four hundred (400) or less square
feet in gross trailer area, certified by their manufacturers as complying with
the ANSI A119.5 standard for recreational park trailers or constructed to
comply with 2018 International Residential Code, appendix V, and is intended
for long term placement of temporary living quarters for recreational, camping
or seasonal use purposes only, permitted and taxed as a trailer. A park home
may have wheels and is not placed on a permanent foundation, however must be
anchored to the ground to resist Code designated wind forces. Park homes will
not have permanent connections to utility services.
PARKING AREA, PUBLIC: An open area, other than a street or alley, which is used
for the temporary parking of more than four (4) automobiles and is available
for public use whether free, for compensation, or as an accommodation for
clients or customers.
PARKING SPACE, AUTOMOBILE: An area other than a street or alley, reserved for
the parking of a private transportation vehicle, such space having a dimension
of not less than nine feet (9') in width by nineteen feet (19') in depth, plus
such additional area as is necessary to afford adequate ingress and egress.
PATIO: A permanent uncovered outdoor living area installed at grade.
PAWNSHOP: A place of business of a “pawnbroker” as defined in section
3-8-1 of this Code.
PERSON: A natural person, his heirs, executors, administrators, or assigns, and
also includes a firm, association, organization, partnership, trust, company or
corporation, its or their successors or assigns, or the agent of any of the
aforesaid.
PLACE OF BUSINESS: Any vehicle, building, structure, yard, area, lot, premises,
or part thereof, or any other place in or on which one or more persons engage
in a gainful occupation.
PLANNING COMMISSION: The Planning and Zoning Commission 3 .
PORCH: A permanent covered outdoor living area attached to a building.
PORCH, ENCLOSED: A porch with a solid enclosure four feet (4') or higher above
the floor surface.
PORCH, OPEN: A porch with a railing or solid enclosure less than four feet (4')
above the floor surface.
PREMISES: Any lot, plot, parcel or tract of land, building or buildings,
structure or structures, used publicly or privately as a place of business,
dwelling or meeting place.
PRINCIPAL BUILDING: The building or buildings of which contain a use that is
one of the primary uses permitted by the zoning classification in which it is
located.
PRINCIPAL USE: The main use of land or structures, as distinguished from a
secondary or accessory use.
PUBLIC THOROUGHFARE: Any right-of-way under the jurisdiction and maintenance of
the governmental agencies of the Federal, State and Municipal government; which
may be used by the public in general; and which serves as the frontage street
to the abutting property (see definition of street).
PUBLIC UTILITY STRUCTURE: Shall mean any above ground structure, except a
tower, antenna or utility pole and associated appurtenances, which is placed on
a site in a permanent manner to facilitate the provision of utility services to
the benefit of the public.
REACH: A term describing a longitudinal section of a stream, river or
watercourse.
RECREATIONAL FACILITY: A public or private, commercial or non-commercial
building, structure, place, venue, field or defined area, indoor or outdoor,
used for a specific purpose or function usually related to a competitive or
sporting activity, exercise, relaxation or athletic sport or recreation-based
entertainment.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE: A single chassis trailer or motor vehicle which is four
hundred (400) or less square feet when measured at the largest horizontal
projection and is designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable,
permitted and taxed as a trailer or motor vehicle. Recreational vehicles are
designed to provide temporary living quarters for recreational or camping,
travel or seasonal use purposes only. Recreational vehicles will not have
permanent connections to utility services.
REGULATORY FLOOD: For purposes of this title, the regulatory flood is
designated as the 100-year return frequency flood which is a flood having a one
percent (1%) chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.
REGULATORY FLOOD ELEVATION: The elevation indicated on the FIRM and determined
from flood profiles contained in the West Des Moines flood insurance study, the
Jordan Creek floodplain study and other available studies as being the
elevation of the 100-year flood.
RENTAL, LONG TERM: Lodging within a dwelling or dwelling unit available for use
or is used to accommodate guests paying a fee or other compensation for a
period of more than thirty (30) consecutive days.
RENTAL, SHORT TERM: Lodging within a dwelling or dwelling unit available for
use or used to accommodate guests paying a fee or other compensation for a
period of thirty (30) consecutive days or less.
RESIDENTIAL: The term “residential” or “residence” is applied herein to any
lot, plot, parcel, tract, area, or piece of land or any building used
exclusively for family dwelling purposes or intended to be used, including
concomitant uses specified herein.
REST HOME: A home operated as a boarding home, and in which nursing, dietary
and other personal services are furnished to convalescents, invalids and aged
persons; but in which no persons suffering from a mental sickness, disease,
disorder or ailment or from a contagious or communicable disease are kept, and
in which no surgical or other primary treatments such as are customarily
provided in sanatoriums or hospitals are performed.
RESTAURANT: A retail establishment where food is prepared and served and not
operated as a dining room in connection with a hotel, motel or ancillary to
other residential or service uses. For the purposes of identifying applicable
zoning districts, restaurants shall be categorized in accordance with section
9-6-4, “Specific Use Regulations”, of this title.
RESTAURANT, FAST FOOD: Any establishment whose principal business is the sale
of food, frozen desserts, or beverages in ready to consume individual servings,
for consumption either within the restaurant building or for carryout, and
where either:
A.   Foods, frozen desserts or beverages are usually served in paper, plastic
or other disposable containers, and where food and drink is ordered at a
counter rather than at the table at which the food and drink will be consumed;
or
B.   The establishment includes a drive-up or drive-through service facility or
offers curb side service.
RESUBDIVISION: Any change in the shape or size of any lot, tract or parcel of
land previously platted for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of sale,
rent, lease, building development, anchorages or other use. Any change in the
shape or size of any lot, tract or parcel of land previously approved for
building purposes whether immediate or future and regardless whether or not the
same is vacant or improved in whole or in part, for sale, rent, lease, building
development, anchorage or other use.
ROOF: A permanent hard material cover which provides complete protection from
the elements for an area below. If the cover is comprised of a lightweight
material or fabric, or is designed to be more than fifty percent (50%) open to
the elements, it is not considered a roof for the purposes of this title.
RUNWAY: A defined area on an airport prepared for landing and takeoff of
aircraft along its length.
RUNWAYS 12L, 3OR: The runways of the Des Moines Municipal Airport with hazard
zones which impact the City of West Des Moines.
SANATORIUM: A health station or retreat or other place where resident patients
are kept, and where medical or surgical treatment is given to persons suffering
from a sickness, disease, disorder or ailment other than a mental sickness,
disease, disorder or ailment, but which does not specialize in giving clinical,
temporary or emergency service.
SCOREBOARD: An on site accessory structure used exclusively to transmit to
patrons of a stadium or recreational facility information primarily related to
the activity occurring in the facility through the use of moving or static
letters, numbers, images, designs, graphic representations or other visual or
audio depictions.
SECOND DWELLING UNIT (SDU): A second residential dwelling unit located on the
same lot as a single family dwelling, which may be attached to the single
family dwelling or a separate standalone dwelling structure or incorporated
into an accessory building (such as a detached garage) on the lot. These
dwellings are designed for residential occupancy, independent of the single-
family dwelling on the lot.
SECTION: A section of this title or of a chapter of this title unless some
other ordinance, Code or statute is indicated.
SELF-SERVICE STORAGE FACILITY (Miniwarehousing/Climate Controlled/Indoor
Storage/Single- Or Multi-Story): A nonresidential building, portion of
building, or group of buildings with defined storage space or units rented to
and accessible to the public for the storage of household and personal
property, operable vehicles, and recreational vehicles, including, but not
limited to, RVs, boats, snowmobiles, enclosed or open air trailers, etc.
A.   Exterior Unit Access: An exterior accessed self-storage facility generally
consists of a long, single-story, simplified building structure with roll-up
doors and direct drive-up access to conventional outside units.
B.   Interior Unit Access: An interior accessed self-storage facility consists
of a building with all units contained within that building and all units
having an access door from an interior hallway.
SERVICE STATION: See definition of gas station.
SETBACK: The minimum horizontal distance between the front, rear or side lines
of the lot and the front, rear or side lines of the building respectively. When
two (2) or more lots under one ownership are used, the exterior property line
of the lots so grouped shall be used in determining offsets.
SIGN1: Every sign, billboard, freestanding sign, wall sign or roof sign as well
as other signs of every description and character as defined herein and shall
include any announcement, declaration, demonstration, display, illustration or
insignia used to advertise or promote the interests of any person or firm when
the same is placed out of doors in view of the general public.
SIGN, OFF SITE: A sign other than on site sign (see definition of billboard).
SIGN, ON SITE: A sign relating in its subject matter to the premises on which
it is located or to products, accommodations, services or activities on the
premises. On site signs do not include signs erected by the outdoor advertising
industry in the conduct of the outdoor advertising business.
SIGNS, NUMBER AND SURFACE AREA: For the purpose of determining number of signs,
a sign shall be considered to be a single display surface or displaying device
containing elements organized, related and composed to form a unit. Where
matter is displayed in a random manner without organized relationship of
elements or where there is a reasonable doubt about the relationship of
elements, each element shall be considered to be a single sign. The surface
area of a sign shall be computed as including the entire area within a regular
geometric form or combinations of regular geometric forms compromising all of
the display area of the sign and including all of the elements of the matter
displayed. Frames and structural members not bearing advertising matter shall
not be included in the computation of the surface area, except where such
frames and structural members are used as an integral primary or subsidiary
portion of the graphic, literal, or numerical display, such as forming a
picture frame to facilitate continuity or providing contrast to emphasize the
intended purpose of the sign.
SITE: See definition of lot.
SNOW MAINTENANCE FACILITY: A temporary facility to address the removal of snow.
SPECIAL PERMIT: The authorization of a zoning certificate for an unclassified
or special use of a lot by the Board of Zoning Adjustment following a review of
the application for use by the Planning Commission. A special permit may be
issued only for those uses listed under the “unclassified and special uses” of
this title.
STABLES:
Private: A building or structure used, or intended to be used for housing
horses belonging to the owner of the property and for noncommercial purposes.
Public And Riding Academy: A building or structure used or intended to be used,
for the housing only of horses on a fee basis. Riding instructions may be given
in connection with a public stable or riding academy.
Riding Club: A building or structure used or intended to be used, for the
housing only of horses by a group of persons for noncommercial purposes.
STADIUM: A place or venue used primarily for indoor or outdoor sports, concerts
or other events consisting of a field or stage either partly or completely
surrounded by a tiered structure designed to allow spectators to stand or sit
and view the event.
STANDARD PROJECT FLOOD: A hypothetical flood estimated by the corps of
engineers, representing the critical flood runoff volume and peak discharge
that may be expected from the most severe combination of hydrological and
meteorological conditions that are considered reasonably characteristic of the
geographic region.
STORY: That portion of a building included between the upper surface of any
floor and the upper surface of the floor next above, except that the topmost
story shall be that portion of a building included between the upper surface of
the topmost floor and the ceiling or roof above. If the finished floor level
directly above a basement or cellar is more than six feet (6') above grade such
basement or cellar shall be considered a story.
STORY, HALF: See definition of half story.
STREET: Any thoroughfare or public space not less than sixteen feet (16') in
width which has been dedicated or deeded to the public for public use.
STREET LINE: A dividing line between a lot, tract or parcel of land and a
contiguous street (see definition of lot lines: front).
STRUCTURAL ALTERATIONS: Any replacement or change in the shape or size of any
portion of a building or of the supporting members of a building or structure
such as walls, columns, beams, arches, girders, floor joist, roof joist, or
roof trusses, beyond ordinary repairs and maintenance.
STRUCTURE: That which is built or constructed, an edifice or building of any
kind, or any piece of work artificially built up or composed of parts joined
together in some definite manner to enclose, confine, conceal, give support or
shelter, including but not limited to buildings, towers, poles, sheds and
fences. Accessory structures or buildings must be a permanent structure,
complying with all applicable Fire and Building Codes and do not include tents
as defined herein.
SUBDIVISION: A division of a lot, tract or parcel of land into three (3) or
more lots, plats, sites, or other subdivision of land for the purpose, whether
immediate or future, of sale, rent, lease, building development, anchorage,
right-of-way dedication, or other use.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE: Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the
cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or
exceed fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the structure before the
damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT: Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition or other
improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty percent
(50%) of the market value of the structure before the “start of construction”
of the improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred
“substantial damage” regardless of actual repair work performed. The term does
not, however, include either: a) any project for improvement of a structure to
correct existing violations of State or local Health, Sanitary, or Safety Code
specifications which have been identified by the Local Code Enforcement Officer
and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or b) any
alteration will not preclude the structure’s continued designation as a
“historic structure”.
SUPPORTING STRUCTURE: Any pole, tower, or structure which serves the purpose of
supporting components necessary to the operation of or conducting the primary
use within a parcel such as cables, lighting, mechanical equipment, fencing or
netting.
TAPROOM (BEER PARLOR): See definition of beer parlor (taproom).
TASTING ROOM: Any portion of a distillery where either the sale or consumption
of the distillery product by the glass occurs.
TEMPORARY STRUCTURE OR BUILDING: A structure intended to be limited in duration
serving a permitted use on a lot. Temporary structures do include tents as
defined herein. Temporary structures approved under a permit are limited to the
time period as noted in the permit.
TENT: Any structure or enclosure, the roof or one-half (½) or more of the sides
of which are of silk, cotton, canvas or any light material, either attached to
a building or structure or unattached.
TINY HOME: A building which is four hundred (400) or less square feet in floor
area excluding any lofts, constructed to comply with the International Tiny
House provisions within the International Residential Code and is intended to
be a single-family dwelling, permitted and taxed as real property. To be
considered a tiny home, the building must be on a permanent foundation with
permanent connections to utility services.
TOWNHOUSE: A dwelling unit which is attached horizontally, and not vertically
to one or more other dwelling units, wherein the land or lot beneath each
dwelling may be individually owned by the owner of the dwelling. A townhouse
subdivision shall have common elements which are specified in or determined
under the rules and regulations set forth by recorded covenants. Covenants for
a townhouse subdivision shall establish the guidelines for maintenance of
common elements and permit free movement through common areas by members of the
homeowners’ association (council of co-owners) to assure access to the
structural exterior of each townhouse unit by the individual unit owner.
TRAILER: Any structure used for temporary human habitation, business or storage
purposes, having no permanent foundation, but is supported by wheels, blocks,
or jacks, and which is or was equipped with wheels or other devices for
transporting the structure from place to place.
TRANSIENT PERSON: Any person or persons who obtain lodging or the use of any
lodging space for any period of thirty one (31) consecutive days or less and
whose permanent address for legal purposes is not the lodging unit occupied.
TRASH: Cuttings from vegetation, refuse, paper, bottles, rags (see also
definition of junk).
USED MERCHANDISE STORE OR SECONDHAND MERCHANDISE STORE: A retail store that
sells previously owned or used goods of recent or modern vintage. The
merchandise generally is less valuable than its original worth. This definition
does not include antiques and collectibles or flea markets.
VARIANCE: A modification of the specific regulations of this title granted by
resolution of the Board of Adjustment in accordance with the terms of this
title for the purpose of assuring that no property, because of special
circumstances applicable to it, shall be deprived of privileges commonly
enjoyed by other properties in the same vicinity and zone.
VENDING MACHINE: Any unattended, product holding, automated, self-service
device that dispenses goods, products or anything of value upon insertion of
money, token, credit or identification.
WATERFRONT: Any site shall be considered as waterfront premises providing any
or all of its lot lines abut on or are contiguous to any body of water,
including creek, canal, lake, river of any other body of water, natural or
artificial, not including a swimming pool, whether said lot line is front, rear
or side.
YARD: An open space other than a court, on a lot, unoccupied and unobstructed
from the ground upward, except for landscaping or as otherwise provided in this
title.
YARD, FRONT: The yard area lying to the front of the principal building or
between the front building line and the front lot line.
YARD, REAR: The yard area lying to the rear of the principal building, or
between the rear building line and the rear lot line.
YARD, SIDE: The yard area lying to the sides of the principal building or
between the side building lines and the side lot lines.
YARD, STREET SIDE: Within certain/specified single family residential zoning
districts, on corner lots where the abutting adjacent lot does not require a
consistent building setback line (i.e. front yard setback or front yard lot
lines: front) to be maintained, a street side yard may be allowed. For example,
when a corner lot directly abuts the rear yard of another corner lot, the yard
that is fronting the street common to both lots is considered to be a street
side yard, or if a corner lot abuts a third street (a double-frontage lot), the
frontage on the opposite side of the interior side yard is considered a street
side yard. See Illustrations #1 and 2 below. Additionally, see Title 10,
Chapter 3, Section 1.
Illustration #1
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5dd626f68508237cd281a645678e92f34786b23f/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4679.jpg]
Illustration #2
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5dd626f68508237cd281a645678e92f34786b23f/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4681.jpg]
ZONE: Any one of the classes of districts established by this title.
ZONING ADMINISTRATOR: The Administrative Officer designated or appointed by the
City of West Des Moines to administer and enforce the regulations contained in
this title.
ZONING CERTIFICATE: Written statement issued by the Zoning Administrator
authorizing buildings, structures, or uses consistent with the terms of this
title and for the purpose of carrying out and enforcing its provisions.
(Ord. 430, 8-11-1969; amd. Ord. 454, 1-11-1971; Ord. 510, 9-17-1973; Ord. 614,
7-10-1978; Ord. 644, 10-22-1979; Ord. 652, 4-14-1980; Ord. 685, 2-1-1982; 1985
Code §§3-2.02, 6-7.03; Ord. 782, 3-10-1986; Ord. 799, 8-4-1986; Ord. 811, 2-16-
1987; Ord. 854, 7-11-1988; Ord. 923, 8-20-1990; 5-22-1991; 1993 Code; Ord.
1129, 5-8-1995; Ord. 1130, 5-8-1995; Ord. 1190, 6-17-1996; Ord. 1675, 1-30-
2006; Ord. 1677, 2-27-2006; Ord. 1816, 10-6-2008; Ord. 1860, 3-22-2010; Ord.
1898, 12-13-2010; Ord. 1901, 12-27-2010; Ord. 2080, 2-9-2015; Ord. 2085, 3-9-
2015; Ord. 2112, 9-8-2015; Ord. 2113, 9-8-2015; Ord. 2123, 11-2-2015; Ord.
2136, 1-26-2016; Ord. 2145, 5-16-2016; Ord. 2162, 8-8-2016; Ord. 2169, 9-6-
2016; Ord. 2176, 10-31-2016; Ord. 2201, 3-6-2017; Ord. 2248, 9-18-2017; Ord.
2249, 9-18-2017; Ord. 2265, 12-11-2017; Ord. 2269, 1-8-2018; Ord. 2285, 3-5-
2018; Ord. 2287, 3-19-2018; Ord. 2292, 4-16-2018; Ord. 2357, 5-6-2019; Ord.
2364, 6-3-2019; Ord. 2390, 12-2-2019; Ord. 2454, 12-7-2020; Ord. 2486, 8-16-
2021; Ord. 2540, 9-19-2022; Ord. 2541, 9-19-2022; Ord. 2560, 4-3-2023; Ord.
2566, 5-15-2023; Ord. 2567, 6-5-2023; Ord. 2589, 12-4-2023; Ord. 2621, 8-5-
2024; Ord. 2662, 7-7-2025)
 
Notes
1 See title 2, chapter 2 of this Code.
2 See title 2, chapter 2 of this Code.
3 See
  chapter 18 of this title.
CHAPTER 3
GENERAL ZONING PROVISIONS
SECTION:
9-3-1: Title
9-3-2: Interpretation Of Standards
9-3-3: Scope; Modifications And Exceptions
9-3-4: Nonconforming Buildings, Structures, Uses, Uses Of Land, Or Uses Of
Buildings Or Structures
9-3-5: Street Frontage Required
9-3-6: Accessory Buildings And Garages (Rep. by Ord. 1354, 3-22-1999)
9-3-7: Yards
9-3-8: Fences, Walls And Vision Clearance (Rep. by Ord. 1354, 3-22-1999)
9-3-9: Open Space Requirements (Rep. by Ord. 1839, 9-21-2009)
9-3-10: Buffers (Rep. by Ord. 1839, 9-21-2009)
9-3-11: Sidewalks Required
9-3-1: TITLE:
This title shall be known and may be cited and referred to as the ZONING
ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF WEST DES MOINES, IOWA. (Ord. 430, 8-11-1969)
9-3-2: INTERPRETATION OF STANDARDS:
In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this title shall be
held to be minimum requirements. Where this title imposes a greater restriction
than is imposed or required by other provisions of law or by other rules or
regulations or ordinances, the provisions of this title shall control. Where,
for a specific land use, the requirements of any other ordinance of the city
are more stringent or restrictive than the requirements set forth herein,
nothing herein shall be construed to waive compliance with the provisions of
such other ordinance. (Ord. 430, 8-11-1969)
9-3-3: SCOPE; MODIFICATIONS AND EXCEPTIONS:
A.   Conformance Required: Except as hereinafter specified, no building or
structure shall be erected, converted, enlarged, reconstructed, moved or
structurally altered, nor shall any building or land be used which does not
comply with all of the district regulations established by this chapter for the
district in which the building or land is located.
B.   Continuing Existing Uses: The lawful use of a building existing at the
time of the enactment of this title may be continued even though such use may
not conform with the regulations of this title for the district in which it is
located. Any use in existence at the adoption hereof which was not an
authorized "nonconforming use" under previous zoning ordinances, shall not be
authorized to continue as a nonconforming use pursuant to this title, or
amendments hereto.
C.   Building Permits: Nothing herein contained shall require any change in the
overall layout, plans, construction, size or designated use of any building or
part thereof, for which approvals and required building permits have been
granted before the effective date hereof, the construction in conformance with
such plans shall have been started prior to the effective date hereof and
completion thereof carried on in a normal manner and not discontinued for
reasons other than those beyond the builder's control.
D.   Exceptions And Modifications:
1.   Exceptions And Modifications Enumerated: The regulations specified in this
title shall be subject to the following exceptions and interpretations:
a.   Use Of Existing Lots Of Record: In any district where dwellings are
permitted, a single-family dwelling may be located on any lot or plot of
official record as of the effective date hereof irrespective of its area or
width, and in addition, any two-family dwelling may be located on any lot or
plot in any residential high density district (RH) that has lot width of not
less than sixty feet (60') and is of official record as of the effective date
hereof; provided, however:
(1)   The sum of the side yard width of any such lot or plot need not exceed
thirty percent (30%) of the width of the lot, but in no case less than ten
percent (10%) of the width of the lot for any one side yard.
(2)   The depth of the rear yard of any such lot shall not be less than twenty
percent (20%) of the depth of the lot, but in no case less than ten feet (10').
b.   Structures Permitted Above Height Limit: The building height limitations
related to non-single-family residential zoning districts of this title shall
be modified as follows:
(1)   Operational elements of a building not intended for occupancy such as
mechanical penthouses, elevator shafts, stair towers, stage towers or scenery
lofts, may exceed the building height limits as provided in Chapter 7 of this
title as noted below, however no element shall exceed twelve feet (12') above
the measured height of the building.
(A)   Elements up to six feet (6') may be allowed with no setback from any roof
edge.
(B)   Elements exceeding six feet (6'), but no higher than twelve feet (12')
may be allowed if set back from any roof edge one foot (1') for each foot of
height above the height limit.
(C)   Any element that does not conform with the exceptions noted in subsection
D.1.b(1), may be approved by the Director of Development Services if it’s shown
that without the requested exception, strict compliance with the ordinance
results in a practical difficulty. A “practical difficulty” may be shown by:
(i)   Significant or unjustified expense in light of the scope of the project;
(ii)   Destruction or demolition of significant or attractive features of the
structure, or similar reasons;
(iii)   Inability to achieve compliance with adopted building, fire or life
safety regulations;
(iv)   Orientation or interior configuration of the structure which impacts the
logical function of the intended improvement unless additional modifications
are made to the layout or use of the existing or proposed structure.
(2)   Decorative architectural elements not intended for occupancy such as
towers, dormers, cupolas, spires, domes, etc. may exceed the building height
limits as provided in Chapter 7 of this title as noted below, however no
element shall exceed twelve foot (12') above the measured height of the
building.
(A)   Decorative elements may be allowed up to twelve feet (12') above the
building height limit.
(B)   The total of all decorative elements that exceed the building height
limit are restricted to no more than five percent (5%) of the total façade
length when located at or within six feet (6') of the roof edge. Decorative
elements that exceed the building height that are located more than six feet
(6') from the roof edge are limited to five percent (5%) of the total roof
area.
(C)   Any element that does not conform with the exceptions noted in subsection
b(2), may be approved by the Director of Development Services if it’s shown
that without the requested exception, strict compliance with the ordinance
results in a practical difficulty. A “practical difficulty” may be shown by:
(i)   Significant or unjustified expense in light of the scope of the project;
(ii)   Destruction or demolition of significant or attractive features of the
structure, or similar reasons;
(iii)   Inability to achieve compliance with adopted building, fire or life
safety regulations;
(iv)   Orientation or interior configuration of the structure which impacts the
logical function of the intended improvement unless additional modifications
are made to the layout or use of the existing or proposed structure.
(3)   Public, semipublic or public service buildings, hospitals, sanatoriums or
schools, when permitted in a district, may be erected to a height not exceeding
sixty feet (60'), and churches and temples, when permitted in a district, may
be erected to a height not exceeding seventy five feet (75') if the building is
set back from each property line at least one foot (1') for each foot of
additional building height above the height limit otherwise provided in the
district in which the building is built.
(4)   The exceptions noted above do not apply to building mounted equipment for
communication antennas, towers and flag poles. Those elements must follow the
height limit provisions for the respective equipment as noted in Title 9.
(5)   Building mounted renewable energy generation equipment may exceed the
building height limitations but must still meet the specific height limit
provisions for the equipment as noted in Title 9, Chapter 14.
(6)   The height of any building, tower, sign or any attachment to any
structure shall not exceed maximum elevations as delineated within chapter 13
of this title and prescribed for each airport hazard and height (overlay) zone
unless a variance is granted through proper procedures as specified in this
title.
c.   Area Requirements: In any district, and for building purposes, where
either public water, public sanitary sewer or both of the aforementioned are
not available, the minimum lot area and frontage requirements shall be:
(1)   All lots, except those of ten (10) acres or more, shall be provided with
access and connections to public water mains.
(2)   Any lot or lots which cannot be reasonably served by a public sanitary
sewer system shall have a minimum frontage of one hundred twenty five feet
(125') and an area of not less than forty thousand (40,000) square feet, or the
minimum permitted by this title, whichever is larger, for the district of which
said parcel is a part.
d.   Double Frontage Lots: Buildings on through lots and extending through from
street to street shall provide the required front yard on both streets.
e.   Exceptions To Yard Requirements: Every part of a required yard shall be
open to the sky unobstructed with any building or structure, except for a
permitted accessory building.
f.   Exceptions To Prohibited Uses: The city council may, by special permit
after public hearing, authorize the location of any of the following buildings
or uses in any district from which they are prohibited by this title:
Any public building erected and used by any department of the city, township,
county, state or federal government.
Airport or landing field.
Community building or recreation field.
Country clubs and golf courses.
Hospitals, nonprofit fraternal institutions, provided they are used solely for
fraternal purposes, and institutions of an educational, religious or
philanthropic character; provided, that the building shall be set back from all
yard lines a distance of not less than two feet (2') for each foot of building
height.
Nurseries and greenhouses.
Preschools.
Public and private cemeteries.
Temporary or seasonal amusement enterprises.
g.   Improvements Undertaken by the City:
Improvements undertaken by the City which the City Council determines serve a
legitimate public purpose but which may be contrary to or deviate from City
zoning regulations shall be exempt from the requirements of the West Des Moines
Code of Ordinances. In making its determination, the City Council shall
consider:
whether the improvement is necessary or appropriate for the convenience,
service or welfare of the general public;
whether there is a feasible alternative for the improvement, considering size,
location or other relevant characteristics of the improvement;
the extent to which the improvement is detrimental to adjoining or affected
landowners or residents.
The City Council shall weigh these and any other factors it determines relevant
and grant the exemption if it determines that, on balance, the benefit of the
improvement to the health, safety and welfare of the community is greater than
the burden created by exempting the improvement from the Code of Ordinances.
2   Special Permit Approval: Before issuance of any special permit for any of
the above buildings or uses, the city council shall refer the proposed
application to the city planning and zoning commission, which commission shall
be given forty five (45) days in which to make a report regarding the effect of
such proposed building or use upon the character of the neighborhood, traffic
conditions, public utility facilities and other matters pertaining to the
general welfare. No action shall be taken upon any application for a proposed
building or use above referred to until and unless the report of the planning
and zoning commission has been filed; provided, however, that if no report is
received from the planning and zoning commission within forty five (45) days,
it shall be assumed that approval of the application has been given by the said
commission. (Ord. 430, 8-11-1969; amd. Ord. 614, 7-10-1978; Ord. 652, 4-14-
1980; 1993 Code; Ord. 1289, 3-9-1998; Ord. 2411, 4-20-2020; Ord. 2457, 12-21-
2020; Ord. 2527, 7-5-2022)
9-3-4: NONCONFORMING BUILDINGS, STRUCTURES, USES, USES OF LAND, OR USES OF
BUILDINGS OR STRUCTURES:
A.   Purpose:
1.   The city of West Des Moines intends that buildings and structures, and the
uses of land, buildings, and structures which do not comply with the
regulations provided in this title for the district in which the structure,
building, use, or land is located eventually will be discontinued, removed, or
replaced. The purpose of this section is to provide regulation of nonconforming
buildings, structures, and uses and to specify conditions or circumstances
where those nonconforming buildings, structures, or uses shall be permitted to
continue.
2.   Nothing in this title shall be deemed to prevent the strengthening or
restoring to a safe condition any building, structure, or part thereof declared
to be unsafe by the appropriate authority.
3.   To be a legal nonconforming structure, building, lot, or use, the same
must have been lawfully established on or before the effective date of this
title and must have been in active use. The provisions of this section also
shall apply to buildings, structures, uses of buildings or structures, or uses
of land which hereafter become nonconforming due to the adoption of this title,
amendments thereto, or rezonings.
4.   Landowners shall bear the burden of proof to show that a lot, use of land,
structure, use of structure, or characteristic of use of land that is
nonconforming with the current zoning ordinances in force on the subject land
comes under one or more of the exceptions to the zoning requirements provided
in this section and that such otherwise nonconforming lot, use of land,
structure, use of structure, or characteristic of use of land was lawfully
established on the subject property. Conformity or nonconformity runs with the
land, not with the owner.
B.   Five Basic Categories Of Nonconformity Are Recognized:
1.   Nonconforming lots of record: These lots were legal when they were
subdivided but do not meet the current requirements for width, depth, area,
access, or other requirements.
2.   Nonconforming use of land: These are land uses that would not be permitted
under current regulations, but which were established before the regulations
went into effect.
3.   Nonconforming structures: These are buildings or structures that were
legal at the time they were constructed, but encroach into the current yard
setbacks or exceed the current height or area limitations.
4.   Nonconforming uses of structures: These are uses of buildings or land and
buildings that would not be permitted under current regulations but which were
established before the regulations went into effect.
5.   Nonconforming characteristics of use: This is a category that covers
nonconformities to the parking, landscaping, signage or other requirements not
covered by the other categories.
C.   Provisions:
1.   Nonconforming Legal Lots Of Record:
a.   If two (2) or more lots or combinations of lots and portions of lots with
continuous street frontage in single ownership are of record as of the
effective date of this title, or amendments thereto, and if all or part of the
lots do not meet the requirements for lot width and area as established by this
code, the lands involved may be considered to be an undivided parcel for the
purposes of this title, and no portion of said parcel shall be used or occupied
which does not meet lot width and area requirements, nor shall any division of
the parcel be made which leaves remaining any lot with width or area below the
requirements of this title. If such lots or parts of lots are to be considered
an undivided parcel, the owner will be required to either replat the lots in
question or to legally tie the lots together by recording a lot tie form with
the appropriate county recorder.
b.   The use of existing legal lots of record will be governed by the
provisions of subsection C1a of this section and all applicable regulations for
the district in which the lot is located.
2.   Nonconforming Building Or Structure:
a.   A nonconforming building or structure lawfully established on or before
the effective date of this title may be maintained although it does not conform
to the area, height, yard, open space, landscaping, or visual clearance
provisions of this title, except as otherwise provided in this section.
b.   Repairs and nonstructural alterations may be made to a nonconforming
building or structure, for ordinary maintenance repairs including internal and
external painting, decorating, paneling, and the repair or replacement of
doors, windows, nonbearing walls, fixtures, heating components, wiring,
plumbing, roofing or other nonstructural components provided that the cubic
content or the footprint of the building or structure as it existed prior to
the effective date of this title or subsequent amendment of this title is not
increased. (See Accessory Structures Chapter in this title for provisions for
reconstruction of a non-conforming fence.)
c.   A nonconforming building or structure shall not be structurally altered or
enlarged in any manner except to bring the structure in conformance with all
regulations of the district in which it is located. (See Accessory Structures
Chapter in this title for provisions for reconstruction of a non-conforming
fence.)
d.   A nonconforming building or structure shall not be moved in whole or in
any part to any other location on the lot or another lot unless every portion
of such building or structure is made to conform to all the regulations of the
district in which it is or will be located.
e.   The nonconforming use of a nonconforming building may be changed to a use
permitted within the district in which the building is located upon the
approval of a site plan or permitted conditional use permit.
f.   Nonconforming accessory uses and structures will be treated under this
section subject to the provisions governing the principal nonconforming uses,
buildings, and structures set forth in this section.
g.   Where nonconforming use status applies to a building and land in
combination removal or destruction of the building shall eliminate the
nonconforming status of the land.
3.   Nonconforming Use Of A Building Or Structure:
a.   A nonconforming use of a building or structure lawfully established on or
before the effective date of this title, may be continued although it does not
conform with the use provisions of this title, except as otherwise provided in
this section.
b.   Repairs and nonstructural alterations may be made to a building or
structure which contains a nonconforming use for ordinary maintenance repairs
including internal and external painting, decorating, paneling, and the repair
or replacement of doors, windows, nonbearing walls, fixtures, heating
components, wiring, plumbing, roofing or other nonstructural components
provided that the cubic content or the footprint of the building or structure
as it existed prior to the effective date of this title or subsequent amendment
of this title is not increased.
c.   When a building or structure contains a nonconforming use, structural
alterations and additions only are permitted when the use of the entire
building or structure is changed to a use which conforms to all of the
regulations of the district in which it is located. Exception will be made for
single-family residential structures located in nonresidential zones. For those
cases, alterations or additions may be made so long as the bulk and setback
regulations are met for the zone in which the residential structure is located
and no additional dwelling units are constructed. Exception will also be made
for existing legal, nonconforming agricultural buildings and structures not
located in the agricultural/open space (OS) zoning district. For those cases,
the building or structure may be expanded by up to twenty percent (20%) of its
current size so long as expansion complies with all standards for the
agricultural/open space (OS) zoning district and with all other pertinent codes
and regulations existing at the time of expansion.
d.   The non-conforming use of a building or structure may be changed to a use
of the same classification, a less intense use of the same classification, a
use of a different classification which is of the same or lesser intensity, or
to a conforming use for the district in which the building or structure is
located. Where a nonconforming use of a building or structure is changed
thusly, it shall not thereafter be changed to another non-conforming use of a
more intense nature in that classification or in any other classification. A
request to change a nonconforming use to a use of the same or lesser intensity
within the same classification, or to a use of the same or lesser intensity
within a different classification will be evaluated by the Director of
Development Services and will be allowed if there is no or only a negligible
increase in vehicular traffic, no change in the general hours of operation, no
increased demand on public services, no known increase in the impact of noise,
odor or light on adjacent developed properties, and no enlargement, expansion
or material change in the building or structure itself. A material deviation of
one or more of these factors as determined by the Director of Development
Services will prohibit a non-conforming change in use.
e.   A building or structure containing a nonconforming use shall not, in any
manner, be extended, expanded, or relocated in whole or in part to any location
unless the use of the entire building or structure is changed to a use which
conforms to all of the regulations of the district in which it is located. The
nonconforming use of a part of a building or structure shall not be expanded
within that building or structure.
(1)   Except for the provisions in subsection C8 of this section, an exception
will be made for single-family residential structures located in nonresidential
zones. For those cases, alterations or additions may be made so long as the
bulk and setback regulations are met for the zone in which the residential
structure is located and no additional dwelling units are constructed.
(2)   If a single-family residential structure located in a nonresidential zone
is altered or enlarged as provided in subsection C3e(1) of this section, such
alteration or enlargement shall exempt adjacent landowners from further
buffering requirements for the benefit of the altered or enlarged property.
(3)   Except for the provisions in subsection C8 of this section, an exception
will be made for existing legal, nonconforming agricultural buildings and
structures not located in the Agricultural/Open Space (OS) Zoning District. For
those cases, the building or structure may be expanded by up to twenty percent
(20%) of its current size so long as expansion complies with all standards for
the Agricultural/Open Space (OS) Zoning District and with all other pertinent
codes and regulations existing at the time of expansion.
f.   In any building or structure where a nonconforming use existed, in whole
or part of the building or structure, is discontinued, becomes vacant or
otherwise unoccupied for a continuous period of one year or more must
thereafter be occupied by a use which conforms to the regulations of the
district in which the building or structure is located.
g.   Where nonconforming use status applies to a building and land in
combination, removal or damage greater than fifty percent (50%) of assessed
value of the building shall eliminate the conforming status of the land.
4.   Nonconforming Uses Of Land:
a.   Nonconforming uses of land where no building is involved, and which use is
lawfully established prior to the effective date of this title, may be
continued, except as otherwise provided for in this section.
b.   Land which contains a nonconforming use, which does not have a building or
structure thereon, may be maintained or repaired including gravel, paving,
surfacing, fences, screening, or drainageways, provided that the amount of land
devoted to such use which lawfully existed as of the effective date of this
title, is not increased.
c.   A nonconforming use of land shall not, in any manner, be expanded or
extended on the same lot.
d.   If a nonconforming commercial, office, industrial or multi-family use of
land or any portion thereof is discontinued for one year or is proposed to be
changed, any future or proposed use of such land shall be in conformance with
the provisions of this title.
e.   Single family detached residential uses in non-single family residential
designated areas may be permitted upon application to the Director of
Development Services. The Director, or designee, may approve the permit if all
of the following criteria are met:
(1)   That the applicant provide clear and convincing evidence that a single
family residence existed on the parcel any time within the past fifteen (15)
years from date of application.
(2)   That the parcel is the same size and configuration as when the house
existed.
(3)   That no subdivision of the parcel is proposed or has been done to create
a lot for the residential dwelling.
(4)   That the properties immediately adjacent have not been developed in
accordance with the current land use and zoning.
(5)   That only one single family detached dwelling will be constructed on the
parcel.
(6)   That the property owner executes an acknowledgement which will be
recorded with the respective county and which includes the following
provisions:
(A)   Legal description provided by the property owner.
(B)   That the dwelling will be constructed a minimum of one hundred feet
(100') from the parcel’s boundaries, including from the ultimate rights-of-way
of adjacent streets.
(C)   That accessory structures will be set back a minimum of fifty feet (50')
from the parcel’s boundaries and that no accessory structure will be
constructed in the front yard as defined in this title. Two (2) detached
accessory structures or less, not to exceed a combined total of one thousand
(1,000) square feet regardless of size of the property will be located on the
property.
(D)   That no buffer will be required between an adjacent property and the
subject parcel at time of development of the adjacent properties. If desired,
the burden of providing a buffer lies with the property owner of the subject
parcel upon which the single family dwelling is constructed.
(E)   A note of the Comprehensive Plan land use designation and zoning district
of the subject property.
(F)   Comprehensive Plan land use designation and zoning district of the
adjacent properties is clearly identified.
(G)   That if future utility infrastructure is to cross the property, an
easement for the utility will be granted if the exact alignment is known. If
future utility infrastructure is anticipated to cross the property but the
exact alignment is unknown, agreement that an easement for the utility shall be
granted at such time the alignment is determined. Acknowledgement that no
structures will be constructed within an anticipated easement area.
(H)   That development of the property for non-single family residential uses
may not occur until the single-family residential use ceases.
(I)   That no commercial activity will be allowed on the parcel unless one of
the following applies:
(i)   A home occupation permit approval is granted for a qualifying activity;
or
(ii)   With site plan and building permit approval the dwelling is converted to
a commercial structure that complies with current codes and regulations,
including allowed uses as specified in the Zoning Code for the applicable
zoning district.
(J)   That the rebuilding and expansion provisions for single-family
residential property in non-residential zones of this section applies to the
subject parcel.
(K)   That the burden lies with the property owner to notify potential buyers
of these provisions.
5.   Nonconforming Characteristics Of Use:
a.   Nonconforming characteristics of use due to changes in zoning provisions
including, but not limited to, parking requirements, signs, landscaping,
lighting, building materials, buffering, which generally are addressed in
development approvals will be addressed at the time a submittal is made to the
City for modification to the development.
b.   Nonconforming characteristics of use which are in evidence because of
failure to comply with the conditions of approval for a development will be
subject to Code enforcement actions available to the City to address the
nonconformity and bring the development into compliance with this Code or the
conditions of its approval.
6.   Reconstruction/Replacement:
a.   Reconstruction or Replacement Construction means any work where
alterations exceed the definition of “Repairs and Nonstructural Alterations” as
defined in subsection C.2.b of this section or where more than fifty percent
(50%) of the existing structure is being replaced. Replacement Construction
shall meet the requirements of New Construction.
b.   Where a nonconforming building or structure is damaged or destroyed by
catastrophe or act of God to the extent equaling fifty percent (50%) or more of
its total assessed value, it shall not be reconstructed except in conformance
with the regulations of the district in which it is located. Exception will be
made for lawfully established nonconforming fences as stated in Section 9-14-11
of this Code.
c.   Where an otherwise conforming building or structure containing a
nonconforming use is damaged by catastrophe or act of God to the extent
equaling fifty percent (50%) or more of its total assessed value, it may be
reconstructed to comply with all regulations, including use, of the district in
which it is located. An otherwise conforming building or structure containing a
nonconforming use damaged to the extent less than fifty percent (50%) of its
assessed value may be reconstructed provided that the nonconforming use as it
existed prior to the damage is not increased or enlarged and provided that the
reconstruction commences within one hundred eighty (180) days of the damaging
incident and is diligently pursued to its completion.
d.   Exception will be made for lawfully established nonconforming fences as
stated in Section 9-14-11 of this Code.
e.   Except for the provisions in subsection C8 of this section, an exception
will be given to single-family detached residential uses in nonresidential
districts, where the residential building or detached accessory structure is
damaged by catastrophe or act of God. Reconstruction of the structure or
building shall be permitted provided that there is no increase in the number of
dwelling units. The reconstruction of the building or structure will comply
with all residential standards for the comparable district in which the
structure or building was first constructed or a comparable residential
district, as determined by the director of development services, and with all
other pertinent codes and regulations existing at the time of reconstruction.
Reconstruction must begin within one hundred eighty (180) days or the use will
be deemed discontinued, abandoned, or vacated.
This exception will not be granted when nonaccidental causes, intentional acts
by the owner, lessee, or other person such as arson, or by circumstances of
neglect where the building runs down or becomes dilapidated are in evidence.
The only exception for nonaccidental causes shall be for intentional demolition
associated with a building permit to replace the structure with a new structure
as provided in subsection C7f of this section.
f.   Except for the provisions in subsection C8 of this section, an exception
will be given to existing legal, nonconforming agricultural buildings and
structures not located in the agricultural/open space (OS) zoning district,
where said building or structure is damaged by catastrophe or act of God.
Reconstruction of the structure or building shall be permitted provided that
the square footage of the structure or building is not enlarged or increased
beyond twenty percent (20%) of its predamaged size. The reconstruction of the
building or structure will comply with all standards for the agricultural/open
space (OS) zoning district and with all other pertinent codes and regulations
existing at the time of reconstruction. Reconstruction must begin within one
hundred eighty (180) days or the use will be deemed discontinued, abandoned, or
vacated.
This exception will not be granted when nonaccidental causes, intentional acts
by the owner, lessee, or other person such as arson, or by circumstances of
neglect where the building runs down or becomes dilapidated are in evidence.
The only exception for nonaccidental causes shall be for intentional demolition
associated with a building permit to replace the structure with a new structure
as provided in subsection C7e of this section.
7.   Other Exceptions:
a.   Exceptions may be granted upon application of a variance request to the
board of adjustment for nonconforming uses to be allowed in structures,
buildings or land which were established on or before the effective date of
this title, provided that the use is appropriate to the design, special
equipment, and intent of such a building or structure; the board is convinced
that the use is of benefit and is appropriate to the neighborhood; that the
traffic generated is similar or less than that generated by the existing
nonconforming use; that the structure, or the structure and land in
combination, cannot reasonably or economically be used for a conforming
purpose; that the use will not be detrimental to the existing character of
development in the immediate neighborhood; that the use will not endanger the
public health, safety, or general welfare; and that the use is consistent with
the comprehensive plan.
b.   For existing legal, nonconforming residential garages which do not conform
to current standards regarding side yard setback and/or size only, the
nonconforming garage may be rebuilt in a rear yard with the same nonconforming
size and/or side yard setback or at a minimum side yard setback of three feet
(3'), whichever is greater, within one hundred eighty (180) days of its
destruction, provided that the area of nonconformity is not increased and that
in all other regards the garage meets accessory structure standards and
regulations.
c.   For existing nonconforming detached single-family uses, up to two (2)
detached accessory structures not to exceed one thousand (1,000) combined
square feet may be permitted.
d.   The acquisition of a portion of an otherwise conforming lot by the city or
by the city for the benefit of a governmental agency under eminent domain
proceedings or by agreement under threat of eminent domain proceedings shall
not cause such an otherwise conforming lot to become nonconforming under this
title.
e.   Except for the provisions in subsection C8 of this section, an exception
will be given to existing legal, nonconforming agricultural buildings and
structures not located in the agricultural/open space (OS) zoning district.
Reconstruction or replacement of the structure or building shall be permitted
provided that no other nonconformity is increased, and the building square
footage is not enlarged or increased by more than twenty percent (20%) of its
current size. The reconstruction of the building or structure shall comply with
all other standards for the agricultural/open space (OS) zoning district and
with all other pertinent codes and regulations existing at the time of
reconstruction. Reconstruction must begin within one hundred eighty (180) days
or the use will be deemed discontinued, abandoned, or vacated.
f.   Except for the provisions in subsection C8 of this section, an exception
will be given to existing legal, nonconforming single-family detached
residential buildings and detached accessory structures located in
nonresidential zoning districts. Reconstruction or replacement of the structure
or building shall be permitted provided that there is no increase in the number
of dwelling units. The reconstruction of the building or structure shall comply
with all residential standards for the comparable district in which the
structure or building was first constructed or a comparable residential
district, as determined by the director of development services, and with all
other pertinent codes and regulations existing at the time of reconstruction.
Reconstruction must begin within one hundred eighty (180) days or the use will
be deemed discontinued, abandoned, or vacated.
8.   Flood (Overlay) District:
a.   For any structure or use of a structure or land made nonconforming by the
adoption of a flood (overlay) district, such use may be expanded, enlarged,
altered or changed in any way which does not increase its nonconformity if:
(1)   The structure or use is not nonconforming with respect to any underlying
zoning district.
(2)   The alteration does not represent an addition or repair exceeding fifty
percent (50%) of the value of the structure at the time the structure became
nonconforming by virtue of this subsection, unless the structure or use is
permanently changed to a conforming use. In the case of the above stated fifty
percent (50%) valuation rule such shall be measured on a cumulative basis
rather than evaluating each alteration independently against the maximum
variation.
(3)   Nothing in this subsection shall be construed to prevent normal and
necessary maintenance or upkeep of any use made nonconforming by virtue of a
Flood (Overlay) District. (Ord. 1599, 9-13-2004; amd. Ord. 1869, 6-1-2010; Ord.
2246, 9-5-2017; amd. Ord. 2475, 6-7-2021; Ord. 2570, 7-5-2023; Ord. 2631, 9-16-
2024)
9-3-5: STREET FRONTAGE REQUIRED:
Except as herein provided, no lot shall contain any building used in whole or
in part for residence purposes unless such lot abuts for at least forty feet
(40') on at least one street, or abuts common area formally established through
a homeowners' association of which said lot owner has a legal interest. In
situations of hardship, a special permit may be issued for an exclusive
unobstructed private easement of access or right-of-way of at least twenty feet
(20') wide to a street, and there shall be not more than one single-family
dwelling for such frontage or easement; except, that a common easement of
access at least fifty feet (50') wide shall be provided for two (2) or more
such single-family dwellings or for one or more two-family or multiple
dwellings. (Ord. 430, 8-11-1969; amd. 5-22-1991)
9-3-6: ACCESSORY BUILDINGS AND GARAGES:
(Rep. by Ord. 1354, 3-22-1999)
9-3-7: YARDS:
A.   Front Yard:
1.   Unless provided elsewhere within this title or defined within a planned
unit development (PUD) or specific plan ordinance (ZCSP), in any district in
which residential dwellings are allowed, there shall be a minimum front yard
depth required as stated in the yard requirements for the particular district;
provided, however: a) any replat in any Residential District adjacent to an
existing plat with dwellings located thereon, the front yard depth for the lots
in the replat shall not be less than the smallest front yard depth of existing
dwellings located within two hundred feet (200') of the replat, but in no event
shall the front yard depth be less than the smallest front yard depth of the
existing dwelling immediately adjacent thereto which fronts on the same side of
the street; b) no front yard depth of any existing lot without a dwelling shall
be less than the smallest front yard depth of any lot with existing dwelling
immediately adjacent thereto and within two hundred feet (200') fronting on the
same side of the street. (Ord. 2333, 12-26-2018)
B.   Corner Lots:
1.   For corner lots platted after the effective date hereof, the street side
yard shall be equal in width to the minimum required side yard for the district
in which it is located, plus twenty feet (20'); i.e., for a minimum required
side yard of ten feet (10') the street side yard shall be not less than thirty
feet (30'); provided, however, this regulation shall not be interpreted as to
require a side street yard of greater width than the minimum required front
yard width.
2.   For corner lots platted after the effective date hereof, the minimum
required lot width shall be increased by an amount not less than twenty feet
(20') so as to allow for the additional required street side yard, i.e., for a
minimum required lot width of sixty feet (60'), the minimum width of a corner
lot shall be not less than eighty feet (80').
3.   On corner lots platted and of record at the time of the effective date
hereof, the same regulations shall apply except that these regulations shall
not be so interpreted as to reduce the buildable width of the corner lot facing
an intersecting street and of record or as shown by existing contract of
purchase at the time of the effective date hereof, to less than twenty eight
feet (28') nor to prohibit the erection of an accessory building.
4.   On any corner lot, the depth of a front yard or side street yard abutting
a "major street" shall be measured from the proposed right-of-way lines shown
on the official major street plan. (Ord. 430, 8-11-1969)
C.   Required Yard Cannot Be Reduced: No lot shall be reduced in size so as to
make the width or total area of the lot, or any yard, or any other open space,
less than the minimum required by this title. No part of a yard or other open
space provided about any building or structure for the purpose of complying
with the provisions of this title shall be included as a part of a yard or
other open space required under this title for another building or structure.
Off street parking and loading areas may occupy all or part of any required
yard or open space except as specified in subsection
9-19-8I of this title. (Ord. 1859, 2-22-2010)
D.   Building Lines On Approved Plats: Whenever the plat of a land subdivision
approved by the City Council and on record in the Office of the County Recorder
and County Auditor shows a setback building line along any frontage for the
purpose of creating a front yard or side street yard line, the building line
thus shown shall apply along such frontage in place of any other yard line
required in this title unless specific yard requirements in this title require
a greater setback. (Ord. 430, 8-11-1969)
9-3-8: FENCES, WALLS AND VISION CLEARANCE:
(Rep. by Ord. 1354, 3-22-1999)
9-3-9: OPEN SPACE REQUIREMENTS:
(Rep. by Ord. 1839, 9-21-2009)
9-3-10: BUFFERS:
(Rep. by Ord. 1839, 9-21-2009)
9-3-11: SIDEWALKS REQUIRED:
A.   The intent and purpose of this section is to establish the regulations
regarding the installation of public sidewalks and pathways in the City to
ensure the orderly and harmonious development of a Citywide sidewalk system in
existing and new developments in such a manner as to provide a comprehensive
sidewalk system that will safeguard the public's health, safety and general
welfare.
B.   Notwithstanding any other provisions of this Code, all dwellings,
nonresidential buildings and uses, whether occupied or unoccupied, shall have,
after adoption hereof, a permanent sidewalk built for the entire width and/or
length of the lot or lots upon which the dwelling, nonresidential building or
use is located, and the sidewalk(s) shall be built for the entire width and/or
length of all sides of any lot or lots which abut a public or private street or
roadway.
1   Public Sidewalks: Sidewalks and pathways along public streets shall be
installed on both sides of a roadway in accordance with design standards as
adopted by the city.
2   Private Sidewalks:
a   Adjacent to Private Streets and Interior Vehicular Roadways: Sidewalks
shall be installed on both sides of a private roadway or an interior vehicular
roadway in accordance with design standards for public sidewalks except that
said sidewalks shall be allowed to be located a minimum of five feet (5') from
the edge of the roadway.
b   Adjacent to Parking: Sidewalks and pathways immediately adjacent to head-in
parking are not required to be located five feet (5') from the curb edge;
however, if the sidewalk or pathway is located immediately adjacent to the
curb, said sidewalk width must be increased to a minimum of six feet (6') to
accommodate vehicle bumper overhang while still providing a minimum of four
feet (4') of clear pedestrian pathway.
C.   At such time that eighty percent (80%) of a plat or subdivision is
developed, the property owner(s) of any undeveloped parcels, upon written
notification by the City, shall install the required sidewalk(s) on their
property within one hundred twenty (120) days of the notification by the City.
After expiration of the one hundred twenty (120) day period, the City may take
any legal action necessary to proceed with the installation of the sidewalk(s)
and assess the cost of the installation and any legal expenses, as allowed by
law, as a lien against the property.
D.   In the event that no grade has been set or there is no curb and gutter on
the street or roadway upon which the sidewalk(s) is to be placed, the Council
may defer the sidewalk requirement on application of the affected property
owner(s) and upon the affected property owner(s) signing an agreement to
install such a sidewalk(s) within one hundred twenty (120) days after the
property owner(s) has been notified that a curb and gutter has been installed
and/or that the grade has been set. The agreement shall be verified and placed
on record in the Office of the County Recorder of the applicable county, and
shall be a covenant running with the land, and shall be binding upon the heirs,
assigns, and successors of the property owner.
E.   At the discretion of the City Council, the installation of any required
sidewalk(s) may be deferred or waived when an off street bike/pedestrian trail
has been identified on the comprehensive plan or on the trail’s master plan
adjacent to the subject property. In the event that the sidewalk installation
is deferred or waived, the property owner shall provide assurances, acceptable
to the City, for the cost equivalent to the cost of installing the public
sidewalk(s), that can be combined with other funding sources available to the
City, for the installation of the off street bike/pedestrian trail.
F.   When the strict application of standards or requirements established by
this section would cause substantial hardship or impose unreasonable
restrictions regarding the installation of a sidewalk(s) because of natural or
physical conditions or limitations not created by the property owner, at the
request of an applicant, developer, or property owner, the City Council may
grant such deferrals and/or waivers from these standards or requirements as may
be necessary. At such time when the conditions or limitations are eliminated,
the property owner(s) will be required to install such sidewalk(s) within one
hundred twenty (120) days after written notification by the City.
G.   Any waiver or deferral that is granted by the City Council shall be
recorded by the City as a matter of public record at the Office of the County
Recorder of the applicable county.
H.   The enforcement of this section shall be by special assessment pursuant to
division IV of Iowa Code chapter 384. (Ord. 1178, 4-22-1996; amd. Ord. 2527, 7-
5-2022; Ord. 2589, 12-4-2023)
CHAPTER 4
ZONING DISTRICTS AND MAP
SECTION:
9-4-1: Purpose
9-4-2: Establishment Of Districts
9-4-3: Definition Of Districts
9-4-4: General Regulations For Overlay Districts
9-4-5: Boundaries
9-4-6: Interim Use Of Property
9-4-1: PURPOSE:
A.   These regulations are adopted for the following purposes:
1.   To protect and provide for the public health, safety, and general welfare
of the municipality.
2.   To guide the future growth and development of the municipality in
accordance with the comprehensive plan.
3.   In order to classify, regulate and segregate uses of lands and buildings.
4.   To provide for adequate light, air, and privacy, to promote safety from
fire, flood, and other danger, and to prevent overcrowding of the land and
undue congestion of population, and to regulate and limit the height and bulk
of buildings hereafter erected or altered.
5.   To protect and conserve the value of land throughout the municipality and
the value of buildings and improvements upon the land, and to minimize the
conflicts among the uses of the land and buildings.
6.   To protect and conserve open space through limits to the intensity of the
use of a property, the area of yards, courts and open space. (Ord. 1190, 6-17-
1996)
9-4-2: ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS:
A.   The city is divided into twenty four (24) zoning districts, three (3)
flood (overlay) districts, and four (4) airport hazard and height (overlay)
districts. The use, height and area regulations are uniform in each class of
zoning district and overlay district, and said districts shall be known as:
ZONING DISTRICTS
OS    Agricultural/open space district
RE    Residential estate district
RS    Residential single-family district
R-1   Single-family residential district
SF-CR Single-family commerce residential district
SF-VJ Residential district single-family Valley Junction
MH    Manufactured housing district
RM    Residential medium-density district
RH    Residential high-density district
RC    Regional commercial district
CMC   Community commercial district
NC    Neighborhood commercial district
CVC   Convenience commercial district
SC    Support commercial district
VJC   Valley Junction commercial district
VJHB  Valley Junction historic business district
WR    Warehouse retail district
BP    Business park district
VJLI  Valley Junction light industrial district
LI    Light industrial district
GI    General industrial district
OF    Office district
PCP   Professional commerce park district
PUD   Planned unit development district
FLOOD OVERLAY DISTRICTS
FW    Floodway (overlay) district
FF    Floodway fringe (overlay) district
FP    General floodplain (overlay) district
AIRPORT HAZARD AND HEIGHT (OVERLAY) ZONES
AZ    Approach zone (overlay)
CZ    Conical zone (overlay)
HZ    Horizontal zone (overlay)
TZ    Transitional zone (overlay)
 
(Ord. 1629, 4-25-2005)
9-4-3: DEFINITION OF DISTRICTS:
A.   Categories And Purposes: The categories and purposes of land use zones
that have been established within the Municipality are as follows:
1.   OS - Agricultural/Open Space District:
a.   It is intended of this district to provide for areas that will be
dominated by agricultural uses, grazing, nonfarm wooded areas and very large
lot estate or farm homes. To encourage the preservation of areas designated as
agricultural/open space in a largely undeveloped state, allowable dwelling
units may be transferred to portions of the subject property which are not
designated agricultural/open space. It is also intended that this designation:
1) provide for very low-density farmland environment and housing/lifestyle
choice; 2) retain land with significant topographical or other physical
constraints as open space; 3) provide a buffer between incompatible land uses;
4) provide for the controlled development of natural resources; 5) provide for
the preservation of areas with unique environmental resources; and 6) hold some
land from urban development until such time as development within urban
services areas are approaching full development or the development of the
property has a significant beneficial effect for the City and furtherance of
the policies of the comprehensive plan.
2.   RE - Residential Estate District:
a.   The purpose of this district is to promote a residential environment
typified by larger lot single-family dwellings of an individual design. The
minimum lot size within a development or area shall be stipulated by a minimum
lot size suffix that will be established for each RE District. These low-
density lots shall be grouped and be of such a number so as to form an
identifiable neighborhood and image. Agricultural uses shall be allowed as
permitted in the applicable use matrix. Developments within this density range
may lend themselves to development with septic systems. However, all
developments on septic systems shall be fitted with dry sewers to allow
connection to the Citywide sanitary system when it becomes available. Septic
systems shall only be allowed for developments located in areas that have soils
and unit densities suitable for septic systems. Areas with poor soils for
septic systems and no available sewers shall not be developed until such time
that adequate sanitary sewers for the development are secured.
3.   RS - Residential Single-Family District:
a.   The purpose of this district is to encourage residential neighborhoods of
exclusively single-family dwellings with a wide range of lot sizes. Any
development must have an overall density from 1.1 to 6.0 du/acre. Minimum lot
sizes may be established for each RS District through the use of a minimum lot
size suffix. This land use zone is also intended to facilitate pedestrian
access to schools, churches, parks, and neighborhood convenience shopping.
4.   R-1 - Single-Family Residential District:
a.   The purpose of this district is to encourage residential neighborhoods of
exclusively single-family dwellings with a minimum lot size of seven thousand
five hundred (7,500) square feet. No minimum lot suffixes shall be used with
this district designation. This district is also intended for public or private
parks and playgrounds. Pedestrian access to schools, churches, and parks should
be encouraged.
5.   SF-CR - Single-Family Commerce Residential District:
a.   The purpose of this district is to recognize and encourage the existing
and unique residential neighborhood in commerce as a neighborhood of single-
family dwellings with a minimum lot size of seven thousand five hundred (7,500)
square feet. This land use zone is also intended to address the physical
constraints created by the topography and the Raccoon River floodplain.
6.   SF-VJ - Residential District Single-Family Valley Junction:
a.   The purpose of this district is to recognize and encourage the existing
and unique residential neighborhood in Valley Junction as a neighborhood of
single-family dwellings with a typical lot size of six thousand (6,000) square
feet. This land use zone is also intended to address the physical constraints
created by the small lot size in this area.
7.   Reserved. (Ord. 1309, 6-29-1998)
8.   MH - Manufactured Housing District:
a.   The purpose of this district is to provide areas for manufactured and
mobile home subdivisions and parks that will foster alternative housing choices
for the City's residents. The manufactured and mobile homes shall be grouped in
subdivisions and parks of densities between 5.1 to 12.0 du/acre. Suffixes shall
be used in the MH District to identify the maximum allowed density for the
subject property.
9.   RM - Residential Medium-Density District:
a.   The purpose of this district is to foster a residential environment
typified by multi-family dwelling units of no more than twelve (12) du/acre.
Suffixes shall be used in the RM District to identify the maximum allowed
density for the subject property.
10.   RH - Residential High-Density District:
a.   The purpose of this district is to provide for a compact residential
environment, allowing multi-family dwellings of no more than eighteen (18) du/
acre. Suffixes shall be used in the RH District to identify the maximum allowed
density for the subject property.
11.   RC - Regional Commercial District:
a.   Regional commercial areas shall be designated to supply the shopping needs
for comparison shopping for a variety of products ranging from electronics,
household goods, apparel, furniture, and sporting goods. Regional commercial
areas will generally be composed of an enclosed mall as the focal point for the
area with at least seven hundred fifty thousand (750,000) square feet or more.
A variety of commercial uses of various sizes will be located in close
proximity to the mall site. Although the regional commercial area will extend
over a broad area and across streets, unifying themes and/or architecture
should be used to tie the area together. The Valley West Mall area along
University Avenue is the present regional commercial area for the City. The
need for another regional commercial area may develop in the future. The
service area for a regional commercial area is typically eight (8) miles or
more. A regional commercial area should be a minimum of one hundred twenty
(120) acres or larger. Regional commercial areas should be located on arterial
streets with direct freeway access.
12.   CMC - Community Commercial District:
a.   Community commercial areas shall be designated to supply daily and
occasional shopping needs. The community commercial area shall serve a similar
function as a neighborhood commercial area plus the sale of goods such as
appliances, hardware, etc. Each community commercial area should be encouraged
to include a variety merchandise store, one or more supermarkets, a drugstore,
restaurants, banks and a large number and variety of other stores. Community
commercial areas may be large, may tend to expand across streets, and may be
created in small incremental additions. Individual commercial centers and uses
within community commercial areas should be tied together by prominent common
features such as a tree type, roofing material and style, and architectural
theme. The separation between community commercial areas should be three (3) to
five (5) miles. A community commercial area should range in size from fifteen
(15) to fifty (50) acres. Community commercial areas should be located at the
intersection of either two (2) arterial or major collector streets. Primary
access should not be taken off local residential streets.
13.   NC - Neighborhood Commercial District:
a.   Neighborhood commercial areas shall be designated to provide for small
commercial centers and uses which provide a limited range of products and
services to the residents of the surrounding neighborhood. Typical uses would
include professional offices, laundry and dry-cleaning establishments,
drugstores, a supermarket, beauty and barber shops, and other personal
services. Because of their proximity to residential areas, such centers or uses
should be specifically designed and operated to be compatible with the adjacent
residential development. Limitations on design and operation would include
building height and intensity, trip generation, architectural and signage
controls suitable for a residential neighborhood, increased landscaping and
stricter control of noise and glare compared to larger commercial centers, and
controls on hours of operation and on delivery vehicles. Projects in this
category will be limited to a height of one story and have a residential style
roof design, e.g., mansard, pitched, gable, etc. Emphasis should be placed upon
unrestricted pedestrian access to and from the surrounding residential areas.
The separation between a neighborhood commercial area and other community,
neighborhood and convenience commercial areas should be one to two (2) miles. A
neighborhood commercial area should range in size from five (5) to fifteen (15)
acres. Neighborhood commercial areas should be located to have access from
either arterial or major collector streets, and should avoid having local
residential streets serve as their principal access. No more than two (2)
corners of an intersection should be devoted to a neighborhood commercial use.
Strip centers should be avoided.
14.   CVC - Convenience Commercial District:
a.   Convenience commercial areas shall be designated to provide for single
users commercial sites or small commercial centers and uses which provide
opportunities for the sale of most frequently purchased goods or services.
Typical uses in this designation would be a convenience market, professional
offices, daycare centers, banks, and other personal services. Like neighborhood
commercial designated areas, convenience commercial areas shall be specifically
designed and operated to be compatible with adjacent residential areas.
Specifically, limitations on the design and the operation of uses shall include
architectural and building mass, hours of operation, delivery vehicles, noise
and lighting control, signage and traffic. Developments shall be limited to one
story in height and have a residential exterior design, material and roof
style. Projects shall emphasize unrestricted pedestrian access to and from
surrounding residential areas. The separation between a convenience commercial
area and other community, neighborhood and convenience commercial areas should
be one and one-half (11/2) miles. A convenience commercial area should range in
size from one to five (5) acres. Convenience commercial areas should be located
to have access from either arterial or major collector streets, and should
avoid having local residential streets serve as their principal access. No more
than two (2) corners of an intersection should be devoted to a convenience
commercial use.
15.   SC - Support Commercial District:
a.   Support commercial areas shall be designated to provide for commercial
centers and uses which are oriented toward the freeway motoring public and/or
employment centers. Typical uses would include hotels/motels, restaurants,
gasoline service stations, professional offices, laundry and dry cleaning
establishments, banks, drugstores, office supply stores, convenience markets or
other professional services. Support commercial areas shall be sized to meet
the needs of the motoring public and/or the employment center. Support
commercial areas that are intended to provide services to employment centers
shall incorporate pedestrian orientation to and from the employment areas into
their design.
16.   VJC - Valley Junction Commercial District:
a.   Valley Junction commercial areas shall be designated to provide for
commercial uses which are oriented toward the motoring public along First
Street and Railroad Avenue. Typical uses would include restaurants, convenience
gas stations (without repair service), professional offices, laundry and dry
cleaning establishments, banks, drugstores, office supply stores, or other
service uses as defined by the Valley Junction commercial land use matrix.
Development of the Valley Junction commercial district area shall be in
conformance with the Valley Junction subarea plan and historic guidelines.
17.   VJHB - Valley Junction Historic Business District:
a.   The historic business district designation shall be utilized to denote the
old downtown area of Valley Junction. Uses within this area shall include
professional offices, restaurants, bar/restaurants, bars, specialty retail
stores, and other personal services. Development of commercial property shall
be in conformance with the Valley Junction subarea plan and historic
guidelines.
18.   WR - Warehouse Retail:
a.   Warehouse retail areas shall be designated to provide areas for mixed use
development of lighter industrial uses and the more intensive service, retail,
and wholesale commercial uses. Allowable uses include research and development;
light distribution; wholesale or retail sale of industrial supplies, building
equipment and materials, home furnishings and home improvement; car
dealerships; restaurants; and convenience stores.
19.   BP - Business Park District:
a.   Business park areas shall be designated to provide desirable areas
protected by performance, design and use controls regarding lot size, building
size, appearance, land coverage, parking and loading facilities, noise, dust,
fumes, internal circulation and other environmental and functional issues for a
variety of office, research and development, warehouse and distribution, and
light assembly and manufacturing uses. Included within this category is a
limited range of commercial uses located and designed to service the business
park area. Business park areas should be encouraged to be planned as a unit
with compatibility of design, building materials, and landscaping acting as a
unifying theme. Access to business park areas should be off of arterial and/or
collector roadways. Primary access should not be taken off of local residential
streets.
20.   VJLI - Valley Junction Light Industrial District:
a.   The purpose of this district is to recognize and encourage the existing
and unique light industrial neighborhood in Valley Junction as an area with a
typical lot size of seven thousand two hundred fifty (7,250) square feet. This
land use is intended to address the physical constraints and limitations
created by the small lot sizes in this area in order to promote the future
development and redevelopment of this unique area. Uses allowed in this area
are intended to be low impacting industrial uses that can coexist with
residential uses in the neighborhood.
21.   LI - Light Industrial District:
a.   Light industrial areas shall be designated to provide areas for most light
industrial, and warehouse and distribution facilities. It is of special concern
to the city that there be an adequate variety of sizes and locations of light
industrial parcels. Appropriate buffering as prescribed by the zoning ordinance
shall be established between light industrial areas and other uses, in
particular, residential uses. Every effort should also be made to encourage
redevelopment of existing industrial areas. Access to light industrial areas
should be off of arterial and/or collector streets.
22.   GI - General Industrial District:
a.   General industrial areas shall be designated to provide areas for light
and heavy industrial uses, and warehouse and distribution facilities. In
particular, general industrial areas are intended to provide areas where
outside storage and fabrication yards are allowed if properly mitigated,
including dust control and visual screening when deemed necessary. Appropriate
buffering as prescribed by the zoning ordinance shall be established between
general industrial areas and other uses, in particular, residential uses. Every
effort should also be made to encourage redevelopment of existing industrial
areas. Access to general industrial areas shall not be through residential
areas. Access to general industrial areas should be off of arterial and/or
collector streets.
23.   OF - Office District:
a.   Office areas shall be designated to attract desirable and stable
professional office development which will be in harmony with adjacent land
uses. Typical office uses include insurance, medical, law, real estate, finance
and investment, and other services. Adequate landscape buffering shall be
provided between office uses and residential uses. Office uses immediately
adjacent to single-family residential land uses should not exceed three (3)
stories in height unless adequate buffering and additional setbacks, as
provided by the zoning ordinance, are provided. Primary access to office areas
should generally not be taken directly off of local residential streets.
Limited support commercial uses such as sit down restaurants and hotels/motels
shall be allowed given specific design restrictions.
24.   PCP - Professional Commerce Park District:
a.   This district has been identified as an area for accommodating the
management, research, design, marketing and production needs of those
professional-commerce enterprises which comply with the performance standards
of the applicable sections of this Code for the abatement of all obnoxious,
detrimental or other generally unacceptable characteristics including ugliness
of physical and natural properties; and for the encouraged use of those
contemporary, modern and futuristic design techniques which yield compatibility
of one area to another as well as special beauty. Further, in the interest of
general community welfare, it is recognized that the community should be
beautiful as well as financially prosperous, spacious as well as efficient,
physically balanced as well as regulated. This district shall not be used
indiscriminately to permit any use which might violate the general welfare of
the community; but that it shall be restricted and confined to only those
integrated professional- commerce uses which produce net gain to the community
in both aesthetic and material quality.
25.   PUD - Planned Unit Development District:
a.   This district shall allow the planned development of an area in which the
proposed land uses, transportation elements, building densities, arrangements,
types, architecture and other development standards are set out in a unified
plan. A planned unit development may consist of mixed residential, commercial,
office, industrial and public land uses.
B.   Overlay Districts:
1.   Floodplain Overlay Districts:
a.   The boundaries of these districts are indicated upon the official flood
(overlay) zoning map of the City, supported by elevations and documentation
contained in the West Des Moines Flood Insurance Study and the Jordan Creek
Floodplain Study and further supported by the flood boundaries and encroachment
lines as delineated on the Federal flood insurance rate map (FIRM), the flood
boundary and floodway map (FLOODWAY), and plates 1 and 2 of the Jordan Creek
Floodplain Study. All flood elevations, floodproofing elevations, requirements
related to flood protection, shall be drawn from the official flood (overlay)
zoning map and its supporting documents, that, together with all notations,
references, and other material shown thereon, shall be as much a part of this
title as if the notations, references and other matters set forth on said maps
were all fully described herein, the originals of which are properly attested
and on file in the Office of the City Clerk.
b.   Boundaries as indicated are based on elevation of the ground and elevation
of the regulatory flood height through the reach affecting any given property.
Reference or interpretation to any individual parcel(s) shall be made by
scaling distances on the official flood (overlay) map. Where a parcel or
parcels may be located on the boundary of a district or districts, and an exact
determination shall be necessary as to inclusion or exclusion from any flood
district, or floodproofing requirements, the petitioner requesting such
interpretation shall supply to the building inspector, a certified
topographical map of the property, prepared by a registered professional
engineer, from which the building inspector may draw the proper determination.
In the case of a question as to the actual district (overlay) boundaries,
elevation shall act as the final resolution determinant.
c.   Elevations for minimum building height and floodproofing, as specified
herein, shall always be drawn from the maps and supporting documents
accompanying the official flood (overlay) map, except in the case of the
General Floodplain (Overlay) District, where specific flood elevation
information is not provided by the Federal Insurance Administration. In the
case of the FP District, the building inspector may require the person seeking
a permit to supply sufficient information allowing the City Engineer to
reasonably ascertain the floodway and flood height affecting the parcel for
which a permit is sought.
2.   Airport Hazard And Height (Overlay) Zones:
a.   The boundaries of these zones are indicated upon the official airport
hazard and height (overlay) map of the City, supported by zone boundaries and
elevations as delineated by the Federal Aviation Agency in conjunction with the
authorities of the Des Moines International Airport. Boundaries as indicated
are based upon datum provided in section
 9-13-2 of this title. Elevations for maximum structural height shall be
determined by the City inspector of buildings and shall meet all standards of
height regulation as specified in chapter 13 of this title.
(Ord. 1190, 6-17-1996; Ord. 1309, 6-29-1998; Ord. 1419, 8-21-2000; Ord. 1441,
4-2-2001; Ord. 1629, 4-25-2005; Ord. 1860, 3-22-2010; Ord. 2222, 5-30-2017;
Ord. 2357, 5-6-2019; Ord. 2566, 5-15-2023; Ord. 2662, 7-7-2025)
9-4-4: GENERAL REGULATIONS FOR OVERLAY DISTRICTS:
The regulations set forth for any overlay zone shall modify the regulations for
the primary district designation with which they are combined. All uses and
regulations of the primary district designation shall apply, except insofar as
they are modified or augmented by the overlay zone regulations. (Ord. 1190, 6-
17-1996)
9-4-5: BOUNDARIES:
A.   Zoning of a property shall be in compliance with the adopted Comprehensive
Plan of the City, and any specific standards and/or regulations identified in
the subareas of the plan. In situations where the Comprehensive Plan and the
zoning of a property differ or conflict, the Comprehensive Plan shall be the
prevailing document. The zoning map, which is made a part of this title by
reference, and all the notations, references and other matters shown thereon,
shall be as much a part of this title as if the notations, references and other
matters set forth by said plan were all fully described herein, the original of
which is properly attested and is on file in the Office of the City Clerk.
B.   The zoning district boundaries are either lot lines, section lines, or the
centerlines of streets and alleys, unless otherwise shown. Where the districts
designated are bounded approximately by street, alley, or lot lines and are not
dimensioned otherwise, the lot lines or the centerlines of streets and alleys
shall be construed to be the boundary of the district. Where uncertainty of
district boundaries still exists, the Plan and Zoning Commission shall, by
written resolution, recommend the location of any district boundary to the City
Council for its action and final decision. (Ord. 1190, 6-17-1996)
9-4-6: INTERIM USE OF PROPERTY:
While a property remains vacant, it may be used for the growing of crops, or
organized community youth groups' recreational activities prior to development
in accordance with the provisions of this title, except that no structures
shall be erected or constructed without proper permit. (Ord. 1190, 6-17-1996)
CHAPTER 5
AGRICULTURAL/OPEN SPACE AND RESIDENTIAL ZONING DISTRICT
SECTION:
9-5-1: Title And Citation
9-5-2: Purpose
9-5-3: Interpretations
9-5-4: Specific Use Regulations
9-5-5: Use Codes
9-5-6: Suffixes To Zoning Districts
9-5-7: Building Form Regulations And Zoning District Compatibility For
Residential Districts
9-5-8: Open Space/Agricultural And Residential Use Regulations
9-5-9: Index
9-5-1: TITLE AND CITATION:
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the AGRICULTURAL AND
RESIDENTIAL USE MATRIX. (Ord. 1190, 6-17-1996)
9-5-2: PURPOSE:
A.   For the purposes of this chapter, it shall be generally recognized that
the type of use is not so important as the manner in which the use is
accomplished. It would be impractical, if not impossible, to accurately
enumerate all of the uses which would be beneficial or detrimental to the
community at large. It is also intended that the districts listed in this
chapter shall not be used indiscriminately to permit any use which could be
detrimental to the public health, welfare, and safety of the community or its
citizens. While the City desires to encourage the development of the community,
it shall be done in a responsible manner consistent with the rules and
regulations of the City and in accordance with the goals and policies of the
comprehensive plan.
B.   The regulations set forth in this chapter specify the uses that are
allowed in the various zones under this chapter. (Ord. 1190, 6-17-1996)
9-5-3: INTERPRETATIONS:
A.   Except for single family residential dwellings, uses shown in the matrix
as “permitted” (P) are a permitted use by right in the applicable district,
however, new construction or expansion of existing structures, or expansion of
the area of use or operation, shall require review and site plan development
approval by the city.
B.   Uses shown in the matrix as "permitted conditional use permit" (Pc) may be
permitted in the applicable district following review and approval by the Board
of Adjustment. This requirement shall apply to new uses, as well as the
expansion of any use or change in operation.
A permitted conditional use permit (Pc) allows the City to regulate the
intensity of development of a particular use, activity, or location. A
permitted conditional use (Pc) should not be seen as a means to prohibit uses
but as a way to allow the City to secure more information concerning a specific
use and its operational characteristics and apply conditions or restrictions on
its operation as deemed necessary to limit impacts to surrounding properties
and guard the safety, health and welfare of this community. It is further the
intent of this chapter to allow flexibility and diversity of land uses.
C.   Each use is subject to all provisions of this title.
D.   Where a proposed land use is not identified in this chapter, the Director
of Development Services or their designee shall review the proposed use, based
upon the characteristics of the use and operational intentions, to determine
which of the uses listed in this chapter is most closely equivalent to that
proposed and thus whether to classify the property land use as permitted (P) or
as a permitted conditional use (Pc). The proposed use, if determined to be
equivalent to an allowed use, shall be subject to review through the process
indicated within the matrix.
(Ord. 1190, 6-17-1996; amd. Ord. 2274, 2-5-2018; Ord. 2570, 7-5-2023; Ord.
2662, 7-7-2025)
9-5-4: SPECIFIC USE REGULATIONS:
A.   The following regulations shall be applied to the specific uses listed
below in any district where that use is allowed. Any violations of the
following zoning regulations in this section may also be deemed to constitute
nuisances, and may also be addressed pursuant to the provisions of title 4,
chapter 4, "Nuisances", of this Code.
1.   The following vehicles and/or equipment, when parked or maintained within
any area zoned for residential purposes, shall be defined as "commercial or
industrial storage" and shall constitute a violation of this title, unless
determined by the City to be an accessory use of a home occupation in
accordance with the standards set forth in this subsection:
a.   Any bus or motor driven passenger vehicle designed for the transport of
over nine (9) persons.
b.   Any ambulance equipped with life support systems and used to transport to
medical facilities sick and injured persons who require emergency medical care.
c.   Any truck designed primarily for carrying livestock, merchandise, and
freight of any kind and having a cargo capacity greater than two (2) tons
including dump trucks, flatbed trucks, stake trucks and garbage packers.
d.   Any pickup truck with a cargo box length greater than eight feet (8'), and
maximum cargo capacity greater than two (2) tons, provided no more than one
pickup truck used for commercial purposes shall be parked or maintained on the
premises, regardless of size.
e.   Any light delivery or panel delivery truck greater than twenty feet (20')
in length or eight feet (8') in height, provided no more than one panel
delivery truck used for commercial purposes shall be parked or maintained on
the premises, regardless of size.
f.   Any trailer in excess of twelve feet (12') in overall length, except this
subsection shall not be construed to include mobile homes or recreational
travel trailers, or trailers for personal recreational uses, regardless of
length.
g.   Any truck-tractor (semitruck) or road tractor.
h.   Any backhoe, cement breaker, grader, end loader, dragline, or similar
equipment intended to be used, or normally identified with commercial
construction, landscaping, residential construction, or commercial or
industrial service purposes.
B.   Storage Of Vehicles And Equipment: Storage of a "commercial or industrial
vehicle or equipment", as defined in subsections A1b through A1f of this
section, on the premises of the resident occupant shall be permitted and
considered an accessory use to a "home occupation" for the purposes of this
subsection; provided, any commercial or industrial vehicle parked or maintained
on the premises shall be limited to a single rear axle; said commercial or
industrial vehicle or equipment is owned or operated by the resident occupant;
the vehicle or equipment is stored in a standard garage constructed and
intended for the storage of passenger cars or vans with overhead door opening
not greater than ten feet (10') in height and conforming to setback, yard,
height and size restrictions for accessory buildings and garages as specified
in this title, and provided, there is no more than one garage on the premises,
the vehicle or equipment is concealed from public view at all times during
storage, and no more than one vehicle and one item of equipment as described in
subsection A1h of this section used for commercial or industrial use is stored
on the premises at any time.
1.   This subsection shall not be interpreted to include the following:
a.   Recreational vehicles and vans used for private, noncommercial transport
and recreational activities which are used, owned or leased by the person
residing on the premises on which the vehicle is being parked and maintained;
b.   Equipment actively engaged in legal construction work upon the premises
where the equipment is maintained, and shall exclude such vehicles or equipment
only during the period of construction and a reasonable cleanup period
thereafter not to exceed forty eight (48) hours;
c.   Equipment and vehicles used as part of an on premises agricultural
operation within an undeveloped area of greater than ten (10) acres and zoned
for residential purposes;
d.   Equipment stored for private, noncommercial use for on premises landscape
and lawn maintenance; and
e.   Pickup trucks, light delivery, and panel trucks of a weight capacity and
size less than the standards set forth in subsections A1d and A1e of this
section.
C.   Multi-Family Entertainment And Service Centers: Multi-family entertainment
and service centers shall be allowed as an accessory use when provided as part
of an apartment, condominium, townhouse project, or as an accessory use to a
single-family development, and limited primarily to residents and their guests.
Multi-family entertainment and service centers shall be designed into the
project or development to minimize the negative impact of the use on the
surrounding residential properties.
D.   Short Term Rental: All dwellings or dwelling units as defined in Title 8,
Chapter 2, Article A of this Code and Chapter 2, Section 2, "Definitions"
within this title, offered for a fee for a period of thirty (30) days or less
shall be subject to the requirements of Title 8, Chapter 2, Article A,
"Building Code", Subsection 15, Rental Housing of this Code, this title, and
Iowa Code chapter 423A subject to the exemptions provided therein, and any
requirements imposed by the Iowa Department of Inspections and Appeals, except
that no inspection fee shall be charged.
E.   Alternative Dwelling Units: The following may serve as dwellings on a
short term or long term basis:
1.   Manufactured Or Mobile Home: Is to be used as a place for long term
residential occupancy: greater than one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days
in any calendar year.
a.   Units located outside of a manufactured or mobile home park:
(1)   Must meet the bulk regulations and setbacks of the zoning district where
they are located.
(2)   All units, including when utilized as a second dwelling unit, must be on
a permanent foundation. The appearance of the foundation must be visually
compatible with the surrounding residential structures.
(3)   Must meet the specific use regulations for Residential Districts related
to enclosed garage space (subsection 9-10-4B of this title) except when
utilized as a second dwelling unit no garage shall be required for the second
dwelling unit.
(4)   Must meet the off street parking regulations for the applicable
residential use (chapter 15 of this title) except when utilized as a second
dwelling unit no off-street parking is required to be provided for the second
dwelling unit.
(5)   When utilized as a second dwelling unit, the unit shall be converted to
real property by being placed on a permanent foundation and assessed for real
estate taxes pursuant to State Code.
2.   Park Home Or Park Model: Is to be used for long term placement of a
trailer intended for temporary residential occupancy for recreational, camping
or seasonal use: no more than one hundred eighty (180) (non-consecutive) days
in any calendar year.
3.   Recreational Vehicle:
a.   Occupancy of a recreational vehicle is not an allowed use unless located
in an approved campground or recreational vehicle park.
b.   Recreational vehicles may be used for sleeping purposes only, for a time
period of no more than thirty (30) (non-consecutive) days in any calendar year,
and only for non-paying guests of the occupant of a single family dwelling. A
recreational vehicle must be located in conformance with all City regulations
governing parking and storage. Vehicles cannot be used for sleeping purposes
when parked on any public or private street, off street parking lot or loading
area.
4.   Tiny Home: Is to be used as a place for long term residential occupancy:
greater than one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days in any calendar year.
a.   Parking and drives:
(1)   Must meet the off-street parking regulations for the applicable
residential use (chapter 15 of this title) except when utilized as a second
dwelling unit no off-street parking is required to be provided for the second
dwelling unit.
b.   A minimum ten foot by ten foot (10' x 10') storage shed or twenty foot by
fourteen foot (20' x 14') garage shall be provided within the property upon
which the home is located for exclusive use by the occupants of the tiny home
except when utilized as a second dwelling unit, no garage or shed shall be
required for the second dwelling unit.
F.   Second Dwelling Units: These dwelling units shall conform to all
applicable codes for dwellings within the specific zoning district except for
the following:
1.   Lot shall meet the minimum bulk regulations for the respective single
family zoning district. Lots with second dwelling units are not required to
meet the maximum density requirements noted in Section
9-7-4, Table 7.1 of City Code.
2.   Unit shall not exceed one thousand square feet or fifty percent of the
size of the single family residence, whichever is larger. Size calculation will
include the total above grade gross floor area of the dwelling, including any
attached garage.
3.   A second dwelling unit may be detached from or attached to the single
family dwelling. Any shared walls between the single family dwelling, or an
accessory building and the second dwelling unit must comply with all building
and fire protection requirements in City code, including adopted building and
fire codes.
4.   Services:
a.   Dwellings cannot share heating, cooling and ventilation systems (HVAC) and
must have independent control of essential utility facilities such as HVAC,
electricity, communication services and water.
b.   Dwellings may share utility service lines from the utility main to the
dwellings if metering and maintenance provisions can be met.
5.   Each dwelling on the property shall have individual entries and direct
access to a street.
6.   Parking: No additional off-street parking spaces are required for the
second dwelling unit. The new dwelling cannot make the original dwelling
deficient to off street parking provisions of Title 9, Chapter 15 in City Code.
(Ord. 2068, 11-17-2014; Ord. 2136, 1-26-2016; Ord. 2269, 1-8-2018; Ord. 2357,
5-6-2019; Ord. 2358, 5-6-2019; Ord. 2560, 4-3-2023; Ord. 2662, 7-7-2025)
9-5-5: USE CODES:
A.   The City hereby adopts the "Standard Industrial Classification Manual"
(1987 edition) as prepared by the U.S. Office of Management and Budget, as a
method of classifying and defining permitted uses in the zoning districts. Any
subsequent supplements and amendments to the "Standard Industrial
Classification Manual" (SIC) will be incorporated into the land use matrix. In
all cases, except where noted by the lack of an SIC code number, the SIC Manual
will be used to define uses within a category.
Any application for a development permit shall be accompanied by such
information as is deemed necessary by the Director of Community Development in
order to determine the applicable SIC code. The assignment of the appropriate
classification shall determine the proper zoning district for the intended use.
The SIC code shall be used as a guide.
The determination of the Director of Community Development as to the proper
classification of any use under said SIC designation shall be final, subject to
appeal as provided in this title. (Ord. 1190, 6-17-1996)
9-5-6: SUFFIXES TO ZONING DISTRICTS:
A.   For the purpose of establishing the minimum lot size in the RE and RS
Districts, a numerical suffix shall follow the zoning district code. The
numerical suffix shall denote the minimum lot size within the subject property.
1.   In the RS District, the lot size suffixes shall be identified in one
thousand (1,000) square foot increments for minimum lot sizes between five
thousand (5,000) and fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet. For lots greater
than fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet in size, the lot size suffix shall
be identified in five thousand (5,000) square foot increments.
2.   In the RE District, the lot size suffixes shall identify the minimum lot
size in acres and shall be denoted in one-acre increments up to lots of ten
(10) acres in size. Lot sizes of greater than ten (10) acres shall be denoted
in five (5) acre increments.
3.   Examples:
Lot Size Suffix Minimum Area Per Lot
Lot Size Suffix Minimum Area Per Lot
RS - 5          5,000 square feet
RS - 6          6,000 square feet
RS - 7          7,000 square feet
RS - 8          8,000 square feet
RS - 9          9,000 square feet
RS - 10         10,000 square feet
RS - 11         11,000 square feet
RS - 12         12,000 square feet
RS - 13         13,000 square feet
RS - 14         14,000 square feet
RS - 15         15,000 square feet
RS - 20         20,000 square feet
RS - 25         25,000 square feet
RS - 30         30,000 square feet
RS - 35         35,000 square feet
RS - 40         40,000 square feet
RE - 1A         1 acre
RE - 2A         2 acres
RE - 3A         3 acres
RE - 4A         4 acres
RE - 5A         5 acres
RE - 6A         6 acres
RE - 7A         7 acres
RE - 8A         8 acres
RE - 9A         9 acres
RE - 10A        10 acres
RE - 15A        15 acres
RE - 20A        20 acres
 
(Ord. 1190, 6-17-1996)
B.   For the purpose of establishing the maximum density of developments in the
RM and RH Districts, a numerical suffix shall follow the zoning district code.
The numerical suffix shall denote the maximum density per acre allowed within
the subject property.
1.   Examples:
DU/Acre Suffix Permitted DU/Acre
DU/Acre Suffix Permitted DU/Acre
RM - 4         4 dwellings per acre
RM - 6         6 dwellings per acre
RM - 8         8 dwellings per acre
RM - 10        10 dwellings per acre
RM - 12        12 dwellings per acre
RH - 8         8 dwellings per acre
RH - 10        10 dwellings per acre
RH - 12        12 dwellings per acre
RH - 14        14 dwellings per acre
RH - 16        16 dwellings per acre
RH - 18        18 dwellings per acre
 
(Ord. 2357, 5-6-2019)
C.   Comprehensive Plan Suffixes:
1.   To identify properties within any zoning district that has specific
development standards or conditions identified within the Comprehensive Plan, a
suffix of (CP) will be included to notify individuals to refer to the
Comprehensive Plan for further requirements.
2.   As an example, single-family residential properties within the Buffalo
Road Corridor Subarea of the Comprehensive Plan have a minimum lot size of
thirteen thousand (13,000) square feet (except for 5 properties in the area
that are 10,000 square foot lots) and other development standards identified in
the Comprehensive Plan. Those properties would be identified as follows:
RS-13 (CP). (Ord. 1190, 6-17-1996)
9-5-7: BUILDING FORM REGULATIONS AND ZONING DISTRICT COMPATIBILITY FOR
RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS:
A.   Intent:
1.   The following sections designate the appropriate form and scale (and
therefore, character) of residential development. This framework will allow for
a common understanding of development characteristics present in residential
uses of and promote appropriate transition of different intensities within the
City.
2.   Building form regulations are a set of design regulations for controlling
building types and how they impact the public realm and the character of the
City. Building form regulations can control such things as: the mass of
building; unit arrangement; the visibility and accessibility of building
entrances and public space along with certain accessory elements such as
garages.
3.   Zoning district compatibility requirements designate that the intensity of
any proposed residential development will be compatible with other existing
residential development in the area. Compatibility requirements compare the
density of the proposed development with the surrounding developed properties
and place controls on density or building form to assure appropriate intensity
transitioning.
B.   Building Type:
1.   Single Family Detached (SF-D): Unit arrangements:
a.   One dwelling per lot. Lot shall meet the minimum bulk regulations for the
respective single family zoning district.
(1)   Typical property regime: Ownership of unit structure and real property.
May have common property providing storm water management or buffering
requirements. Maintenance and management of common property provided by an
association.
b.   One second dwelling unit is allowed on the same lot as a single family
dwelling.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5dd626f68508237cd281a645678e92f34786b23f/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3275.png]
 
2.   Multi Family Detached (MF-D): Unit arrangements: no attachment.
a.   Footprint lots: One dwelling unit per footprint lot, multiple footprint
lots are allowed within the common property. Density of units within the common
property must meet allowed density of the respective zoning district.
(1)   Typical property regime: Ownership of unit structure and real property.
Will have common property providing services to units (i.e., utilities,
access), storm water management or buffering requirements. Maintenance and
management of common areas provided by an association.
b.   No real property associated with unit: Multiple dwellings are allowed
within the common property. Density of units within the common property must
meet allowed density of the respective zoning district.
(1)   Typical property regimes: Separate ownership of just the unit envelopes
and common property, or one owner of all buildings and common property, will
have common property providing services to units (i.e., utilities, access),
storm water management or buffering requirements. Maintenance and management of
common areas and possibly the dwelling units provided by an association or
property manager.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5dd626f68508237cd281a645678e92f34786b23f/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3273.png]
 
 
Zoning:                      Ag/OS RE RS R-1 SF-CR SF-VJ MH RM RH
Multi-family detached (MF-D)                             P  P
 
3.   Multi Family Attached Horizontal (MF-AH): Unit arrangements: units are
attached only horizontal, no stacked units. Units may be attached along side
walls or attached along the side and rear wall.
a.   Footprint lots: One dwelling unit per footprint lot, multiple dwellings
are allowed within the common property. Density of units within the common
property must meet allowed density of the respective zoning district.
(1)   Typical property regime: Ownership of unit structure and real property.
Will have common property providing services to units (i.e., utilities,
access), storm water management or buffering requirements. Maintenance and
management of common areas provided by an association.
b.   No real property associated with unit: Multiple dwellings are allowed
within the common property. Density of units within the common property must
meet allowed density of the respective zoning district.
(1)   Typical property regimes: Separate ownership of just the unit envelopes
and common property or one owner of all buildings and common property. Will
have common property providing services to units (i.e., utilities, access),
storm water management or buffering requirements. Maintenance and management of
common areas and possibly the dwelling units provided by an association or
property manager.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5dd626f68508237cd281a645678e92f34786b23f/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3271.png]
 
 
Zoning:                                  Ag/OS RE RS R-1 SF-CR SF-VJ MH RM RH
Multi-family attached horizontal (MF-AH)                                P  P
 
4.   Multi Family Attached Vertical (MF-AH): Unit arrangements: units are
attached vertically and may be attached horizontally.
a.   No real property associated with unit: Multiple dwellings are allowed
within the common property. Density of units within the common property must
meet allowed density of the respective zoning district.
(1)   Typical property regimes: Separate ownership of just the unit envelopes
and common property or one owner of all buildings and common property. Will
have common property providing services to units (i.e., utilities, access)
storm water management or buffering requirements. Maintenance and management of
common areas and possibly the dwelling units provided by an association or
property manager.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5dd626f68508237cd281a645678e92f34786b23f/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3269.png]
 
 
Zoning:                                Ag/OS RE RS R-1 SF-CR SF-VJ MH RM RH
Multi-family attached vertical (MF-AV)                                P  P
 
C.   Zoning District Compatibility and Transitioning:
1.   Transition of Densities: To assure an appropriate transition in lot sizes
or densities with other existing residential development in the area, any
residential development proposed for review and approval after the effective
date hear of shall meet the follow requirements:
a.   The density of multi-family developments should not differ more than fifty
percent (50%) from the average density of the developed properties within two
hundred feet (200') of the subject property.
b.   Developed properties are defined as those properties that are zoned
residential and platted as a detached unit residential subdivision prior to the
subject property obtaining Final Plat or Site Plan Permit approval.
c.   Proposed development that will not meet the density transition guidelines
as noted above, shall mitigate the impact of the development by transitioning
the building form within the development as noted below:
2.   Transition of Building Form: To assure compatibility of residential
developments that do not meet the density transition noted above, the number of
units per building, length of the building and the number of stories per
building will be restricted according to the following:
a.   Applicability - Building Mass Buffer will apply as follows:
(1)   Will apply to Medium or High Density Residentially zoned properties with
plat or site plan permits approved after October 19, 2012.
(2)   Will not apply to any property with a PUD in existence prior to October
19, 2012.
(3)   Will not apply along an adjacent property when a developing property
modifies their zoning classification prior to development of the adjacent
property that then triggers the need for the building mass buffer.
b.   Multi Family Zoning Districts - Building Mass Buffer: one hundred fifty
(150) feet from any adjacent developed property where the proposed development
cannot meet the density transition as provided in Sub Section C1a of this
section.
(1)   Buffer is measured from the lower density property line and includes the
ROW if a street separates the subject properties.
(2)   Buffer will overlay any required setbacks, landscape buffer park or
easements on the property.
c.   Restrictions - Within the Building Mass Buffer, the following shall apply:
(1)   No more than six (6) attached units per building.
(2)   No more than two (2) stories in height.
(3)   Maximum building length (measured from foundation of parallel walls of
greatest distance apart):
(A)   Residential Buildings - Maximum length of one hundred and sixty (160)
feet.
(B)   Garage Buildings - Maximum length of one hundred (100) feet.
(4)   For every eight (8) garage bays, there must be a total garage building
separation of no less than twenty (20) feet.
(5)   The above restrictions apply to the entirety of any building located
fully or partially within the Building Mass Buffer.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5dd626f68508237cd281a645678e92f34786b23f/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3267.png]
 
(Ord. 1961, 10-15-2012; amd. Ord. 2344, 2-19-2019; Ord. 2357, 5-6-2019; Ord.
2358, 5-6-2019; Ord. 2514, 5-2-2022; Ord. 2662, 7-7-2025)
9-5-8: OPEN SPACE/AGRICULTURAL AND RESIDENTIAL USE REGULATIONS:
A.   Introduction: These matrices represent those uses in the applicable
Residential Districts which are permitted (P), a permitted conditional use
permit (Pc), or not permitted (blank space). The applicable zoning district is
B.   Table Of Contents:
 
Table
1. Residential uses                5.1
3. Agricultural and animal keeping  5.2
4. Recreational uses               5.3
5. Other uses                      5.4
6. Public administration           5.5
 
C.   Use Matrices:
   TABLE 5.1 RESIDENTIAL USES
   Permitted = P Permitted conditional use = Pc Not permitted = Blank
space
SIC #   Classification titlZoning Districts
   Use description         RE RS R-1 SF-CR SF-VJ MH RM RH OS
   TABLE 5.1 RESIDENTIAL USES
   Permitted = P Permitted conditional use = Pc Not permitted = Blank space
SIC #   Classification title/                  Zoning Districts
   Use description                             RE RS R-1 SF- SF- MH RM RH OS
                                                            CR  VJ
Single-family dwelling
   Detached                                    P  P  P   P   P   P      P
Tiny Home                                         P  P  P   P   P   P      P
Manufactured or Mobile Home, individual not part  P  P  P   P   P   P      P
of a ‘mobile home park’
Park Home or Park Model                                              Pc
   Second dwelling                             P  P  P   P   P   P      P
Multi-family dwelling
   Detached                                                 P  P  P   
   Attached dwellings - horizontal or vertical                P  P   
attachment
 
6515 Manufactured or Mobile Home Park                         P       
805  Nursing and personal care facilities           Pc Pc Pc Pc Pc P  P  P   
835  Child and day care services - must comply with Iowa Administrative Code
     441, Chapter 110 and Code of Iowa, Chapter 237A
    Childcare in home - five (5) children or less1 P  P  P  P  P  P      P
    Child development home1 - maximum six (6) full P  P  P  P  P  P      P
     time children (State license category A or B)
    Child development home1 - seven (7) or more                     
     full-time children (State license category C)
    Childcare center (commercial) - seven (7) or             Pc Pc Pc  
     more full-time children
Note:
   1.   In-home daycare/child development home/childcare require a Home
Occupation Permit issued by the city in addition to any State requirements,
registration, and/or licensing.
 
 
RE    Residential Estate District        MH Manufactured Housing District
RS    Residential Single-Family District RM Residential Medium-Density District
R-1   Single-Family Residential District RH Residential High-Density District
SF-CR Single-Family Commerce Residential OS Agricultural/Open Space District
      District
SF-VJ Single-Family Valley Junction Residential District
 
 
   TABLE 5.2 AGRICULTURAL AND ANIMAL KEEPING
   Permitted = P Permitted conditional use = Pc Not permitted = Blank space
 
SIC #   Classification titlZoning Districts
      Use description   RE RS R-1 SF-CR SF-V J M H RM RH
01         Agricultural production - crops outdoors
          011 Cash grains                                P  P  P  P  P  P  P P
               Cultivation of marijuana with or without a
          018 license as a medical cannabidiol                         
               manufacturer
02         Agricultural production, Livestock and Animal                
           Specialties
               Concentrated Animal Feeding Operations
             (AFO) - open air and/or confined within a                
               structure (CAFO)
               Agricultural Production Animals, Personal
             -                                                        
               lot size less than forty thousand (40,000)
               square foot
               Agricultural Production Animals, Personal
               -
             lot size of forty thousand (40,000) square Pc Pc Pc Pc Pc Pc   
               foot or greater - maximum eight (8)
               animals, including dogs and cats
             Homesteader Farm                                         
             Agricultural Production Animals,                         
               Commercial
           Horses and Other Equines - A minimum lot size
0272       of two (2) acres is required and a minimum of  Pc             
           two (2) acres per horse is required
           Apiary (bee and honey farm/ beekeeping) (no
0279 -9901 minimum lot size) See                          P  P  P  P  P  P    
           9-10-4.19 for specific regulations related to
           beekeeping
0752       Animal special services except veterinary -    Pc             
           horse only
 
RE    Residential Estate District MH     Manufactured Housing District
RS    Residential Single-Family   RM     Residential Medium-Density
      District                           District
R-1   Single-Family Residential   RH     Residential High-Density District
      District
SF-CR Single-Family Commerce
      Residential District        SF-V J Single-Family Valley Junction
                                        Residential District
 
   TABLE 5.3 RECREATIONAL USES
   Permitted = P Permitted conditional use = Pc Not permitted = Blank space
SIC #   Classification title/ Use descriptiZoning Districts
                                              RE RS R-1 SF-C R SF-V J MH RM RH
   TABLE 5.3 RECREATIONAL USES
   Permitted = P Permitted conditional use = Pc Not permitted = Blank space
SIC #   Classification title/ Use descriptioZoning Districts
                                               RE RS R-1 SF-C R SF-V J MH RM RH
Parks, public or private (including typical
courts, fields and facilities found in public  P  P  P   P      P      P  P  P
parks)
Tennis courts, private                         P  P  P   P      P      P  P  P
Trails, pedestrian/biking                      P  P  P   P      P      P  P  P
7991 Physical fitness facilities               Pc Pc Pc  Pc     Pc     Pc Pc Pc
7992 Golf course, public or private            P  P  P   P      P      P  P  P
7997 Membership Sports and Recreation Clubs,   Pc Pc Pc  Pc     Pc     Pc Pc Pc
     except golf and country clubs
    - Membership golf and country club        P  P  P   P      P      P  P  P
     Amusement and Recreation Services, NEC -
7999 horse shows, horse stables and commercial Pc                       
     areas only
Notes:
   **   Recreational Facilities - see Section
9-10-4  A.21 in Code.
 
 RE  Residential Estate District MH     Manufactured Housing District
RS    Residential Single-Family   RM     Residential Medium-Density
      District                           District
R-1   Single-Family Residential   RH     Residential High-Density District
      District
SF-CR Single-Family Commerce      SF-V J Single-Family Valley Junction
      Residential District               Residential District
 
   TABLE 5.4 OTHER USES
   Permitted = P Permitted conditional use = Pc Not permitted = Blank
space
SIC #   Classification titlZoning Districts
      Use description   RE RS R-1 SF-CR SF-VJ M H RM RH
   TABLE 5.4 OTHER USES
   Permitted = P Permitted conditional use = Pc Not permitted = Blank space
SIC #   Classification title/                                          Zoning Districts
      Use description                                               RE RS R- SF- SF- M  RM RH
                                                                                1  CR  VJ  H
     Accessory uses and structures (other than to agricultural or         P  P  P  P   P   P  P  P
     dwellings)
     Gardens, noncommercial                                               P  P  P  P   P   P  P  P
     Open or outdoor storage
1381 Drilling oil and gas wells
491  Electric services                                                    P  P  P  P   P   P  P  P
493  Combination electric and gas, and other utility services             P  P  P  P   P   P  P  P
494  Water supply                                                         P  P  P  P   P   P  P  P
495  Sanitary services - sewerage systems                                 P  P  P  P   P   P  P  P
2
543  Fruit and Vegetable Markets
       (i.e., roadside stands) - seasonal or permanent commercial, grown
     - on-site                                                            Pc
       May also operate as “P” (permitted) under Temporary Use Permit
5992 Florist
       (i.e., roadside stands) - seasonal or permanent commercial, grown
     - on-site
       May also operate as “P” (permitted) under Temporary Use Permit
6553 Cemeteries                                                           Pc Pc Pc Pc  Pc  Pc Pc Pc
7261 Funeral services and crematories                                     Pc Pc Pc Pc  Pc  Pc Pc Pc
8211 Elementary and secondary school                                      P  P  P  P   P   P  P  P
8322 Individual and family social services                                Pc Pc Pc Pc  Pc  Pc Pc Pc
 
 
SIC #   Classification title/ Use descriptionZoning Districts
                                                RE RS R-1 SF-CR SF-VJ M H RM RH
8331 Job training and vocational rehabilitation Pc Pc Pc  Pc    Pc    Pc  Pc Pc
     services
8399 Social services NEC                        Pc Pc Pc  Pc    Pc    Pc  Pc Pc
8661 Religious organizations                    Pc Pc Pc  Pc    Pc    Pc  Pc Pc
 
Notes:
   **   All uses with outdoor storage or display - see Sections
9-10-4.A.8 and
9-10-4.A.9 in code.
   **   All uses with a canopy structure, either free-standing or
attached to building - see Section
9-10-4.A.28 in code.
 
RE     Residential Estate District MH     Manufactured Housing District
RS     Residential Single-Family   RM     Residential Medium-Density
       District                           District
R-1    Single-Family Residential   RH     Residential High-Density District
       District
SF-C R Single-Family Commerce      SF-V J Single-Family Valley Junction
       Residential District               Residential District
 
   TABLE 5.5 PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION
   Permitted = P Permitted conditional use = Pc Not permitted = Blank
space
SIC #   Classification titlRE RS R-1 SF-CR SF-VJ M H RM RH
      Use description
   TABLE 5.5 PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION
   Permitted = P Permitted conditional use = Pc Not permitted = Blank space
SIC #   Classification title/               RE RS R-1 SF-CR SF-VJ M H RM RH
      Use description
91   Executive, legislative, and general       Pc Pc Pc  Pc    Pc    Pc  Pc Pc
     government, except finance
92   Public order and safety
9221 Police Protection                         Pc Pc Pc                  Pc Pc
9224 Fire protection                           Pc Pc Pc  Pc    Pc    Pc  Pc Pc
9229 Public order and safety, NEC              Pc Pc Pc                  Pc Pc
93   Public finance, taxation and monetary     Pc Pc Pc                  Pc Pc
     policy
94   Administration of human resource programs Pc Pc Pc                  Pc Pc
95   Administration of environmental quality   Pc Pc Pc                  Pc Pc
     and housing programs
96   Administration of general economic        Pc Pc Pc                  Pc Pc
     programs
 
 
RE     Residential Estate District MH     Manufactured Housing District
RS     Residential Single-Family   RM     Residential Medium-Density
       District                           District
R-1    Single-Family Residential   RH     Residential High-Density District
       District
SF-C R Single-Family Commerce      SF-V J Single-Family Valley Junction
       Residential District               Residential District
 
(Ord. 1309, 6-29-1998; amd. Ord. 1472, 3-18-2002; Ord. 1575, 3-29-2004; Ord.
1618, 1-31-2005; Ord. 1816, 10-6-2008; Ord. 1817, 10-6-2008; Ord. 2136, 1-26-
2016; Ord. 2141, 4-4-2016; Ord. 2162, 8-8-2016; Ord. 2248, 9-18-2017; Ord.
2285, 3-5-2018; Ord. 2454, 12-7-2020; Ord. 2514, 5-2-2022; Ord. 2608, 4-15-
2024; Ord. 2621, 8-5-2024; Ord. 2662, 7-7-2025)
9-5-9: INDEX:
Table SIC Classification/Use
Table SIC       Classification/Use
5.5   95        Administration of Environmental Quality and Housing Programs
5.5   96        Administration of General Economic Programs
5.5   94        Administration of Human Resource Programs
5.2   01        Agricultural Production
5.2   02        Agricultural production, Livestock and Animal Specialties
5.3   7999      Amusement and Recreation Services, not elsewhere classified -
                horse shows, horse stables and commercial areas only
5.2   0752      Animal Special Services Except Veterinary - horse only
5.2   0279-9901 Apiary (bee and honey farm/ beekeeping) (no minimum lot size)
                See 9-10-4.19 for specific regulations related to beekeeping
5.2   011       Cash Grains
5.4   6553      Cemeteries
5.1   8351      Child and Day Care Services
5.4   493       Combination Electric and Gas, and Other Utility Services
5.4   1381      Drilling Oil and Gas Wells
5.4   491       Electric Services
5.4   8211      Elementary and Secondary School
5.5   91        Executive, Legislative, and General Government, except Finance
5.5   9224      Fire Protection
5.4   5992      Florist
5.4   543       Fruit and Vegetable Markets
5.4   7261      Funeral Services And Crematories
5.3   7992      Golf Course, public or private
                Horses and Other Equines - A minimum lot size of two (2) acres
5.2   0272      is required and a minimum of two (2) acres per horse is
                required
5.4   8322      Individual and Family Social Services
5.4   8331      Job Training and Vocational Rehabilitation Services
5.1   6515      Manufactured or Mobile Home Park
5.3   7997      Membership Sports and Recreation Clubs,
                except golf and country clubs
5.1   805       Nursing and Personal Care Facilities
5.3   7991      Physical Fitness Facilities
5.5   9221      Police Protection
5.5   93        Public Finance, Taxation and Monetary Policy
5.5   9229      Public Order and Safety, not elsewhere classified
5.5   92        Public Order And Safety
5.4   8661      Religious Organizations
5.4   4952      Sanitary Services - Sewerage Systems
5.4   8399      Social Services not elsewhere classified
5.4   494       Water Supply
 
(Ord. 1575, 3-29-2004; amd. Ord. 2136, 1-26-2016; Ord. 2248, 9-18-2017; Ord.
2454, 12-7-2020; Ord. 2608, 4-15-2024)
CHAPTER 6
COMMERCIAL, OFFICE AND INDUSTRIAL ZONING DISTRICT
SECTION:
9-6-1: Title And Citation
9-6-2: Purpose
9-6-3: Interpretations
9-6-4: Specific Use Regulations
9-6-5: Use Codes
9-6-6: Commercial, Office And Industrial Use Regulations
9-6-7: Index
9-6-1: TITLE AND CITATION:
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the COMMERCIAL USE MATRIX.
(Ord. 1190, 6-17-1996)
9-6-2: PURPOSE:
A.   For the purposes of this chapter, it shall be generally recognized that
the type of use is not so important as the manner in which the use is
accomplished. It would be impractical, if not impossible, to accurately
enumerate all of the uses which would be beneficial or detrimental to the
community at large. It is also intended that the districts listed in this
chapter shall not be used indiscriminately to permit any use which could be
detrimental to the public health, welfare, and safety of the community or its
citizens. While the City desires to encourage the development of the community,
it shall be done in a responsible manner consistent with the rules and
regulations of the City and in accordance with the goals and policies of the
Comprehensive Plan.
B.   The regulations set forth in this chapter specify the uses that are
allowed in the various zones under this chapter. (Ord. 1190, 6-17-1996)
9-6-3: INTERPRETATIONS:
A.   Uses shown in the matrix as "permitted" (P), are a permitted use by right
in the applicable district; however, new construction or expansion of existing
structures, or expansion of the area of use or operation, shall require review
and site plan development approval by the city.
B.   Uses shown in the matrix as "permitted conditional use permit" (Pc) may be
permitted in the applicable district following review and approval by the Board
of Adjustment. This requirement shall apply to new uses, as well as the
expansion of any use or change in operation.
A permitted conditional use permit (Pc) allows the City to regulate the
intensity of development of a particular use, activity, or location. A
permitted conditional use (Pc) should not be seen as a means to prohibit uses
but as a way to allow the City to secure more information concerning a specific
use and its operational characteristics and apply conditions or restrictions on
its operation as deemed necessary to limit impacts to surrounding properties
and guard the safety, health and welfare of this community. It is further the
intent of this chapter to allow flexibility and diversity of land uses.
C.   Each use is subject to all provisions of this title.
D.   Where a proposed land use is not identified in this chapter, the Director
of Development Services or their designee shall review the proposed use, based
upon the characteristics of the use and operational intentions, to determine
which of the uses listed in this chapter is most closely equivalent to that
proposed and thus whether to classify the property land use as permitted (P) or
as a permitted conditional use (Pc). The proposed use, if determined to be
equivalent to an allowed use, shall be subject to review through the process
indicated within the matrix. (Ord. 1190, 6-17-1996; amd. Ord. 2274, 2-5-2018;
Ord. 2570, 7-5-2023)
9-6-4: SPECIFIC USE REGULATIONS:
A.   The following regulations shall be applied to the specific uses listed
below in any district where that use is allowed:
1.   Day nursery schools and childcare centers shall be allowed, provided that
no building, structure or accessory use for property so used, is located no
closer than thirty feet (30') from any other principal building on any other
lot in a Residential District. In addition there must be an established and
well maintained, fenced play lot of no less than one thousand (1,000) square
feet in area for the first twenty (20) or less children under care, with twenty
five (25) square feet added to such play lot area for each additional
designated child capacity of the principal building.
2.   The best practical means known for the disposal of refuse matter or water
carried waste, and abatement of obnoxious or offensive odor, dust, smoke, gas,
noise or similar nuisance, shall be employed for any use within this chapter.
(Ord. 2136, 1-26-2016)
3.   Unless allowed elsewhere in this title or defined within a planned unit
development (PUD) or Specific Plan Ordinance (ZCSP), residential uses shall be
prohibited within the Commercial, Office and Industrial Districts. Residential
uses located above nonresidential uses and single-family detached dwellings in
the Valley Junction Historical Business District and Valley Junction Commercial
District may be permitted in accordance with Building, Fire and Rental Codes.
Residential uses are not allowed on the first floor of a mixed-use building in
the Valley Junction Historical Business District and Valley Junction Commercial
District. Multi-family residential uses are permitted within the Support
Commercial Zoning District when incorporated and approved by the City Council
as part of a mixed use building and/or development. Multi-family residential
uses shall be permitted within the Professional Commerce Park (PCP) Zoning
District when the only use within a standalone building and approved by the
City Council. (Ord. 2333, 12-26-2018)
4.   The maximum number of consecutive nights tents, camp trailers, travel
trailers, motor homes, or similar movable or temporary sleeping quarters may
occupy a campground is fifteen (15). After fifteen (15) nights, the temporary
sleeping quarters must be removed from the campground for a minimum of three
(3) consecutive nights. (Ord. 2136, 1-26-2016)
5.   The intent of this subsection is to create benchmarks to clearly
distinguish the differences in restaurants, bar/restaurants and bars (aka
drinking places (SIC 5813)). In determining the variations in the use,
businesses that serve food and beverages are divided into four (4) class
categories. The classes are defined by a list of operational characteristics
that help to establish the intensity of how the use operates and help
anticipate possible impact to the surrounding area. The following chart shall
be used to determine the class category for uses under SIC 58.
FLOWCHART 6.1
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5dd626f68508237cd281a645678e92f34786b23f/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3393.png]
 
(Od. 2136, 1-26-2016; amd. Ord. 2333, 12-26-2018; Ord. 2364, 6-3-2019; Ord.
2566, 5-15-2023)
9-6-5: USE CODES:
A.   The City hereby adopts the "Standard Industrial Classification Manual"
(1987 edition) as prepared by the U.S. Office of Management and Budget, as a
method of classifying and defining permitted uses in the zoning districts. Any
subsequent supplements and amendments to the "Standard Industrial
Classification Manual" (SIC) will be incorporated into the land use matrix. In
all cases, except where noted by the lack of an SIC code number, the SIC Manual
will be used to define uses within a category.
Any application for a development permit shall be accompanied by such
information as is deemed necessary by the Director of Community Development in
order to determine the applicable SIC code. The assignment of the appropriate
classification shall determine the proper zoning district for the intended use.
The SIC code shall be used as a guide.
The determination of the Director of Community Development as to the proper
classification of any use shall be final, subject to appeal as provided in this
title. (Ord. 1190, 6-17-1996)
9-6-6: COMMERCIAL, OFFICE AND INDUSTRIAL USE REGULATIONS:
A.   Introduction: The following matrix represents those uses in the applicable
zoning districts which are permitted (P), allowed with the approval of a
permitted conditional use permit (Pc), or not permitted (blank space). The
applicable zoning district is identified at the top of the matrix and the uses,
and their SIC codes, are identified along the left side of the matrix. For the
ease of finding a particular subject in the matrix, a table of contents has
been included that identifies the subject areas and the page number of the
beginning of that section in the matrix.
B.   Table Of Contents:
Division A - Agricultural, Forestry, And Fishing   SIC Major Group
Division A - Agricultural, Forestry, And Fishing   SIC Major Group
Agricultural production - crops                                              01
Agricultural production - livestock and animal specialties                   02
Agricultural services                                                        07
Forestry, except forestry services                                           08
Fishing, hunting and trapping - noncommercial only                           09
Division B - Mining
Metal mining                                                                 10
Coal mining                                                                  12
Oil and gas extraction                                                       13
Mining and quarrying of nonmetallic materials except fuels                   14
Division C - Construction
Building construction - general contractors and operative builders           15
Heavy construction other than building construction - contractors            16
Construction - special trade contractors                                     17
Division D - Manufacturing
Food and kindred products                                                 20
Tobacco products                                                             21
Textile mill, products                                                       22
Apparel and other finished products made from fabrics and other similar      23
materials
Lumber and wood products                                                     24
Furniture and fixtures                                                       25
Paper and allied products, except SIC 2611, 2621, and 2631                   26
Printing, publishing and allied industries, except SIC 275                   27
Chemicals and allied products, except SIC 283, 2844, 2892, and 2899          28
Petroleum refining and related industries, except SIC 2951                   29
Rubber and miscellaneous plastics products                                   30
Leather and leather products, except SIC 311                                 31
Stone, clay, glass and concrete products                                     32
Primary metal industries, except SIC 3313, 3315, 336, 3398 and 3399          33
Fabricated metal products, except machinery and transportation equipment     34
Industrial and commercial machinery and computer equipment, except SIC 357   35
Electronic and other electrical equipment and components, except computer    36
equipment, and except SIC 3691 and 3692
Transportation equipment                                                     37
Measuring, analyzing, and controlling instruments; photographic, medical and 38
optical goods; watches and clocks
Miscellaneous manufacturing industries                                       39
Division E - Transportation, Communication And Public Utilities
Railroad transportation                                                      40
Local and suburban transit and interurban highway passenger transportation,  41
except bus terminal operations and ambulance services
Motor freight transportation and warehousing - section                       42
9-10-4.a.8 in code applicable to all SIC 42 uses
U.S. Postal Service                                                          43
Water transportation, except SIC 4493                                        44
Transportation by air                                                        45
Pipelines, except natural gas                                                46
Transportation services                                                      47
Communications - see Sections
9-10-4.A.2 and                                                               48
9-10-4.A.5 in code
Electric, Gas and Sanitary Services (includes Water Supply) - see Sections
9-10-4.A.2 and                                                               49
9-10-4-A.3 in code
Division F - Wholesale Trade
Wholesale trade - durable goods - no outdoor storage in Business Park (BP)   50
or Valley Junction Light Industrial (VJLI)
Wholesale trade - nondurable goods                                           51
Division G - Retail Trade
Building materials, hardware, garden supply and mobile home dealers          52
General merchandise stores                                                   53
Food stores                                                                  54
Automotive dealers and gasoline service stations                             55
Apparel and accessory stores                                                 56
Home Furniture, Furnishings and Equipment Stores, except SIC 5714, 572 and   57
5734
Eating and Drinking Places - see Title 3, Chapter 2 and Title 9, Chapters 2,
6, and 10 in city code for definitions, allowances, specific regulations and 58
performance standards
Miscellaneous retail                                                         59
Division H - Finance, Insurance, Real Estate And Other Office Uses Not
Elsewhere Classified
Depository Institutions, (e.g., banks and credit unions), except SIC 6099,   60
Check Cashing Agency if delayed deposit
Nondepository credit institutions, except SIC 6141                           61
Security and commodity brokers, dealers, exchanges and services              62
Insurance carriers                                                           63
Insurance agents, brokers, and services                                      64
Real estate office                                                           65
Holding and other investment offices                                         67
Division I - Services
Hotels, rooming houses, camps, and other lodging places                      70
Personal services                                                            72
Business services                                                            73
Automotive repair, services, and parking                                     75
Miscellaneous repair services                                                76
Motion pictures                                                              78
Amusement and recreation services                                            79
Health services                                                              80
Legal services                                                               81
Educational services                                                         82
Social services                                                              83
Museums, art galleries, and botanical and zoological gardens, except         84
botanical garden
Membership organizations, except SIC 866 and 869                             86
Engineering, accounting, research, management and related services           87
Services not elsewhere included                                              89
Division J - Public Administration
Executive, legislative and general government, except finance                91
Justice, public order and safety                                             92
Public finance, taxation and monetary policy                                 93
Administration of human resource programs                                    94
Administration of environmental quality and housing programs                 95
Administration of economic programs                                          96
National Security                                                            97
 
C.   Table 6.1 - Use Matrix:
DIVISION A - AGRICULTURE, FORESTRY AND FISHING
P = Permitted / Pc = Permitted Conditional / Blank Cell = Prohibited
SIC #                    Zoning District
Classification title/Use RC CMC NC CVC SC VJC VJHB WR BP VJLI LI GI OF PCP OS
description
DIVISION A - AGRICULTURE, FORESTRY AND FISHING
P = Permitted / Pc = Permitted Conditional / Blank Cell = Prohibited
SIC #                                                                     Zoning District
Classification title/Use description                                      RC CMC NC CVC SC VJC VJHB WR BP VJLI LI GI OF PCP OS
01    Agricultural production - crops outdoors
   011   Cash grains                                                P  P   P  P   P         P  P      P  P  P  P   P
   013   Field crops except cash grains                                                          P       P
   016   Vegetables and melons                                                                   P       P
   017   Fruit and tree nuts                                                                     P       P
   018   Horticulture specialties - other than cultivation of mariju a                           P       P
   -   Including Agritourism when on a working farm, horticultural o                                    Pc
agricultural operation
   -   Cultivation of marijuana with or without a license as a medic                                     
cannabidiol manufacturer
01    Agricultural production - crops under cover
   016    Vegetable and melons                                                                         P
   017    Fruit and tree nuts                                                                          P
   018    Horticultural specialties - other than cultivation of mar u a               P  P      P  P       P
   -   Including Agritourism when on a working farm, horticultural o                                    Pc
agricultural operation
   -    Cultivation of marijuana, with or without a license as a med a                                   
cannabidiol manufacturer
   -   Cultivation of marijuana as part of a licensed medical cannabidiol
manufacturer                                                                                           Pc       
      Must comply with the State s medical cannabidiol regulations
   019    General Farms, Primarily Crop                                                                P
   -   Including Agritourism when on a working farm, horticultural o                                    Pc
agricultural operation
02   Agricultural production - livestock and animal specialties
   -   Concentrated Animal Feeding Operations (AFO) - open air and/o                                     
confined within a structure (CAFO)
   -   Agricultural Production Animals, Personal - lot size less tha                                     
forty thousand (40,000) square foot
   -   Agricultural Production Animals, Personal - lot size of forty                                    Pc
thousand (40,000) square foot or greater
   -   Agricultural Production Animals, Commercial                                                       
        027   Animal specialties                                                                   P1
      0272   Horses and Other Equines - a minimum lot size of two 2                                  P1
acres is required and a minimum of two (2) acres per horse is required
      0279 -    Apiary (beekeeping, bee farm,
      9901   bee yard or honey farm) - no minimum lot size                                           P
      See
9-10-4.19 for specific regulations related to beekeeping
        029   General Farms, Primarily Livestock and Animal Specialties -
e.g., Homesteader Farms ("livestock" animal as defined in Code of Iowa,                                       P1
Sec, 717.1; "animal specialties" as included in SIC 027 listing)
   -   Animal Allowances:                                                                                
      -   Large animals (e.g., horse, cattle) - minimum of two (2 a es                               P1
per one (1) animal
      -   Medium animals (e.g., pigs, goats, sheep) - minimum of  e 1)                               P1
acre per four (4) animals
      -   Small animals (e.g., chickens, turkeys, geese) - minimu o                                  P1
(1) acre per ten (10) animals
      -   Collective number of animals shall not exceed ten (10)  r ac                               P1
one (1) acre of ground upon which the animals live and/or graze
      -   Including Agritourism when on a working farm, horticult a or                               Pc
agricultural operation
07   Agricultural services
   071   Soil preparation services                                                         P    P  P       P
   072   Crop services                                                                     P    P  P       P
   -   Cultivation of marijuana without a license as a medical                                           
cannabidiol manufacturer
   -   Cultivation of marijuana as part of a licensed medical cannabidiol
manufacturer                                                                                           Pc       
      Must comply with the State s medical cannabidiol regulations
   0741   Veterinary services for livestock - see Section                                        P        
9-10-4 .A.20 in code
   0742   Veterinary services for animal specialties - see Section
9-10-4 .A.19 in code
   -   No outdoor runs                                              Pc Pc  Pc    Pc Pc      Pc         P       P
   -   With outdoor runs                                                                                Pc
      0751   Livestock services, except veterinary                                                    
      0752   Animal specialty services, except veterinary, groomi   d                                Pc
boarding services
      -   Boarding, no outdoor runs                              Pc Pc  Pc    Pc Pc      Pc   Pc   Pc Pc      P
      -   Boarding, with outdoor runs                                                                Pc
      -   Grooming, no unattended animal(s) outside              P  P   P     P  P       P  P  P    P  P       P
      -   Grooming, with outdoor holding pens/cages/runs         Pc Pc  Pc    Pc Pc      Pc Pc Pc   Pc Pc      Pc
   076   Farm labor and management services                         P  P          P   P    P  P  P    P  P  P  P    
      0781   Landscape counseling and planning                   P  P   P       P   P    P  P  P    P  P  P  P   P
      0782   Lawn and garden services                                               P    P    P  P       P
      0783    Ornamental shrub and tree services                          P  P       P    P    P  P        
08   Forestry, except forestry services                                                                    Pc
   -   Including Agritourism when on a working farm, horticultural o                                    Pc
agricultural operation
   085   Forestry services                                                         P      P  P    P  P  P  P   P
09   Fishing, hunting and trapping - noncommercial only                                                    P
Notes:
   1.   Livestock and Animal Specialties: Approval of a Permitted Conditional (Pc) Use Permit shall be required for any
property upon which any building housing the animal(s) is located one hundred (100) feet or less from a residential dwelling
not on the same property as the animal(s).
 
 
RE    Residential Estate District        MH Manufactured Housing District
RS    Residential Single-Family District RM Residential Medium-Density District
R-1   Single-Family Residential District RH Residential High-Density District
SF-CR Single-Family Commerce Residential OS Agricultural/Open Space District
      District
SF-VJ Single-Family Valley Junction
      Residential District
 
(Ord. 1629, 4-25-2005; amd. Ord. 2160, 7-25-2016; Ord. 2285, 3-5-2018; Ord.
2454, 12-7-2020; Ord. 2608, 4-15-2024)
DIVISION B - MINING
P = Permitted / Pc = Permitted Conditional / Blank Cell = Prohibited
SIC #                    Zoning District
Classification title/Use RC CMC NC CVC SC VJC VJHB WR BP VJLI LI GI OF PCP OS
description
DIVISION B - MINING
P = Permitted / Pc = Permitted Conditional / Blank Cell = Prohibited
SIC #                                                        Zoning District
Classification title/Use description                         RC CMC NC CVC SC VJC VJHB WR BP VJLI LI GI OF PCP OS
10   Metal Mining
12   Coal Mining
13   Oil and Gas Extraction
14   Mining and Quarrying of Nonmetallic Minerals, except                                         Pc        Pc
Fuels
Notes:
   **   See Section 9-10-4 A.13 in code.
 
 
RE    Residential Estate District        MH Manufactured Housing District
RS    Residential Single-Family District RM Residential Medium-Density District
R-1   Single-Family Residential District RH Residential High-Density District
SF-CR Single-Family Commerce Residential OS Agricultural/Open Space District
      District
SF-VJ Single-Family Valley Junction
      Residential District
 
(Ord. 1629, 4-25-2005; amd. Ord. 2608, 4-15-2024)
DIVISION C - CONSTRUCTION
P = Permitted / Pc = Permitted Conditional / Blank Cell = Prohibited
SIC #                    Zoning District
Classification title/Use RC CMC NC CVC SC VJC VJHB WR BP VJLI LI GI OF PCP OS
description
DIVISION C - CONSTRUCTION
P = Permitted / Pc = Permitted Conditional / Blank Cell = Prohibited
SIC #                                                         Zoning District
Classification title/Use description                          RC CMC NC CVC SC VJC VJHB WR BP VJLI LI GI OF PCP OS
15   Building Construction - General Contractors and Operative Builders
   -   Offices only: no warehouse component             P  P   P         P   P    P  P  P    P  P  P  P
   -   With warehouse component - no outdoor storage                     Pc  Pc   P  P  P    P  P
   -   With warehouse component - paved outdoor storage yard                      Pc    Pc   Pc P
   -   With warehouse component - gravel outdoor storage yard                                   P
16   Heavy Construction other than Building Construction - Contractors
   -   Offices only: no warehouse component             P  P   P         P   P    P  P  P    P  P  P  P
   -   With warehouse component - no outdoor storage                     Pc  Pc   P  P  P    P  P
   -   With warehouse component - paved outdoor storage yard                      Pc    Pc   Pc P
   -   With warehouse component - gravel outdoor storage yard                                   P
17   Construction - Special Trade Contractors
   -   Offices only: no warehouse component             P  P   P         P   P    P  P  P    P  P  P  P
   -   With warehouse component - no outdoor storage                     Pc  Pc   P  P  P    P  P
   -   With warehouse component - paved outdoor storage yard                      Pc    Pc   Pc P
   -   With warehouse component - gravel outdoor storage yard                                   P
Notes:
   **   All uses with outdoor storage or display - see Sections 9-10-4.A.8 and 9-10-4.A.9 in code
 
 
RE    Residential Estate District        MH Manufactured Housing District
RS    Residential Single-Family District RM Residential Medium-Density District
R-1   Single-Family Residential District RH Residential High-Density District
SF-CR Single-Family Commerce Residential OS Agricultural/Open Space District
      District
SF-VJ Single-Family Valley Junction
      Residential District
 
(Ord. 1874, 6-28-2010; amd. Ord. 2608, 4-15-2024)
DIVISION D - MANUFACTURING
P = Permitted / Pc = Permitted Conditional / Blank Cell = Prohibited
SIC #                    Zoning District
Classification title/Use RC CMC NC CVC SC VJC VJHB WR BP VJLI LI GI OF PCP OS
description
DIVISION D - MANUFACTURING
P = Permitted / Pc = Permitted Conditional / Blank Cell = Prohibited
SIC #                                                                    Zoning District
Classification title/Use description                                     RC CMC NC CVC SC VJC VJHB WR BP VJLI LI GI OF PCP OS
20   Food and kindred products                                                                  
   201   Meat products                                                                                  
   202   Dairy products                                                                 P  P    P  P        
   203   Canned, Frozen, and Preserved Fruits, Vegetables, and Food                     P  P    P  P        
Specialties
   204   Grain mill products                                                                    P        
   205   Bakery products                                                                P  P    P  P        
   206   Sugar and confectionery products                                               P  P    P  P        
   207   Fats and oils                                                                          P        
   208   Beverages, except SIC 2082 & 2085                                              Pc     Pc P        
      2082   Malt Beverages (see Section 9-10-4.A.15)
      -   Brewery with no taproom - any square footage                               Pc     Pc P        
      -   Brewery five thousand (5,000) square feet or less in  Pc Pc  Pc    Pc    Pc   Pc Pc     Pc Pc       
conjunction with taproom
      -   Brewery between five thousand and one (5,001) square fPctPcnd     Pc        Pc Pc     Pc Pc       
ten thousand (10,000) square feet in conjunction with taproom
      -   Brewery ten thousand and one (10,001) square feet and  e er                Pc     Pc P        
in conjunction with taproom
      2085   Distilled and Blended Liquors (see Section 9-10-4 A.25.)
      -   Distillery with no taproom - any square footage                            Pc     Pc P        
      -   Distillery five thousand (5,000) square feet or less iPc Pc       Pc    Pc   Pc Pc     Pc Pc       
conjunction with taproom
      -   Distillery between five thousand and one (5,001) squarPcfPct      Pc        Pc Pc     Pc Pc       
and ten thousand (10,000) square feet in conjunction with taproom
      -   Distillery ten thousand and one (10,001) square feet a                     Pc     Pc Pc       
greater in conjunction with taproom
   209   Miscellaneous food preparations and kindred products, exce                     Pc Pc   Pc P        
SIC 2091 & SIC 2092
      2091   Canned and cured fish and seafood                                                       
      2092   Prepared Fresh or Frozen Fish and Seafoods                                              
21   Tobacco products                                                                            P  P        
22   Textile mill, products                                                                  P      P        
23   Apparel and other finished products made from fabrics and other                       P  P    P  P        
similar materials
24   Lumber and wood products                                                                              
   241   Logging
   -   Commercial business and/or activity                                                              
   -   Noncommercial - personal activity and use of wood                                               P
   242   Sawmills and planing mills
   -   Commercial business and/or activity
   -   Noncommercial - personal activity and use of wood                                                             P
   243   Millwork, veneer, plywood and structural wood members
      2431   Millwork                                                       Pc      P  P  Pc   P  P        
      2434   Wood kitchen cabinets                                          Pc      P  P  Pc   P  P        
      2435   Hardwood veneer and plywood                                               Pc   P  P        
      2436   Softwood veneer and plywood                                               Pc   P  P        
      2439   Structural wood members, not elsewhere classified                         Pc   P  P        
   244   Wood containers                                                                  Pc   Pc P        
   245   Wood buildings and mobile homes                                                Pc     P  P        
   249   Miscellaneous wood products, except SIC 2491 and 2493                            Pc   P  P        
      2491   Wood preserving                                                                         
      2493    Reconstituted wood products                                                            
25   Furniture and fixtures                                                       P   P    P  P  P    P  P        
26   Paper and allied products, except SIC 2611, 2621, and 2631                                    P        
   2611   Pulp mills                                                                                    
   2621   Paper mills                                                                                   
   2631   Paperboard mills                                                                              
27   Printing, publishing and allied industries, except SIC 275                          P  P  Pc   P  P        
     275   Commercial printing                                                      P  P  P    P  P        
28   Chemicals and allied products, except SIC 283, 2844, 2892, and 28                             Pc       
   283   Drugs, except processing of marijuana                                        P  P  P    P  P        
   -   Processing of marijuana as part of a licensed medical cannabidiol
manufacturer                                                                                          Pc       
      Must comply with the State medical cannabidiol regulations
   -   Processing of marijuana without a license as a medical                                           
cannabidiol manufacturer
   2844   Perfumes, Cosmetics and other Toilet Preparations, except                           Pc Pc       
cosmetic preparations
      -   Cosmetic preparations                                                    P  P  P    P  P        
   2875   Fertilizers, Mixing Only                                                      Pc     Pc Pc       
   2892   Explosives                                                                                    
   2899   Chemicals and chemical preparations, not elsewhere classi e                                   
29   Petroleum refining and related industries, except SIC 2951
   2951   Asphalt paving mixtures and blocks                                                    Pc       
30   Rubber and miscellaneous plastics products
   301   Tires and inner tubes                                                                  Pc       
   302   Rubber and plastic footwear                                                    Pc Pc   P  P        
   305   Gaskets, packing and sealing devices and rubber and plasti                           Pc P        
hoses and belting
   306   Fabricated rubber products, not elsewhere classified                             Pc   P  P        
   308   Miscellaneous plastic products, except SIC 3084 and 3089                       Pc Pc   P  P        
   3084   Plastic pipe                                                                        Pc P        
   3089   Plastic products, not elsewhere classified                                    Pc Pc   Pc P        
31   Leather and leather products, except SIC 311                                          P  Pc   P  P        
   311   Leather tanning and finishing                                                                  
32   Stone, Clay, Glass and Concrete Products
   321   Flat glass                                                                       Pc   Pc Pc       
   322   Glass and glassware, pressed and blown                                       Pc   Pc   Pc Pc       
   323   Glass Products, made of purchased glass                                      P    P    P  P        
   324   Cement, hydraulic                                                                    Pc Pc       
   325   Structural clay products                                                             Pc Pc       
   326   Pottery and related products                                          Pc  Pc   Pc Pc Pc   Pc Pc       
   327   Concrete, gypsum, and plaster products, except SIC 3271 an                           Pc Pc       
3273
   3271   Concrete block and brick                                                            P  P        
   3273   Ready-mixed concrete                                                                Pc Pc      Pc
   328   Cut stone and stone products                                                         Pc Pc       
   329   Abrasive, Asbestos, and Miscellaneous Nonmetallic Mineral                            P  Pc       
Products, except SIC 3292
   3292   Asbestos products                                                                             
33   Primary metal industries, except SIC 3313, 3315, 336, 3398 and 3399
   3313    Electrometallurgical products, except steel                                          Pc       
   3315   Steel wiredrawing, steel nails and spikes                                       Pc   Pc Pc       
   336   Nonferrous foundries (castings)                                                        Pc       
      3398   Metal heat treating                                                     Pc Pc   P  P        
      3399   Primary metal products, not elsewhere classified, e e                                   
metal fasteners
   -   Metal fasteners                                                                  Pc Pc   Pc P        
34   Fabricated metal products, except machinery and transportation equipment
   341   Metal cans and shipping containers                                               Pc   P  P        
   342   Cutlery, hand tools and general hardware                                       P  Pc   P  P        
   343   Heating equipment, except electric and warm air; and plumb g                   P  P    P  P        
fixtures, and except SIC 3431
      3431   Enameled iron and metal sanitary ware                                           P        
   344   Fabricated structural metal products, except SIC 3442 and  4                         Pc P        
      3442   Metal doors, sash, frames, molding and trim                             P  P    P  P        
      3444   Sheet Metal Work                                                        P  P    P  P        
      -   Cutlery, hand tools and general hardware using forged  d                         Pc Pc       
dropped forged manufacturing
      3451   Screw machine products                                                  P  P    P  P        
      3452   Bolts, nuts, screws, rivets and washers                                   Pc   Pc Pc       
   346   Metal forging and stamping                                                             Pc       
   347   Coating, engraving and allied services                                           Pc   Pc P  P      
   348   Ordinance and accessories, and guided missiles, except SIC 4                                   
      3484   Small arms                                                              P      P  P        
   349   Miscellaneous fabricated metal products                                        Pc Pc   Pc P        
35   Industrial and commercial machinery and computer equipment, excep                     P  Pc   P  P        
SIC 357
   357   Computer and office equipment                                                P  P  Pc   P  P        
36   Electronic and Other Electrical Equipment and Components, except                      P  P    P  P        
Computer Equipment, and except SIC 3691 and 3692
   3691   Storage batteries                                                                     Pc       
   3692   Primary batteries, Dry and Wet                                                        Pc       
37   Transportation equipment
   371   Motor Vehicles and Motor Vehicle Equipment, except SIC 3714
      No outside storage in Light Industrial (LI) and Business Park B                   P      P  P        
zones
   3714   Motor Vehicle Parts and Accessories - no outdoor storage                      P  Pc   P  P        
   372   Aircraft and parts, except SIC 3724                                          Pc P  Pc   P  P        
      3724   Aircraft engines and engine parts                                     P  P  Pc   P  P        
   373   Ship and boat building and repair                                                      P        
   374   Railroad equipment                                                                     P        
   375   Motorcycles, bicycles, and parts                                               P  Pc   P  P        
   376   Guided missiles, space vehicles and parts                                    P  P  Pc   P  P        
   379   Miscellaneous Transportation Equipment - no outside storag i                   P  Pc   P  P        
Business Park (BP) zone
38   Measuring, Analyzing, and Controlling Instruments; Photographic,                    P  P  Pc   P  P        
Medical and Optical Goods; Watches and Clocks
   3843   Dental Equipment and Supplies, not to exceed five thousand
(5,000) square feet and no outdoor presence of the manufacturing
activity                                                                                                P      
         SIC 3843 at five thousand and one (5,001) square feet and
greater as provided in SIC 38
39   Miscellaneous manufacturing industries
   391   Jewelry, Silverware and Plated Ware, except SIC 3914                  P   P    P  P  P    P  P        
   3914   Silverware                                                                      Pc   Pc Pc       
   393   Musical instruments                                                          P  P  P    P  P        
   394   Dolls, Toys, Games, and Sporting and Athletic Goods                          P  P  P    P  P        
   395   Pens, pencils, office and other art supplies and materials                   P  P  P    P  P        
   396   Costume Jewelry, Costume Novelties, Buttons and Miscellane s          P   P    P  P  P    P  P        
Notions, except Precious Metal
   399   Miscellaneous Manufacturing Industries, except SIC 3995 an                     P  Pc   P  P        
3996
   3995   Burial caskets                                                                  Pc   Pc P        
   3996   Linoleum, Asphalted-Felt-Base, and Other Hard Surface Flo                             Pc       
Coverings, not elsewhere classified
Notes:
   **   All uses with outdoor storage or display - see Section 9-10-4.A.8. and 9. in code
 
 
RE    Residential Estate District        MH Manufactured Housing District
RS    Residential Single-Family District RM Residential Medium-Density District
R-1   Single-Family Residential District RH Residential High-Density District
SF-CR Single-Family Commerce Residential OS Agricultural/Open Space District
      District
SF-VJ Single-Family Valley Junction
      Residential District
 
(Ord. 1629, 4-25-2005; amd. Ord. 2113, 9-8-2015; Ord. 2225, 5-30-2017; Ord.
2250, 9-18-2017; Ord. 2265, 12-11-2017; Ord. 2285, 3-5-2018; Ord. 2605, 4-15-
2024; Ord. 2608, 4-15-2024)
DIVISION E - TRANSPORTATION, COMMUNICATION AND PUBLIC UTILITIES
P = Permitted / Pc = Permitted Conditional / Blank Cell = Prohibited
SIC #                    Zoning District
Classification title/Use RC CMC NC CVC SC VJC VJHB WR BP VJLI LI GI OF PCP OS
description
DIVISION E - TRANSPORTATION, COMMUNICATION AND PUBLIC UTILITIES
P = Permitted / Pc = Permitted Conditional / Blank Cell = Prohibited
SIC #                                                                        Zoning District
Classification title/Use description                                         RC CMC NC CVC SC VJC VJHB WR BP VJLI LI GI OF PCP OS
40   Railroad transportation                                                                           Pc Pc   Pc Pc
41   Local and Suburban Transit and Interurban Highway Passenger                           Pc  Pc   Pc Pc Pc   Pc Pc P
Transportation, except bus terminal operations and ambulance services
         -    Bus and terminal operations                                                  Pc Pc Pc   Pc Pc
      4119-    Ambulance services,                                               P           Pc Pc Pc   P  P
      9902    road (not air)
42   Motor Freight Transportation and Warehousing - Section 9-10-4.A.8 in code applicable to all SIC 42 uses
   421   Trucking and courier services, except air                                               P  Pc Pc   P  P
      4212   Local Trucking without Storage                                                   P  Pc Pc   P  P
         -    Product transportation services, garbage collection and                                 Pc Pc
transport, not disposal
   422   Public Warehousing and Storage
      4222    Refrigerated warehousing and storage                                            Pc P  Pc   P  P
      4225   General Warehousing and Storage, except Mini warehousing/self-storage; storage of fireworks; and storage of
explosives and explosive materials - must abide by 9-10-4.A.8
         -    With no outdoor storage yard                       Pc Pc  Pc                 P  P  P    P  P
         -    With paved outdoor storage yard                                                         Pc P
         -    With gravel outdoor storage yard                                                           P
      4225   Mini Warehousing/Self-Service Storage Facility - must abide by Sections 9-10-4.A.8 and 9-10-4.A.16.a
         -    Exterior unit access with no outside storage yard                            P     Pc   P  P
         -    Exterior unit access with paved outdoor storage yard                         P          P  P
         -    Exterior unit access with gravel outdoor storage yard                                      P
      4225   Self-Service Storage Facility - must abide by Sections 9-10-4-A.8. and 9-10-4.A.16.b
         -    Interior unit access with no outside storage yard  Pc Pc  Pc     Pc Pc  Pc   P  P  P    P  P  P  P
         -    Interior unit access with paved outside storage yard                         P          P  P
         -    Interior unit access with gravel outdoor storage yard                                      P
      4225   General warehousing and storage - fireworks                                                    P
      4225   General warehousing and storage - explosives and explosive
materials
      4226   Special warehousing and storage, not elsewhere classified                                   P  P
         -    Liquid storage                                                                          P  P
         -    Household goods and furniture storage                                        Pc P       P  P
         -    Document and office records storage                                          P  P  P    P  P
   423   Terminal and joint terminal maintenance facilities for motor                            Pc         Pc Pc
freight transportation
43   U.S. Postal Service                                                  P
44   Water transportation, except SIC 4493
   4493   Marinas                                                                                                        Pc
45   Transportation by air
   -   Heliport/helistop (ancillary to a primary use such as a hospitalPc Pc                     Pc Pc Pc   Pc Pc Pc Pc
   -   Noncommercial Airstrips and airfields                                                                             P
46   Pipelines, except natural gas                                        Pc Pc  Pc Pc  Pc Pc  Pc   Pc Pc Pc   Pc Pc Pc Pc
47   Transportation services
   472   Arrangement of Passenger Transportation                       P  P          P  P   P    P                P  P
   473   Arrangement of Transportation of Freight and Cargo            P  P      P   P  P   P    P                P  P
   474   Rental of railroad cars                                                                 Pc Pc Pc   Pc Pc
   478   Miscellaneous Services Incidental to Transportation
      4783   Packing and crating                                    P  P                      P  P  Pc   P  P
      4785   Fixed facilities and inspection and weighing services for motor                  Pc Pc      Pc P
vehicle transportation
      4789    Transportation services, not elsewhere classified                                  Pc         Pc
         -    Horsedrawn transportation services - must abide by provisions
in Title 3, Chapter 12 in code location of housing of animals allowed as per                      Pc
SIC 0752
         -    Stockyards, not primarily for fattening or selling of
livestock
48   Communications - see Sections 9-10-4.A.2 and 9-10-4.A.5 in code
   481   Telephone Communications, except transmitting/receiving tower PcdPc  Pc Pc  Pc Pc  Pc   Pc Pc Pc   Pc Pc Pc Pc  Pc
or dishes
      -   Unmanned service buildings                                P  P   P  P   P  P   P    P  P  P    P  P  P  P   P
   482   Telegraph and Other Message Communications, except transmittinP/ P                      P  P             P  P
receiving tower and/or dishes
   483   Radio and Television Broadcasting Stations, except transmittinP/ P                      P  P             P  P
receiving tower and/or dishes
   484   Cable and Other Pay Television Services, except transmitting/ Pc Pc  Pc Pc  Pc Pc  Pc   Pc Pc Pc   Pc Pc Pc Pc  Pc
receiving tower and/or dishes
      -   Unmanned service buildings                                P  P   P  P   P  P   P    P  P  P    P  P  P  P   P
   489   Communications services, not elsewhere included except                                  Pc    Pc   Pc Pc        Pc
transmitting/receiving tower and/or dishes
      -   Wall mounted antennas and/or dishes                       Pc Pc  Pc Pc  Pc Pc  Pc   Pc Pc Pc   Pc Pc Pc Pc  Pc
      -    Transmitting/receiving towers                                                                 Pc Pc        Pc
49   Electric, Gas and Sanitary Services (includes Water Supply) - see Sections 9-10-4.A.2 and 9-10-4-A.3 in code
   491   Electric services                                             P  P   P  P   P  P   P    P  P  P    P  P  P  P   P
      -   Small wind energy conversion system - see section 9-14-13 in code                              P  P  P  P   P
      -   Small solar energy system (see section 9-14-14 of this titPe)P   P  P   P  P   P    P  P  P    P  P  P  P   P
      -   Large solar energy system (see section 9-14-14 of this titPe)P   P  P   P  P   P    P  P  P    P  P  P  P   P
      -   Electric vehicle charging station providing charging to paProPs oP  P   P  P   P    P  P  P    P  P  P  P   P
an allowed primary use within same site (e.g., grocery store)
      -   Renewable energy electric vehicle charging station providing
charging to patrons of an allowed primary use within same site (e.g.,        P  P   P  P   P  P   P    P  P  P    P  P  P  P   P
grocery store)
   492   Gas production and distribution
      4922   Natural Gas Transmission, except commercial storage andPcIPc  Pc Pc  Pc Pc  Pc   Pc Pc Pc   Pc Pc Pc Pc  Pc
4925
      -    Commercial natural gas storage
      4925   Mixed, manufactured, or liquefied petroleum gas productPcnPcndPc Pc  Pc Pc  Pc   Pc Pc Pc   Pc Pc Pc Pc  Pc
or distribution, except production and manufacturing
      -   Production and manufacturing
   493   Combination Electric and Gas, and Other Utility Services      P  P   P  P   P  P   P    P  P  P    P  P  P  P   P
   494   Water supply                                                  P  P   P  P   P  P   P    P  P  P    P  P  P  P   P
   495   Sanitary Services
      4952   Sewerage services                                      P  P   P  P   P  P   P    P  P  P    P  P  P  P   P
      4953   Refuse systems
      4959   Sanitary services, not elsewhere classified            P  P   P  P   P  P   P    P  P  P    P  P  P  P   P
   496   Steam and air conditioning supply
   497   Irrigation systems
 
 
RE    Residential Estate District        MH Manufactured Housing District
RS    Residential Single-Family District RM Residential Medium-Density District
R-1   Single-Family Residential District RH Residential High-Density District
SF-CR Single-Family Commerce Residential OS Agricultural/Open Space District
      District
SF-VJ Single-Family Valley Junction
      Residential District
 
(Ord. 1629, 4-25-2005; amd. Ord. 1860, 3-22-2010; Ord. 1940, 12-27-2011; Ord.
1958, 8-20-2012; Ord. 2145, 5-16-2016; Ord. 2187, 12-12-2016; Ord. 2225, 5-30-
2017; Ord. 2287, 3-19-2018; Ord. 2288, 3-19-2018; Ord. 2349, 3-4-2019; Ord.
2608, 4-15-2024)
DIVISION F - WHOLESALE TRADING
P = Permitted / Pc = Permitted Conditional / Blank Cell = Prohibited
SIC # CODES              Zoning District
Classification title/Use RC CMC NC CVC SC VJC VJHB WR BP VJLI LI GI OF PCP OS
description
DIVISION F - WHOLESALE TRADING
P = Permitted / Pc = Permitted Conditional / Blank Cell = Prohibited
SIC # CODES                                                              Zoning District
Classification title/Use description                                     RC CMC NC CVC SC VJC VJHB WR BP VJLI LI GI OF PCP OS
50   Wholesale trade - durable goods - no outdoor storage in Business Park (BP) or Valley Junction Light Industrial (VJLI)
   501   Motor vehicles and motor vehicle parts and supplies                                 Pc    P    P  P
   502   Furniture and home furnishings                                                      P  P  P    P  P
   503   Lumber and construction materials                                                   P     Pc   P  P
   504   Professional and Commercial Equipment and Supplies                                  P  P  Pc   P  P
   505   Metals and minerals, except petroleum                                                             P
   506   Electrical goods                                                                    P  P  P    P  P
   507   Hardware, and plumbing and heating equipment and supplies                           P  P  P    P  P
   508   Machinery, equipment and supplies                                                   P  P  Pc   P  P
   509   Miscellaneous Durable Goods, except SIC 5092-03 (Fireworks),                        P  P  P    P  P
5093 and 5099
      5092 -Fireworks -                                                                                    P
      03 wholesale
      5093   Scrap and waste materials
      5099   Durable Goods, not elsewhere classified except ammunition                    P  P  P    P  P
and wood byproducts
      -   Ammunition, except sporting wholesale
      -   Wood byproducts
51   Wholesale trade - nondurable goods
   511   Paper and paper products                                                            P  P  P    P  P
   512   Drugs, drug proprietaries, and druggists’ sundries                                P  P  P    P  P
      -    Distribution of marijuana as part of a licensed medical
cannabidiol manufacturer                                                                                         Pc
         Must comply with State medical cannabidiol regulations
      -    Distribution of marijuana without a license as a medical
cannabidiol manufacturer
   513   Apparel, piece goods and notions                                                    P  P  P    P  P
   514   Groceries and related products                                                      P  P  P    P  P
   515   Farm-product raw materials                                                                        Pc
   5154   Livestock
   516   Chemicals and Allied Products, except SIC 5169 Explosives, all                      P     P    P  P
kinds
   5169   Explosives
   517   Petroleum and petroleum products                                                                  Pc
   518   Beer, wine and distilled beverages                                                  P  P  P    P  P
   519   Miscellaneous Nondurable Goods, except SIC 5191 and 5198                            P  P  Pc   P  P
   5191   Farm Supplies, except Agricultural Chemicals and Fertilizer
and Fertilizer Materials
   5198   Paints, varnishes and supplies                                                     Pc Pc Pc   P  P
Notes:
   **   All uses with outdoor storage or display - see 9-10-4.A.8 and 9-10-4.A.9 in code.
 
 
RE    Residential Estate District        MH Manufactured Housing District
RS    Residential Single-Family District RM Residential Medium-Density District
R-1   Single-Family Residential District RH Residential High-Density District
SF-CR Single-Family Commerce Residential OS Agricultural/Open Space District
      District
SF-VJ Single-Family Valley Junction
      Residential District
 
(Ord. 1629, 4-25-2005; amd. Ord. 2225, 5-30-2017; Ord. 2285, 3-5-2018; Ord.
2608, 4-15-2024)
DIVISION G - RETAIL TRADE
P = Permitted / Pc = Permitted Conditional / Blank Cell = Prohibited
SIC # CODES              Zoning District
Classification title/Use RC CMC NC CVC SC VJC VJHB WR BP VJLI LI GI OF PCP OS
description
DIVISION G - RETAIL TRADE
P = Permitted / Pc = Permitted Conditional / Blank Cell = Prohibited
SIC # CODES                                                                  Zoning District
Classification title/Use description                                         RC CMC NC CVC SC VJC VJHB WR BP VJLI LI GI OF PCP OS
52   Building materials, hardware, garden supply and mobile home dealers
   521   Lumber and Other Building Material Dealers - no outdoor storage in
Business Park (BP), Valley Junction Light Industrial (VJLI), and Valley                  P       P  P  P    P  P        
Junction Commercial (VJC) zones
   -    Showrooms/display rooms and associated offices - sales displays            P   P    P  P  P    P  P        
only, no distribution or warehousing of materials and no outdoor storage
   523   Paint, glass and wallpaper stores                             P  P          P   P    P                  
   525   Hardware stores
      -   Fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet or less             P  P   Pc      P   P    P        P  P        
      -   Fifteen thousand and one (15,001) square feet and greater P  P                 P        P  P        
   526   Retail nurseries, lawn and garden supply stores               Pc Pc  Pc      Pc      P        P  P       Pc
   527   Mobile home dealers                                                                                
53   General merchandise stores
   531   Department stores                                             P  P                 P                  
   533   Variety stores
      -   Ten thousand (10,000) square feet or less                 P  P   P          P    P                  
      -   Ten thousand and one (10,001) square feet or greater      P  P             P    P                  
   539   Miscellaneous general merchandise stores                      P  P             P    P                  
54   Food stores
   541   Grocery Stores, except Convenience Stores                     P  P   P     P     Pc   P                  
      -    Convenience Stores, with or without fuel pumps           Pc Pc  Pc Pc  Pc Pc  Pc   Pc Pc               
   542   Meat and Fish (Seafood) Markets, including Freezer ProvisionerP  P   Pc Pc    Pc  Pc   Pc                 
   543   Fruit and vegetable markets
      -   Permanent commercial; product not grown on-site           P  P   P  P     P   P    P                  
      -   (i.e., roadside stands) - seasonal or permanent commercial, grown
on-site                                                                                                          Pc
         May also operate as "P" (permitted) under Temporary Use Permit
   544   Candy, nut, and confectionery stores                          P  P   P  P     P   P    P                  
   545   Dairy products stores                                         P  P   P  P     P   P    P                  
   546   Retail bakeries                                               P  P   P  P     P   P    P                  
   549   Miscellaneous food stores, no drive-through                   P  P          P   P    P                  
55   Automotive dealers and gasoline service stations
   551   Motor Vehicle Dealers (new and used)                                    Pc        Pc                 
   552   Motor Vehicle Dealers (used only)                                       Pc        Pc                 
   -   Indoor showroom only                                                      Pc        Pc         Pc       
   553   Auto and home supply stores                                   P  P        Pc Pc      Pc   P              
   554   Gasoline service stations
      -   Without repair services                                   Pc Pc  Pc Pc  Pc Pc  Pc   Pc                 
      -   With repair services                                      Pc         Pc        Pc                 
   555   Boat dealers                                                            Pc        Pc   P              
   556   Recreational vehicle dealers                                            Pc        Pc   P              
   557   Motorcycle dealers                                                      Pc        Pc         Pc       
   559   Automotive dealers, not elsewhere classified (i.e., utility             Pc        Pc         Pc       
trailers, aircraft, snowmobiles, go-karts, dune buggies)
56   Apparel and accessory stores                                         P  P        P  P   P    P                  
57   Home Furniture, Furnishings and Equipment Stores, except SIC 5714, 57P  P          P   P    P                  
and 5734
   572   Household Appliance Stores - no outdoor storage (new or used  P  P   P     P  P   P    P                  
appliances) or display
   5734   Computer and computer software stores                        P  P        P  P   P    P                  
58   Eating and Drinking Places - see Title 3, Chapter 2 and Title 9, Chapters 2, 6, and 10 in city code for definitions,
allowances, specific regulations and performance standards
   -   Restaurant, including coffee and drink restaurant and/or kiosks P nP   P  P   P  Pc  P                  P    
drive-through
   -   Restaurant, including coffee and drink restaurant and/or kiosks P  P        P                           
with drive-through
   --   Bar/Restaurant, no drive-through
      -    Bar/Restaurant Class 1                                   P  P   P  P   P     P                  P    
      -   Bar/Restaurant Class 2
      -   Class 2, three hundred (300) feet or less from residentialPc Pc  Pc    Pc    Pc   Pc       Pc Pc       
      -   Class 2, three hundred and one (301) feet or greater from P  P   P     P     P    P        P  P        
residential
   --   Bar, no drive-through
      -   Bar, three hundred (300) feet or less from residential    Pc Pc  Pc    Pc    Pc   Pc       Pc Pc       
      -   Bar, three-hundred and one (301) feet or greater from resiPenPialP     P     P    P        P  P        
   --   Taproom/beer parlor in conjunction with a brewery, no drive-through
      -    Taproom/beer parlor, less than or equal to five thousand Pc,Pc0)Pc    Pc    Pc   Pc Pc     Pc Pc       
square feet
      -     Taproom/beer parlor, five thousand and one (5,001) squarPcfPct      Pc        Pc Pc     Pc Pc       
up to ten thousand (10,000) square feet
      -    Taproom/beer parlor, ten thousand and one (10,001) square e                   Pc     Pc Pc       
and greater
   --   Taproom/Tasting Room in conjunction with a distillery, no drive-through
      -    Taproom/beer parlor, less than or equal to five thousand Pc,Pc0)Pc    Pc    Pc   Pc Pc     Pc Pc       
square feet
      -     Taproom/beer parlor, five thousand and one (5,001) squarPcfPct      Pc        Pc Pc     Pc Pc       
up to ten thousand (10,000) square feet
      -     Taproom/beer parlor, ten thousand and one (10,001) squar f t                 Pc     Pc Pc       
and greater
   594   Miscellaneous Shopping Goods Stores
      5941    Sporting goods stores and bicycle shops               P  P   P  P     P   P    P                  
      5942    Bookstores                                            P  P   P  P   P  P   P    P                  
      5943    Stationery stores                                     P  P   P  P   P  P   P    P                  
      5944    Jewelry stores                                        P  P   P  P     P   P    P                  
      5945   Hobby, toy and game shops                              P  P   P  P     P   P    P                  
      5946    Camera and photographic supply stores                 P  P   P  P   P  P   P    P                  
      5947   Gift, novelty and souvenir shops                       P  P   P  P     P   P    P                  
      5948    Luggage and leather goods stores                      P  P          P   P    P                  
      5949    Sewing, needlework and piece goods stores             P  P   P  P     P   P    P                  
      5961   Catalog and mail-order houses
         -    Five thousand (5,000) sq. ft. or less              P  P   Pc    P  Pc      P  P  P    P  P        
         -    Five thousand and one (5,001) sq. ft. and greater  P  Pc  Pc    Pc Pc      P  P  Pc   Pc P        
      5962    Automatic Merchandising Machine Operators - see Sectio   10              P  P  P    P  P        
4.A.23 and 9-10-4.A.28 in code
      5962   Vending machines, excluding SIC 60 Automated Teller Machines (ATMs) - see Sections 9-10-4.A.23 and 9-10-4.A.28 in
code
         -    Located outdoors                                                                        
         -    Located indoors                                    P  P   P  P   P  P   P    P  P  P    P  P  P  P    
         -    Unattended fuel pumps                              Pc Pc  Pc Pc  Pc Pc  Pc           Pc Pc       
         -   Attended fuel pumps (see SIC 541 and SIC 554)   
      5963   Direct selling establishments                                         P    P  P  P    P  P        
   598   Fuel dealers                                                                     Pc   Pc   Pc Pc       
   599   Retail Stores, not elsewhere categorized
      5992   Florists                                                                                    
         -    Permanent commercial; product not grown on-site    P  P   P  P   P  P   P    P                  
         -    (i.e., roadside stands) - seasonal or permanent commercial,
grown on-site                                                                                                    Pc
            May also operate as "P" (permitted) under Temporary Use Permit
      5993    Tobacco stores and stands                             P  P   P  P   P  P   P    P                  
      5994   News dealer and newsstands
            Must comply with Adult Entertainment Facilities regulPtiPns PndP   P  P   P    P  P          P  P    
provisions - see Title 9, Chapter 17 in cod
      5995   Optical goods stores                                   P  P   P  P   P  P   P    P                  
      5999   Miscellaneous retail stores, not elsewhere categorized - no outdoor sales or storage, unless otherwise specifically
noted
         -    Miscellaneous SIC 5999 not otherwise specifically iPenPifiPd      P   P    P                  
in following
         -    Adult entertainment establishment selling sexually oriented
merchandise such as, films, books, magazines, toys, etc.                     Pc Pc                                  
            Must comply with Adult Entertainment Facilities regulations and
provisions - see Title 9, Chapter 17 in code)2
         -    Alarm and safety equipment                         P  P          P   P    P  P  P    P  P        
         -    Art and architectural supply stores                P  P   P  P   P  P   P    P                  
         -    Art, picture frames and decoration stores          P  P   P  P     P   P    P                  
         -    Auction rooms                                                             P    P  P        
         -    Banners, flags, decals and poster stores           P  P          P   P    P                  
         -    Batteries, nonautomotive                           P  P   P       P   P    P                  
         -    Binocular and telescope stores                     P  P          P   P    P                  
         -    Canvas products                                                           P    P  P        
         -    Cleaning equipment and supplies                                               P  P        
1, 2 Must comply with the City s Adult Entertainment Ordinance
         -    Coin and stamp stores                              P  P   P  P     P   P    P                  
         -    Concrete products, precast                                                      P        
         -    Educational aids and electronic training material sPorPs  P  P   P  P   P    P                  
         -    Electronic parts and equipment                     P                   P    P    P  P        
         -    Engine and motor equipment and supply stores       P  P        Pc        P                  
         -    Event tents                                                               P    P  P        
         -    Farm equipment and supply stores                   Pc                                    
         -    Fiberglass materials, except insulation                                         Pc       
         -    Fireworks - must obtain state license*
            Indoor sales: approval of Fire Department and Building Division
required
            Outdoor sales: approval of Fire Department, Building PivPsioP  P     P       P  P  P    P  P        
and Planning Division required
         *    Copy of State license and submittal information must be
provided to the cit
 
   *   Copy of State license and submittal information must be provided to City
         -    Foam and foam products                                                    P    P  P        
         -    Gem and precious stones                            P  P   P  P     P   P    P                  
         -    Infant furnishings and equipment                   P  P             P    P                  
         -    Insecticides                                                                    P        
         -    Medical apparatus and supply                       P  P        P  P   P    P              P    
         -    Monument and tombstones                            P  P                 P                  
         -    Packaging materials, e.g., boxes, padding materials - stand-
alone establishment not located within SIC 4225                                                 P    P    P  P        
            If located within SIC 4225, must be ancillary to storage area
and is limited to window signage in accordance with code
         -    Pet and pet supplies
            See                                                  Pc Pc            Pc   Pc                 
9-10-4 .A.20 in code
         -    Sales barn                                                                             Pc
         -    Swimming pools, hot tubs and sauna equipment and suPplPes        P       P  P  P    P  P        
         -    Telephone and communication equipment and supplies P  P   P  P   P  P   P    P                  
         -    Toiletries, cosmetics and perfume                  P  P   P  P   P  P   P    P                  
         -    Typewriter and business machines                   P  P   P  P   P  P   P    P                  
         -    Vaults and safes                                                      P    P    P  P        
         -    Water and air purification equipment for agricultur   es                  P    P  P        
activities
         -    Water and air purification equipment for residentiaPc                  P    P    P  P        
         -    Welding supplies                                                          P    P  P        
Notes:
   **   All uses with outdoor storage or display - see Sections
9-10-4 .A.8 and
9-10-4 .A.9 in code
   **   All uses with a canopy structure, either free-standing or attached to building - see Section
9-10-4 .A.28 in code
 
 
RE    Residential Estate District        MH Manufactured Housing District
RS    Residential Single-Family District RM Residential Medium-Density District
R-1   Single-Family Residential District RH Residential High-Density District
SF-CR Single-Family Commerce Residential OS Agricultural/Open Space District
      District
SF-VJ Single-Family Valley Junction
      Residential District
(Ord. 1629, 4-25-2005; amd. Ord. 1830, 6-1-2009; Ord. 1883, 11-1-2010; Ord.
1901, 12-27-2010; Ord. 1911, 2-22-2011; Ord. 2080, 2-9-2015; Ord. 2085, 3-9-
2015; Ord. 2113, 9-8-2015; Ord. 2177, 10-31-2016; Ord. 2201, 3-6-2017; Ord.
2224, 5-30-2017; Ord. 2225, 5-30-2017; Ord. 2265, 12-11-2017; Ord. 2270, 1-8-
2018; Ord. 2285, 3-5-2018; Ord. 2288, 3-19-2018; Ord. 2305, 6-11-2018; Ord.
2334, 12-26-2018; Ord. 2364, 6-3-2019; Ord. 2519, 6-6-2022; Ord. 2526, 6-20-
2022; Ord. 2566, 5-15-2023; Ord. 2608, 4-15-2024; Ord. 2621, 8-5-2024)
 
DIVISION H - FINANCE, INSURANCE, REAL ESTATE AND OTHER OFFICE USES, NEC
P = Permitted / Pc = Permitted Conditional / Blank Cell = Prohibited
SIC # CODES              Zoning District
Classification title/Use RC CMC NC CVC SC VJC VJHB WR BP VJLI LI GI OF PCP OS
description
DIVISION H - FINANCE, INSURANCE, REAL ESTATE AND OTHER OFFICE USES, NEC
P = Permitted / Pc = Permitted Conditional / Blank Cell = Prohibited
SIC # CODES                                                            Zoning District
Classification title/Use description                                   RC CMC NC CVC SC VJC VJHB WR BP VJLI LI GI OF PCP OS
60   Depository Institutions, (e.g., banks and credit unions), excepP  P   P  P   P  P   P    P  P             P  P
SIC 6099, Check Cashing Agency if delayed deposit
      -   Outdoor freestanding automatic teller machine (ATM) Pc Pc  Pc Pc  Pc Pc  Pc   Pc Pc            Pc Pc
   609   Functions closely related to banking                    P  P   P  P   P  P   P    P  P  P    P  P  P  P
61   Nondepository credit institutions, except SIC 6141             P  P   P      P  Pc  Pc   P  P  P          P  P
   6141   Personal credit institutions, including check and cash Pc Pc            Pc
agencies and delayed deposit services businesses
62   Security and commodity brokers, dealers, exchanges and servicesP  P   P  P   P  Pc  Pc   P  P  P          P  P
63   Insurance carriers                                             P  P   P  P   P  Pc  Pc   P  P  P          P  P
64   Insurance agents, brokers, and services                        P  P   P  P   P  Pc  Pc   P  P  P          P  P
65   Real estate office                                             P  P   P  P   P  Pc  Pc   P  P  P          P  P
   -   Cemeteries                                                                                                  Pc
67   Holding and other investment offices                           P  P   P  P   P  Pc  Pc   P  P  P          P  P
   -   Professional and Semiprofessional Offices, not elsewhere
classified, without attendant retail, manufacturing, assembly or       P  P   P      P  Pc  Pc   P  P             P  P
warehousing
Notes:
   **   All uses with a canopy structure, either free-standing or attached to building - see Section 9-10-4.A.28 in code
 
RE    Residential Estate District        MH Manufactured Housing District
RS    Residential Single-Family District RM Residential Medium-Density District
R-1   Single-Family Residential District RH Residential High-Density District
SF-CR Single-Family Commerce Residential OS Agricultural/Open Space District
      District
SF-VJ Single-Family Valley Junction
      Residential District
 
(Ord. 1678, 3-27-2006; amd. Ord. 1901, 12-27-2010; Ord. 1958, 8-20-2012; Ord.
2201, 3-6-2017; Ord. 2608, 4-15-2024)
DIVISION I - SERVICES
P = Permitted / Pc = Permitted Conditional / Blank Cell = Prohibited
SIC # CODES              Zoning District
Classification title/Use RC CMC NC CVC SC VJC VJHB WR BP VJLI LI GI OF PCP OS
description
DIVISION I - SERVICES
P = Permitted / Pc = Permitted Conditional / Blank Cell = Prohibited
SIC # CODES                                                               Zoning District
Classification title/Use description                                      RC CMC NC CVC SC VJC VJHB WR BP VJLI LI GI OF PCP OS
70   Hotels, rooming houses, camps, and other lodging places
   701   Hotels and motels
      -   Without an event venue                                 P  Pc2        P  P        P                P1 P
      -   With an event venue                                    P  Pc2        P  P        P                P1 P
   703   Camps and recreational vehicle parks                                                                         Pc
72   Personal services
   7211   Power laundries, family and commercial                    P  P                      P     Pc   P  P
   7212   Garment pressing and agents for laundries and dry cleanersP- P   P  P   P  P   P    P  P  P    P  P  P  P
see Section 9-10-14-A.14 in code
   7213   Linen supply                                                                        Pc Pc Pc   P  P
   7215   Coin operated laundries and dry cleaning - see Section 9-1P- P   Pc Pc  P  Pc  Pc         Pc
14-.A.14 in code
   7216   Dry-cleaning plants, except rug cleaning
         See                                                                               Pc Pc Pc   P  P
9-10-4.A.14 in code
   7217   Carpet and upholstery cleaning                                                      Pc Pc Pc   P  P
   7218   Industrial launderers                                                               Pc    Pc   P  P
   7219   Laundry and garment service, not elsewhere classified                               Pc    Pc   P  P
   722   Photographic and optical goods equipment repair            P  P   P      P  P   P    P
   723   Beauty shops                                               P  P   P  P   P  P   P    P                   P
   724   Barbershops                                                P  P   P  P   P  P   P    P                   P
   725   Shoe repair shops and shoeshine parlors                    P  P   P  P   P  P   P    P                P  P
   726   Funeral service and crematories
      -    Without crematory                                     Pc Pc         Pc Pc  Pc   Pc               Pc Pc
      -   With crematory                                         Pc                        Pc
   7291   Tax Return Preparation Services                           P  P   P  P   P  P   P    P                P  P
   7299   Miscellaneous personal services, not elsewhere classified
      -    Personal appearance                                   P  P          P  P   P    P
      -    Massage therapy establishments and steam bath         P  P   P  Pc  Pc Pc  P    Pc               P  P
      -    Dating and escort                                     Pc            Pc Pc  Pc
      -   House and baby sitting                                 P  P          P  P   P    P                P  P
      -    Personal document and information                     P  P   P      P  P   P    P  P             P  P   >
      -    Station operation                                                                          Pc Pc
      -    Stitching services                                    P  P   P      P  P   P    P     P    P  P
      -    Clothing rental                                       P  P          P  P   P    P
      -    Personal financial                                    P  P   P  P   P  P        P                P  P
      -    Personal item care and storage                        P  P          P  P        P
      -    Consumer purchasing                                   P  P   P      P  P   P    P
73   Business services
   731   Advertising                                                P  P          P  P   P    P  P  P    P  P  P  P
   732   Consumer credit reporting and collection agencies, mercantiPe P          P  P   P    P  P  P    P  P  P  P
reporting agencies
   733   Mailing, Reproduction, Commercial Art and Photography, and P  P             P   P    P  P  P    P     P  P
Stenographic Services, except SIC 7334
      7334    Photocopying and duplicating                       P  P   P  P   P  P   P    P  P  P    P
   734   Services to Dwellings and Other Buildings                                            P     P    P  P
      7342    Disinfecting and pest control services                                       P     P    P  P
      7349    Building cleaning and maintenance services, not elsewhere                    P     P    P  P
classified
   735   Miscellaneous equipment rental and leasing
      7352    Medical equipment                                  P  P             P        P  P  P    P  P
      7353   Heavy construction equipment                                                             Pc Pc
      7359   Equipment rental and leasing, not elsewhere classified
         -    Businesses with no outdoor storage             P  P                      P     P    P  P
         -    Businesses with outdoor storage                                          Pc    Pc   Pc Pc
   736   Personnel supply                                           P  P          P  P   P    P  P  P    P  P  P  P
   737   Computer Programming, Data Processing and Other Computer RePatPd         P  P   P    P  P  P    P  P  P  P
Services
   738   Miscellaneous business services
      7381    Detectives, guard and armored care services except:PguPrd                    P  P  P    P  P  P  P
dogs and armored car
         -    Guard and armored car and/or equipment storage                           Pc    Pc   Pc Pc
         -    Guard dogs                                                                          Pc Pc
      7382    Security systems services                          Pc Pc         Pc          Pc Pc      P  P  P
      7383   News syndicates                                     P  P                 P    P  P             P  P
      7384   Photo finish labs                                   P  P   Pc Pc  Pc Pc  Pc   Pc Pc Pc   Pc Pc
      7389   Business services, not elsewhere classified
         -   Office Related Businesses (e.g., arbitration, intPriPr         P  P   P    P  P  P    P  P  P  P
decorating, notaries, etc.)
         -   Manufacturing Related Business Services (e.g., field                             Pc   P  P
warehouse, liquidator of merchandise, swimming pool cleaning, etc.)
         -   Auction, Appraisal and Exchange Services (flea maPkeP)                P    P
75   Automotive repair, services, and parking
   751   Automotive rental and leasing, without drivers             Pc Pc         Pc          Pc         Pc Pc
   752   Automotive parking: (parking lot with no building or use on same
parcel as lot) - public lot only: owned by the city
   753   Automotive repair shops
      7532   Top, body, and upholstery repair, paint shops                                 Pc    Pc   P  P
      7533    Automotive exhaust system repair shops             Pc Pc         Pc          Pc    Pc   P  P
      7534   Tire retreading and repair                          Pc Pc         Pc          Pc    Pc   P  P
      7536    Automotive glass replacement shops                 Pc Pc         Pc          Pc    Pc   P  P
      7537    Automotive transmission repair shops               Pc Pc         Pc          Pc    Pc   P  P
      7538    General automotive repair shops                    Pc Pc         Pc          Pc    Pc   P  P
      7539   Automotive repair shops, not elsewhere classified
         -    Frame and front-end repair                     Pc Pc         Pc          Pc    Pc   Pc P
         -    Power train components repair services         Pc Pc         Pc          Pc    Pc   Pc P
         -    Electrical services                            Pc Pc         Pc          Pc    Pc   Pc P
         -    Brake services                                 Pc Pc         Pc          Pc    Pc   Pc P
   754   Automotive services, except repair
         7542    Carwashes                                   Pc Pc         Pc Pc       Pc    Pc   Pc Pc
         7549    Automotive services, except repair and carwaPcePc         Pc          Pc    Pc   Pc Pc
76   Miscellaneous repair services
   762   Electrical                                                 P  P                 P    P  P  P    P  P
   763   Watch, clock, and jewelry                                  P  P             P   P    P  P  P    P  P
   764   Reupholstery and furniture                                 P  P             P   P    P  P  P    P  P
   769   Miscellaneous repair shops and related services
      7692    Welding repair                                                               Pc    Pc   P  P
      7694    Armature rewinding                                                              Pc P    P  P
      7699   Repair shops and related services, not elsewhere classified
         -    Professional instruments                       P  P             P   P    P  P  P    P  P
         -    Tank repair and cleaning                                                       Pc   Pc Pc
         -    Waste cleaning                                                                         Pc
         -    Boiler and heating                                                                     Pc
         -    Industrial equipment                                                     Pc    Pc   Pc P
         -    Nautical repair                                                          Pc            Pc
         -    Hospital equipment                             P  P                      P  P  P    P  P
         -    Scientific equipment                           P  P                      P  P  P    P  P
         -    Recreational sporting equipment                P  P   P         Pc  Pc   P  P  P    P  P
         -    Musical instrument                             P  P             P   P    P  P  P    P  P
         -    Lock and key services                          P  P          P  P   P    P     P    P  P
         -    Metal reshaping and replating                                            Pc    Pc   P  P
         -    Recreational vehicle repair                    Pc Pc         Pc          Pc    Pc   P  P
         -    Agricultural equipment repair                                Pc          Pc    Pc   Pc P
         -    Household appliance repair                     P  P             Pc  Pc   P     P    P  P
         -    Cleaning services                                                        P     P    P  P
         -    General household repair                                        P   Pc   P     P    P  P
         -    Leather goods and luggage repair               P  P             P   P    P
         -    Customizing services, except railroad car custoPizPng           P   P    P  P  P    P  P
         -    Railroad car customizing                                                               P
         -    Gun services                                   Pc Pc            Pc  Pc   Pc
         -    Aircraft and heavy equipment repair                                      P             P
         -    Tool repair                                    P  P   P         P   P    P     P    P  P
         -    Miscellaneous automotive repair services       Pc Pc         Pc          Pc    Pc   P  P
         -    Miscellaneous building item repair services                              P     P    P  P
         -    Window blind repair                            P  P             P   P    P  P  P    P  P
         -    Hobby and collectors services                   P  P             P   P    P  P  P    P  P
         -    Photographic and optical goods equipment repair P  P             P   P    P  P  P    P  P
78   Motion pictures
   781   Motion picture production and allied services                                        P  P  P    P  P  P  P
   782   Motion picture distribution and allied services            P  P                      P  P  P    P  P  P  P
   783   Motion picture theatres
      7832   Motion Picture Theatres, except Drive-In
      -   Single screen theatres                                 P  P                      P          Pc Pc
      -    Multi-screen theatres                                 P  P                      P
      7833    Drive-in motion picture theatre                                                                      Pc
   784   Video tape rental                                          P  P   P  P      P        P
79   Amusement and recreational services
   -   Event venue
      -   Five thousand (5,000) square feet or less              Pc Pc  Pc Pc     Pc  Pc   Pc Pc Pc   Pc Pc Pc Pc
      -   Five thousand and one (5,001) square feet or greater   Pc Pc2                    Pc Pc      Pc Pc Pc Pc
   -   Parks, public or private (including typical courts, fields anP  P   P  P   P  P   P    P  P  P    P  P  P  P   P
facilities found in public parks)
   -   Sports Facilities including Arenas, Stadiums and Fields, public
and private/club, professional and non-professional                       P  Pc         Pc          Pc Pc            Pc Pc  Pc
      Includes ancillary uses/activities such as concessions, equipment
rentals, merchandise shops, etc.
   791   Dance studios, schools and halls                           P  P   P  P   P  P   P    P          P
   792   Theatrical Producers (except Motion Pictures), and miscellaPeoPs                P    P          Pc Pc
theatrical services
      -    Theatrical Productions, Bands, Orchestras and EntertaiPerP                 P    P
except Motion Pictures
   793   Bowling centers                                            P  P                      P
      7948   Racing, including track operations                  Pc
      7991   Physical fitness facilities
      -   Five thousand (5,000) square feet or less              P  P   P  P   P  P   P    P  P  P    P  P  P  P
      -   Five thousand and one (5,001) square feet or greater   P  P   Pc Pc  Pc Pc  Pc   Pc Pc P    P  P  P  P
      7992   Golf Courses, public and private, membership and non-
membership, with or without clubhouse                                     P  P                      P  P             P  P   P   
         Includes ancillary uses/activities such as concessions,
equipment rentals, merchandise shops, etc.
      7993   Coin operated amusement devices (video arcades)     P  P   Pc     Pc Pc  Pc
      7996    Amusement parks
      7999    Amusement and Recreation Services, not elsewhere classified
and not specifically identified in the following - public and private,    Pc Pc  Pc Pc  Pc Pc  Pc   Pc Pc Pc   Pc Pc Pc Pc
regardless of whether by membership or not, except Fireworks Display
Services
      -    Archery ranges                                        Pc Pc  Pc Pc  Pc Pc  Pc   Pc Pc Pc   Pc Pc Pc Pc  P
      -   Batting cages                                          P  P   Pc Pc  P  Pc  Pc   P  P  P    P  P  P  P   P
      -    Bathing beaches                                       P  P   P  P   P  P   P    P  P  P    P  P  P  P   P
      -    Bicycle and micro-transportation rental               P  P   P  P   P  P   P    P  P  P    P  P  P  P   P
      -   Boat Rental, including canoe, rowboats, and kayak      Pc Pc  Pc Pc  Pc Pc  Pc   Pc Pc Pc   Pc Pc Pc Pc  Pc
      -    Personal watercraft rental                            Pc Pc  Pc Pc  Pc Pc  Pc   Pc Pc Pc   Pc Pc Pc Pc  Pc
      -   Day camps                                              P  P   Pc Pc  P  Pc  Pc   P  P  P    P  P  P  P   Pc
      -    Fireworks display services, including bulk storage of                                         P
fireworks
      -   Fishing piers and lakes, operation of                  Pc Pc  Pc Pc  Pc Pc  Pc   Pc Pc Pc   Pc Pc Pc Pc  P
      -    Go-kart raceway operation                             Pc Pc  Pc Pc  Pc Pc  Pc   Pc Pc Pc   Pc Pc Pc Pc  Pc
      -   Golf - Driving range open air                          P  Pc  Pc Pc  P  Pc  Pc   P  P  P    P  P  P  P   P
      -   Golf - Driving range within/from structure (e.g., TopgoPf)P   Pc Pc  P  Pc  Pc   P  P  P    P  P  P  P
      -   Golf - Miniature course                                P  P   Pc Pc  P  Pc  P    P  P  P    P  P  P  P   P
      -   Golf - Professionals not operating retail stores       P  P   Pc Pc  P  Pc  Pc   P  P  P    P  P  P  P   P
      -   Golf - Pitch and Put, Par-3 and Executive Courses      P  P   Pc Pc  P  Pc  Pc   P  P  P    P  P  P  P   P
      -   Horse Shows and Riding Stables and Arenas, including RiPinP   Pc Pc  P  Pc  Pc   P  P  P    P  P  P  P   P
School
      -   Ice skating rink, operation of                         P  P   Pc Pc  P  Pc  Pc   P  P  P    P  P  P  P   P
      -    Observation tower                                     Pc Pc  Pc Pc  Pc Pc  Pc   Pc Pc Pc   Pc Pc Pc Pc  Pc
      -    Paintball course, operation of                        Pc Pc  Pc Pc  Pc Pc  Pc   Pc Pc Pc   Pc Pc Pc Pc  Pc
      -   River Rafting, operation of, including rental of equipmPctPc  Pc Pc  Pc Pc  Pc   Pc Pc Pc   Pc Pc Pc Pc  Pc
      -    Shooting ranges, operation of                         Pc Pc  Pc Pc  Pc Pc  Pc   Pc Pc Pc   Pc Pc Pc Pc  Pc
      -   Skeet shooting facilities, operation of                Pc Pc  Pc Pc  Pc Pc  Pc   Pc Pc Pc   Pc Pc Pc Pc  Pc
      -   Water Park, commercial - outdoor                       Pc Pc         Pc             Pc            Pc Pc
      -   Water Park, commercial - indoor                        Pc Pc         Pc             Pc            Pc Pc
80   Health services
   801    Offices and clinics of doctors of medicine               P  P   P  P   P  P   P    P                P  P
   802   Offices and clinics of dentists                            P  P   P  P   P  P   P    P                P  P
   803   Offices and clinics of doctors of osteopathy               P  P   P  P   P  P   P    P                P  P
   804   Offices and clinics of other health practitioners          P  P   P  P   P  P   P    P                P  P
   805   Nursing and personal care facilities                       Pc Pc                     Pc               Pc Pc
   806   Hospitals                                                  Pc Pc                     Pc               Pc Pc  Pc
   807    Medical and dental laboratories                          P  P          P           P  P  P    P  P  P  P
   808   Home health care services                                  P  P          P      P    P  P  P    P  P  P  P
   809   Miscellaneous health and allied services, not elsewhere    P  P                      P                P  P
classified
81   Legal services                                                    P  P   P  P   P      P    P                P  P
82   Educational services
   821   Elementary and secondary schools                           Pc Pc  Pc Pc  Pc Pc  Pc   Pc Pc Pc   Pc Pc Pc Pc
   822   Colleges, Universities, Professional Schools, and Junior   Pc Pc  Pc Pc  Pc Pc  Pc   Pc Pc Pc   Pc Pc Pc P
Colleges
   823   Libraries                                                  Pc Pc  Pc Pc  Pc Pc  Pc   Pc Pc Pc   Pc Pc Pc Pc
   824   Vocational schools                                         P  P   Pc Pc  Pc Pc  Pc   Pc Pc Pc   Pc Pc Pc P
   829   Schools and educational services, not elsewhere classified P  P   Pc Pc  Pc Pc  Pc   Pc Pc Pc   Pc Pc Pc P
83   Social services
   832    Individual and family social services                    P  P   P      P  P   P    P                P  P
   833   Job training and vocational rehabilitation services        P  P   P      P  P   P    P  P  P    P  P  P  P
   835   Child day care services                                    Pc Pc  Pc Pc  Pc Pc  Pc   Pc Pc            Pc P
   836   Residential Care, except Juvenile Care                     Pc               Pc
      -    Juvenile care                                                                                 Pc
   839   Social services, not elsewhere classified                  P  P   P  Pc  P  P   P                     P  P
84   Art Galleries, and Botanical and Zoological Gardens, except MuseumPc Pc  Pc Pc  Pc Pc  Pc   Pc Pc Pc   Pc Pc Pc Pc
and Botanical Garden
      -    Botanical Garden                                      Pc Pc  Pc Pc  Pc Pc  Pc   Pc Pc Pc   Pc Pc Pc Pc  P
      -   Museums                                                Pc Pc  Pc Pc  Pc Pc  Pc   Pc Pc Pc   Pc Pc Pc Pc  P
86   Membership organizations, except SIC 866 and 869                  P  P          P  P   P    P  P             P  P
   866   Religious organizations                                    Pc Pc  Pc Pc  Pc Pc  Pc   Pc Pc Pc   Pc Pc Pc Pc
   869   Membership organizations - not elsewhere classified, exceptP  P          P  P   P    P  P             P  P
organizations with food/drink service and conference facilities
      -    Organizations with food/drink services and conference Pc Pc         Pc Pc  Pc   Pc               Pc Pc
facilities
87   Engineering, Accounting, Research, Management and Related Services
   -   Engineering, Accounting, Research, Management and Related    P  P   P  P   P  P   P    P  P             P  P
Services, except SIC 8731, 8734 and 8744
87   Engineering, accounting, research, management and related servicesP  P   P  P   P  P   P    P  P             P  P
(except: 8731, 8734, 8744)
   8731   Commercial physical and biological research                                         P  P  P    P  P  P  P
   8734   Testing laboratories, except auto testing                                           P  P  P    P  P  P  P
      -   Auto testing laboratories                                                        Pc
   8744   Facilities support management services                                              Pc
89   Services, not elsewhere included
   8999   Artists and artists studios                               P  P   P      P  P   P    P     P
      -   Art related                                            P  P   P      P  P   P    P
      -    Commercial and literary writings                      P  P   P      P  P   P    P
      -    Communication                                         P  P   P      P  P   P    P
      -   Earth science                                          P  P          P  P   P    P  P  P    P  P  P  P
      -    Lecturing                                             P  P   P      P  P   P    P
      -    Personal services                                     P  P   P      P  P   P    P
      -    Scientific consulting                                 P  P   P      P  P   P    P  P  P    P  P
      -    Songwriting                                           P  P   P      P  P   P    P
      -    Weather related services                              P  P   P      P  P   P    P
Note:
   **   All uses with outdoor storage or display - see Section 9-10-4.A.8 and A.9 in code.
   **   All uses with a canopy structure, either free-standing or attached to building - see Section 9-10-4.A.28 in code.
   1.    Except when the property shares a property line with a single family or medium density zoned or utilized property, then
the use is not permitted.
   2.    Only permitted within three hundred feet (300') of established residential use(s) when the average height is thirty-six
feet (36') or less; the overall size of the building is one hundred thousand (100,000) square feet or less; and, in the case of
a hotel, the individual rooms are served by an interior hallway versus opening to the exterior of the building. No internally
illuminated signage shall be allowed to face towards the residential use(s).
 
 
RE    Residential Estate District        MH Manufactured Housing District
RS    Residential Single-Family District RM Residential Medium-Density District
R-1   Single-Family Residential District RH Residential High-Density District
SF-CR Single-Family Commerce Residential OS Agricultural/Open Space District
      District
SF-VJ Single-Family Valley Junction
      Residential District
 
(Ord. 1629, 4-25-2005; amd. Ord. 1707, 9-25-2006; Ord. 1779, 9-10-2007; Ord.
1818, 10-6-2008; Ord. 1830, 6-1-2009; Ord. 1832, 7-27-2009; Ord. 1883, 11-1-
2010; Ord. 1931, 9-6-2011; Ord. 1958, 8-20-2012; Ord. 2080, 2-9-2015; Ord.
2081, 2-9-2015; Ord. 2123, 11-2-2015; Ord. 2136, 1-26-2016; Ord. 2225, 5-30-
2017; Ord. 2349, 3-4-2019; Ord. 2385, 10-21-2019; Ord. 2442, 10-5-2020; Ord.
2523, 6-20-2022; Ord. 2530, 7-18-2022; Ord. 2535, 8-15-2022; Ord. 2585, 11-20-
2023; Ord. 2596, 1-2-2024; Ord. 2608, 4-15-2024; Ord. 2621, 8-5-2024)
 
DIVISION J - Public Administration
P = Permitted / Pc = Permitted Conditional / Blank Cell = Prohibited
SIC # CODES              Zoning District
Classification title/Use RC CMC NC CVC SC VJC VJHB WR BP VJLI LI GI OF PCP OS
description
DIVISION J - Public Administration
P = Permitted / Pc = Permitted Conditional / Blank Cell = Prohibited
SIC # CODES                                                   Zoning District
Classification title/Use description                          RC CMC NC CVC SC VJC VJHB WR BP VJLI LI GI OF PCP OS
91   Executive, Legislative and General Government, except
Finance
92   Justice, public order, and safety
   921   Courts                                         Pc Pc  Pc Pc  Pc Pc  Pc   Pc Pc Pc   Pc Pc Pc Pc  Pc
   9221   Police protection                             Pc Pc  Pc Pc  Pc Pc  Pc   Pc Pc Pc   Pc Pc Pc Pc  Pc
   9222   Legal counsel and prosecution                 P  P          P  P   P    P  P             P  P
   9223   Correctional institutions                                                             Pc        Pc
   9224   Fire protection                               Pc Pc  Pc Pc  Pc Pc  Pc   Pc Pc Pc   Pc Pc Pc Pc  Pc
   9229   Public order and safety, not elsewhere classifPedP          P  P   P    P  P       P  P  P  P
93   Public Finance, Taxation and Monetary Policy          P  P          P  P   P    P  P             P  P
94   Administration of human resource programs             P  P   P      P  P   P    P  P             P  P
95   Administration of environmental quality housing prograPs P   P      P  P   P    P  P             P  P
96   Administration of economic programs                   P  P          P  P   P    P  P             P  P
97   National Security                                                                             P
Notes:
   **   All uses with a canopy structure, either free-standing or attached to building - see Section 9-10-4.A.28
in code.
 
(Ord. 1629, 4-25-2005; amd. Ord. 2288, 3-19-2018; Ord. 2543, 10-3-2022; Ord.
2608, 4-15-2024)
 
9-6-7: INDEX:
Division SIC Land Use
Division SIC        Land Use
D        329        Abrasive, Asbestos, and Miscellaneous Nonmetallic Mineral
                    Products Manufacturing, except SIC 3292
J        96         Administration of Economic Programs
J        95         Administration of Environmental Quality and Housing
                    Programs
J        94         Administration of Human Resource Programs
G        5999       Adult Entertainment Establishment selling sexually oriented
                    merchandise such as, films, books, magazines, toys, etc.
I        731        Advertising Services
I        7699       Agricultural Equipment Repair Services
A        01         Agricultural Production - crops outdoors/crops under cover
A        02         Agricultural Production - livestock and animal specialities
A        07         Agricultural Services
I        7699       Aircraft and Heavy Equipment Repair Services
D        372        Aircraft and parts manufacturing, except SIC 3724|
D        3724       Aircraft Engines and Engine Parts Manufacturing
G        5999       Alarm and Safety Equipment Stores
E        4119- 9902 Ambulance Services, Road (not air)
I        79         Amusement and Recreational Services
                    Amusement and Recreation Services, not elsewhere classified
I        7999       and not specifically identified in the following - public
                    and private, regardless of whether by membership or not,
                    except Fireworks Display Services
I        7996       Amusement Parks
A        027        Animal Specialities
A        0752       Animal Specialty Services, except veterinary, grooming and
                    boarding services
A        0279- 9901 Apiary (beekeeping, bee farm, bee yard or honey farm)
G        56         Apparel and Accessory Stores
D        23         Apparel and Other Finished Products made from Fabrics and
                    other similar materials - manufacturing
F        513        Apparel, Piece Goods, and Notions, wholesale trade
I        7999       Archery Ranges
I        7694       Armature Rewinding Repair Shops
E        472        Arrangement of Passenger Transportation
E        473        Arrangement of Transportation of Freight and Cargo
G        5999       Art and Architectural Supply Stores
G        5999       Art, Picture Frames and Decoration Stores
D        395        Art Supplies, manufacturing of
I        8999       Art-Related Services
I        8999       Artists and Artists’ Studios
D        3292       Asbestos Products Manufacturing
D        2951       Asphalt Paving Mixtures and Blocks Manufacturing
I        7389       Auction, Appraisal and Exchange Services (flea market)
G        5999       Auction Rooms
G        553        Auto and Home Supply Stores
G        5962       Automatic Merchandising Machine Operators - see Sections 9-
                    10-4.A.23 and 9-10-4.A.28 in code
G        55         Automotive Dealers and Gasoline Service Stations
G        559        Automotive Dealers, not elsewhere classified (i.e., utility
                    trailers, aircraft, snowmobiles, go-karts, dune buggies)
I        7533       Automotive Exhaust System Repair Shops
I        7536       Automotive Glass Replacement Shops
I        752        Automotive Parking
I        751        Automotive Rental and Leasing, Without Drivers
I        75         Automotive Repair, Services, and Parking
I        753        Automotive Repair Shops
I        7538       Automotive Repair Shops, General
I        7539       Automotive Repair Shops, Not Elsewhere Classified
I        754        Automotive Services, Except Repair
I        7549       Automotive Services, Except Repair and Car Washes
I        7534       Automotive Tire Retreading and Repair
I        7532       Automotive Top, Body, and Upholstery Repair, Paint Shops
I        7537       Automotive Transmission Repair Shops
D        205        Bakery Products Manufacturing
H        609        Banking, Functions Closely Related to
H        60         Banks/Depository Institutions (see also ATM machines)
G        5999       Banners, Flags, Decals and Poster Stores
G        58         Bar, see drinking places
I        724        Barbershops
I        7299       Bathing Beaches
G        5999       Batteries, Nonautomotive - Retail Stores
D        3692       Batteries, Primary - dry and wet
D        3691       Batteries, Storage
I        7299       Batting Cages
I        723        Beauty Shops
A        0212       Beef Cattle, Except Feedlots
A        0211       Beef Cattle Feedlots
F        518        Beer, Wine and Distilled Beverages, wholesale trade
D        208        Beverages, except SIC 2082 & 2085
I        7299       Bicycle And Micro-Transportation Rental
G        555        Boat Dealers
I        7299       Boat Rental, Including Canoe, Rowboats, And Kayak
I        7699       Boiler and Heating Repair Services
D        3452       Bolts, Nuts, Screws, Rivets and Washers Manufacturing
G        5942       Bookstores
I        793        Bowling Centers
C        15         Building Construction - General Contractors and Operative
                    Builders
G        52         Building Materials, Hardware, Garden Supply and Mobile Home
                    Dealers
D        3995       Burial Caskets
E        41         Bus Terminal Operations
I        861        Business Associations
I        73         Business Services
E        484        Cable and Other Pay Television Services, except
                    transmitting/receiving tower and/or dishes
G        5946       Camera and Photographic Supply Stores
I        703        Camps and Recreational Vehicle Parks
G        544        Candy, Nut, and Confectionery Stores
D        2091       Canned and Cured Fish and Seafoods Manufacturing
D        203        Canned, Frozen, and Preserved Fruits, Vegetables, and Food
                    Specialties Manufacturing-
G        5999       Canvas Products Stores
G        551        Car Dealers, New and Used
G        552        Car Dealers, Used
I        7217       Carpet and Upholstery Cleaning
I        7542       Carwashes
G        5961       Catalog and Mail-Order Houses
D        324        Cement, Hydraulic manufacturing
H        65         Cemeteries
D        28         Chemicals and Allied Products Manufacturing, except SIC
                    283, 2844, 2892, and 2899
F        516        Chemicals and Allied Products Wholesale Trading, except SIC
                    5169 Explosives, all kinds
D        2899       Chemicals and chemical preparations, not elsewhere
                    classified
I        835        Child Daycare Services
I        864        Civic, Social, and Fraternal Associations
G        5999       Cleaning Equipment And Supplies Retail Stores
I        7699       Cleaning Services
I        7299       Clothing Rental Services
B        12         Coal Mining
D        347        Coating, Engraving and Allied Services Manufacturing
G        5999       Coin and Stamp Stores
I        7993       Coin Operated Amusement Devices (video arcades)
I        7215       Coin Operated Laundries and Dry cleaning - see Section 9-
                    10-14-A.14 in code
I        822        Colleges, Universities, Professional Schools, and Junior
                    Colleges
E        493        Combination Electric and Gas, and Other Utility Services
I        8999       Commercial and Literary Writings
I        8999       Communication Services
E        48         Communications - see Sections 9-10-4.A.2 and 9-10-4.A.5 in
                    code
E        489        Communications services, not elsewhere included except
                    transmitting/receiving tower and/or dishes
G        5734       Computer and Computer Software Stores
I        737        Computer and Data Processing Services
D        357        Computer and Office Equipment
D        3271       Concrete Block and Brick
D        327        Concrete, Gypsum, and Plaster Products Manufacturing,
                    except SIC 3271 and 3273
G        5999       Concrete Products, precast - Retail Stores
D        353        Construction and Related Materials
C        17         Construction - Special Trade Contractors
I        732        Consumer Credit Reporting and Collection Agencies,
                    Mercantile Reporting Agencies, etc.
I        7299       Consumer Purchasing Services
G        541        Convenience Stores, with or without fuel pumps
J        9223       Correctional Institutions
D        396        Costume Jewelry, Costume Novelties, Buttons and
                    Miscellaneous Notions Manufacturing, except Precious Metal
J        9211       Courts
A        072        Crop Services
I        7699       Customizing Services (EXCEPT: Railroad Car Customizing)
D        328        Cut Stone and Stone Products Manufacturing
D        342        Cutlery, Hand Tools and General Hardware Manufacturing
A        024        Dairy Farms
D        202        Dairy Products Manufacturing
G        545        Dairy Products Stores
I        791        Dance Studios, Schools, and Halls
I        7299       Dating and Escort Services
I        7299       Day Camps
D        3843       Dental Equipment and Supplies Manufacturing
I        802        Dentists, Offices and Clinics of
G        531        Department Stores
H        60         Depository Institutions/Outdoor freestanding automatic
                    teller machine (ATM)
I        7381       Detective and Office
I        7381       Detectives, Guard and Armored Car Services
G        5963       Direct Selling Establishments
D        2085       Distilled and Blended Liquors (see Section 9-10-4.A.25)
                    Manufacturing - distillery with or without taproom
I        801        Doctors of Medicine, Offices and Clinics of
I        803        Doctors of Osteopathy, Offices and Clinics of
D        394        Dolls, Toys, Games, and Sporting and Athletic Goods
                    Manufacturing
G        5714       Drapery, Curtain, and Upholstery Stores
G        58         Drinking Places
I        7833       Drive-In Motion Pictures
D        283        Drugs Manufacturing, Except Processing of Marijuana
F        512        Drugs, Drug Proprietaries, and Druggists' Sundries
                    Wholesale Trading
G        591        Drugstores and Proprietary Stores
I        7216       Dry-Cleaning Plants, Except Rug Cleaning
F        5099       Durable Goods, not elsewhere classified except ammunition
                    and wood byproducts; wholesale trading
I        8999       Earth Science Services
                    Eating and Drinking Places - see Title 3, Chapter 2 and
G        58         Title 9, Chapters 2, 6, and 10 in city code for
                    definitions, allowances, specific regulations and
                    performance standards
G        5999       Educational Aids and Electronic Training Material Stores
E        49         Electric, Gas and Sanitary Services (includes Water Supply)
                    - see Sections 9-10-4.A.2 and 9-10-4-A.3 in code
E        491        Electric Services
F        506        Electrical Goods, Wholesale Trade
I        762        Electrical Repair Shops
D        3313       Electrometallurgical Products Manufacturing, Except Steel
                    Electronic and Other Electrical Equipment and Components
D        36         Manufacturing, except Computer Equipment, and except SIC
                    3691 and 3692
G        5999       Electronic Parts And Equipment Retail Stores
I        821        Elementary and Secondary Schools
D        3431       Enameled Iron and Metal Sanitary Ware Manufacturing
G        5999       Engine and Motor Equipment and Supply Stores
G        5999       Engine And Motor Equipment And Supply Stores
I        87         Engineering, Accounting, Research, Management and Related
                    Services
I        7359       Equipment Rental and Leasing, Not Elsewhere Classified
G        5999       Event Tents
I        79         Event Venue
D        2892       Explosives Manufacturing
F        5169       Explosives, Wholesale Trade
D        306        Fabricated Rubber Products Manufacturing, Not Elsewhere
                    Classified
D        344        Fabricated Structural Metal Products Manufacturing, except
                    SIC 3442 and 3444
I        7299       Facility Rental and Party Planning Services
G        5999       Farm Equipment and Supply Stores
A        076        Farm Labor and Management Services
F        515        Farm-Product Raw Materials, Wholesale Trade
F        5191       Farm Supples, except Agricultural Chemicals and Fertilizer
                    and Fertilizer Materials
D        207        Fats and Oils Manufacturing
D        2875       Fertilizers, Mixing only
G        5999       Fiberglass materials, except insulation
J        93         Finance, Taxation and Monetary Policy
J        9224       Fire Protection
I        7299       Fireworks Display Services, Including Bulk Storage Of
                    Fireworks
F        5092-03    Fireworks - wholesale
G        5999       Fireworks retail stores
D        2091       Fish and Seafood, Canned and Cured
D        2092       Fish, Prepared Fresh or Frozen
A        09         Fishing, Hunting and Trapping - noncommercial only
I        7299       Fishing Piers And Lakes, Operation Of
E        4785       Fixed Facilities and Inspection and Weighing Services for
                    Motor Vehicle Transportation
D        321        Flat Glass Manufacturing
G        5992       Florists
G        5999       Foam and Foam Products Retail Stores
D        20         Food and Kindred Products Manufacturing
G        54         Food stores
A        08         Forestry, except forestry services
A        085        Forestry services
G        543        Fruit and Vegetable Markets
G        598        Fuel Dealers
H        609        Functions closely related to banking
I        726        Funeral Service And Crematories
                    Furniture and Fixtures (EXCEPT: Wood Office Furniture,
D        25         Public Bldg. and Related Furniture, Wood Partitions and
                    Fixtures)
D        25         Furniture and Fixtures, Manufacturing
F        502        Furniture and Home Furnishings, Wholesale Trade
G        57         Furniture, Home Furnishings, and Equipment Stores
I        7212       Garment Pressing, and Agents for Laundries and Dry Cleaners
                    - see Section 9-10-14-.A.14 in code
E        492        Gas Production and Distribution
D        305        Gaskets, Packing, and Sealing Devises and Rubber and
                    Plastic Hoses and Belting Manufacturing
G        554        Gasoline Service Stations
G        5999       Gem and Precious Stones Retail Stores
A        019        General Farms, Primarily Crop
A        029        General Farms, Primarily Livestock and Animal Specialties
I        7699       General Household Repair Services
G        53         General Merchandise Stores
                    General Warehousing and Storage, except Mini warehousing/
E        4225       self-storage; storage of fireworks; and storage of
                    explosives and explosive materials - must abide by 9-10-
                    4.A.8
G        5947       Gift, Novelty and Souvenir Shops
D        322        Glass and Glassware Manufacturing, Pressed and Blown
D        323        Glass Products Manufacturing, made of purchased glass
I        7299       Go-Kart Raceway Operation
I        7992       Golf Courses, public and private, membership and non-
                    membership, with or without clubhouse
I        7299       Golf - Driving Range OpenAair
I        7299       Golf - Driving Range within/from Structure (e.g., Topgolf)
I        7299       Golf - Miniature Course
I        7299       Golf - Pitch and Put, Par-3 and Executive Courses
I        7299       Golf - Professionals not Operating Retail Stores
D        204        Grain Mill Products Manufacturing
F        514        Groceries and Related Products, Wholesale Trade
G        541        Grocery Stores, except Convenience Stores
I        7381       Guard and Armored Car/Equipment Storage
I        7381       Guard Dogs
D        376        Guided Missiles, Space Vehicles and Parts Manufacturing
I        7699       Gun Services
F        507        Hardware, and Plumbing and Heating Equipment and Supplies
                    Wholesale Trading
G        525        Hardware Stores Retail Trade
D        2435       Hardwood Veneer and Plywood Manufacturing
I        809        Health and Allied Services, Not Elsewhere Classified
I        804        Health Practitioners, Offices and Clinics of Other
I        80         Health Services
D        343        Heating Equipment Manufacturing, except electric and warm
                    air; and plumbing fixtures, and except SIC 3431
I        7353       Heavy Construction Equipment Rental and Leasing
C        16         Heavy Construction other than Building Construction -
                    Contractors
E        4581       Heliport/Helistop
I        7699       Hobby and Collectors Services
G        5945       Hobby, Toy and Game Shops
H        67         Holding and Other Investment Offices
G        57         Home Furniture, Furnishings and Equipment Stores, except
                    SIC 5714, 572 and 5734
I        808        Home Healthcare Services
E        4789       Horse-Drawn Transportation Services
I        7299       Horse Shows and Riding Stables and Arenas, including Riding
                    School
A        0272       Horses and Other Equines
A        018        Horticulture Specialties - except cultivation of marijuana
I        7699       Hospital Equipment Repair Services
I        806        Hospitals
I        701        Hotels and Motels
I        70         Hotels, Rooming Houses, Camps, and Other Lodging Places
I        7299       House and Baby sitting Services
I        7699       Household Appliance Repair Services
G        572        Household Appliance Stores - no outdoor storage (new or
                    used appliances) or display
I        7299       Ice Skating Rink, Operation of
I        832        Individual and Family Social Services
D        35         Industrial and Commercial Machinery and Computer Equipment
                    Manufacturing, except SIC 357
I        7699       Industrial Equipment Services
I        7218       Industrial Launderers
G        5999       Infant Furnishings and Equipment Retail Stores
G        5999       Insecticides Retail Stores
D        38         Instruments and Related Products Manufacturing
H        64         Insurance Agents, Brokers, and Services
H        63         Insurance Carriers
E        497        Irrigation Systems
D        391        Jewelry, Silverware and Plated Ware Manufacturing, except
                    SIC 3914
G        5944       Jewelry Stores
I        833        Job Training and Vocational Rehabilitation Services
J        91         Justice, Public Order and Safety
I        863        Labor Unions and Similar Labor Organizations
A        0781       Landscape Counseling and Planning
I        7219       Laundry and Garment Service, Not Elsewhere Classified
A        0782       Lawn and Garden Services
D        31         Leather and leather products Manufacturing, except SIC 311
I        7699       Leather Goods and Luggage Repair Services
D        311        Leather Tanning and Finishing
I        8999       Lecturing Services
J        9222       Legal Counsel and Prosecution
I        81         Legal Services
I        823        Libraries
I        7213       Linen Supply
D        3996       Linoleum, Asphalted-Felt-Base, and Other Hard Surface Floor
                    Coverings, not elsewhere classified
G        592        Liquor Stores
A        0751       Livestock Services, Except Veterinary
F        5154       Livestock, Wholesale Trade
                    Local and Suburban Transit and Interurban Highway Passenger
E        41         Transportation, except bus terminal operations and
                    ambulance services
E        4212       Local Trucking without Storage
I        7699       Lock and Key Services
D        241        Logging
G        5948       Luggage and Leather Goods Stores
F        503        Lumber and Construction Materials Wholesale Trading
G        521        Lumber and Other Building Material Dealers Retail Trade
D        24         Lumber and Wood Products Manufacturing
F        508        Machinery, Equipment and Supplies Wholesale Trading
I        733        Mailing, Reproduction, Commercial Art and Photography, and
                    Stenographic Services, except SIC 7334
D        2082       Malt Beverages Manufacturing (see Section 9-10-4.A.15) -
                    Breweries with or without taprooms
                    Manufacturing Related Business Services (e.g., field
I        7389       warehouse, liquidator of merchandise, swimming pool
                    cleaning, etc.)
E        4493       Marinas
I        7299       Massage Therapy Establishments and Steam Bath Services
                    Measuring, Analyzing, and Controlling Instruments;
D        38         Photographic, Medical and Optical Goods; Watches and Clocks
                    Manufacturing
G        542        Meat and Fish (Seafood) Markets, including Freezer
                    Provisioners Retail Trade
D        201        Meat Products Manufacturing
I        807        Medical and Dental Laboratories
G        5999       Medical Apparatus and Supply Retail Stores
I        7352       Medical Equipment
I        869        Membership Organizations, Not Elsewhere Classified (e.g.,
                    farm bureaus, poetry associations)
D        341        Metal Cans and Shipping Containers Manufacturing
D        3442       Metal Doors, Sash, Frames, Molding and Trim
D        346        Metal Forging and Stamping Manufacturing
D        3398       Metal Heat Treating Manufacturing
B        10         Metal Mining
D        34         Metal Products, Fabricated, Except Machinery and
                    Transportation Equipment Manufacturing
I        7699       Metal Reshaping and Replating Services
F        505        Metals and Minerals, Except Petroleum, Wholesale Trade
D        2431       Millwork Manufacturing
D        243        Millwork, Veneer, Plywood and Structural Wood Members
                    Manufacturing
E        4225       Mini Warehousing/Self-Service Storage Facility - must abide
                    by Sections 9-10-4.A.8 and 9-10-4.A.16.a
B        14         Mining and Quarrying of Nonmetallic Minerals, Except Fuels
I        7699       Miscellaneous Automotive Repair Services
I        7699       Miscellaneous Building Item Repair Services
I        738        Miscellaneous Business Services
F        509        Miscellaneous Durable Goods Wholesale Trading, except SIC
                    5092-03 (Fireworks), 5093 and 5099
I        735        Miscellaneous Equipment Rental And Leasing Services
D        349        Miscellaneous Fabricated Metal Products Manufacturing
D        209        Miscellaneous Food Preparations and Kindred Products
                    Manufacturing, except SIC 2091 and SIC 2092
G        549        Miscellaneous Food Stores
G        539        Miscellaneous General Merchandise Stores
D        399        Miscellaneous Manufacturing Industries Manufacturing,
                    except SIC 3995 and 3996
F        519        Miscellaneous Nondurable Goods, Wholesale Trade
I        7299       Miscellaneous Personal Services, Not Elsewhere Classified
D        308        Miscellaneous Plastic Products Manufacturing, except SIC
                    3084 and 3089
I        76         Miscellaneous Repair Services
I        769        Miscellaneous Repair Shops and Related Services
G        59         Miscellaneous Retail
                    Miscellaneous retail stores, not elsewhere categorized - no
G        5999       outdoor sales or storage, unless otherwise specifically
                    noted
E        478        Miscellaneous Services Incidental to Transportation
G        594        Miscellaneous Shopping Goods Stores
D        379        Miscellaneous Transportation Equipment Manufacturing - no
                    outside storage in Business Park (BP) zone
D        249        Miscellaneous wood products manufacturing, except SIC 2491
                    and 2493 - Manufacturing
E        4925       Mixed, manufactured, or liquefied petroleum gas production
                    and/or distribution, except production and manufacturing
G        527        Mobile Home Dealers Retail Trade
G        5999       Monument and Tombstones Retail Stores
I        78         Motion Pictures
I        782        Motion Picture Distribution and Allied Services
I        781        Motion Picture Productions and Allied Services
I        7832       Motion Picture Theatres
E        42         Motor Freight Transportation and Warehousing - Section 9-
                    10-4.A.8 in code applicable to all SIC 42 uses
G        551        Motor Vehicle Dealers (new and used)
G        552        Motor Vehicle Dealers (used only)
D        3714       Motor Vehicle Parts and Accessories Manufacturing
F        501        Motor Vehicles and Motor Vehicle Parts and Supplies
                    Wholesale Trading
D        371        Motor Vehicles and Motor Vehicle Equipment Manufacturing,
                    except SIC 3714
G        557        Motorcycle Dealers
D        375        Motorcycles, Bicycles, and Parts Manufacturing
I        84         Museums, Art Galleries, Botanical and Zoological Gardens
I        7699       Musical Instrument Repair Services
D        393        Musical Instruments Manufacturing
J        97         National Security
E        4922       Natural Gas Transmission, except commercial storage and SIC
                    4925
I        7699       Nautical Repair Services
G        5994       News Dealers and Newsstands
I        7383       News Syndicates
H        61         Nondepository Credit Institutions, except SIC 6141
D        336        Nonferrous Foundries (castings) Manufacturing
I        805        Nursing and Personal Care Facilities
I        7299       Observation Tower
I        7389       Office Related Businesses (e.g., arbitration, interior
                    decorating, notaries, etc.)
B        13         Oil and Gas Extraction
G        5995       Optical Goods Stores
D        348        Ordinance and Accessories, and Guided Missiles
                    Manufacturing, except SIC 3484
A        0783       Ornamental Shrub and Tree Services
G        5999       Packaging Materials Retail Stores, e.g., boxes, padding
                    materials
E        4783       Packing and Crating
G        523        Paint, Glass and Wallpaper Stores Retail Trade
I        7299       Paintball Course, Operation of
F        5199       Paints, Varnishes and Supplies Wholesale Trading
D        26         Paper and allied products manufacturing, except SIC 2611,
                    2621, and 2631 Manufacturing
F        511        Paper and Paper Products, Wholesale Trade
D        2621       Paper Mills Manufacturing
D        2631       Paperboard Mills Manufacturing
I        79         Parks, public or private (including typical courts, fields
                    and facilities found in public parks)
D        395        Pens, Pencils, Office, and Other Art Supplies and Materials
D        2844       Perfumes, Cosmetics and other Toilet Preparations, except
                    cosmetic preparations manufacturing
I        7299       Personal Appearance Services
H        6141       Personal Credit Institutions, including check and cash
                    agencies and delayed deposit services businesses
I        7299       Personal Document and Information Services
I        7299       Personal Financial Services
I        7299       Personal Item Care and Storage Services
I        72         Personal Services
I        7299       Personal Watercraft Rental
I        736        Personnel Supply Services
G        5999       Pet and Pet Supplies Retail Shops
F        517        Petroleum and Petroleum Products, Wholesale Trade
D        29         Petroleum Refining and Related Industries Manufacturing,
                    except SIC 2951
I        7384       Photo Finish Labs
I        7334       Photocopying and Duplicating Services
I        7699       Photographic and Optical Goods Equipment Repair Services
I        722        Photographic and Optical Goods Equipment Repair
I        7991       Physical Fitness Facilities
E        46         Pipelines, except natural gas
D        3084       Plastic Pipe Manufacturing
D        3089       Plastic Products Manufacturing, Not Elsewhere Classified
J        9221       Police Protection
I        865        Political Organizations
E        431        Postal Service, U.S.
D        326        Pottery and Related Products Manufacturing
I        7211       Power Laundries, Family and Commercial
D        2092       Prepared Fresh or Frozen Fish and Seafoods Manufacturing
D        3692       Primary batteries Manufacturing, Dry and Wet
D        33         Primary Metal Industries Manufacturing, except SIC 3313,
                    3315, 336, 3398 and 3399
D        3399       Primary Metal Products Manufacturing, not elsewhere
                    classified, except metal fasteners
D        275        Printing, Commercial
D        27         Printing, publishing and allied industries, except SIC 275
E        421        Product Transportation Services, Garbage Collection and
                    Transport - Not Disposal
F        504        Professional and Commercial Equipment and Supplies
                    Wholesale Trading
H        67         Professional and Semiprofessional Offices, NEC, without
                    attendant retail, manufacturing, assembly or warehousing
I        7699       Professional Instrument Repair Services
I        862        Professional Membership Organizations
J        93         Public Finance, Taxation and Monetary Policy
J        9229       Public Order and Safety, Not Elsewhere Classified
E        422        Public Warehousing and Storage
D        2611       Pulp Mills Manufacturing
I        7948       Racing, Including Track Operations
E        483        Radio and Television Broadcasting Stations, except
                    transmitting/receiving tower and/or dishes
I        7699       Railroad Car Customizing
E        474        Railroad Cars, Rental of
D        374        Railroad Equipment Manufacturing
E        40         Railroad Transportation
D        3273       Ready-Mixed Concrete Manufacturing
H        65         Real Estate Office
D        2493       Reconstituted Wood Products Manufacturing
I        7699       Recreational Sporting Equipment Repair Services
G        556        Recreational Vehicle Dealers
I        7699       Recreational Vehicle Repair Services
E        4222       Refrigerated Warehousing and Storage
E        4953       Refuse Systems
I        866        Religious Organizations
I        7699       Repair Shops and Related Services, Not Elsewhere Classified
I        836        Residential Care
G        58         Restaurants, see Eating and Drinking Places
G        546        Retail Bakeries
G        526        Retail Nurseries, Lawn And Garden Supply Stores Retail
                    Trade
G        599        Retail Stores, not elsewhere categorized
I        764        Reupholstery and Furniture Repair
I        7299       River Rafting, Operation of, Including Rental of Equipment
D        335        Rolling, Drawing, and Extruding of Nonferrous Metals
                    Manufacturing
D        30         Rubber and Miscellaneous Plastics Products Manufacturing
D        302        Rubber and Plastic Footwear Manufacturing
G        5999       Sales Barn
E        495        Sanitary Services
E        4959       Sanitary Services, Not Elsewhere Classified
D        242        Sawmills and Planing Mills
I        829        Schools and Educational Services, Not Elsewhere Classified
I        8999       Scientific Consulting
I        7699       Scientific Equipment Repair Services
F        5093       Scrap and Waste Materials Wholesale Trading
D        3451       Screw Machine Products Manufacturing
H        62         Security and Commodity Brokers, Dealers, Exchanges and
                    Services
I        7382       Security Systems Services
E        4225       Self-Service Storage Facility - must abide by Sections 9-
                    10-4-A.8. and 9-10-4.A.16.b
I        734        Services to Dwellings And Other Buildings
E        4952       Sewerage Services
G        5949       Sewing, Needlework and Piece Goods Stores
D        3444       Sheet Metal Work
D        373        Ship and Boat Building and Repair
I        725        Shoe Repair Shops and Shoeshine Parlors
I        7299       Shooting Ranges, Operation of
D        3914       Silverware Manufacturing
I        7299       Skeet Shooting Facilities, Operation of
I        83         Social Services
I        839        Social Services, Not Elsewhere Classified (e.g., advocacy
                    groups, community development groups)
D        2436       Softwood Veneer and Plywood Manufacturing
A        071        Soil Preparation Services
I        8999       Song Writings
E        4226       Special warehousing and storage, not elsewhere classified
D        394        Sporting Goods Manufacturing
G        5941       Sporting Goods Stores and Bicycle Shops
I        79         Sports Facilities including Arenas, Stadiums and Fields,
                    public and private/club, professional and non-professional
I        7299       Station Operation Services
G        5943       Stationery Stores
E        496        Steam and Air-Conditioning Supply
D        3315       Steel Wiredrawing and Steel Nails and Spikes Manufacturing
I        7299       Stitching Services
E        4789       Stockyards, Not Primarily for Fattening or Selling of
                    Livestock
D        32         Stone, Clay, Glass and Concrete Products Manufacturing
D        325        Structural Clay Products Manufacturing
D        2439       Structural Wood Members Manufacturing, Not Elsewhere
                    Classified
D        206        Sugar and Confectionery Products Manufacturing
G        5999       Swimming Pools, Hot Tubs and Sauna Equipment and Supplies
                    Retail Stores
I        7699       Tank Repair and Cleaning Services
I        7291       Tax Return Preparation Services
E        482        Telegraph and Other Message Communications, except
                    transmitting/receiving tower and/or dishes
G        5999       Telephone and Communication Equipment And Supplies Retail
                    Stores
E        481        Telephone Communications, except transmitting/receiving
                    tower and/or dishes)
E        423        Terminal and Joint Terminal Maintenance Facilities for
                    Motor Freight Transportation
D        22         Textile Mill, Products Manufacturing
I        792        Theatrical Producers (except Motion Pictures), and
                    miscellaneous theatrical services
I        792        Theatrical Productions, Bands, Orchestras and Entertainer,
                    except Motion Pictures
D        301        Tires and Inner Tubes Manufacturing
D        21         Tobacco Products Manufacturing
G        5993       Tobacco Stores and Stands
G        5999       Toiletries, Cosmetics and Perfume Retail Stores
I        7699       Tool Repair Services
E        489        Transmitting/Receiving Towers and/or Dishes
D        37         Transportation Equipment Manufacturing
E        4789       Transportation Services, Not Elsewhere Classified
D        301        Trees and Inner Tubes Manufacturing
E        421        Trucking and Courier Services, Except Air
G        5999       Typewriter and Business Machines Retail Stores
G        5932       Used Merchandise Stores, except Antiques, Bookstores,
                    Building Materials and Pawnshops
E        493        Utility Services, Combination
G        533        Variety Stores
G        5999       Vaults and Safes Retail Stores
                    Vending machines, excluding SIC 60 Automated Teller
G        5962       Machines (ATMs) - see Sections 9-10-4.A.23 and 9-10-4.A.28
                    in code
A        0742       Veterinary Services for Animal Specialties With Outdoor
                    Runs
A        0742       Veterinary Services for Animal Specialties, No Outdoor Runs
A        0741       Veterinary Services for Livestock
I        7993       Video Arcades, Coin Operated Amusement Devices
I        784        Video Tape Rentals
I        824        Vocational Schools
I        7699       Waste Cleaning Services
I        763        Watch, Clock, and Jewelry Repair
G        5999       Water and Air Purification Equipment for Residential Retail
                    Stores
G        5999       Water And Air Purification Equipment For Agricultural Uses/
                    Activities Retail Stores
I        7299       Water Park, commercial - Indoor
I        7299       Water Park, commercial - Outdoor
E        494        Water Supply
E        44         Water Transportation, except SIC 4493
I        8999       Weather Related Services
I        7692       Welding Repair
G        5999       Welding Supplies Retail Stores
                    Wholesale Trade - durable goods - no outdoor storage in
F        50         Business Park (BP) or Valley Junction Light Industrial
                    (VJLI)
F        51         Wholesale Trade - nondurable goods
I        7699       Window Blind Repair Services
D        245        Wood Buildings and Mobile Homes Manufacturing
D        244        Wood Containers Manufacturing
D        2434       Wood Kitchen Cabinets Manufacturing
D        2491       Wood Preserving Manufacturing
 
(Ord. 1190, 6-17-1996; amd. Ord. 1258, 7-14-1997; Ord. 1303, 5-4-1998; Ord.
1307, 6-1-1998; Ord. 2080, 2-9-2015; Ord. 2136, 1-26-2016; Ord. 2364, 6-3-2019;
Ord. 2608, 4-15-2024)
CHAPTER 7
SETBACK AND BULK DENSITY REGULATIONS
SECTION:
9-7-1: Title And Citation
9-7-2: Purpose
9-7-3: Interpretations
9-7-4: Setback And Density Regulations
9-7-1: TITLE AND CITATION:
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the SETBACK AND BULK DENSITY
MATRIX. (Ord. 1190, 6-17-1996)
9-7-2: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to set forth specific development standards
which are applicable to the zoning districts and uses specified. This chapter
lists in matrix form the specific development standards applicable to specific
zones. (Ord. 1190, 6-17-1996)
9-7-3: INTERPRETATIONS:
A.   Any cell within the matrix that does not include a specific numerical
designation or is labeled not applicable (n/a), indicates that the use is not
considered an allowed use within that zoning district.
B.   Where the specific requirements of a proposed land use that is determined
to be an acceptable use by the City Council, the Director of Community
Development or their designee shall review the proposed use and, based upon the
characteristics of the use, determine which of the specific development
regulations listed in this chapter is equivalent to that proposed.
C.   Individual manufactured housing units shall be allowed in all single-
family detached zones. The unit shall be required to comply with all of the
height and bulk requirements for that zone. (Ord. 1190, 6-17-1996; amd. Ord.
2570, 7-5-2023)
9-7-4: SETBACK AND DENSITY REGULATIONS:
A.   Setback and building separation requirements noted below do not preclude
any part of a structure from meeting all applicable Building and Fire Code
requirements.
B.   See section
9-19-8, "Landscape Provisions", of this title on how building separation and
setbacks are applied along required buffers.
C.   The following regulations shall apply to development within the
Residentially Zoned Districts and single-family residential development in the
Agricultural/Open Space and Valley Junction Historic Business Districts.
1.   Zoning District Abbreviations:
OS    Agricultural/Open Space District
RE    Residential Estate District
RS    Residential Single-Family District
R-1   Single-Family Residential District
SF-CR Single-Family Commerce Residential District
SF-VJ Residential District Single-Family Valley Junction
MH    Manufactured Housing District
RM    Residential Medium-Density District
RH    Residential High-Density District
VJHB  Valley Junction Historic Business District
 
2.   Residential Building Types: See section
9-5-7, "Building Form Regulations And Zoning District Compatibility For
Residential Districts", of this title for descriptions of residential building
types.
3.   Measurement: All setbacks or separations are measured from the closest
part of the foundation of the building or structure.
a.   For structures with setbacks of seven feet (7') or larger:
(1)   Building projections are allowed to encroach up to two feet (2') from
each building into minimum setback or separation; however, no part of any
structure, including eaves and overhangs, may be closer than five feet (5') to
a property line.
(2)   Building projections that are allowed to encroach within a setback cannot
exceed a distance of four feet (4') from the foundation line. Should the
projection exceed four feet (4'), any setbacks and building separations will be
measured from the closest part of the projection for the extent of the
projection.
(3)   No window well or any ground mounted mechanical equipment may be closer
than three feet (3') to a property line.
b.   For structures with setbacks of less than seven feet (7'):
(1)   Building projections are allowed to encroach up to two feet (2') from
each building into minimum setback or separation as long as they meet all
applicable Building Codes on fire resistive construction.
(2)   No window well or any ground mounted mechanical equipment may be closer
than two feet (2') to a property line.
c.   Setbacks from private streets and drives:
(1)   Unless otherwise noted, the minimum setback for attached or detached
garages facing a public or private street or interior vehicular roadway as
measured perpendicularly from the garage opening to the closest point of the
sidewalk, or back of curb of the intersecting private street or interior
vehicular roadway (whichever is more restrictive) shall be twenty five feet
(25') or greater, except that, when the vehicle entrance for a garage faces an
alley, the setback from the alley shall be a minimum of twenty feet (20') or as
necessary to accommodate the parking of a vehicle on the driveway without the
vehicle encroaching into the alley.
(2)   Unless otherwise noted, the minimum setback for a residential structure
shall be fifteen feet (15') from the interior edge of the sidewalk or the back
of curb of an adjacent private street or interior vehicular roadway (whichever
is more restrictive). This setback shall apply to all structures, including
accessory or ancillary structures such as maintenance sheds, clubhouses or
leasing offices.
d.   See footnotes in
tables 7.2 and
7.3 of this subsection C for setbacks on outdoor living areas for footprint
lots.
4.   Building Height: Maximum building height for single family dwellings is
three (3) stories.
5.   Bulk Regulations For Residential Districts:
TABLE 7.1
Maximum Unit Density
 
Required Standards OS  RE   RS  R-1 SF-CR SF-VJ VJHB MH   RM   RH
Maximum du/acre    0.1 0.91 6.0 5.8 5.8   6.0   6.0  12.0 12.0 18.0
 
Lot Area - Standard Lots (Not Footprint Lots2)
 
Required    OS    RE     RS     R-1    SF-CR  SF-VJ  VJHB  MH    RM    RH
Standards
Minimum lot 10    40,000 5,000  7,500  7,500  6,000  6,000 5,300 2
area        acres sq.    sq.    sq.    sq.    sq.    sq.   sq.   acres 2 acres
                  ft.    ft.    ft.    ft.    ft.    ft.   ft.
Minimum lot                                   18,000       6,500
size - non- n/a   2.5    1 acre 1 acre 1 acre sq.    n/a   sq.   2     2 acres
residential       acres                       ft.          ft.   acres
uses
Minimum     75%   25%    25%    25%    25%    25%    25%   25%   25%   25%
open space
 
Lot Width - Standard Lots (Not Footprint Lots2)
 
                    RS
                    5,000 8,000 10,000 15,000
Required  OS   RE   To    To    To     Sq. Ft. R-1 SF- SF-VJ VJHB MH  RM   RH
Standards           7,999 9,999 14,999 Or          CR
                    Sq.   Sq.   Sq.    Greater
                    Ft.   Ft.   Ft.
Minimum
lot width
at        200' 100' 50'   70'   80'    100'    50' 50' 40'   40'  50'
building
setback
line1
Minimum
street    40'  40'  40'   40'   40'    40'     40' 40' 40'   40'  40' 100' 150'
frontage
 
Notes:
1.    The minimum lot width for corner lots shall be increased by 25 feet.
2.    Lot area and dimensions of footprint lots are dictated by setback
requirements noted in tables 7.2 and 7.3 of this subsection C.
6.   Minimum Setbacks And Building Separations For Principal Buildings
(Dwellings) In Single Family Zoning Districts:
TABLE 7.2
Setbacks And Building Separations4 - Standard Lots
 
                    RS
Required            5,000   8,000   10,000  15,000          SF-
Standards  OS   RE  To      To      To      Sq. Ft. R-1     CR  SF-VJ VJHB MH5
                    7,999   9,999   14,999  Or
                    Sq. Ft. Sq. Ft. Sq. Ft. Greater
Front yard 50'  50' 30'     35'     35'     35'     30'     20' 20'   20'  20'
setback1,2
Rear yard  50'  50' 35'     35'     35'     35'     35'     20' 35'   35'  10'
setback
Minimum
side yard  50'  20' 7'      8'      8'      8'      7'      5'  5'    5'   5'
setback on
any 1 side
Minimum
sum of     100' 40' 14'     20'     20'     20'     14'     10' 10'   10'  10'
side yard
setbacks
Street
Side Yard           20'     20'     20'     20'     20'
(see Title          25' to  25' to  25' to  25' to  25' to
10,                 garage  garage  garage  garage  garage
Chapter 3,          opening opening opening opening opening
Section 1)
 
Notes:
1.    In any existing platted property where the average front yard setback is
different than that required for the specific zoning district, the front yard
setback for the subject lot is equal to the average of the front yard depths of
any existing immediate adjacent dwellings on the same side of the street
including the existing dwelling of the subject property. Resulting front yard
setback shall not be less than the minimum required side yard setback for the
zoning district. Front yard setback measured from the face of any garage
accessed from the street will be a minimum of 25 feet regardless of the
averaged front yard depth. If the overall depth of the lot from the subject
front yard is 50 feet or less, the setback for any garage accessed from the
street will be a minimum of 20 feet. The average front yard setback requirement
shall not be applicable in situations in which the greatest extent of an
improvement made on the subject lot is seventy-five feet (75') or greater from
the closest element of a structure on both of the lots on either side of the
subject lot.
2.    Open porches with a minimum depth of 6 feet are allowed to encroach up to
8 feet into the standard lot front yard setback.
3.    Reduced Setbacks:
      a.   Reduced Setbacks may be designated on an individual parcel/lot
within a subdivision if the lot meets all of the following criteria, without
exception:
         (1)   Lot size ranges from a minimum of 5,000 sq. ft. to a maximum of
7,999 sq. ft. (up to a maximum of 11,000 sq. ft. for a corner lot).
         (2)   Lot width is a maximum of 50 feet wide at the building setback
line (75 feet for a corner lot).
         (3)   Lot has a minimum of 40 feet of street frontage.
      b.   When a lot meets these parameters, the front yard setback may be
reduced to no less than 25', the rear yard setback reduced to no less than 30'
and the side yard reduced to no less than 6' with a minimum total of 12'
combined side yards.
      c.   The provision of an average front yard setback as provided in note
#1 shall not be applicable in determining reduced front yard setback on lots
which provide a reduced setback.
      d.   Allowance for open porches to extend into the front yard setback as
provided in note #2 shall not be allowed on lots which provide a reduced
setback.
      e.   A Variance or Zoning Exception applicable to the principal building
(dwelling) shall not be allowed for lots which provide a reduced setback;
however, a variance or zoning exception may still be an option for detached
accessory structures within a lot that has provided reduced setbacks.
      f.   The reduced setback dimensions and buildable area must be noted on
the subdivision plat drawing(s).
4.    Building Separations for detached second dwelling units: A minimum of
five feet (5') as measured from any part of the building from any dwelling unit
or accessory building on the same lot.
5.    Manufactured homes within a land lease manufactured home park must be
completely contained within the land lease area and comply with separation or
fire protection requirements under the authority of 42 USC section 5403
(Federal Manufactured Home Construction and Safety Standards). Manufactured
homes not within a land lease manufactured home park must meet the setback and
separation distances of the applicable zoning district.
7.   Minimum Setbacks And Building Separations For Principal And Accessory
Buildings Or Structures In Multi Family Zoning Districts:
TABLE 7.3
Required Standards
For all of the following:
1.   Unless otherwise indicated, setbacks indicated are the minimum to be
provided.
2.   Must abide by Zoning District Compatibility and Transitioning as provided
in Chapter 5, Section 7.C within this title.
3.   Setbacks shall be measured from:
      - the right-of-way line along public streets;
      - the dwelling side of a sidewalk along a private street or interior
vehicular roadway; or,
      - the curb of a private street or interior vehicular roadway if a
sidewalk is not required.
4.   No portion of a private lot or structure may extend into a required
perimeter setback; however, required buffers and/or streetscapes may overlap
the perimeter setback.
Required Standards                                                      RM  RH
Detached dwellings (detached townhomes)
Perimeter Setbacks:
 Front yard setback along all adjacent street frontages                30' 30'
 Rear yard setback (common lot or area: not within footprint lots)     30' 30'
 Side yard setback
  When adjacent to another private lot with different zoning or       30' 30'
    developed single family residential
  When adjacent to another private lot with like zoning               7'  7'
Interior Setbacks:
 Front yard setback for dwelling structure (not garage)                15' 15'
 Setback of garage, unless alley loaded (see                           25' 25'
  9-7-4.C.3.c.(1) for setback)
 Rear and side yard for dwelling structure (not garage)                7'  7'
Setbacks within footprint lots 2:
 Minimum setback from building foundation of all yards for footprint   7'  7'
  lot2
  Maximum setback from building foundation of one side or the rear yard
 of the footprint lot to accommodate additional yard or private        15' 15'
  outdoor living areas2
 Maximum setback from building foundation of all other yards for       10' 10'
  footprint lot2
 Minimum separation between principal buildings                        14' 14'
 Minimum separation between accessory buildings or structures under    10' 10'
  1,500 sq. ft. and all other buildings4
 
Required Standards RM RH
Required Standards                                                      RM  RH
Attached dwelling building up to 2 stories, 4 units or less per building
(townhomes, apartments or condominiums):
Perimeter Setback:
 All sides, regardless of if abut a street                             30' 30'
Interior Setbacks:
 Front and rear yard setback
  Front yard setback of dwelling structure (not garage)               15' 15'
    Setback of garage attached to & dedicated to an individual
  dwelling; (detached and as part of off-street parking lot not       25' 25'
    required to have 25' of parking in front thereof)
 Side yard setback of dwelling structure (not garage)                  7'  7'
Setbacks within footprint lots 2:
 Minimum setback from building foundation of all yards for footprint   7'  7'
  lot2
  Maximum setback from building foundation of one side or the rear yard
 of the footprint lot to accommodate additional yard or private        15' 15'
  outdoor living areas2
 Maximum setback from building foundation of all other yards for       10' 10'
  footprint lot2
 Minimum separation between principal buildings                        14' 14'
 Minimum separation between accessory buildings or structures under    10' 10'
  1,500 sq. ft. and all other buildings4
Attached dwelling building up to 2 stories, more than 4 units per building -or-
3 stories or greater, 4 units or less per building
(townhomes, apartments or condominiums):
Perimeter Setbacks:
 Front yard setback (along all streets)                                50' 50'
 Rear and side yard setback (if not adjacent to a street)              35' 35'
Interior Setbacks:
 Front and rear yard setback                                           20' 20'
    Setback of garage attached to & dedicated to an individual
  dwelling; (detached as part of off-street parking lot not required  25' 25'
    to have 25' of parking in front thereof)
 Side yard setback                                                     10' 10'
Minimum Setback within footprint lots2:
 Minimum setback from building foundation of all yards for footprint   7'  7'
  lot
 
Required Standards RM RH
Required Standards                                                      RM  RH
  Maximum setback from building foundation of one side or the rear yard
 of the footprint lot to accommodate additional yard or private        15' 15'
  outdoor living areas
 Maximum setback from building foundation for all other yards of a     10' 10'
  footprint lot
 Minimum separation between principal buildings                        20' 20'
 Minimum separation between accessory buildings or structures under    20' 20'
  1,500 sq. ft. and all other buildings 4
Attached dwelling building 3 stories or greater, more than 4 units per building
(townhomes, apartments or condominiums):
Perimeter Setbacks3:
 Front yard setback (along all streets)                                60' 60'
 Rear and side yard setback (if not adjacent to a street)              35' 35'
Interior Setbacks:
 Front and rear yard setback                                           30' 30'
 Side yard setback:                                                    15' 15'
Within footprint lots2:
 Minimum setback from building foundation for all yards of a footprint 7'  7'
  lot
  Maximum setback from building foundation of one side or the rear yard
 of the footprint lot to accommodate additional yard or private        15' 15'
  outdoor living areas
 Maximum setback from building foundation for all other yards of a     10' 10'
  footprint lot
 Minimum separation between principal buildings                        30' 30'
 Minimum separation between accessory buildings or structures under    20' 20'
  1,500 sq. ft. and all other buildings4
Notes:
   1.   Reserved.
   2.   Outdoor living areas associated with, and adjacent to the dwelling unit
for footprint lots must be contained in the footprint lot and meet the
following setback requirements:
         a.   Patios: set back a minimum of 1 foot from the footprint property
line.
         b.   Decks that do not exceed 30 inches in height or open trellises:
set back a minimum of 5 feet from footprint property line.
         c.   Structures that exceed 30 inches in height such as decks, porches
and sunrooms: set back a minimum of 7 feet from footprint property line.
   3.   For any building over 3 stories, an additional 10 feet of building
setback is required for every story over 3 stories.
   4.   Accessory buildings over 1,500 square feet must meet primary building
setbacks and separations, including setbacks adjusted for primary building
height.
 
8.   Minimum Setbacks And Bulk Regulations For Principal Buildings Of Non-
Residential Uses (Daycares, Churches, Schools) In Residential Zoning Districts:
TABLE 7.4
Required Standards RE RS R-1 SF-CR SF-VJ MH RM RH
Required Standards                     RE   RS   R-1  SF-CR SF-VJ MH  RM   RH
Minimum setback 1:
Front yard setback                     100' 50'  50'  20'   20'   35' 50'  50'
Rear yard setback                      100' 50'  50'  20'   20'   35' 50'  50'
Side yard setback                      50'  25'  25'  15'   15'   10' 25'  25'
Lot size:
Minimum lot width                      100' 100' 100' 50'   50'   50' 100' 150'
Minimum street frontage                50'  50'  50'  50'   50'   50' 100' 150'
Minimum open space                     25%  25%  25%  25%   25%   25% 25%  25%
Building height:
Maximum height of principal building2  40'  40'  40'  40'   40'   40' 40'  40'
Maximum height of accessory building   20'  20'  20'  20'   20'   20' 20'  20'
or structure (at highest roof element)
 
Notes:
1.    See subsection C9 and
table 7.5 of this section for detached accessory structure setbacks in
Residential Zoning Districts.
2.    Additional 12 feet of height allowed for each additional 10 feet of
setback.
9.   Bulk Regulations, Minimum Setbacks And Building Separations For Accessory
Buildings And Structures In Residential Districts:
a.   See chapter 14, "Accessory Structures", of this title for additional
standards and construction requirements for accessory buildings and structures.
b.   Accessory buildings and structures (other than fences and walls) that meet
the minimum separation distance from the principal building are considered
detached accessory structures. In such case, the detached accessory structure
must meet the setback requirements as noted in
table 7.5 of this subsection C9.
c.   Accessory structures (other than fences and walls) that do not meet the
minimum separation from the principal structure are considered part of the
principal structure, no matter if they are physically separate from the
principal structure. In such case, the accessory structure must meet the
setback requirements as noted below.
(1)   Accessory structures (other than fences and walls) that do not exceed
thirty inches (30") in height as measured from grade to the highest element and
any railing or trellis designed to be open fifty percent (50%) or more may
follow the detached accessory structure setbacks, no matter their proximity to
the principal structure.
(2)   Accessory structures that are considered part of the principal structure
and which exceed thirty inches (30") in height must be setback a minimum of
twenty feet (20') from the rear property line(s) and must meet the pertinent
side and front yard setback of the principal structure.
d.   Accessory structures cannot encroach into any buffer area or perimeter
setback.
e.   In a footprint lot development, detached accessory structures are not
allowed within footprint lots and are only allowed for development use when
located on common development property. Fences are allowed on or within the
boundaries of individual footprint lots for purposes that serve the occupants
of the dwelling. Fences are only allowed on common development property for
purposes that serve the development as a whole. See Chapter 14 of this Title
(Fences), Section 4 (Fence Height and Required Setback) for additional fencing
requirements for footprint developments.
f.   Accessory buildings over one thousand (1,000) square feet, which are only
permitted in Residential Estate, Agricultural/Open Space zoning and for
religious, institutional, or civic uses within residential districts, shall
meet the minimum front yard setback of their respective zoning district and be
set back a minimum of twenty feet (20') from the side and rear property lines.
g.   Accessory buildings over one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet in
multi-family Residential Districts must meet primary building setbacks and
separations including setbacks adjusted for primary building height.
TABLE 7.5
DETACHED ACCESSORY STRUCTURES
Single Family Zoning Districts
Required Standards OS R E RS                R-1 SF-CR SF-VJ MH2 VJHB
                          < 8,000' > 8,000'
                                        RS
Required Standards              OS  R E <       >       R-1     SF-CR  SF-VJ  MH2     VJHB
                                        8,000'  8,000'
Front yard setback1             50' 50' 30'     35'     30'     20'    20'    20'     20'
                                        20'     20'     20'
Street Side Yard (see                   25' to  25' to  25' to
Title 10, Chapter 3, Section 1)         garage  garage  garage
                                        opening opening opening
Rear and side
yard setback
   Structures 1,000 sq ft or 5'  5'  5'      5'      5'      5'     5'     5'      5'
less,
                                        not     not     not     not    not    not     not
   Structures over 1,000 sq f20' 20' allowed allowed allowed allowe allowe allowed allowed
                                                                d      d
Setback from alleys where the   20' 20' 20'     20'     20'     20'    20'    20'     20'
structure accesses the alley
Minimum separation between
accessory buildings or          5'  5'  5'      5'      5'      5'     5'     5'      5'
structures and all other
buildings
Maximum building height         20' 20' 20'     20'     20'     20'    20'    20'     20'
 
Multi-Family Zoning Districts2
 
Required Standards          RM                RH
Front yard setback1         35'               35'
Rear and side yard setback  10'               10'
Setback from alleys where
the structure accesses the  20'               20'
alley
Minimum separation between  See               See
accessory buildings or      table 7.3 of this table 7.3 of this subsection
structures under 1,500 sq.  subsection C      C
ft. and all other buildings
 
Notes:
1.    In any existing platted property where the average front yard setback is
different than that required for the specific zoning district, the front yard
setback for the subject lot is equal to the average of the front yard depths of
any existing immediate adjacent dwellings on the same side of the street
including the existing dwelling of the subject property. Resulting front yard
setback shall not be less than the minimum required side yard setback for the
zoning district. Front yard setback measured from the face of any garage
accessed from the street will be a minimum of 25 feet regardless of the
averaged front yard depth. If the overall depth of the lot from the subject
front yard is 50 feet or less, the setback for any garage accessed from the
street will be a minimum of 20 feet. The average front yard setback requirement
shall not be applicable in situations in which the greatest extent of an
improvement made on the subject lot is seventy-five feet (75') or greater from
the closest element of a structure on both of the lots on either side of the
subject lot.
2.    Accessory buildings or structures within a land lease manufactured home
park must be completely contained within the land lease area and comply with
adopted Building Code separation and fire protection requirements from all
other structures. Accessory structures not within a land lease manufactured
home park must meet the setback and separation distances of the applicable
zoning district requirements.
3.   Accessory buildings over 1,500 square feet must meet primary building
setbacks and separations, including setbacks adjusted for primary building
height.
4.   Detached accessory structures cannot be located within the front yard,
therefore no accessory structure shall be located closer to the front lot line
than the front plane of the primary structure.
D.   The following regulations shall apply to development within the
Commercial, Office and Industrial Zoned Districts and non- residential
development in the Agricultural/Open Space and Valley Junction Historic
Business Districts.
1.   Zoning District Abbreviations:
RC   Regional Commercial District
CMC  Community Commercial District
NC   Neighborhood Commercial District
CVC  Convenience Commercial District
SC   Support Commercial District
VJC  Valley Junction Commercial District
VJHB Valley Junction Historic Business District
WR   Warehouse Retail District
BP   Business Park District
VJLI Valley Junction Light Industrial District
LI   Light Industrial District
GI   General Industrial District
OF   Office District
PCP  Professional Commerce Park District
OS   Agricultural/Open Space District
 
2.   Measurement: All setbacks or separations are measured from the closest
part of the foundation of the building or structure.
a.   Building projections are allowed to encroach up to two feet (2') from each
building into minimum setback or separation.
b.   Any part of the structure, including eaves and overhangs, must meet all
applicable Building and Fire Codes on fire resistive construction based on
distance from the property line or proximity to adjacent buildings.
c.   Building projections that are allowed to encroach within a setback cannot
exceed a distance of four feet (4') from the foundation line. Projections that
exceed four feet (4') from the foundation line will need to meet required
setbacks and separation distances.
d.   No window well or any ground mounted mechanical equipment may be closer
than three feet (3') to a property line.
e.   Except for the following, all detached accessory structures must meet
primary building setback and separation requirements.
(1)   Trash and mechanical enclosures may use off-street parking setbacks for
their respective district along the side and rear yards, however no enclosure
may be located closer than five feet (5') from a property line.
(2)   Maintenance sheds or garages equal to or less than one hundred twenty
(120) square feet in floor area may use off-street parking setbacks for their
respective district along the side and rear yards, however no shed or garage
may be located closer than five feet (5') from a property line.
3.   Bulk Regulations And Setbacks For Principal And Accessory Buildings Or
Structures In Commercial Districts:
TABLE 7.6
Required Standards RC CMC NC CVC SC VJC VJHB WR
Required  RC      CMC     NC      CVC     SC      VJC     VJHB      WR
Standards
Lot size:
Minimum   60,000  60,000  60,000  40,000  60,000  20,000  6,250 sq. 20,000 sq.
lot area  sq. ft. sq. ft. sq. ft. sq. ft. sq. ft. sq. ft. ft.       ft.
Minimum   50'     50'     50'     50'     50'     50'     50'       50'
lot width
Minimum
open      25%     25%     25%     25%     25%     25%     0%        25%
space
Minimum
setback:
Front
yard      100' 2  100' 2  45'     45'     100' 2  35'     0'        50' 2
setback 4
Rear yard 50'     50'     35'     35'     50'     35'     0'        50'
setback 1
Side yard 50'     50'     35'     50'     50'     35'     0'        50'
setback1
Building
height:
Maximum
height of
principal 36'2    36'2    30'     30'     36'2    30'     36'       60'2
building
or
structure
Maximum
height of
accessory
building
or        20' 2   20' 2   20'     20'     20' 2   20'     20'       20' 2
structure
(at
highest
roof
element)
 
Notes:
   1.   Reserved.
   2.   Outdoor living areas associated with, and adjacent to the dwelling unit
for footprint lots must be contained in the footprint lot and meet the
following setback requirements:
         a.   Patios: set back a minimum of 1 foot from the footprint property
line.
         b.   Decks that do not exceed 30 inches in height or open trellises:
set back a minimum of 5 feet from footprint property line.
         c.   Structures that exceed 30 inches in height such as decks, porches
and sunrooms: set back a minimum of 7 feet from footprint property line.
   3.   For any building over 3 stories, an additional 10 feet of building
setback is required for every story over 3 stories.
   4.   Accessory buildings over 1,500 square feet must meet primary building
setbacks and separations, including setbacks adjusted for primary building
height.
TABLE 7.7
Required Standards BP VJLI LI GI OF PCP OS
Required  BP      VJLI      LI      GI         OF         PCP        OS
Standards
Lot size:
Minimum   20,000  7,250 sq. 10,000  20,000 sq. 10,000 sq. 60,000 sq. 10 acres
lot area  sq. ft. ft.       sq. ft. ft.        ft.        ft.
Minimum   75'     50'       75'     75'        80'        150'       200'
lot width
Minimum
open      35%     20%       20%     20%        25%        35%        75%
space
Minimum
setback:
Front
yard      50' 1   15'       30' 1   40' 1      30' 1      50' 1      50' 1
setback 4
Rear yard 50'     10' (from 35'     35'        35'        50'        50'
setback           alleyway)
- If
abuts
like                        15'                15'        25'
zoning
district
Side yard 50'     10' 2     20'2    35'2       10'2       50'        50
setback
- If
abuts
like                                                      25'
zoning
district
Building
height:
Maximum
height of
principal 60'1    15', 30'3 60'1    60'1       36'1       60'1       60'1
building
or
structure
Maximum
height of
accessory
building
or        20' 1   20'       20' 1   20' 1      20' 1      20' 1      20' 1
structure
(at
highest
roof
element)
 
Notes:
1.    Additional 12 feet of height allowed for each additional 10 feet of
setback.
2.    Setback of 0 feet allowed if abuts a similar district.
3.    Maximum height of 30 feet allowed with a building side yard setback of 20
feet.
4.   Detached Accessory Building(s) may be located forward of the front plane
of the primary structure, up to the minimum building setback line, when all
sides of the detached accessory building which are visible from an adjacent
roadway or property outside of the subject property abide by all provisions
provided in Chapter 14, as applicable to the zoning district in which the
structure is located. This includes the detached accessory building(s) being of
design, materials, and colors consistent with the primary building(s) on the
subject property and with the detached accessory building visually presenting
as a primary structure.
(Ord. 2357, 5-6-2019; amd. Ord. 2386, 10-21-2019; Ord. 2391, 12-2-2019; Ord.
2449, 11-2-2020; Ord. 2541, 9-19-2022; Ord. 2548, 12-5-2022; Ord. 2567, 6-5-
2023; Ord. 2572, 7-17-2023; Ord. 2589, 12-4-2023; Ord. 2622, 8-5-2024; Ord.
2662, 7-7-2025)
CHAPTER 8
HOME OCCUPATION
SECTION:
9-8-1: Title And Citation
9-8-2: Purpose
9-8-3: Definitions
9-8-4: Application And Permit Processing
9-8-5: Restrictions For Home Occupations
9-8-6: Conditions Of Approval
9-8-7: Fees
9-8-1: TITLE AND CITATION:
This Chapter shall be known and may be cited as the HOME OCCUPATION ORDINANCE.
(Ord. 1190, 6-17-1996)
9-8-2: PURPOSE:
In adopting this Chapter, it is recognized that while a home occupation in and
of itself is an acceptable use within a residential area, it is when those uses
take on a more commercial character that conflicts arise. This Chapter seeks to
ensure that home occupations do not have a negative impact upon the residential
area in which they are located. (Ord. 1190, 6-17-1996)
9-8-3: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this Chapter, "home occupation" shall mean any occupation or
profession conducted solely by the resident occupants in their place of abode,
involving primarily service and limited sale of commodities upon the premises.
(Ord. 1190, 6-17-1996)
9-8-4: APPLICATION AND PERMIT PROCESSING:
A.   A home occupation permit shall be required for all home occupation uses
under this Chapter.
A home occupation permit must be issued prior to the commencement of any home
occupation use. The Director of Community Development may, from time to time,
specify the form of the home occupation permit application. Applications for
said home occupation permit shall be secured from the Director of Community
Development in the manner prescribed by this Chapter, who shall cause the
application to be directed to all concerned City departments and divisions.
Affected departments or divisions shall comment on the application.
B.   Home occupations may be subject to additional permits or inspections as
required by any applicable law or regulation.
C.   Home occupation permits shall be renewed every two (2) years and are not
transferable to another party. The Director of Community Development or his
designee shall be authorized to approve, conditionally approve or deny any
request for a home occupation permit or a renewal of a home occupation permit.
(Ord. 1190, 6-17-1996)
9-8-5: RESTRICTIONS FOR HOME OCCUPATIONS:
A.   All home occupations shall comply with all pertinent City codes,
ordinances and regulations in addition to the following restrictions:
1.   The home occupation shall be incidental and secondary to the use of the
dwelling for residential purposes.
2.   To avoid any traffic congestions, all customers, clients, etc., shall be
handled by appointment only with a restriction of only two (2) clients allowed
per hour on a daily average basis, unless noted otherwise in this Chapter.
3.   Only one nonresident of the dwelling shall be employed on the premises at
any one time in the conduct of a home occupation, unless noted otherwise in
this Chapter.
4.   No signs relating to the home occupation shall be allowed, other than what
is required by State law. Signs shall be limited to one square foot in area,
and nontransferable.
5.   Home occupation permits are valid only for the person(s) and use(s)
approved and are nontransferable.
6.   No dwelling shall be built, altered, furnished or decorated for the
purpose of conducting the home occupation in such a manner as to change the
residential character and appearance of the dwelling, or in such a manner as to
cause the structure to be recognized as a place where a home occupation is
conducted.
7.   A home occupation shall be conducted entirely within the dwelling unit or
a garage, and the activities of such home occupation shall not be visible, or
otherwise noticeable outside the structure, unless noted otherwise in this
Chapter. (Ord. 1190, 6-17-1996)
8.   There shall be no home occupation activities that are objectionable due to
glare, dust, fumes, odor, vibration, noise or other nuisances that disturb the
peace.
9.   No equipment or process shall be used which creates visual or audible
electrical or mechanical interference in any radio or television receiver or
other device outside the dwelling unit structure, or causes fluctuations in the
line voltage outside the dwelling unit structure.
10.   No more than five hundred (500) square feet of floor area of the building
(s) in total may be used in pursuit of the occupation in which the general
public is going to the premises to receive a good or service. In those cases
where the general public does not go to the premises to receive a good or
service, up to one-fourth (1/4) of the home or a garage or five hundred (500)
square feet of floor area, whichever is greater, may be utilized for the home
occupation.
11.   No portion of an accessory structure, carport or similar structure,
except a garage, shall be used for home occupation purposes.
12.   No storage of mechanical/construction equipment shall be permitted on the
premises, other than that normally associated with a residential use.
13.   No vehicles or trailers except those normally incidental to a residential
use shall be parked so as to be visible from the public right of way.
14.   The home occupation shall not cause, involve or result in the use of
commercial vehicles for deliveries to or from the premises, excluding a vehicle
not to exceed three-fourths (3/4) ton capacity, which shall be registered to
the operator of such home occupation.
15.   The use of the United States postal service in conjunction with
appropriate uses as determined by the director of community development, such
as mail order businesses, shall be done by means of a post office box.
16.   No deliveries of goods or merchandise may originate from or be made to
the premises except during the hours of eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. to nine
o'clock (9:00) P.M., Monday through Saturday.
17.   The home occupation shall not generate vehicular traffic and/or vehicular
parking which degrades or is otherwise detrimental to the residential nature of
the neighborhood and thus becomes objectionable to the neighboring residents.
18.   If the home occupation is to be conducted in a rental unit, a written
statement from the property owner giving his or her permission shall be
required.
19.   The home occupation shall not affect nor reduce the parking spaces
required by this code.
20.   The home occupation shall not involve the use and/or on site storage of
chemicals, flammable materials, or other hazardous materials, except as may be
permitted by the fire code as adopted by the city.
21.   Those occupations normally classified as a trade and involving the use of
contractors' or mechanics' tools or equipment used by carpenters, electricians,
painters, plumbers, pest control services, etc., shall be limited to office use
only.
22.   Any citizen who wishes to make other than minor repairs to his own
vehicles must abide by the aforementioned conditions. No more than two (2)
vehicles per year, owned by the occupant, shall be rebuilt, repaired, or
reconstructed. (Ord. 1190, 6-17-1996; amd. Ord. 1242, 4-21-1997)
23.   The operation of an in home childcare business shall require the issuance
of a home occupation permit prior to initiation of the activity. In home
childcare businesses shall be limited to childcare homes (5 or fewer children
at any 1 time), and child development homes in accordance with Iowa department
of human services registration guidelines including category C with two (2)
providers. Any other applicable state or federal regulations shall apply. In
home childcare businesses shall be exempt from subsections A2, A3, A11, and A17
of this section, of the conditions for home occupations. (Ord. 1949, 5-29-2012)
24.   Private swim lessons shall be permitted as a home occupation in a home
outdoor pool, provided that there is no more than a maximum of four (4)
students per one hour time period. No more than one instructor shall be giving
lessons during any given time, and no more than one employee may be employed in
the home occupation other than the residents of the household where the
business is conducted. Hours of operation shall be limited to between the hours
of eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. and six o'clock (6:00) P.M. Monday through Friday,
eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. to twelve o'clock (12:00) noon on Saturdays, with a
maximum of five (5) total hours per day and only during the months of June,
July, August and September. Prior to issuance of a home occupation permit for
this use, the applicant shall be required to submit verification that the pool
has been registered with the state and is in compliance with all state and
local regulations for the commercial use of a residential pool. (Ord. 1863, 5-
3-2010)
9-8-6: CONDITIONS OF APPROVAL:
A.   The director of community development may impose such conditions on a home
occupation permit as is necessary to meet the purposes of this chapter and
protect the public health, safety and welfare and adjacent uses. Conditions
which may be imposed may include, but are not limited to:
1.   Yard setback and open space requirements.
2.   Parking.
3.   Fences, walls or other screening.
4.   Vehicular and pedestrian ingress and egress.
5.   Property maintenance during the course of the activity.
6.   Control of illumination, noise, odor, vibration or other nuisances.
7.   Hours of operations. (Ord. 1190, 6-17-1996)
9-8-7: FEES:
Each application request for a home occupation permit, or a renewal, shall be
accompanied by the fee specified by city council resolution before it is
accepted for filing and processing. (Ord. 1190, 6-17-1996)
CHAPTER 9
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT
SECTION:
9-9-1: Definitions
9-9-2: Residential Density
9-9-3: Minimum Acreage
9-9-4: Intent
9-9-5: Reserved
9-9-6: Review Process
9-9-1: DEFINITIONS:
AREA DEVELOPMENT PLAN (ADP): A plan that identifies infrastructure, planning
units, major street patterns, stormwater drainage and detention, public and
private utilities, shared public spaces, vehicular traffic impacts, proposed
density, and land use assumptions for geographically designated areas within
the Town Center Overlay District. The ADP establishes development parcels that
may be under one or several specific plans. The intent is to encourage
cohesive, unified development and identify the phasing of construction by
creating partnerships with the adjacent property owners and developers.
MIXED USE: A single building containing two (2) or more types of land use or a
single development of more than one building and use where the different types
of land uses are in close proximity, planned as a unified complementary whole,
and functionally integrated to the use of shared vehicular and pedestrian
access and parking areas.
OPEN SPACES: Shall include all uncovered areas surrounding buildings except
streets, private drives, and parking areas.
OVERLAY DISTRICT: Districts which are placed over base zoning districts to
modify the development standards and to achieve a specific purpose for that
area. The regulations of the underlying zoning district and all other
regulations remain in effect; however, if any overlay district's regulations
conflict with the underlying zoning regulations the overlay's regulations
prevail.
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT (PUD): Any development in which the proposed land
uses, transportation elements, building densities, arrangements and types are
set out in a unified plan. A planned unit development may consist of mixed
residential, commercial, office, and public land uses or a single use
development.
PLANNING UNITS: Parcels of land uses, such as mixed use or single-family that
are determined during the review of the area development plan and further
defined during the review of the specific plan.
SPECIFIC PLAN DEVELOPMENT (SP): An alternate type of planned unit development
which applies to development within the Town Center Overlay District. The SP is
an ordinance that is produced through a creative design process which outlines
detailed development criteria such as density, architectural building details,
usable open space, traffic and streetscape details for each planning unit as
identified in the area development plan.
USABLE OPEN SPACE: Areas which serve the need for leisure, recreation, and
pedestrian interaction. Spaces may include, but are not limited to, plaza
areas, open lawn areas, trails, open air recreation facilities, outdoor
gardens, pedestrian walkways, and waterways. (Ord. 1524, 4-28-2003)
9-9-2: RESIDENTIAL DENSITY:
Provided that the overall density of the residential development does not
exceed the density otherwise permitted by the Comprehensive Plan, the density
of residential land uses shall be as set forth by the planned unit development
(PUD) or specific plan development (SP). In determining whether or not to allow
the density of development to be varied from this Code, the Plan and Zoning
Commission and City Council shall give consideration to the following:
A.   The amount, location, and proposed use of common open space;
B.   The location and physical characteristics of the site of the proposed
development; and
C.   The location, design, and type of dwelling units and other land uses.
(Ord. 2222, 5-30-2017)
9-9-3: MINIMUM ACREAGE:
No minimum acreage is required to establish a planned unit development
district, unless specifically provided in the planned unit development or
specific plan ordinance, for any development. (Ord. 2222, 5-30-2017)
9-9-4: INTENT:
A.   Planned unit developments or specific plans shall be used as an alternate
development tool for those developments that propose a creative and innovative
development whose layout is not achievable by the standards under which the
property is currently zoned. This type of zoning shall be reserved for only
those developments which meet one or more of the following goals:
1.   To encourage unique innovations in residential, commercial, and industrial
development, and/or urban renewal so that the growing demands of the population
may be met by greater variety in type, design, and layout of buildings and by
the conservation and more efficient use of open space;
2.   To encourage a more efficient use of land and of public/private services,
and to reflect changes in the technology of land development that benefit the
future resigned;
3.   To conserve the value of the land in order to allow for development that
is a creative, unique or efficient use of the land that the typical zoning
standard would prevent;
4.   To provide a procedure which can relate the type, design, and layout of
development to the particular site, thereby encouraging preservation of the
site's natural characteristics;
5.   To provide for infill development that enhances, revitalizes and protects
the overall characteristics of the surrounding neighborhood and natural
resources.
B.   In addition to meeting one of the above-mentioned goals, a statement of
intent for the planned unit development or specific plan shall be prepared
which gives specific direction as to the objective of the development.
C.   A reduction or modification of setbacks, bulk regulations, additional
signage, or amendment of land uses shall not be the sole justification for a
planned unit development or specific plan. The applicant must demonstrate how
the proposed development is a creative, unique or efficient use of the land and
that the typical zoning standard would prevent a development that will benefit
the community. (Ord. 1524, 4-28-2003; amd. Ord. 2222, 5-30-2017; Ord. 2570, 7-
5-2023)
9-9-5: RESERVED:
Repealed by Ord. 2570, 7-5-2023.
9-9-6: REVIEW PROCESS:
A.   Plan And Zoning Commission: The commission shall hold a public hearing and
make a recommendation to the City Council on the proposed request. If the
applicant proceeds to Council with the commission's recommendation for denial,
a super majority of the Council members must vote in the affirmative for the
ordinance to pass.
B.   City Council: Upon the Planning and Zoning Commission making a
recommendation, the City Council shall hold a public hearing to consider and
take action on the proposed PUD.
C.   Amendments To A Planned Unit Development/Specific Plan: Amendments to a
PUD or specific plan shall be considered by the City Council after receiving a
recommendation by the Plan and Zoning Commission. It shall be the burden of the
applicant to prove that the amendment meets the established intent of the
existing PUD/ZCSP. (Ord. 1524, 4-28-2003; amd. Ord. 2222, 5-30-2017; Ord. 2527,
7-5-2022; Ord. 2570, 7-5-2023)
CHAPTER 10
PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
SECTION:
9-10-1: Title And Citation
9-10-2: Purpose
9-10-3: Interpretations
9-10-4: Specific Use Regulations
9-10-1: TITLE AND CITATION:
This chapter shall be known and cited as the ZONING PERFORMANCE STANDARDS.
(Ord. 1190, 6-17-1996)
9-10-2: PURPOSE:
The regulations set forth in this chapter identify specific performance
standards that all uses within the specified zoning district shall comply with.
These standards have been established for the following purposes:
A.   To protect and provide for the public health, safety, and general welfare
of the City.
B.   To provide for adequate light, air, and privacy, to secure safety from
fire, flood, and other danger.
C.   To protect the character and the social and economic stability of all
parts of the City and to encourage the orderly and beneficial development of
the community through appropriate growth management techniques by assuring
proper urban form and open space separation of urban areas, and protecting
environmentally critical areas from premature urban development.
D.   To protect and conserve the value of land throughout the City and the
value of buildings and improvements upon the land, and to minimize the
conflicts among the uses of land and buildings.
E.   To establish reasonable standards of design and procedures for development
and redevelopment in order to further the orderly layout and use of land.
F.   To prevent the pollution of air, streams, and ponds; to assure the
adequacy of drainage facilities; to safeguard the water table; and to encourage
the wise use and management of natural resources throughout the City in order
to preserve the integrity, stability, and beauty of the community and the value
of the land.
G.   To prevent the problems associated with inappropriately developed land,
including excess development and low grade development. (Ord. 1190, 6-17-1996)
9-10-3: INTERPRETATIONS:
Where a question arises about the applicable standards to be applied for a
proposed use as outlined in this chapter, the Director of Development Services
or their designee shall review the proposed use based upon the characteristics
of the use, and determine which of the performance standards listed in this
chapter are appropriate to that proposed use. (Ord. 1190, 6-17-1996; amd. Ord.
2570, 7-5-2023)
9-10-4: SPECIFIC USE REGULATIONS:
The following performance standards shall be applied to the specific uses
listed below in any district or in the specific district where that use is
allowed. In the event that any of the standards below conflict with other
standards, regulations of requirements of Federal, State, County laws or
regulations, or as outlined elsewhere within this Code, the more restrictive
regulation shall apply. (Ord. 1190, 6-17-1996)
A.   The Following Standards Shall Apply To All Zoning Districts Unless Noted
Otherwise In This Title:
1.   Fuel Supply Systems: All fuel supply systems shall be constructed and
installed in accordance with all applicable requirements of this title, the
Building Code as adopted and amended by the City, the Fire Code as adopted and
amended by the City, and any other applicable, local, County, State, or Federal
regulations or requirements.
2.   Screening Of Mechanical Units: The following standards apply to the
location and screening of mechanical equipment:
a.   Screening Of Ground Mounted Mechanical Units: For all uses, except for
single-family detached and bi-attached residential uses, all ground mounted
mechanical units, including, but not limited to: air conditioning condensers,
heat pumps, ventilation units, computer cooling equipment, etc., and any
related utility structures and equipment, that are visible from any adjacent
public thoroughfare shall be visibly screened from public view by the use of a
screening wall built out of materials compatible and consistent with the
architecture and materials of the principal building, landscape plantings of
predominately evergreen materials to provide year round screening, or a
combination of the above. The type of screening to be used shall be identified
as part of the site plan submittal. (Ord. 2274, 2-5-2018)
b.   Screening Of Roof Mounted Mechanical Units: All roof mounted mechanical
units shall be screened from adjacent public thoroughfares by the use of an
opaque screening material compatible with the architecture of the building or
architecturally designed screening, such as a parapet wall. The screening of
the roof mounted units shall be designed to blend with the building and roof
materials. Additional screening may be required due to topographic differences
in the adjoining properties.
c.   Location Of Meters In Single-Family And Bi-Attached Developments: Single-
family and bi-attached residential developments shall be prohibited from
locating the mechanical units and meters in the front yard of the property
unless adequate screening is provided to visibly screen these elements from the
public view.
3.   Screening Of Solar Energy Systems:
a.   Ground mounted solar energy systems should be sited to visually mitigate
undesirable features that are visible at grade from surrounding properties and
public thoroughfares. The City is aware of the operating needs of these types
of structures and acknowledges that it may be impossible to orient a system to
hide its undesirable features such as the structural elements, rear face of the
collector panels, mechanical equipment and accessories. Should any of these
features be visible, the following options are acceptable methods of screening
the view of these undesirable features:
(1)   An enclosure or a freestanding screen wall or fence of an opaque design
built out of materials consistent with the architecture and materials of the
principal building. Landscape plantings may be implemented in combination with
the screen enclosure, fence or wall to soften the appearance of the
installation.
(2)   Landscape plantings that are composed of evergreen materials to provide
year round screening may be implemented in lieu of screen enclosure, fence or
wall. Plant material shall be of sufficient height and size at the time of
installation to fully screen the undesirable features of the system.
b.   Building mounted systems do not require screening if they comply with the
requirements as noted in section
9-14-14, "Solar Energy Systems", of this title. However the structural
elements, equipment and accessories related to a system mounted on a flat roof
that are visible from any adjacent public thoroughfare or adjacent property
shall be selected to be a similar color to the roof surface or adjacent
building materials to mitigate the visual impact of the system. Wall or ground
mounted mechanical equipment related to any solar energy system as noted in
subsection A2a of this section, will require screening.
4.   Screening Of Trash Receptacles: For any development or properties where
three (3) or more residential dwelling units are using a common trash
receptacle and all nonresidential uses; trash receptacles and dumpsters shall
be opaquely screened on all sides by the use of a permanent enclosure, with
gates for disposal truck access. The enclosure shall be constructed of
materials and colors compatible with the dominant architectural materials of
buildings on site and shall be integral to a building on site whenever
possible. The enclosure shall be constructed to visibly screen the receptacle
from public view and views from the adjoining properties. The design of the
pedestrian access to the receptacle should be designed to minimize the views
into the enclosure. The enclosure should be landscaped to mitigate the visual
impact of the enclosure on surrounding properties and public thoroughfares.
5.   Satellite Dishes And Communication Antennas: The following standards shall
apply to satellite dishes and communication antennas:
a.   Interference With Emergency Frequencies: All satellite dishes and
communication antennas shall be subject to any State and Federal regulations
and shall not interfere with emergency frequencies within the City.
b.   Advertising Prohibited: No satellite dish or communication antenna shall
be permitted to display advertising or identification of any kind that is
visible from the ground, on elevated structures, or readily discernible to the
general public.
c.   Building Permit Required: Satellite dishes and communication antennas are
considered accessory structures, which require a building permit and are
subject to all applicable requirements for accessory structures identified
elsewhere within this title.
d.   Freestanding Dishes And Antennas: The City is aware of the operating needs
of these types of structures and acknowledges that it may be impossible to
totally screen a satellite dish or communication antenna, however, every effort
should be made by the dish owner to minimize the visual impact of the dish on
the general public, the surrounding properties and the principal outdoor use
areas of the adjoining properties.
(1)   Satellite dishes and antennas shall be prohibited in the front and side
yard of residential property and shall comply with the applicable setback
requirements for accessory structures. If the applicant can show that a usable
signal cannot be obtained from the rear yard area, the satellite dish or
antenna may be located on an interior (nonstreet side) side yard with the
approval of the Director of Community Development, and, provided, that in all
cases a building permit is obtained prior to installation.
(2)   Satellite dishes and antennas in nonresidential areas shall be sited to
minimize the visual impact on surrounding properties and public thoroughfares.
Location of satellite dishes and communication antennas in the front yard (to
include all of the area between the principal structure and the public street)
shall be discouraged and shall only be allowed if approved through the
appropriate site plan process.
e.   Roof Mounted Satellite Dishes And Antennas: Roof mounted satellite dishes
and antennas shall be located in such a manner as to be screened from
surrounding properties and public thoroughfares by the use of a parapet wall or
blended into the design and color of the building such that it is not readily
apparent. Roof mounted dishes and antennas shall be limited to a maximum height
of ten feet (10') above the structure.
f.   Wall Mounted Satellite Dishes And Antennas: Wall mounted satellite dishes
and communication antennas on existing structures may be permitted by the City
Council if the petitioner can demonstrate that the combination of the dish/
antennas design and position on the structure is established as an
architectural feature or element to the existing structure.
g.   Accessory Equipment Associated With Satellite Dishes And Antennas:
Accessory equipment associated with satellite dishes and communication antennas
shall either be located within the building, on the roof in a screened
enclosure constructed of materials compatible with the building or other roof
structures, or on the ground within a structure designed and landscaped to be
compatible with the principal structure. The location of the equipment and
enclosure shall meet setback standards for the principal structure and shall be
subject to site plan review as required elsewhere in this title.
6.   Transmitting/Receiving Towers: In the applicable zoning districts, the
installation of transmitting/receiving towers may be permitted by the City
Council following their review and approval through the permitted conditional
use process, if the petitioner meets the following requirements:
a.   Interference With Emergency Frequencies: All transmitting/receiving towers
shall be subject to any State and Federal regulations and shall not interfere
with emergency frequencies within the City.
b.   Advertising Prohibited: No tower or associated structures shall be
permitted to display advertising or identification of any kind that is visible
from the ground, on elevated structures, or readily discernible to the general
public.
c.   Building Permit Required: A building permit shall be required prior to
installation of the tower and associated structures.
d.   Setback Standards: All towers and associated structures shall meet setback
standards for a principal structure in the applicable zoning district described
elsewhere in this title.
e.   Architecture Of The Associated Structures: The architecture of any
structures associated with a transmitting/receiving tower shall be reviewed
during the development permit application process for compatibility with the
predominate architectural character of the surrounding area.
7.   Exterior Lighting: The following standards shall apply to all exterior
lighting.
a.   The use of "wall pack" lights shall be prohibited in the following
districts and situations:
(1)   Neighborhood Commercial District.
(2)   Convenience Commercial District.
(3)   All residential districts.
(4)   For any nonresidential use which abuts a residential district where the
building or structure that the "wall pack" is to be located, is within one
hundred fifty feet (150') of a residentially zoned property or a residential
use.
b.   All light fixtures shall be of a cutoff type to eliminate glare and
spillover lighting beyond the property line.
8.   Outdoor Storage Yards: Outdoor storage yards associated with service
oriented businesses such as, but not limited to, construction contractors,
plumbing companies, wholesale material suppliers, etc., and self-storage
facilities shall only be allowed in rear and side yard areas within the
Warehouse Retail (WR), Valley Junction Light Industrial (VJLI), Light
Industrial (LI) and General Industrial (GI) Zoning Districts unless noted
otherwise elsewhere within this title. Areas of outside storage shall not
occupy any portion of required yard areas, open space, required off street
parking areas, etc., and shall be screened from views from the public streets,
adjoining properties, especially those of a different zoning classification and
any residential property through the use of opaque screening reviewed as part
of the site plan submittal. The need for limited visibility for security
reasons should be considered when determining appropriate screening levels.
With the exception of business associated vehicles, equipment and trailers and
recreational vehicles, no material being stored shall exceed the height of the
screening structure. Appropriate security lighting shall be so arranged as to
divert the light away from adjoining traveled roadway of public streets and
adjoining properties.
That portion of a site indicated and identified as an outdoor storage yard on a
City approved site plan associated with a business and self-storage facilities
shall be exempt from off street parking regulations stated in chapter 15 of
this title for striping, dimensions, surfacing and curbing. Gravel shall be a
prohibited surfacing material for storage yards unless all of the following
conditions are met:
a.   The property is located within a General Industrial (GI) zoned district;
and
b.   The parcel upon which the storage yard is located does not share a common
property line with any residentially used or zoned property; and
c.   The storage yard is located within the rear yard of the parcel; and
d.   A defined permanent edge or curbing is installed to confine the granular
material; and
e.   Appropriate dust mitigation measures are implemented to control dust.
9.   Outside Display Areas: Outside display areas shall not occupy any portion
of required yard areas, open space, required off street parking areas, etc.,
unless approved as part of a site plan, conditional use permit or temporary use
permit. Bulk storage of merchandise (such as that typical of garden centers
associated with home improvement stores), shall be appropriately screened from
views from public thoroughfares and adjacent properties. No merchandise being
stored shall exceed the height of the screening structure. All display and
storage shall occur on asphaltic or portland cement concrete pavement
consistent with the surfacing and curbing requirements of off street parking
areas.
10.   Overtax Public Utilities And Facilities: No use shall be permitted that
involves any activity that substantially increases the burden on any existing
or proposed public utilities or facilities, unless provisions are made for any
necessary adjustments.
11.   Utilities: All developments must be designed to interface with existing
utility systems and provide for any extension of the utilities as necessary for
the proposed use. All utilities and easements must be accommodated in the site
design. No overhead wiring shall be permitted where utilities can reasonably be
accommodated underground.
12.   Permitted Noise Levels: In any zoning district, noise levels shall not be
permitted in excess of sixty five (65) dBA on the community noise equivalent
level (CNEL) as measured at the property line.
13.   Extraction Of Earth Products: In those districts where mining is allowed,
the following standards shall apply:
a.   As part of the application submittal, a map, to a scale of no greater than
one inch equals one hundred feet (1" = 100'), of the proposed area of
extraction shall be submitted that shows the existing topography in two foot
(2') intervals, the location of existing watercourses and drainageways, and the
outline of the area to be excavated. A second map, drawn to the same scale,
shall be required that shows a general plan for proposed operation and
rehabilitation of the site that includes:
(1)   The locations of proposed watercourses and drainage systems, including
lakes, ponds, and retention basins.
(2)   The sequence of operations and the schedule of rehabilitation measures.
(3)   The proposed locations of sorting, grading, crushing, stockpiling of
topsoil, and similar equipment necessary for the operation and the initial
distribution of the excavated products.
(4)   The proposed locations of any buildings, scale house, equipment storage
areas, and equipment repair sheds or areas.
(5)   Temporary and permanent soil erosion and sedimentation controls.
(6)   Proposed ground cover and landscaping to be installed following the
completion of the operation or the expiration of the use permit.
b.   All mines and quarries shall be located adjacent to, or have direct access
over a private haul road to, an arterial street which is designed for heavy
truck traffic.
c.   All aboveground operations shall be located no less than seven hundred
fifty feet (750') from residentially zoned property or one thousand feet
(1,000') from an existing residence.
d.   All belowground operations shall be located no less than two hundred feet
(200') from the nearest property line, measured laterally.
e.   After completion of the operation, and in accordance with the approved
rehabilitation plan, the premises shall be cleared of debris, and a layer of
soil capable of supporting vegetation shall be spread over the premises to a
depth of at least three inches (3") (except for area underwater) and shall be
seeded with grass or other ground cover to prevent erosion.
f.   All lakes, ponds, and retention areas to remain and as shown on the
rehabilitation plan shall be graded so that the slope of the underwater grades
within the first fifty feet (50') of the permanent water elevation, does not
exceed one foot (1') of drop per ten feet (10') of run.
g.   All mines and quarries shall follow state and federal guidelines and
requirements for blasting and vibrations.
14.   Dry Cleaners: In those districts in which SIC 7212 is allowed, when said
operation includes dry cleaning equipment the following standards shall apply:
a.   Maximum of one solvent based cleaning machine shall be located on the
premises;
b.   Class I and II solvents shall be allowed. No class III solvents for the
cleaning operation shall be allowed;
c.   The maximum amount of solvent present on site at a given time shall not
exceed one drum (maximum 55 gallons);
d.   Establishment and operation shall comply with all city of West Des Moines
adopted fire and building code regulations, including addendums;
e.   A minimum one hour firewall shall exist between tenant spaces, including
ceiling and floors;
f.   A Fire Marshal approved solvent containment basin and accompanying storage
container shall be utilized;
g.   Fire Marshal must approve of solvent transfer operations, including fill
location;
Upon approval of the initial operation, any changes to equipment, type of
solvent used, or solvent transfer or fill operations will require the review
and approval of the Building Division and Fire Marshal. At the discretion of
the chief building official and/or Fire Marshal, additional measures to ensure
safety and eliminate potential impacts on adjacent tenants/businesses/
properties may be required and shall be adhered to.
15.   Taprooms Or Beer Parlors: In those districts where a taproom/beer parlor
is allowed, the taproom/beer parlor shall only be allowed by approval of a
permitted conditional use permit to operate in conjunction with a brewery. The
brewery must have a native beer brewery (NAB or NAAB) permit issued through the
State of Iowa and a Class B beer license approved by the City. The Class B beer
license shall be restricted to serving only those beers brewed on site, plus a
maximum of five (5) additional microbrewery or craft beers that are brewed off
site.
No Class LC liquor permit will be allowed in conjunction with the taproom;
having such license will classify the establishment as a bar/restaurant for the
purposes of this subsection and regulation.
For taprooms/beer parlors exceeding fifty percent (50%) of the gross square
footage of the brewery, or serving more than five (5) varieties of microbrewery
or craft beers, those uses will be considered a bar/restaurant for purposes of
this subsection and regulation.
Parking space requirements for a brewery with taproom/beer parlor will be
calculated at the parking rate for 58 eating and drinking places for that
portion of the brewery identified as the taproom/beer parlor. This parking
calculation shall be in addition to the parking requirement for SIC 20 food and
kindred products for that portion of the brewery identified for production
purposes.
16.   Self-Service Storage Facilities: The intent of these performance
standards is to allow two (2) distinct building forms while maintaining
building form compatibility with the zoning district in general and the site
specific surrounding development.
a.   Exterior Unit Access (Miniwarehouse Storage): This building type is
intended to allow for single-story, long row, connected units with exterior
access doors in the Warehouse Retail and Industrial Districts. The following
development standards shall apply, in addition to development standards cited
elsewhere in this title, including, but not limited to, landscaping, open
space, buffers, screening, parking, setbacks, trash enclosures, etc.
(1)   Views of individual unit exterior access doors shall be screened from the
public street or from adjacent nonindustrial or nonwarehouse retail zoned or
developed property.
(2)   The building(s) shall be surfaced with materials compatible with adjacent
industrial or warehouse retail development. Facades visible from the public
street shall be enhanced to add visual character and distinction from the
interior of the development. Facades facing adjacent residential property shall
be screened with a fence or evergreen landscaping and otherwise enhanced by
incorporating front facade materials or enhanced materials used elsewhere in
the development. Three hundred sixty degree (360°) architecture is not intended
for ministorage, but those buildings visible from the street or adjacent
residential developed or zoned property shall be expected to reflect material
enhancements that may not be commonly considered in warehouse retail and
industrial developments.
(3)   Outdoor storage areas, as allowed in this title, should be consolidated
into a single area and screened as required elsewhere in this title.
(4)   Fences and walls used to provide screening shall be maintained in a neat,
clean, safe, and structurally sound condition. RVs, boats, and recreational
trailers may exceed the height of the fence or wall; all other materials shall
not exceed the height of the wall or fence. Fences shall be placed no closer to
the front lot line than the front yard established by the building or building
setback line, whichever is greater.
(5)   Wall signage for the development shall be calculated according to the
Sign Code calculations located elsewhere in this title for the building facade
in which the business office is located. No signage or advertising is allowed
on screen walls or fencing.
(6)   Vehicle circulation shall allow for two-way drive aisles and circulation
with no dead ends.
b.   Interior Unit Access: This building type is intended to allow for
facilities where units are accessed by interior hallways. These structures
shall emulate the exterior architecture and characteristics of buildings in the
specific district in which the facility is located. The following development
standards shall apply, in addition to development standards cited elsewhere in
this title, including, but not limited to, landscaping, open space, buffers,
screening, parking, setbacks, etc.:
(1)   Office And Professional Commerce Park Districts: Interior unit access
self-storage in the Office and Professional Commerce Park Districts is intended
to be designed to be compatible with expected four-sided office design already
exhibited in the City in these districts. The following performance standards
also apply to the design of interior self-storage units:
(A)   All storage units shall gain access from the interior of the building, no
individual unit doors may face the street or be visible from off the property.
(B)   One (1) entrance and one (1) exit overhead door shall be allowed. If the
facility abuts residentially zoned property, the facility loading bays, docks,
or doors shall not be visible from the residential property. Whenever possible,
these features shall be located on facades which face non-residentially zoned
or developed property. These features shall not be located on the facade facing
the public street.
(C)   Ground floor and upper floor facades shall be designed to be compatible
with expected four-sided office design in the City's office districts. Examples
of such architectural and design features include varied massing, proportion,
facade modulation, exterior building materials and detailing, varied roof line,
pedestrian scale, windows, repetition, etc. Views of storage units through
windows shall be mitigated. The building shall look like an office building.
(D)   The building shall be surfaced with high-quality, durable materials
consistent with the surrounding office uses. Un-faced concrete block, painted
masonry, tilt-up and pre-cast concrete panels and non-architectural metal
siding are prohibited in the office districts. Prefabricated buildings are not
allowed in the office districts.
(E)   There shall be a pedestrian entrance facing the street. This entrance
shall be considered the main or principal entrance, even if the tenants enter
through loading docks, bays, doors or other side or rear entrances. This
entrance shall present as a prominent feature that emulates an office lobby.
This entrance shall not be used for the transfer of goods to the storage unit.
(F)   To accommodate future potential redevelopment of the building, parking
for re-use of the building for other permitted or permitted conditional uses in
the applicable zoning district shall be demonstrated at the applicable ratio;
however, only the parking required for the indoor self-storage shall be
required to be constructed.
(G)   Indoor self-storage facilities shall abide by all City codes and
regulations such as, but not limited to, Building Code and Fire Code
provisions.
(H)   Tenant access shall be restricted to the hours of seven o'clock (7:00)
A.M. to ten o'clock (10:00) P.M.
(2)   Commercial Districts: Interior unit access self-storage in the commercial
districts, to include the Valley Junction Historic Business District, is
intended to be designed to be compatible with expected four-sided commercial
design already exhibited in the City in these districts. Retail tenant spaces
shall be included in the first floor design, which may include a retail space
for the self-storage office. Tenant spaces shall extend the length of the
facade which faces a main parking field and the public street where parking is
available between the building and the public street. The intent is to emulate
tenant and multitenant retail store fronts commonly associated with the
commercial districts, to provide the retail activity for the districts, and to
provide services to the community such is commonly available in these
districts. In these instances, the self-storage use will be of secondary
consideration to the retail atmosphere. The following performance standards
also apply to the design of interior self-storage units:
(A)   All storage units shall gain access from the interior of the building, no
individual unit doors may face the street or be visible from off the property.
(B)   One (1) entrance and one (1) exit overhead door shall be allowed. If the
facility abuts residentially zoned property, the facility loading bays, docks,
or doors shall not be visible from the residential property. Whenever possible,
these features shall be located on facades which face non-residentially zoned
or developed property or the public street. In no case will these features
appear on the front facade or public facade where other commercial business
takes place.
(C)   Ground floor and upper floor facades shall be designed to be compatible
with expected four-sided commercial design in the City's commercial districts.
Examples of such architectural and design features include varied massing,
proportion, facade modulation, exterior building materials and detailing,
varied roof line, pedestrian scale, windows, repetition, etc. Views of storage
units through windows shall be mitigated. The building shall look like a retail
or multitenant commercial space.
(D)   The building shall be surfaced with high-quality, durable materials
consistent with the surrounding office uses. Un-faced concrete block, painted
masonry, tilt-up and pre-cast concrete panels, non-architectural metal siding,
and prefabricated buildings are prohibited in the commercial districts.
(E)   To accommodate future potential redevelopment of the building, parking
for re-use of the building for other permitted or permitted conditional uses in
the applicable zoning district shall be demonstrated at the applicable ratio;
however, only the parking required for the indoor self-storage shall be
required to be constructed.
(F)   Indoor self-storage facilities shall abide by all City codes and
regulations such as, but not limited to, Building Code and Fire Code
provisions.
(G)   Self-storage access shall be restricted to the hours of seven o'clock (7:
00) A.M. to ten o'clock (10:00) P.M.
c.   Prohibited Uses: The only activity permitted in individual storage units
shall be the storage of goods and property. Storage units shall not be used
for:
(1)   Residences, offices, workshops, studios, hobbies, events, or rehearsal
areas;
(2)   Manufacturing, fabrication, or processing of goods, services, or repair
of vehicles, engines, appliances, or other electrical equipment or any other
industrial activity;
(3)   Retail sales of any kind including, but not limited to, garage sales,
estate sales, auctions or to conduct any other commercial activity, except in
the business office as permitted in the zone in which the facility is located;
excludes auctions of units conducted by the property owner or manager due to
nonpayment, default, or other storage business operation.
(4)   The storage of flammable, perishable, or hazardous materials.
(5)   The keeping of animals.
(6)   Accessory uses such as the rental of trucks, trailers, moving equipment,
or the installation of trailer hitches are prohibited unless otherwise
permitted in the zone in which the facility is located.
17.   Event Venues: The following standards shall apply to all event venues:
a.   General Requirements:
(1)   All event venues must comply with all Building and Fire Code regulations
related to assembly uses.
(2)   All event venues must comply with parking requirements as follows and as
outlined in chapter 15, "Off Street Parking And Loading", of this title.
(A)   Parking will be calculated at one (1) parking space required per fifty
(50) square feet of assembly or event venue space.
(B)   If the event venue is not the principal use of the building or tenant
space, the business of the principal use of the building or tenant space may
not be conducted during the event except with event attendees, unless the
parking required for the principal use is provided in addition to parking
required for the event venue.
(C)   In cases where the parking available is not equal to or greater than that
needed for the proposed event venue, the event venue space square footage and
maximum occupancy load as determined by the Fire Code and Building Code will be
limited in size and occupancy load to match the available parking.
(D)   If the event venue is part of a commercial center with shared parking,
parking will be calculated at the commercial center rate, plus one (1) space
per fifty (50) square feet of event venue area to avoid an under parked
situation for other tenants.
(E)   No outside activity is allowed if located within three hundred feet
(300') of property zoned for residential development or used for residential.
This includes, but is not limited to, patios, decks, amplified sound, roll-up
windows, or garage type doors. (Ord. 2123, 11-2-2015; amd. Ord. 2143, 5-2-2016;
Ord. 2145, 5-16-2016)
18.   Outdoor Activity Areas And Operable Storefronts:
a.   Definitions:
(1)   Outdoor Activity Areas are exterior areas of any non-residential
establishment designated for food and/or beverage services and/or consumption
and intended for gathering of patrons, with or without designated seating, such
as patios, decks, roof decks, or other designated areas of the site.
(2)   Operable storefronts are defined as a door or window that opens for
purposes including, but not limited to, allowing outside air into the space,
offering bar or food services, displaying TV or video, providing for music out
of doors or allowing other business to be conducted through the opening. For
the purposes of this regulation, operable store front does not mean vehicular
access, drive-in bays, windows for drive-through service or doors used
primarily for entry.
b.   When located in a Commercial District or a Multi-Use Building or
Development: Businesses in a commercial district, a multi-use building or
development that have outdoor activity areas or operable storefronts shall
comply with the following regulations:
(1)   When residential uses are located internal to the multi-use building or
development: no additional regulation on the outdoor activity area and/or
operable storefront shall be required for location or for mitigation of impacts
to internal residential uses.
(2)   When residential uses are external to the commercial district or multi-
use building or development area and are more than three hundred feet (300') to
the outdoor activity area or operable storefront: no additional regulation on
the outdoor activity area and/or operable storefront shall be required for
location or for mitigation of impacts to residential uses. Distance to
residential is measured from the closest point of the outdoor service area's
boundary or facade opening for an operable storefront to the nearest point on a
residential structure when measured in a straight line, regardless of
intervening structures.
(3)   When residential uses external to the commercial district or multi-use
building or development area are located within three hundred feet (300') of
the outdoor activity area and/or operable storefront the business shall comply
with the following regulations:
(A)   Location: The outdoor activity area and/or operable storefront shall be
out of the line of sight of the residential property and oriented to direct
light and sound away from the residential property. Distance to residential is
measured from the closest point of the outdoor activity area's boundary or
facade opening for an operable storefront to the nearest point on a residential
structure when measured in a straight line, regardless of intervening
structures.
An exception to allow screening elements such as landscaping, walls, or sound
mitigating panels may be used to provide the needed mitigation for line of
site, orientation or construction requirements for outdoor activity areas or
operable storefronts with the approval of the Director of Development Services.
(B)   Hours of Operation: The outdoor activity area and operable storefront may
be used no earlier than seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. to no later than ten thirty
(10:30) P.M., Sunday through Thursday, and no earlier than seven o'clock (7:00)
A.M. to no later than twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight on Friday and Saturdays.
(C)   Establishment of use: If an outdoor activity area or operable storefront
is established prior to adjacent residential use(s) such regulations of this
section would not be applicable to the outdoor activity area or operable
storefront.
c.   Compliance with operational requirements noted above do not preclude the
business from complying with other regulations contained in City code,
specifically Title 3 (Business and Licensing), Chapter 2 (Beer And Liquor
Control), Title 4 (Health and Safety Regulations), Chapter 4 (Nuisances) and
Chapter 7 (Noise Control). Modification to the operational aspects of the
business or physical improvements to the building containing the business may
be required should it be determined that the business is in violation of these
regulations.
19.   Beekeeping: In those districts in which SIC 0279-9901 is allowed, the
following regulations shall apply to beekeeping operations:
a.   Beekeeping shall only be allowed on property owned by the beekeeper or on
property owned by a third party for which the beekeeper has written
authorization from the property owner allowing for the keeping of bees.
b.   Honeybee colonies shall be kept in hives with removable frames, with said
hives kept in sound and usable condition.
c.   A maximum of two (2) hives shall be permitted on a property one (1) acre
or smaller in size, while a maximum of ten (10) hives shall be permitted on a
property larger than one (1) acre in size.
d.   Hives shall not be located in the front or side yard.
e.   A source of water shall be readily available to the bees within the
property that the beehives are located at all times during the time of year in
which the bees are active.
f.   When a hive is situated within twenty five feet (25') of a property line,
as measured from the nearest point on the hive to the property line, the
beekeeper shall establish and maintain a flyway barrier parallel to the
property line(s) which is a minimum of six feet (6') in height consisting of a
solid wall of a building, fence, dense vegetation or combination thereof. Said
flyway barrier shall extend a minimum of twelve feet (12') beyond the hive in
all directions so that all bees are forced to fly at an elevation of at least
six feet (6') above ground level over the property line(s) in vicinity of the
apiary. Dense vegetation used as a flyway barrier may exceed a height of six
feet (6'); however, said vegetation shall be a minimum of six feet (6') in
height at the time that beehives are located on the property. A building permit
shall be obtained prior to construction of any building or fence.
g.   As recommended by the Iowa State Apiarist, the beekeeper shall incorporate
best management practices in the beekeeping operation at all times, including
practicing proper management and manipulation of colonies to remedy swarming
and/or aggressive colonies.
h.   In the event that a beekeeping operation is determined to be in violation
of this Code with regard to the above regulations, the beekeeper and/or
property owner shall be given written notice of the violation and be allowed
fourteen (14) days from the date of the notice to correct the violation. If the
property is not brought into compliance within fourteen (14) days, the hives
shall be immediately removed from the property.
20.   Veterinary And Animal Services: The following regulations shall apply in
multi-tenant buildings within all zoning districts in which the use is allowed
and in all situations in which noise or odors of veterinary and animal services
are potentially noticeable to an adjacent or nearby business regardless if
located within the same building:
a.   All veterinary and animal service uses:
(1)   All walls, ceiling or floor assemblies surrounding any area for animal
holding, exam, or treatment areas shall be constructed to meet or exceed a
sound transmission class rating (STC) of 55 and the walls shall extend all the
way from the floor to the roof, sealed with a continuous bead of caulk along
the top, bottom and side wall intersections of the wall and around any
penetrations. Doors or windows within exterior walls for these wall assemblies
must be constructed to meet or exceed a sound transmission class rating (STC)
of 40. Doors or windows within these wall assemblies serving as an interior
wall of the tenant space (not a tenant separation wall) must be constructed to
meet or exceed a sound transmission class rating (STC) of 30.
(2)   The ceiling over any animal holding, exam, or treatment areas shall meet
or exceed a noise reduction coefficient (NRC) of 0.70.
(3)   The HVAC system of the tenant space shall be designed to ensure adequate
ventilation for odor elimination.
(4)   Identify the outdoor open space that will be used for animal waste
elimination and provide a proposed maintenance schedule for the cleaning and
removal of animal waste.
b.   Veterinary and animal service uses in multi-tenant buildings:
(1)   The wall, ceiling or floor assemblies between the entire tenant space
conducting the activity and adjacent tenants shall be constructed to meet or
exceed a sound transmission class rating (STC) of 50 and the walls shall extend
all the way from the floor to the roof, sealed with a continuous bead of caulk
along the top, bottom and side wall intersections of the wall and around any
penetrations.
(2)   The HVAC system for the tenant space shall be completely independent of
any other tenant space to eliminate the transmission of sound or odors.
21.   Recreational Facilities: Characteristics of elements or structures
intended to support recreational activities can be determined by their purpose.
This section intends to provide performance standards based on those activities
or purposes as they relate to recreational uses.
a.   Activity Area Lighting: Illumination of sport fields, courts, non-
residential pools and driving ranges may occur as necessary. Light poles shall
not be subject to setback or height regulations; however, lighting mounted on
the poles shall be located at the minimum height necessary to achieve typical
industry standards for illumination levels for the specific sport or use. Light
fixture design shall be such to direct the light to its intended target or
shields shall be added to minimize views of the lightbulbs themselves from
adjoining properties. Unless otherwise defined as part of the City Council
approval of a site plan development permit, activity area lighting that is
within 1000' of residentially zoned or used properties shall be turned off
within thirty (30) minutes of the conclusion of the activity or closure of the
facility, whichever occurs first. All other lighting within a site, including
parking lot lighting shall abide by regulations provided elsewhere within this
title.
b.   Activity Area Accessory Buildings: Support accessory buildings which
contain uses or activities necessary for operation of the primary use or
activity, such as but not limited to concessions, ticket sales, restrooms,
equipment storage, and maintenance buildings shall be allowed in any number and
at any square footage, subject to the following regulations. With the exception
of structures for ticket sales, such buildings shall not be located in a front
yard and shall be a minimum of twenty-five feet (25') from the property
boundary, unless adjacent to single-family residential zoned or used property,
in which case the minimum setback from property boundary shall be increase to
fifty feet (50'). The height of building(s) shall comply with chapter 7 of this
title.
c.   Activity Area Structures: Structures to facilitate the use or components
of the use, including supporting structures, such as but not limited to goal
posts, scoreboards, bleachers, etc., and fencing or fence poles which provide a
defined boundary, physical barrier, containment of an activity or component of
the activity, or are otherwise necessary for safety of spectators or
participants shall be allowed as necessary.
(1)   For properties developed with single family and medium density
residential dwelling units, said structures, may be allowed in a location and
at a height which meets the applicable setback, height, and separation
requirements for the applicable zoning district for that use. Fence materials
shall comply with chapter 14 of this title.
(2)   For non-residentially and high density residentially zoned properties,
said structures may be allowed in a location and at a height necessary to
achieve the intent and shall not be subject to setback or height regulations,
nor shall be subject to separation from the primary structure requirements.
Acceptable fence materials include all industry standard fence materials,
including chain link, woven netting and wind or visual screen materials.
(3)   Scoreboards: Scoreboards are accessory structures to the primary use of a
stadium or recreational facility. The current technology available for
scoreboards with video display capabilities creates concern for public safety
due to the potential distraction to the motoring public viewing the scoreboard
from adjacent roadways and the potential intrusion of light and sound into
adjacent properties. Every effort should be made in the design and placement of
the scoreboard to limit and screen the view of any video display component of
the scoreboard from the general public. If the scoreboard cannot be screened to
adequately limit its view to patrons of the stadium or recreational facility,
and a continuously unobstructed view to the general public of more than five
(5) seconds exists, the following performance standards shall apply:
(A)   Full use of all capabilities of the scoreboard shall be allowed only when
an event is in progress within the stadium or recreational facility.
(B)   Full use of all capabilities of the scoreboard during the day of an event
shall be limited to pregame warmups, game duration and postgame postings.
(C)   Use of the scoreboard during athletic practices and activities with
limited spectator involvement shall be limited to score and timing functions
and shall not utilize any video display that may be a part of the scoreboard's
capabilities.
(D)   Noise: With the exception of live sporting events and activities related
to the live event itself, noise generated from the site shall abide by title 4,
chapter 7: Noise Control. The activity itself, announcers and live intermission
performances shall be exempted from application of amplified sound restrictions
for one-hour before the start of and during the activity; however, all
amplified sound shall cease no later than thirty (30) minutes from the
conclusion of the sporting event.
22.   Snow Maintenance Facilities: The intent of this subsection is to allow
for the removal of snow and conducting of winter maintenance activities on
nonsingle-family developed property on a seasonal basis and according to the
following performance standards:
a.   Maximum Duration: The snow maintenance facility may not be located on a
site prior to October 1 and must be removed from the site no later than May 31
unless specific permission is granted by the City.
b.   Location Within The Site: To the greatest extent practicable, the snow
maintenance facility shall be located in an unobtrusive location and minimally
visible from any public thoroughfares. Consideration should be given to the
placement of the facility within the site to minimize impact to adjacent
residential properties.
c.   Maximum Area Dedicated To The Facility: The maximum number of permanent
parking spaces allowed to be used for a snow maintenance facility including
material stockpiles, snow removal equipment, storage containers, temporary
sheds, etc., shall not exceed twenty percent (20%) of the parking on site or
twenty percent (20%) of the site area, whichever is more restrictive.
d.   Location On Paved Surfaces: All elements of the snow maintenance facility
shall be located on paved surface areas. No material, structures or equipment
shall be placed within any perimeter parking lot setback.
e.   Temporary Storage: Temporary structures, semivan trailers, shipping
containers and portable on demand storage containers shall be allowed for the
storage of material and equipment during the period of time allowed under this
subsection A22.
f.   Advertising Signage: No signage advertising for any business, other than
typical company signage on vehicles, shall be allowed to be displayed.
g.   Removal: On or before May 31, unless an extension is specifically granted
by the City, all structures, equipment, unused materials, bulk material piles,
etc., associated with the snow maintenance facility shall be removed from the
site. All sites shall be completely cleaned of debris and maintenance elements.
Site elements shall be properly restored to their prestorage facility
condition.
h.   Other Applicable Laws, Rules And Regulations: Any maintenance operation
and the use and/or storage of fuel for equipment and/or chemicals and materials
to aid in the removal of snow and ice shall be conducted in accordance with all
applicable City, County, State and Federal laws, rules and regulations (i.e.,
air quality, chemical or material runoff, erosion prevention, Fire Code, etc.).
i.   Vehicle Maintenance And Repair: Other than immediate repair in the event
of a vehicle or equipment breakdown, maintenance or repair of vehicles and
equipment within the property is prohibited.
23.   Vending Machines: Vending machines are evolving to become more than a
mechanized device that dispenses small items such as snack foods and beverages.
With improvements in vending hardware, software and theft resistant technology,
the operational and locational limitations these machines once had, have been
removed. The intent of this subsection A23 is to establish performance
standards to accommodate the new ways vending machines are being used while
being consistent with the goals and policies of the Comprehensive Plan, the
stated purpose of each zoning district, to minimize visual clutter, and to
maintain the aesthetic and architectural continuity of the community. Vending
machines shall be in accordance with the following performance standards:
a.   All vending machines except outdoor freestanding ATMs, fuel pumps, fuel
canister dispensing units, and tire air pumps, vehicle vacuums or other similar
devices ancillary to the function or service provided by the primary
establishment shall be located within the principal building or vestibule
attached to the principal building.
b.   Any addition to an existing building shall be constructed from similar
material and shall have an appearance complementary to the main building.
c.   No more than fifty percent (50%) of each facade adjacent to the machines
can be transparent.
d.   The vending area shall not block any interior or exterior walkways.
e.   Signage or advertising is allowed as regulated elsewhere in this title.
24.   Public Utility Structures: Shall be located in a private or public
utility easement or street right-of-way unless they exceed one of the following
criteria:
a.   Exceeds sixty four (64) square feet; or
b.   Exceeds a height of six feet (6') above grade.
Those structures exceeding the criteria noted above may be located outside of
private or public utility easements or street rights-of-way and must be set
back a minimum of thirty five feet (35') from the front yard and a minimum of
twenty feet (20') from the side and rear yard. The structure shall be located
to comply with the vision clearance requirements of chapter 14 of this title.
Utility structures can exist on a lot without an associated principal building.
A lot containing only a utility structure does not need to meet the minimum lot
size requirements for the zoning district.
Public utility structures exceeding one thousand (1,000) square feet need to
meet the principal structure setbacks for the specific zoning district where
they are located.
25.   Tasting Rooms In Conjunction With A Distillery: In those districts where
a tasting room is allowed, the tasting room shall only be allowed by approval
of a permitted conditional use permit to operate in conjunction with a
distillery. The distillery must have a native distilled spirits liquor control
license issued through the State of Iowa and a Class LC liquor license issued
by the City. For tasting rooms exceeding fifty percent (50%) of the gross
square footage of the distillery, or serving cocktails, spirits or liquor
produced elsewhere, those uses will be considered a drinking place/bar for
purposes of this subsection A25 and regulation.
Parking space requirements for a distillery with a tasting room will be
calculated at the parking rate for SIC 5813, drinking places for that portion
of the distillery identified as the liquor consumption area. This parking
calculation shall be in addition to the parking requirement for SIC 2085,
distillery for that portion of the distillery identified for production
purposes.
26.   Factory Built Structures: All factory built structures not designated as
a manufactured or mobile home or a trailer for temporary business or storage
use must meet all bulk regulations and design standards of their respective
zoning district.
27.   Cluster Developments: In order to be considered a cluster development, a
minimum of fifty percent (50%) of the development area must be set aside,
identified for preservation or protection and deed restricted from further
development. Cluster development may utilize footprint lots or multiple
buildings on one lot, as noted in subsection
9-7-4C,
table 7.2 of this title.
Preservation areas must be identified and legally restricted from further
development. These protected areas must be unencumbered by structures, off
street parking areas and vehicle use areas but may include landscaped areas,
buffers, fences, pedestrian sidewalks/trails and plazas or recreation areas.
Stormwater management facilities may be included if they are designed as
development or community amenity such as ponds or created wetlands.
28.   Design Standards For Canopies: For all uses, except single-family
residential development, canopies shall comply with the following:
a.   For this subsection a canopy is defined as a projection or shelter that
resembles a roof and is permanent in nature and intended to provide cover for
pedestrian areas and entries, outdoor seating areas, vehicle drop-off areas,
and transactional areas such as gas pumps, ATM's, drive-thru order stations and
pickup windows, online order pickup, etc.
b.   All structures, either detached or attached to the principal structure,
shall be architecturally consistent with the principal structure.
c.   The intent of the following design standards is to promote an appealing
structure that is architecturally consistent with the principal structure,
provides visual interest, and balances the mass of the canopy between the
elements of the structure such as the canopy and the support structure. For all
canopies the following design elements must be present:
(1)   All canopy supports shall be designed to be in proportion with the canopy
size and height, and that dimension shall extend the full height of the
support. Supports shall be clad with materials consistent with the materials
used for the primary structure.
(A)   Canopy supports that are subject to impacts due to vehicle traffic shall
be constructed with hard surface durable material such as brick or stone or
architectural masonry for a minimum of seven feet (7') above the surrounding
paved surface. Less durable hard surface materials such as EIFS and composite
materials, if consistent with the primary building, may be utilized for the
cladding on the upper portion of the column.
(2)   Canopies one hundred (100) linear feet or greater in length shall be
designed to provide visual interest and break the straight line appearance of
the length of the canopy by utilizing changes in massing and materials.
(3)   The color of the canopy shall be consistent with the color of the
materials used to construct the primary structure. The color shall not be
consistent with the signage colors unless considered part of the primary
structure's signage allowance as noted elsewhere in this title.
B.   The Following Standards Shall Apply To Uses Within All Single-Family
Residential Zoning Districts:
1.   It is the city's intent to promote the aesthetic of the city and enjoyment
of property by controlling visual clutter. The presence of lawn mowers, snow
removal equipment, bikes, toys, etc. within a yard can result in a chaotic
environment and unappealing views. To address this, each property shall provide
facilities to accommodate the storage of such items.
2.   For the purpose of this subsection an "enclosed parking space" or
reference to a "garage" shall mean a covered space fully surrounded by walls,
including windows, doors and similar openings or architectural features.
3.   Except for tiny homes and second dwelling units as defined in chapter 2 of
this title, and unless a waiver is granted by the City, for any detached
single-family residential dwelling a minimum of one (1) enclosed garage parking
space shall be required for each dwelling. This garage may be attached or
detached but shall be located on the same parcel as the dwelling and be of a
minimum twenty-foot by fourteen-foot (20' x 14') size to accommodate one
vehicle and additional storage.
a.   A waiver from the garage requirement may be authorized by the Director of
Development Services or designee if consistent with all of the following:
(1)   The dwelling structure does not exceed one thousand six hundred (1,600)
square feet in size.
(2)   The home is owned and occupied by an individual or household with an
annual gross income (as defined in 24 CFR part 5 - General HUD Program
Requirements; Waivers) at or below eighty percent (80%) the Area Median Income
(AMI), with the income limit adjusted for household size in accordance with the
methodology of the HUD standard. Proof of owner/occupant income will need to be
verified by the City prior to issuance of an occupancy (temporary or final)
permit for the dwelling.
(3)   A minimum ten foot by ten foot (10' x 10') detached shed is provided
within the rear yard of the subject property, or a minimum one hundred (100)
square foot indoor area dedicated to storage is constructed on the back of or
within the home, accessed directly from the exterior and includes a minimum
four foot (4') wide access door.
(4)   A minimum fifteen foot (15') side yard setback, as measured to the
closest element of the home, excluding roof overhangs is provided on one side
of the dwelling structure with the other side yard setback meeting the minimum
required distance for the designated zoning district. If the property can be
accessed from an existing alley, a fifteen-foot (15') setback on one side shall
not be required and minimum side yard setbacks shall be provided as stated in
this Code for the respective zoning district.
(5)   Off-street parking stalls as required per chapter 15 of this title are
provided within the subject property.
(6)   A deed restriction is recorded against the property establishing a
retention period in which the home must be occupied by an individual or
household at or below eighty percent (80%) AMI. The home may not be owned or
rented to an individual or household that is not at or below the eighty percent
(80%) AMI. In the event the home is sold or rented to an individual or
household above eighty percent (80%) AMI, the value of the waiver as specified
per the agreement shall be repaid to the lender according to terms outlined in
the agreement.
b.   Those properties which contain a tiny home shall provide a minimum ten-
foot by ten-foot (10' x 10') storage shed or twenty-foot by fourteen-foot (20'
x 14') garage shall be provided within the property upon which the tiny home is
located for the first tiny home dwelling for exclusive use by the occupants of
the tiny home. No garage or shed shall be required for a tiny home located
within the property when utilized as a second dwelling unit.
c.   All single-family residential properties which currently have a dwelling
structure, but no garage as of May 6, 2019 shall be considered grandfathered
and are not required to implement a garage or shed/structure for storage.
d.   Any property which at the direction of the City which is required to
remove an existing garage due to safety concerns, shall not be required to
construct a new garage or shed/structure for storage.
4.   Any existing detached single-family residence which is damaged or
destroyed by catastrophe or act of God to the extent equaling fifty percent
(50%) or more of its total assessed value, shall be exempt from the provisions
of this Code regarding the garage requirement as a part of the reconstruction
of the damage to the residential structure due to the catastrophe or act of
God.
5.   For Single Family Zoning Districts in or adjacent to residentially
developed areas, buildings should be designed to be in keeping with its
surrounding architectural context or historic character of the area with
comparable architectural design, materials and details.
C.   The Following Standards Shall Apply To Uses In The Medium Density
Residential Zoning District:
1.   Access: The design and orientation of these uses should be to provide
principal access to arterial and collector streets.
2.   Pedestrian Circulation: Pedestrian circulation systems (sidewalks,
walkways and paths) shall be located and designed to provide for circulation
within the project to and from the dwelling units to anticipated destinations
(i.e., management office, recreation facilities, playground, etc.) and to the
public sidewalks and pathways adjacent to the project. All sidewalks, walkways
and paths, shall be located and designed to provide adequate physical
separation from vehicles along all public and private streets, interior
vehicular roadways, and any parking area. Adequate physical separation from a
street or roadway shall mean a minimum setback is provided as indicated in
Section
9-3-11 of City Code when the curb of the street or interior vehicular roadway
from which the sidewalk is setback is a vertical four inch (4") or greater
standard barrier curb. Implementation of a mountable curb design (i.e., rolled
or sloped curb) shall require the sidewalk setback from the curb to be
increased to a distance consistent with that required for a “Local” designated
public street. Except for adjacent to handicap parking stalls, all off-street
parking areas shall be bounded by a vertical four inch (4") or greater standard
barrier curb.
3.   Garage or Storage Structure: It is the city's intent to promote the
aesthetic of the city and enjoyment of property by controlling visual clutter.
The presence of lawn mowers, snow removal equipment, bikes, toys, etc. within a
yard can result in a chaotic environment and unappealing views. To address
this, any detached residential dwelling or horizontally attached dwelling (no
living above) located in a medium density zoning district, shall provide
dedicated space for the storage of personal items that are typically kept
outside, and which could be visible from adjoining public roadways and
properties outside of the development. To meet the requirement for dedicated
storage space, each dwelling shall provide one of the following:
a.   Garage, either attached or detached, that is a minimum twenty- foot by
fourteen-foot (20' x 14') size to accommodate one vehicle and additional
storage.
b.   A minimum ten-foot by ten-foot (10' x 10') detached storage shed within
walking distance to the dwelling structure.
c.   A minimum one-hundred (100) square foot indoor area dedicated to storage
is constructed on the back of or within the home, accessed directly from the
exterior and includes a minimum four foot (4') wide access door.
d.   In lieu of a dedicated garage or storage structure, opaque screening of
all resident outdoor use areas (private patios or 'yards') which are visible
from a roadway or property outside of the development may be provided. Said
visual screening may be achieved through implementation of one or more of the
following:
(1)   A six foot (6') tall solid fence or wall located along the perimeter
boundary of the development. Said fence or wall shall be setback a minimum of
ten feet (10') from the perimeter boundary. Landscape vegetation in numbers
equal to 1/3 of a typical thirty foot (30') wide landscape buffer shall be
provided on the public side of the fence or wall to soften the presence of the
fence or wall.
(2)   A minimum six foot (6') high earthen berm located along the perimeter
boundary of development. Said berm shall be designed with undulation to provide
a natural appearance and layered to ensure blockage of all views into the site.
Vegetation shall be provided to anchor the berms to the site and achieve a
natural appearance.
(3)   A minimum six foot (6') tall solid fence or wall enclosing the private
outdoor use area for each dwelling.
D.   The Following Standards Shall Apply To Uses Within The High Density
Residential District:
1.   Access: These uses should be designed and oriented to provide principal
access to arterial and collector streets and should not be designed to direct
traffic through single-family residential districts to access the arterial or
collector street.
2.   Architecture: Architectural design for multi-family buildings shall
attempt to express a creative presentation of exterior building materials,
exterior details and texture, treatment of windows and doors, and use of angles
and multiplicity of planes within the wall and roof design to lessen the
plainness of appearance which can be characteristic of large residential
buildings. The use of brick or stone shall be incorporated into the building's
architecture on all sides of the structure, and thereof design of any and all
buildings within the High-Density Residential District shall be pitched or
gabled and reflect a residential appearance in nature, unless the City Council,
after review by the Plan and Zoning Commission shall determine that the use of
alternate building materials and style, enhances the physical appearance and
accomplishes a compatible structure with the residential uses in the
neighborhood.
3.   Pedestrian Circulation: Pedestrian circulation systems (sidewalks,
walkways and paths) shall be located and designed to provide for circulation
within the project to and from the dwelling units to anticipated destinations,
such as the management office, recreation facilities, playground, etc., the
public sidewalks and pathways adjacent to the project, and public
transportation stops and transfer centers. All sidewalks, walkways and paths,
shall be located and designed to provide adequate physical separation from
vehicles along all public and private streets, interior vehicular roadways, and
any parking area. Adequate physical separation from a street or roadway shall
mean a minimum setback is provided as indicated in Section
9-3-11 of City Code when the curb of the street or interior vehicular roadway
from which the sidewalk is setback is a vertical four inch (4") or greater
standard barrier curb. Implementation of a mountable curb design (i.e., rolled
or sloped curb) shall require the sidewalk setback from the curb to be
increased to a distance consistent with that required for a “Local” designated
public street. Except for adjacent to handicap parking stalls, all off-street
parking areas shall be bounded by a vertical four inch (4") or greater standard
barrier curb.
E.   The Following Standards Shall Apply To All Commercial Districts Unless
Noted Otherwise In This Title:
1.   Outside Storage And Displays: No merchandise shall be stored or displayed
outside a building except as allowed by the approval of the City Council as
part of a site plan permit, or as permitted by a temporary use permit issued by
the Development Services Department.
2.   Architecture: In all commercial zoning districts, all sides of commercial
buildings shall be architecturally treated to produce an aesthetically pleasing
facade which is of a design compatible with surrounding buildings and the
character of the community and shall be reviewed through the applicable
development permit process.
3.   Pedestrian Circulation: Pedestrian circulation systems (sidewalks,
walkways and paths) shall be located and designed to provide for safe,
convenient, and attractive on site pedestrian circulation access linkage to and
from surrounding residential and employment areas to anticipated destinations,
such as the public sidewalks and pathways adjacent to the project and public
transportation stops and transfer centers. All sidewalks, walkways and paths,
shall be located and designed to provide adequate physical separation from
vehicles along all public and private streets and drives within any parking
area.
4.   Community Commercial District:
a.   Individual commercial uses within a Community Commercial District should
be tied together by prominent common features such as architectural theme,
roofing material and style, and landscape materials.
b.   Primary access into a Community Commercial District use shall not be taken
off local residential streets.
5.   Neighborhood Commercial Districts:
a.   Buildings in the Neighborhood Commercial District shall be limited to a
height of one story and shall have a residential style roof design (e.g.,
mansard, pitched, gabled, etc.), unless otherwise approved by City Council.
b.   All uses within a Neighborhood Commercial District shall be specifically
designed and operated to be compatible with the adjacent residential uses.
Specifically, limitations on design and operation of uses shall include
architectural and building mass, hours of operation, delivery hours, noise and
lighting controls, signage and traffic considerations and shall be reviewed
during the site plan or permitted conditional use permit (Pc) review process.
c.   Unless otherwise authorized by the City, outdoor display of merchandise
may occupy an area equal to or less than an amount of square feet that is
twenty percent (20%) of the gross square feet of the tenant space in the
principal building. This display area may occupy an area located adjacent to
the tenant space, without encroaching into any sidewalk (a 4 foot wide sidewalk
must be maintained) or parking area.
d.   Unless otherwise authorized by the City, outdoor storage of larger or bulk
merchandise may occupy an area equal to no more than ten percent (10%) of the
gross square foot of the tenant space in the principal building. All outdoor
storage is expected to be surrounded with an opaque enclosure up to eight feet
(8') tall; no material can exceed the height of the enclosure. This area shall
not be located within required front yard, parking areas or required open
space.
6.   Architecture Requirements In The Valley Junction Commercial District And
The Valley Junction Historic Business District: All uses within the Valley
Junction Commercial District and the Valley Junction Historic Business District
should be designed with the historical character of the area in mind and
encourage the preservation of significant historical, natural, cultural sites
and other unique landmarks.
7.   Pawnshops And Check Cashing, Payday Loan, Personal Credit Institutions,
And Delayed Deposit Services Businesses: The following shall apply to pawnshops
and check cashing, payday loan, personal credit institutions, and delayed
deposit services businesses:
a.   No person shall cause or permit the establishment of any pawnshops or
check cashing, payday loan, personal credit institutions, and delayed deposit
services businesses within one-half (1/2) mile from any other such business.
b.   No person shall cause or permit the establishment of any pawnshops or
check cashing, payday loan, personal credit institutions, and delayed deposit
services businesses within two hundred fifty feet (250') of any existing
residential property or residentially zoned property or a portion of a PUD
district restricted to residential use.
c.   For the purposes of this section, measurement of separation distances
shall be taken on a direct line from the property line of such pawnshop or
check cashing, payday loan, personal credit institution, and delayed deposit
services business to the point on the property line of such other business,
residential property or residentially zoned property, or portion of a PUD
district restricted to residential use which is closest to the property line of
such pawnshop or check cashing, payday loan, personal credit institution, and
delayed deposit services business.
d.   The establishment of a pawnshop or check cashing, payday loan, pawnshops
and check cashing, payday loan, personal credit institution, and delayed
deposit services business shall include the opening of such business as a new
business, the relocation of such business or the conversion of an existing
business location to a pawnshop or check cashing, payday loan, pawnshops and
check cashing, payday loan, personal credit institutions, and delayed deposit
services business.
F.   The Following Standards Shall Apply To All Uses Within The Office
District:
1.   Permitted Uses With Drive-Up Facilities: Any use that is allowed in this
district that includes a drive-up or drive-through window or facility shall
screen the drive-through from the public thoroughfare through the use of
berming and landscaping, fencing and landscaping, or architectural screening.
The proposed screening shall be identified on the plan submitted for a
development permit for review.
2.   Permitted Uses With Garage Doors: Any use that is allowed in this district
that includes a drive-in bay within the building that is accessed through a
garage door, said garage door shall be screened from view from the public
street through the use of berming and landscaping, fencing and landscaping, or
architectural screening. The proposed screening shall be identified on the plan
submitted for a development permit for review.
3.   Pedestrian Circulation: Pedestrian circulation systems (sidewalks,
walkways and paths) shall be located and designed to provide for safe,
convenient, and attractive on site pedestrian circulation access linkage to and
from surrounding residential and commercial areas to anticipated destinations,
such as the public sidewalks and pathways adjacent to the project and public
transportation stops and transfer centers. All sidewalks, walkways and paths,
shall be located and designed to provide adequate physical separation from
vehicles along all public and private streets and drives within any parking
area.
4.   Site Furnishings: The provision of site furnishings and pedestrian plazas
should be encouraged in outdoor open spaces. Such amenities as seating areas,
fountains, pools, information/exhibit kiosks and works of art are desirable.
Site furnishing components should enhance and respect the scale of the urban
spaces in which they are placed. Adjacent sites are encouraged to work together
to develop an overall site furnishings scheme.
G.   The Following Standards Shall Apply To Uses Within The Professional
Commerce Park District:
1.   Intent Of The District: The principle of spacious separation and
adaptation of the manmade elements to be harmonious with the natural
environment shall dominate the central design theme of the site and structural
planning in this district. To accomplish this objective, the standards listed
below shall be considered as minimum acceptable standards. While this district
is predominately occupied by spacious office uses, certain uses not considered
professional- commerce and certain inherent physical characteristics shall be
considered compatible or incompatible with the intent of this district as
follows:
a.   Retail commercial uses not specifically permitted in this district, with
independent access to the building and/or signage that is visible from the
exterior of the building, shall be prohibited. Any enterprise or service which
is specifically intended to augment, facilitate, be subsidiary and be accessory
to the planned principal uses shall be permitted, providing such use shall be
physically accomplished in an aesthetically compatible manner wholly within the
confines of the building and shall comply with all restrictions or performance
standards applicable to the principal uses.
b.   Any enterprise which cannot wholly enclose its functions within the
principal structures or otherwise effectively conceal its functions from public
observation, shall be prohibited. Drive-through windows and drive-up facilities
shall be prohibited in this district except as otherwise identified in this
title. Any drive-through facility shall be screened from the public
thoroughfare through the use of: 1) berming and landscaping, or 2) fencing and
landscaping, or 3) architectural screening.
(1)   Berming: Designed by a registered landscape architect, architect or
engineer; with earth berming and landscape plantings, the plantings shall be
predominately of evergreen type trees and shrubs as to assure year round
effectiveness. The earth berming shall be a minimum height of three feet (3')
above the top of curb of the adjoining parking lot, if applicable, or public
thoroughfare, whichever is higher, and shall be designed to not negatively
affect the drainage of the surrounding area and to be aesthetically pleasing to
the general public. Berms may be required to be higher if the minimum height is
identified during the development review process as being inadequate to provide
effective screening and buffering.
(2)   Landscape Plantings: The equivalent of one overstory tree and three (3)
shrubs per thirty five (35) linear feet of the area adjacent to the public
thoroughfare. Deciduous trees shall be a minimum two (2) to two and one-half
inch (21/2") caliper, evergreen trees shall be a minimum six feet (6') in
height and will be equal to one overstory tree. Shrubs shall be a minimum size
of eighteen inches (18") to twenty four inches (24"). Whenever practical,
existing trees and shrubs should be preserved and incorporated into the overall
design and can be included to meet the total number of required trees and
shrubs, if it is determined during the development review process that the
existing trees will provide the necessary screening and buffering.
Substitution of plant materials will be allowed at the following rate:
Two (2) ornamental trees or five (5) shrubs may be substituted for one
overstory tree.
In no case shall the substitution of overstory trees be in excess of fifty
percent (50%) of the required number, except in extenuating circumstances, such
as under overhead power lines.
In any case, the design shall simulate natural tree stands with groupings and
masses rather than linear or symmetric lines, unless the overall landscape
design is of a more formal nature and deemed appropriate by staff during the
development review process.
(3)   Fencing And Architectural Screening: Architectural design and use of
materials for the construction within the property shall be accomplished in a
manner compatible with PCP professional commerce park zone district building
standards. The architectural design of the fencing and screening shall be
acceptable to the city, by being reviewed by city staff, recommendation made by
the planning and zoning commission and approved by the city council. The design
and style of such an element shall be in context with the surrounding
environment and shall be constructed such that the drive-through is visually
screened from the public view and adjoining properties. Drive-throughs located
away from the public view (rear yard or side yard) are preferred.
H.   The Following Standards Shall Apply To All Uses Within The Business Park
District Unless Noted Otherwise In This Title:
1.   Outside Storage: Any enterprise which cannot wholly enclose its functions
within the principal structures shall be prohibited.
2.   Architecture: While it is not the purpose of this chapter to dictate or
specify building materials and structural standards, the importance of material
strength and permanency and their relationship to the central aesthetic
character of the district shall be recognized. The use of high quality, durable
materials will result in appreciation of improvements over time.
a.   The architectural design of any building shall be acceptable to the city,
and all buildings within a property shall have all sides of any building built
on the property consistent in design and use of materials. No wood, masonite,
visible asphaltic exterior wall or roof material, aluminum siding,
nonarchitectural sheet metal, concrete block, or other similar materials shall
constitute a portion of any building except as a trim material, unless the city
council, after having received a recommendation from the planning and zoning
commission, shall determine said material, when used as a primary element,
enhances the physical appearance, or provides continuity desired to unite all
structures within the property together into one project concept.
b.   Preferred building materials include, but are not limited to, brick, stone
veneers, granite, architectural metals, cast in place concrete panels,
decorative concrete block and tinted glass. This principle shall not be
construed to prevent the use of material innovation nor progressive structural
design; however, it shall recognize the strength of stone as compared to the
frailty of paper mache, the permanency of brick as compared to constant
maintenance of wood veneer, the strength of concrete and steel as compared to
the frailty of light sheet metal, etc.
3.   Pedestrian Circulation: Pedestrian circulation systems (sidewalks,
walkways and paths) shall be located and designed to provide for safe,
convenient, and attractive on site pedestrian circulation access linkage to and
from surrounding residential and employment areas to anticipated destinations,
such as the public sidewalks and pathways adjacent to the project and public
transportation stops and transfer centers. All sidewalks, walkways and paths
shall be located and designed to provide adequate physical separation from
vehicles along all public and private streets and drives within any parking
area.
4.   Site Furnishings: The provision of site furnishings and pedestrian plazas
should be encouraged in outdoor open spaces. Such amenities as seating areas,
fountains, pools, information/exhibit kiosks and works of art are desirable.
Site furnishing components should enhance and respect the scale of the urban
spaces in which they are placed. Adjacent sites are encouraged to work together
to develop an overall site furnishings scheme.
5.   Multiple Buildings On One Site: Multiple use of the site by more than one
building shall be permitted, provided that a master plan, and any other
covenants that are established as deemed necessary by the City Council, to
ensure the use of multiple buildings on a site will be consistent in
architectural design and use of materials and organized utilizing a compatible
planned open space, landscape plan, and parking plan to serve and maintain a
unified master plan concept.
6.   Abatement Or Elimination Of Offensive Activities And Characteristics:
Complete abatement or elimination of all generally offensive or obnoxious
characteristics, such as odors, gases, noise, vibration, pollution of air or
water or soil, excessive and unnatural lighting intensity, unusual human
activity, hazardous activity, etc., which may be detrimental to the general
welfare of this community, shall be accomplished.
7.   Traffic Impact: No use shall involve any activity substantially increasing
the movement of traffic on public streets unless procedures are instituted to
limit traffic hazards and congestion.
I.   The Following Standards Shall Apply To All Industrial Districts Unless
Noted Otherwise Within This Title:
1.   Industrial District Standards: All uses allowed in the industrial
districts shall conform to the performance standards to permit potential
industrial nuisances to be measured, factually and objectively; to ensure that
all industries will provide methods to protect the community from hazards and
nuisances which can be prevented by processes of control and nuisance
elimination; and to protect industries from arbitrary exclusion or persecution
based solely on the nuisance production by any particular type of industry in
the past.
2.   Glare And Heat: Any operation producing intense glare or heat shall be
conducted within an enclosed building or with other effective screening in such
a manner as to make such glare or heat completely imperceptible from any point
along the property line.
3.   Vibration: No operation shall cause inherent and recurring generated
vibration perceptible without instruments at any point along the property line.
Transportation facilities or temporary construction are excluded from this
restriction.
4.   Light: Exterior lighting, except for overhead street lighting and warning,
emergency, or traffic signals, shall be installed in such a manner that the
light source will be sufficiently obscured to prevent glare on public streets
and walkways or into any residential area. The installation or erection of any
lighting which may be confused with warning signals, emergency signals, or
traffic signals shall be unlawful.
5.   Smoke Emissions: No person, firm or entity shall emit or cause to be
emitted into the atmosphere from any air contamination source of emission
whatsoever any air contaminant which is in violation of the provisions of the
Polk County Board of Health rules and regulations for air pollution or any
other local, County, State or Federal regulations.
6.   Odor Emissions: No person, wherever located, shall cause or allow the
emission of odorous air contaminants from any single source such as to result
in detectable odors which are measured in excess of the following limits:
a.   For areas used predominantly for residential or commercial purposes, it is
a violation if odors are detected after the odorous air has been diluted with
seven (7) or more volumes of odor free air.
b.   In all other land use areas, it is a violation if odors are detected after
the odorous air has been diluted with fifteen (15) or more volumes of odor free
air.
c.   When the source is a manufacturing process or agricultural operation, no
violation of subsections K6a and K6b of this section shall be cited by the
City, provided that the best practical treatment, maintenance, and control
currently available shall be utilized in order to maintain the lowest possible
emission of odorous gases, and, where applicable, in determining the best
practical control methods, the City shall not require any method which would
result in an arbitrary and unreasonable taking of property or in the practical
closing of any lawful business or activity if such would be without
corresponding public benefit.
d.   For all areas, it is a violation when odors are detected after the odorous
air has been diluted with one hundred twenty seven (127) or more volumes of
odor free air, in which case the provisions of subsection K6c of this section
shall not be applicable.
7.   Hazardous Materials: If the proposed uses or tenants of the project are
known to use and/or store hazardous materials (including hazardous wastes) on
site, the project shall be designed to comply with all Fire and Building Codes
for the hazardous materials use, and adequate precautions shall be taken to
protect against negative off site impacts of a hazardous materials release,
using best available technology.
8.   Industrial Effluent: All uses shall comply with the provisions of the
industrial pretreatment ordinance and any other applicable local, County, State
or Federal regulations.
9.   Membrane Structures: Membrane structures are allowed only in General
Industrial and Light Industrial Zoning Districts for the storage of bulk
materials and limited equipment necessary to load, unload, or move said
materials. Structures must have foundations and/or sidewalls constructed with
durable materials to the anticipated material height at the exterior walls and
be designed to withstand the loads and impacts related to the storage, loading,
and unloading of bulk materials. Membrane cladding and the related support
structure can only be utilized for the portion of the structure not subject to
bulk material loads or impacts, and must have a minimum of a ten (10) year
useful life. In the event that the membrane structure becomes torn or falls
into disrepair, it shall be removed or replaced. Failure to do so will be
considered a public nuisance and the structure will be abated in accordance
with title 4, chapter 4, "Nuisances", of this Code. Structures must meet all
adopted Building and Fire Codes and comply with applicable setback and bulk
regulations for the specific zoning district where they are located. In
addition to the size of each structure(s) and materials being stored,
structures located within twenty feet (20') of another shall be treated as one
for the purposes of determining fire suppression requirements.
J.   The Following Standards Shall Apply To All Uses Within The Warehouse
Retail District:
1.   Outdoor Storage And Displays: Outdoor storage is allowed in the Warehouse
Retail District in rear and side yards away from the public right-of-way
provided that: a) the location of such storage has been approved in conjunction
with a site plan; and b) the entire area to be used for outdoor storage is
opaquely screened by a fence, screen wall, or a very dense stand of evergreen
trees. The height of the fence, wall, or stand of trees shall be at least as
high as the object(s) being screened. In this district, fences of twelve feet
(12') high will be allowed. Outdoor display areas, such as car sales uses, may
be allowed provided that they are approved as part of a site plan and do not
detract from the general aesthetics of the surrounding area.
2.   Architecture: All buildings shall be aesthetically pleasing and of a
design compatible with surrounding buildings and the character of the
community. Attention to architectural details such as the treatment of doors,
windows, and the definition and treatment of the base, middle, and top of a
building shall be paid to the public entrances of the building and those sides
of the building within public view. Emphasis shall be placed on breaking up the
mass of long blank walls. Accepted materials include brick, stone, wood, and
limited usage of EIFS and metal, unless the City Council, after review by the
Planning and Zoning Commission determines that the use of alternate building
materials and style enhances the physical appearance and accomplishes a
compatible structure.
3.   Multiple Buildings On One Site: Multiple use of the site by more than one
building shall be permitted, provided that a master plan, and any other
covenants or documents that are deemed necessary by the City Council or Board
of Adjustment, are provided and approved. Such master plan and supporting
documents can be used to establish a common plan to meet the City's open space,
stormwater, landscaping, lighting, and parking requirements. The architectural
style and building materials used on multiple buildings on one site should be
compatible.
K.   Regulation Of Specific Activities, Jordan Creek Town Center Overlay
District:
1.   Purpose: The purpose of this subsection M is to provide for the reasonable
regulation of specific activities within the Jordan Creek Town Center Overlay
District to ensure that such activities are harmonious with the pedestrian
oriented village atmosphere of the district and that the operation of such
activities is compatible with the surrounding land uses.
2.   Findings: The City Council makes the following findings:
a.   The Town Center Overlay District is an overlay zoning district that seeks
to incorporate residential, retail, office and recreational activities in a
specific area of the City. The overall objective of the district is to create a
village atmosphere that provides a safe, convenient, energetic and attractive
area in which to live, work, shop and play.
b.   The Town Center Overlay District seeks to achieve a pedestrian friendly
environment while offering a varied choice of residential, retail, office and
recreational opportunities.
c.   The Town Center Overlay District seeks to balance the presence of office
and retail establishments with the goal of creating a traditional residential
community. Attaining a balance between the integration of office and retail
establishments with a residential community to achieve a traditional work, live
and play environment requires reducing the dependence upon and dominance of the
automobile and recognizing the appropriate relationship between each permitted
land use.
d.   Certain permitted uses within the Town Center Overlay District provide the
appropriate balance and serve to complement other permitted uses within the
district. However, the secondary effects of such uses may be detrimental to the
surrounding area.
e.   Commercial and retail establishments in excess of one hundred thousand
(100,000) square feet generate significantly more traffic, noise and light than
other uses permitted within the district.
f.   Larger retail establishments tend to attract a concentration of customers
and traffic patterns that are not compatible with the sleep and domestic
patterns of traditional neighborhoods; smaller retail establishments do not
attract similar concentrations of customers or such concentrations of traffic
patterns.
g.   Large retail establishments, while appropriate at certain hours, are
inappropriate at other hours due to the generation of traffic, noise and light
which detrimentally affect both the residential uses of the district and the
surrounding residential areas.
h.   Additionally, automotive repair facilities, while appropriate in a mixed
use environment at certain hours, also generate excessive noise due to the
nature of the facility, and their operation is therefore inappropriate in a
mixed use environment after certain hours.
i.   Commercial, retail and office uses also require the delivery of
merchandise and supplies by commercial motor vehicle which are necessary for
the operation of the commercial, retail or office use. Such deliveries often
generate noise that may cause undue disruption to the surrounding area.
j.   Residential uses are more sensitive to the noise and disruption caused by
the delivery of the merchandise and supplies, making it necessary to balance
the needs of the commercial, retail and office uses with the needs of the
surrounding residential uses.
k.   In seeking to provide the desired traditional relationship between all
permitted uses within the district while addressing the detrimental effects
large commercial and/or retail establishments may have on existing land uses
both within and surrounding the district, the imposition of reasonable
conditions is necessary.
Therefore, based upon the findings set forth above, it is the determination of
the City Council of the City of West Des Moines that the following conditions
are the most appropriate and least restrictive and are reasonable and necessary
to address the detrimental effects resulting from certain uses within the Town
Center Overlay District.
3.   Definitions:
AUTOMOTIVE REPAIR FACILITY: Any and all facilities as established and defined
by standard industrial classification group 75, excluding car wash facilities.
COMMERCIAL OR RETAIL USE: A development or improvement used for the barter,
exchange, sale, service, or trade of goods and/or materials for financial,
material or monetary gain.
DELIVERY: The act of conveying or transferring property through the use of a
truck, carrier or other commercial vehicle designed primarily for carrying
livestock, merchandise or freight of any kind.
RESIDENTIAL: Any lot, plot, parcel, tract, area, piece of land or building used
or intended to be used for family dwelling purposes, including concomitant uses
specified herein.
4.   Conditions On Specific Activities Within The Town Center Overlay District:
a.   Conditions:
(1)   Hours Of Delivery: No delivery shall be made within the Town Center
Overlay District between the hours of twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight and six
o'clock (6:00) A.M. and no stationary refrigerated cargo container or delivery
vehicle shall be allowed to operate the compressor unit of the refrigerated
container between these hours.
(2)   Hours Of Operation: No commercial or retail use permitted within the Town
Center Overlay District having an area in excess of one hundred thousand
(100,000) square feet shall be open to the public between the hours of twelve
o'clock (12:00) midnight and six o'clock (6:00) A.M., except as otherwise
authorized.
No automotive repair facility shall be open to the public between the hours of
nine o'clock (9:00) P.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) A.M.
(3)   Maximum Light Illumination: No use permitted in the Town Center Overlay
shall be allowed to display an exterior light that exceeds one foot-candle as
measured at the user's property line.
No lighting fixture in the Town Center Overlay District shall exceed twenty
five feet (25') in height as measured from the grade to the top of the fixture.
All lighting fixtures in the Town Center Overlay District shall be cutoff
fixtures and no wall pack or floodlighting shall be allowed. Canopy lighting
used for drive-ups or gas pumps shall be limited to the use of a recessed or
flush lighting fixture, and no part of the fixture shall be visible from the
street.
b.   Exceptions: Upon application, the Director of Community Development or the
Director's designee shall allow the applicant to accept deliveries at times
outside the hours of operation set forth in subsection M4a(1) of this section,
if such deliveries, as determined by the Director of Community Development or
the Director's designee, are essential to the operation of the establishment
and cannot be made during the normal hours of delivery.
Upon application, the Director of Community Development or the Director's
designee may allow the applicant to be open to the public beyond the hours
designated in subsection M4a(2) of this section as it is recognized that there
are special circumstances that justify such operation on a limited basis.
Extended hours may be granted one time each calendar year for a period not to
exceed four (4) consecutive calendar days.
Notwithstanding anything contained herein to the contrary, the limitation on
hours of operation designated in subsection M4a(2) of this section shall not
apply to the period beginning seven (7) calendar days before each Thanksgiving
and continuing through and including January 7 of the following calendar year.
(Ord. 1190, 6-17-1996; amd. Ord. 1251, 6-16-1997; Ord. 1629, 4-25-2005; Ord.
1638, 6-20-2005; Ord. 1697, 6-5-2006; Ord. 1839, 9-21-2009; Ord. 1860, 3-22-
2010; Ord. 1901, 12-27-2010; Ord. 2081, 2-9-2015; Ord. 2123, 11-2-2015; Ord.
2124, 11-2-2015; Ord. 2141, 4-4-2016; Ord. 2143, 5-2-2016; Ord. 2145, 5-16-
2016; Ord. 2160, 7-25-2016; Ord. 2162, 8-8-2016; Ord. 2176, 10-31-2016; Ord.
2187, 12-12-2016; Ord. 2201, 3-6-2017; Ord. 2210, 4-17-2017; Ord. 2224, 5-30-
2017; Ord. 2248, 9-18-2017; Ord. 2265, 12-11-2017; Ord. 2269, 1-8-2018; Ord.
2274, 2-5-2018; Ord. 2357, 5-6-2019; Ord. 2358, 5-6-2019; Ord. 2364, 6-3-2019;
Ord. 2454, 12-7-2020; Ord. 2493, 10-4-2021; Ord. 2511, 4-18-2022; Ord. 2513, 5-
2-2022; Ord. 2540, 9-19-2022; Ord. 2566, 5-15-2023; Ord. 2570, 7-5-2023; Ord.
2589, 12-4-2023; Ord. 2662, 7-7-2025)
CHAPTER 11
PCP PROFESSIONAL COMMERCE PARK DISTRICT
SECTION:
9-11-1: Regulations
9-11-2: Use Regulations
9-11-3: Performance Standards
9-11-4: Height Regulations
9-11-5: Off-Street Parking
9-11-6: Reserved
9-11-7: Bulk Regulations
9-11-1: REGULATIONS:
The regulations set forth in this chapter, and elsewhere in this title which
are applicable, shall apply in the PCP Professional Commerce Park District.
For the purpose of this section, the "PCP District" is defined as an area for
accommodating the management, research, design, marketing and production needs
of those professional-commerce enterprises which comply with the performance
standards of this chapter for the abatement of all obnoxious, detrimental or
other generally unacceptable characteristics including ugliness of physical and
natural properties; and for the encouraged use of those contemporary, modern
and futuristic design techniques which yield compatibility of one area to
another as well as special beauty. (Ord. 430, 8-11-1969)
9-11-2: USE REGULATIONS:
For the purpose of this section, it shall be recognized that the name of a use
is not so important as the manner in which the use is accomplished. Further, in
the interest of general community welfare, it is recognized that the community
should be beautiful as well as financially prosperous, spacious as well as
efficient; physically balanced as well as regulated. Therefore, it is
considered impractical, if not impossible, to accurately enumerate those uses
which would be beneficial or detrimental to the community; and that it is
intended only that this district shall not be used indiscriminately to permit
any use which might violate the general welfare of the community; but that it
shall be restricted and confined to only those integrated professional-commerce
uses which produce net gain to the community in both aesthetic and material
quality.
Certain uses not considered professional-commerce and certain inherent physical
characteristics are considered compatible or incompatible with the intent of
this district as follows:
A.   Any enterprise or service which is specifically intended to augment,
facilitate, be subsidiary and be accessory to the planned principal uses shall
be permitted, providing such use shall be physically accomplished in an
aesthetically compatible manner and shall comply with all restrictions or
performance standards applicable to the principal uses.
B.   Multi-family residential buildings shall be allowed as standalone
buildings in close proximity to existing employment and commercial areas,
(generally meaning within acceptable walking distance), only when three of the
four properties (excluding roadways) bordering the multi-family property have
already been developed with office and/or commercial use buildings and when
compliant with all performance standards specified within this chapter. The
total amount of multi-family residential use within a PCP Zoning District shall
be secondary to the amount of commercial and office use within the PCP zoned
area.
C.   Any retail commercial use shall be prohibited, except as provided in
subsection A of this section.
D.   Any enterprise, regardless of professional-commerce category, which with
the exception of signage cannot wholly enclose its functions within the
principal structures or otherwise effectively conceal its functions from public
observation, shall be prohibited except as otherwise identified in this title.
(Ord. 2333, 12-26-2018; amd. Ord. 2570, 7-5-2023)
9-11-3: PERFORMANCE STANDARDS:
All uses to be permitted within the PCP District shall comply in total with the
following performance standards:
A.   The general manner in which any use is accomplished shall demonstrate good
faith in the doctrines endorsing responsible recognition of neighbors' rights,
coordination of neighborhood efforts and compatibility of neighborhood
elements. (Ord. 430, 8-11-1969)
B.   The principle of spacious separation and adaptation of the manmade
elements to be harmonious with the natural environment shall dominate the
central design theme of the site and structural planning. To accomplish this
objective, the following standards shall be considered as minimum acceptable
standards:
1.   The total ground area devoted to open space for natural landscape and
landscape beautification shall be not less than thirty five percent (35%) of
the total land area within the immediate site under ownership and
consideration. Such open space shall be free of all drives, parking areas,
structures, buildings, etc., except for those walkways, monuments, ornamental
structures, etc., considered to be necessary but essential to the central
landscape theme.
2.   Pedestrian pathways to facilitate residents' movement from residential
buildings to and between offices, retail, recreational, and commercial areas
shall be provided. (Ord. 2333, 12-26-2018)
C.   Parking areas, loading ramps, utility areas, etc., shall be effectively
screened from observation and visibility by normal traffic using all public
thoroughfares within one thousand feet (1,000') of such area's immediate
perimeter or boundary. Screening shall be accomplished through the design
incorporation of landscaping such as planting screens using substantially
mature trees and shrubs which have year-round effectiveness; topography such as
the natural or manmade grade differences with sight restrictions similar to a
hillside; structural additions such as permanent walls or other equally
permanent and effective screening innovations. Any one or combination of
screening methods may be used providing, however, the net result shall be
complementary to the central theme of the overall aesthetic character as well
as effectively accomplish the concealment of the area in question.
D.   While it is not the purpose of this chapter to dictate or specify building
materials and structural standards, the importance of material strength and
permanency in their proportional relationship to the central aesthetic
character shall be recognized and the principle of structural strength and
permanency shall dominate the structural materials and components. This
principle shall not be construed to prevent the use of material innovation nor
progressive structural design; however, it shall recognize the strength of
stone as compared to the frailty of paper mache, the permanency of brick as
compared to constant maintenance of wood veneer, the strength of concrete and
steel as compared to the frailty of light sheet metal, etc.
E.   Complete abatement or elimination of all generally offensive or obnoxious
characteristics such as odors, gases, noise, vibration, pollution of air or
water or soil, excessive and unnatural lighting intensity, unusual human
activity, hazardous activity, etc., which may be detrimental to the general
welfare of this community, shall be accomplished. The standard for compliance
with this paragraph shall be as follows:
1.   Fire Hazard: The use shall not include any activity involving the use or
storage of flammable or explosive material unless protected by adequate
firefighting and fire suppression equipment and by such safety devices as are
normally used in the handling of any such material.
2.   Noise: At the lot or property line, the maximum sound pressure level
radiated in each standard octave band by any use or facility (other than
transportation facilities or temporary construction work) shall not exceed the
values for octave bands lying within the several frequency limits given in
table I of this section, after applying the correction shown in
table II of this section. The sound pressure level shall be measured with a
sound level meter and associated octave band analyzer conforming to standards
prescribed by the American Standards Association. (American Standard Sound
Level Meters for Measurement of Noise and Other Sounds, 224.3-1944, American
Standards Association, Inc., New York, NY, and American Standard Specifications
for an Octave-Band Filter Set for the Analysis of Noise and Other Sounds,
Z24.10-1953, American Standards Association, Inc., New York, NY, shall be
used.)
TABLE I
 
Frequency Range Containing Octave Bands In Octave Band Sound Pressure Level In
Cycles Per Second                          Decibels re .0002 dynes/cm2
20 - 300                                   60
300 - 2400                                 40
Above 2400                                 30
 
If the noise is not smooth and continuous and is not radiated between the hours
of ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) A.M., one or more of the
corrections in
table II of this section shall be applied to the octave band levels given in
table I of this section.
TABLE II
Type Of Location Of Operation Or Character Of Noise Correction In Decibels
Type Of Location Of Operation Or Character Of Noise     Correction In Decibels
a.   Daytime operation only                          Plus 5
b.   Noise source operated less than:
20% of any 1-hour period                                Plus 5
5% of any 1-hour period                                 Plus 10
(apply 1 of these corrections only)
c.   Noise of impulsive character, such as hammering Minus 5
d.   Noise of periodic character, such as humming or Minus 5
screeching
 
3.   Smoke: No emission shall be permitted at any point from any chimney or
otherwise of visible grey smoke of a shade equal to or darker than no. 2 on the
Power's Micro-Ringelmann Chart published by the McGraw-Hill Publishing Company,
Inc., and copyright 1954 (being a direct facsimile reduction or a standard
Ringelmann Chart as issued by the United States Bureau of Mines) except that
visible grey smoke of a shade equal to no. 3 on said chart may be emitted to
four (4) minutes in any thirty (30) minute period of time.
4.   Odors: No emission shall be permitted or odorous gases or other odorous
matter in such quantities as to be readily detectable when diluted in the ratio
of one volume of odorous air to four (4) volumes of clean air, at the lot line.
There is hereby established as a guide in determining such quantities of
offensive odors, table III, "Odor Thresholds" in chapter 5, "Air Pollution
Abatement Manual", copyright 1951 by Manufacturing Chemists' Association, Inc.,
Washington, D.C.
5.   Fly Ash, Dust, Fumes, Vapors, Gases And Other Forms Of Air Pollution: No
emission shall be permitted which can cause any damage to health, animals,
vegetation or other forms of property, or which can cause any excessive soiling
at any point at or beyond the property line. No emission shall be permitted in
excess of the standards specified in table I, chapter 5, "Industrial Hygiene
Standards, Maximum Allowable Concentrations", of the "Air Pollution Abatement
Manual", copyright 1951 by the Manufacturing Chemists' Association, Inc.,
Washington, D.C. In no event shall any emission, from any chimney or otherwise,
or any solid or liquid particles in concentrations, exceed 0.3 grains per cubic
foot of the conveying gas at any point. For measurement of the amount of
particles in gases resulting from combustion, standard corrections shall be
applied to a stack temperature of five hundred degrees Fahrenheit (500°F) and
fifty percent (50%) excess air.
6.   Vibration: The use shall not include vibration which is discernible
without instruments on any adjoining lot or property.
7.   Glare: The use shall not involve any direct or reflected glare which is
visible from any adjoining lot or property.
8.   Traffic Hazard: The use shall not involve any activity substantially
increasing the movement of traffic on public streets unless procedures are
instituted to limit traffic hazards and congestion.
9.   Overtax Public Utilities And Facilities: The use shall not involve any
activity substantially increasing the burden on any public utilities or
facilities, unless provision is made for any necessary adjustments.
10.   Character Of Neighborhood: The use shall not involve any activity not in
character with the majority of the uses in the neighborhood unless by design,
setback, nature of operation, and other devices the character of the
neighborhood will be maintained.
11.   General Welfare Of The Community: The use shall not involve any activity
which adversely affects the general welfare of the community.
F.   The need for private enterprise to visually pronounce their presence
through the use of nameplates, placards, monuments or signs is herein
acknowledged. However, such signing shall be in good taste and in good keeping
with the central aesthetic theme; sign materials shall be permanent or long
lasting in quality with the use of two-dimensional wall painted signs
prohibited; lighting of signs shall be nonobtrusive with backlighting or other
methods of indirect lighting encouraged; and profusion of conflicting or
contrasting signs shall be prohibited1. See chapter 18 of this title.1.
The number of individual signs shall not exceed one sign per property entrance-
exit point and one sign per principal building entrance-exit point. Such signs
shall be limited to the immediate vicinity of the entrance-exit point and shall
not be cumulative in number for locations other than the individual entrance-
exit points.
The size and shape of signs shall not prevent the use of registered trademarks.
However, in no instance shall a sign of such size, shape or design be permitted
which overwhelms the central scene. (Ord. 430, 8-11-1969)
9-11-4: HEIGHT REGULATIONS:
Unless provided elsewhere within this title or defined within a planned unit
development (PUD) or specific plan ordinance (ZCSP), height regulations in the
PCP District shall be as designated in chapter 7, "Setback And Bulk Density
Regulations", of this title. In addition, no building or structure shall be
constructed to a height which may create an air traffic hazard to the approach
or departure of an existing airport within a fifteen (15) mile radius of the
building or structure. (Ord. 2333, 12-26-2018)
9-11-5: OFF-STREET PARKING:
See chapter 15 of this title. (Ord. 430, 8-11-1969; amd. Ord. 2297, 4-30-2018)
9-11-6: RESERVED:
Reserved by Ord. 2570, 7-5-2023.
9-11-7: BULK REGULATIONS:
A.   Unless provided elsewhere within this title or defined within a planned
unit development (PUD) or specific plan ordinance (ZCSP), bulk regulations for
the development of office and commercial use buildings shall abide by the
minimum requirements specified in chapter 7 of this title.
B.   Unless provided elsewhere within this title or defined within a planned
unit development (PUD) or specific plan ordinance (ZCSP), bulk regulations for
the development of standalone multi-family residential use buildings shall
abide by the following minimum requirements:
1.   Minimum lot area shall be sixty thousand (60,000) square feet.
2.   Principal and accessory building setbacks shall be as follows:
a.   Front yard = fifty feet (50').
b.   Rear yard = fifty feet (50').
c.   Side yard = fifty feet (50').
3.   Minimum lot width = one hundred fifty feet (150').
4.   Minimum street frontage on one frontage = one hundred fifty feet (150').
5.   Minimum separation between principal buildings = thirty feet (30');
buildings over three (3) stories in height shall provide an additional ten feet
(10') of building separation.
6.   Minimum separation between accessory buildings = twenty feet (20');
buildings over three (3) stories in height shall provide an additional ten feet
(10') of building separation.
7.   Maximum building height = sixty feet (60'); an additional twelve feet
(12') of height shall be allowed for each additional ten feet (10') of building
setback. (Ord. 2333, 12-26-2018)
CHAPTER 12
RESERVED
(Ord. 2340, 1-21-2019)
CHAPTER 13
AIRPORT HAZARD AND HEIGHT (OVERLAY) ZONES
SECTION:
9-13-1: Purpose
9-13-2: Airport Hazard and Height (Overlay) Zones and Their Airspace Height
Limitations
9-13-3: Use Restrictions
9-13-4: Lighting
9-13-5: Variances
9-13-6: Administration
9-13-7: Conflicting Regulations
9-13-1: PURPOSE:
These regulations are adopted pursuant to the authority conferred on the City
Council by section 329.3 Code of Iowa and pursuant to section 414.1 Code of
Iowa. The prevention of the creation or establishment of airport, mitigation or
marking and lighting of existing airport hazards are public purposes and it is
necessary in the interest of the public health, public safety and general
welfare that creation of airport hazards be prevented. (Ord. 652, 4-14-80)
9-13-2: AIRPORT HAZARD AND HEIGHT (OVERLAY) ZONES AND THEIR AIRSPACE HEIGHT
LIMITATIONS:
In order to carry out the provisions of this Chapter, there are hereby created
and established certain zones which are depicted on the Airport Hazard and
Height (Overlay) Zoning Map. A structure located in more than one zone of the
following zones is considered to be only in the zone with the more restrictive
height limitation. The various zones are hereby established and defined as
follows:
A.   "HZ" - Horizontal Zone (Overlay): Within the Horizontal Zone no structure
shall exceed the elevation of an imaginary "horizontal surface" one hundred
fifty feet (150') above the established airport elevation of nine hundred fifty
eight feet (958') MSL. The boundaries of the Horizontal Zone of the Des Moines
Municipal Airport which affects West Des Moines is constructed by swinging an
arc of ten thousand feet (10,000') radii from the center of the primary surface
of Runway 12L, 30R. (See Exhibit "A" attached to Ordinance 652 and by reference
made a part of this Chapter.)
B.   "CZ" - Conical Zone (Overlay): Within the Conical Zone no structure shall
exceed the elevation of an imaginary "conical surface" which extends outward
and upward at a slope of twenty to one (20:1) from the periphery of the
horizontal surface. The Conical Zone extends outward laterally from the
Horizontal Zone for a distance of four thousand feet (4,000').
C.   "AZ" - Approach Zone (Overlay): Within the Approach Zone no structure
shall exceed the elevation of an imaginary "approach surface" longitudinally
centered on the extended runway center line and extending outward and upward
from the end of the primary surface of runways 12L, 30R. The inner edge of this
approach surface is one thousand feet (1,000') wide and the outer edge of the
approach surface extends for a horizontal distance of ten thousand feet
(10,000') at a slope of fifty to one (50:1) and then twelve thousand feet
(12,000') at a slope of forty to one (40:1), and then restricted to five
hundred feet (500') above the airport elevation for twenty eight thousand feet
(28,000'). (See Exhibit "A" attached to Ordinance 652 and by reference made a
part of this Chapter.)
D.   "TZ" - Transitional Zone (Overlay): Within the Transitional Zone no
structure shall exceed the elevation of an imaginary "transitional surface"
which extends outward and upward at a slope of seven to one (7:1) from the
sides of the approach surface for those portions of the approach surface which
project outward through and beyond the limits of the conical surface. The
Transitional Zone under these transitional surfaces extend a distance of five
thousand feet (5,000') horizontally outward from the approach zone and at right
angles to the runway center line. (See Exhibit "A" attached to Ordinance 652
and by reference made a part of this Chapter.) (Ord. 652, 4-14-80)
9-13-3: USE RESTRICTIONS:
No use may be made of land or water within West Des Moines in such a manner as
to interfere with the operation of any airborne aircraft. The following special
requirements shall apply to each permitted use:
A.   All lights or illumination used in conjunction with street, parking, signs
or use of land and structures shall be arranged and operated in such a manner
that is not misleading or dangerous to aircraft operating from the Des Moines
Municipal Airport or in the vicinity thereof.
B.   No operations from any use shall produce smoke, glare or other visual
hazards which are sufficient to endanger aircraft operating from the airport or
in the vicinity thereof. When the Aviation Director believes such a hazard may
exist, a determination shall be obtained from the FAA as to the existence of
such a hazard.
C.   No operations from any use in West Des Moines shall produce electronic
interference with navigation signals or radio communication between the airport
and aircraft. (Ord. 652, 4-14-80)
9-13-4: LIGHTING:
A.   The owner of any structure over two hundred feet (200') above ground level
must install on the structure lighting in accordance with FAA Advisory Circular
70-7460-1D and amendments. Additionally, any structure, constructed after the
effective date hereof and exceeding nine hundred forty nine feet (949') above
ground level, must install on that structure high intensity white obstruction
lights in accordance with chapter 6 of FAA Advisory Circular 7460-1D and
amendments.
B.   Any variance granted as related to subsection A above may be so
conditioned as to require the grantee/owner of the structures or growth in
question at their expense to install, operate and maintain such markers or
lights as may be necessary to indicate to pilots the presence of an airport
hazard. (Ord. 652, 4-14-80)
9-13-5:VARIANCES:
Any person desiring to erect or increase the height of any structure, or to
permit the growth of any tree, or otherwise use his property in violation of
any sections of this Chapter, may apply to the Board of Adjustment for a
variance from such regulations. No application for a variance to the
requirements of this Chapter may be considered by the Board of Adjustment
unless a copy of the application has been submitted to the Des Moines Municipal
Airport Aviation Director for his opinion as to the aeronautical effects of
such a variance. If the Aviation Director responds to the Board of Adjustment
in favor of the variance, or if he does not respond within fifteen (15) days
from receipt of the copy of the application, then the Board shall make its
decision to grant or deny the variance based upon a preponderance of the
evidence. If the Aviation Director responds in opposition to the variance
within fifteen (15) days from receipt of the application, then the Board shall
grant the variance only if clear and convincing evidence outweighs the opinion
of the Aviation Director. (Ord. 652, 4-14-80)
9-13-6: ADMINISTRATION:
The City Building Inspector shall have the duty to administer the regulations
prescribed in this Chapter. (Ord. 652, 4-14-80)
9-13-7: CONFLICTING REGULATIONS:
Where there exists a conflict between any of the regulations or limitations
prescribed in this Chapter and any other regulations applicable to the same
area, whether the conflict be with respect to height of structures, the use of
land, or any other matter, the more stringent limitation or requirement shall
govern and prevail. (Ord. 652, 4-14-80)
CHAPTER 14
ACCESSORY STRUCTURES
SECTION:
9-14-1: Title
9-14-2: Purpose And Scope
9-14-3: Interpretations
9-14-4: Conflicting Regulations
9-14-5: General Provisions
9-14-6: Accessory Buildings
9-14-7: Bus Stop Shelters
9-14-8: Drive-Up And Freestanding Automated Teller Machines (ATM)
9-14-9: Fuel Pump Islands And Island Canopies
9-14-10: Swimming Pools
9-14-11: Fences
9-14-12: Walls
9-14-13: Small Wind Energy Conversion Systems
9-14-14: Solar Energy Systems
9-14-15: Flagpoles
9-14-16: Variances
9-14-1: TITLE:
This chapter shall be known and may be cited and referred to as the WEST DES
MOINES ACCESSORY STRUCTURES ORDINANCE. (Ord. 1354, 3-22-1999)
9-14-2: PURPOSE AND SCOPE:
The purpose of this chapter is to provide standards for the placement and
construction of accessory structures and buildings for the conservation and
protection of property; the assurance of safety, security, and privacy; and the
improvement of the visual environment, including the provision of an orderly
appearance in keeping with neighborhood character; and to facilitate the
implementation and operation of a use within a parcel. (Ord. 1354, 3-22-1999;
amd. Ord. 2540, 9-19-2022)
9-14-3: INTERPRETATIONS:
Where any accessory structure or building is not specifically identified in
this chapter, the Director of Development Services shall review the accessory
structure or building when requested to do so and based on the characteristics
of the proposed accessory structure or building, determine the appropriate
standards to regulate said accessory structure or building.
Should any aggrieved individual or firm wish to appeal the decision of the
Director, a written request, along with the appropriate fee, shall be received
and stamped filed by the Development Services Department within a period of ten
(10) business days following the Director's decision. Within thirty (30) days
of receiving such a request, the Director shall schedule a hearing before the
Board of Adjustment to review and render a decision on said appeal. The
decision of the Board of Adjustment is appealable to the District Court. (Ord.
1354, 3-22-1999; amd. Ord. 2527, 7-5-2022; Ord. 2540, 9-19-2022)
9-14-4: CONFLICTING REGULATIONS:
Where there exists a conflict between any of the regulations or limitations
prescribed in this chapter and any other regulations applicable to the same
area, the more stringent limitation or requirement shall govern and prevail.
(Ord. 1354, 3-22-1999)
9-14-5: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
The following provisions shall apply to all accessory structures or buildings
located in any zoning district. Specific requirements related to a particular
use and accessory structures or buildings to support a use may be outlined
elsewhere in this title.
A.   Permits: It shall be unlawful for any person to construct, alter, or
relocate any accessory structure or building within the City without first
obtaining the appropriate permits as required by this Code.
B.   Types: Accessory structure and building types include, but are not limited
to the structures and buildings as outlined in
table 14.1 of this subsection. This table applies only when the purpose of the
structure, equipment or building is considered accessory to the primary use
permitted on the property.
TABLE 14.1
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE OR BUILDING TYPES
Agricultural or animal keeping:          
                                        See chapter 7 of this title for setback
                                        and bulk density regulations for
Greenhouse, hoop house (temporary)      accessory structures
                                        See section
                                         9-14-6 of this chapter for accessory
                                        building regulations
                                        See ‘Notes’ with
                                        9-5-8  C. Table 5.2 and
Structures or buildings for animal      9-6-6  C. Table 6.1
keeping                                 See section
                                        9-14-6 of this chapter for accessory
                                        building regulations pertaining to dog
                                        runs, dog pens and housing
Communication equipment and structures:  
All elements associated with communication towers are considered principal
structures. See section
9-10-4 of this title for specific use and screening regulations related to
communication towers. See chapter 7 of this title for setback and bulk density
regulations for principal structures
Display:                                 
Flag poles                              See section
                                        9-14-15 of this chapter
                                        See section
Scoreboards                             9-10-4 of this title for specific use
                                        regulations related to recreational
                                        facilities
Energy generating systems:               
Small wind energy conversion systems    See section
                                        9-14-13 of this chapter
                                        See section
                                         9-14-14 of this chapter
                                        See section
                                        9-10-4 of this title for specific use
Solar energy systems - ground and       regulations related to screening of
building mounted                        ground mounted solar energy systems
                                        See chapter 7 of this title for setback
                                        and bulk density regulations for
                                        accessory structures related to ground
                                        mounted solar energy systems
Fences and walls:                        
                                        See section
                                        9-14-11 of this chapter for fence and
                                        wall standards
Fences or walls                         See chapter 19 of this title for fence
                                        and wall provisions related to
                                        landscaping and screening
                                        See Chapter 10 for fence provisions
                                        related to Recreational Facilities
                                        See section
                                        9-14-12 of this chapter for retaining
                                        wall standards
Retaining walls                         All retaining walls must meet the
                                        standards as outlined in the Building
                                        Code for structural design and fall
                                        protection
Operation and maintenance:               
                                        See section
                                         9-10-4 of this title for specific use
Electrical or mechanical equipment and  regulations
related enclosure or shed - does not    See chapter 7 of this title for setback
include equipment related to            and bulk density regulations for
communication towers or public          accessory structures
utilities                               See section
                                        9-14-6 of this chapter for accessory
                                        building regulations
                                        See chapter 7 of this title for setback
                                        and bulk density regulations for
Laundry (for resident use only as part  accessory structures
of a multi-family use)                  See section
                                        9-14-6 of this chapter for accessory
                                        building regulations
                                        See chapter 7 of this title for setback
                                        and bulk density regulations for
Maintenance shed or garage              accessory structures
                                        See section
                                        9-14-6 of this chapter for accessory
                                        building regulations
                                        See subsection
                                        9-14-11C7 of this chapter for
                                        provisions related to screening
Screen fence or wall                    mechanical equipment
                                        See chapter 19 of this title for fence
                                        and wall provisions related to
                                        landscaping and screening
                                        See section
Trash enclosures                        9-10-4 of this title for specific use
                                        regulations related to screening of
                                        trash receptacles
Outdoor use areas:                       
                                        See chapter 7 of this title for setback
                                        and bulk density regulations for
Arbor, trellis, pergola or canopy       accessory structures
                                        See section
                                        9-14-6 of this chapter for accessory
                                        building regulations
                                        See chapter 7 of this title for setback
Decks                                   and bulk density regulations for
                                        accessory structures
                                        See chapter 7 of this title for setback
Porches                                 and bulk density regulations for
                                        accessory structures
                                        See chapter 7 of this title for setback
                                        and bulk density regulations for
Screen rooms, screen porches            accessory structures
                                        See section
                                        9-14-6 of this chapter for accessory
                                        building regulations
                                        See section
                                        9-14-7 of this chapter for bus stop
                                        shelter requirements
                                        See chapter 7 of this title for setback
Shelters (bus stop, picnic)             and bulk density regulations for all
                                        other shelters
                                        See section
                                        9-14-6 of this chapter for accessory
                                        building regulations
                                        See chapter 7 of this title for setback
                                        and bulk density regulations for
Sunrooms                                accessory structures
                                        See section
                                        9-14-6 of this chapter for accessory
                                        building requirements
Parking structures:                      
Parking structures, parking ramps and building integrated parking may be
considered accessory to the primary use, however due to the large building mass
of these structures they must meet the principal structure setbacks designated
for the property. See chapter 7 of this title for setback and bulk density
regulations for principal structures
Recreation within parcels developed with single-family and medium-density
dwellings:
                                        Clubhouse or recreation buildings may
                                        be considered accessory to the primary
                                        use, however due to the large building
Clubhouse or recreation building (for   mass of these structures they must meet
resident use only as part of a multi-   the principal building setbacks
family use)                             designated for the property
                                        See chapter 7 of this title for setback
                                        and bulk density regulations for
                                        principal buildings
                                        See chapter 7 of this title for setback
                                        and bulk density regulations for
Pool house                              accessory structures
                                        See section
                                        9-14-6 of this chapter for accessory
                                        building regulations
                                        See chapter 7 of this title for setback
                                        and bulk density regulations for
Recreation courts with fence enclosures accessory structures
                                        See section
                                        9-14-11 of this chapter for fence
                                        standards
                                        See section
Swimming pool, spa                      9-14-10 of this chapter for swimming
                                        pool regulations
Recreation within non-residentially and high density residential zoned parcels:
Buildings for concessions, restrooms,   See Chapter 10 for setback and bulk
ticket-booths, shelters, maintenance,   density regulations for accessory
storage, etc.                           structures
Fence enclosures for sport courts,      See Chapter 10 for fence provisions
fields, ranges, and swimming pools      related to Recreational Facilities
Lighting for sport courts, fields, and  See Chapter 10 for provisions when
ranges                                  related to Recreational Facilities
Scoreboards                             See Chapter 10 for provisions when
                                        related to Recreational Facilities
Swimming pool                           See Section 10 of this Chapter for
                                        swimming pool regulations
Storage structures:                      
Hoop houses                             Not allowed for storage purposes
                                        See chapter 7 of this title for setback
                                        and bulk density regulations for
Motor vehicle storage (garages and      accessory structures
carports)                               See section
                                         9-14-6 of this chapter for accessory
                                        building regulations and specific
                                        requirements for carports
                                        See chapter 7 of this title for setback
                                        and bulk density regulations for
                                        accessory structures
Storage buildings and sheds             See section
                                        9-14- 6 of this chapter for accessory
                                        building regulations
                                        See Chapter 10 for provisions when
                                        related to Recreational Facilities
Transactional:                           
                                        See section
ATMs and related canopy                 9-14-8 of this chapter for ATM
                                        requirements
                                        See section
Fuel canister dispensing unit           9-10-4 of this title for specific use
                                        regulations for fuel supply systems
                                        See section
                                        9-14-9 of this chapter for fuel pump
Fuel pump, vehicle charging station and canopy requirements
related canopy                          See section
                                        9-10-4 of this title for specific use
                                        regulations for fuel supply systems
 
C.   Vision Clearance: With regard to visibility, the following restrictions
shall apply:
1.   Intersections: No accessory structure shall be located which may obstruct
vision between a height of thirty inches (30") and ten feet (10') on any corner
lot within a vision triangle of twenty five feet (25') formed by intersecting
street right-of-way lines. (See figure #1 of this section.)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5dd626f68508237cd281a645678e92f34786b23f/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2572.gif]
2.   Driveways: No accessory structure shall be located which may obstruct
vision between a height of thirty inches (30") and ten feet (10') on any corner
lot within a vision triangle of fifteen feet (15') formed by an intersecting
driveway edge (including driveways on adjacent properties) and street right-
of-way line. (See figure #2 of this section.)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5dd626f68508237cd281a645678e92f34786b23f/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2574.gif]
3.   Undeveloped Property: No accessory structure shall be located which may
obstruct vision between a height of thirty inches (30") and ten feet (10') on
any corner lot within a vision triangle of fifteen feet (15') formed by a
street right-of-way line and property line adjoining an undeveloped property.
(See figure #3 of this section.)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5dd626f68508237cd281a645678e92f34786b23f/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2576.gif]
At such time that the adjoining undeveloped property is developed,
modifications which are in compliance with the above provisions may be allowed,
subject to approval by the building official.
D.   Buffer Parks And Buffer Park Easements: No accessory structure may be
allowed to be constructed, built or located within a buffer park or buffer park
easement, unless otherwise noted in this title.
E.   Unsafe And Unlawful Accessory Structures:
1.   Unsafe Accessory Structures: Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection
9-14-11-A3 of this chapter, if the city finds that any accessory structure
regulated herein is unsafe, unsecured, or a hazard to the public, notice shall
be promptly given to the permittee thereof or to the owner of the premises on
which the accessory structure is located. If the permittee or owner fails to
remove or alter the structure so as to comply with the standards indicated
within the notice, such accessory structure may be removed or altered by the
city at the expense of the permittee or owner of the property upon which it is
located.
2.   Unlawful Accessory Structures: If the city finds that any accessory
structure regulated herein has been constructed in violation of the provisions
of this chapter, they shall promptly give notice to the owner of the premises
on which the accessory structure is located. If the owner fails to remove or
alter the structure so as to comply with the standards identified within the
notice, such accessory structure may be removed or altered by the city at the
expense of the owner of the property upon which it is located. (Ord. 1354, 3-
22-1999; amd. Ord. 2248, 9-18-2017; Ord. 2454, 12-7-2020; Ord. 2540, 9-19-2022;
Ord. 2570, 7-5-2023)
9-14-6: ACCESSORY BUILDINGS:
A.   Accessory buildings shall only be allowed in conjunction with a principal
structure, and primary use, to which it relates under the same terms and
conditions as the principal structure, and primary use, in any zoning district
unless otherwise noted in this title.
B.   The design of accessory buildings shall be in keeping with the character
of the zoning district they are located within, with comparable architectural
design, materials, and details to the principal structure, including compatible
roof slope, overhangs, etc. Any metal cladding shall be prefinished and have
the appearance of the materials used on the primary building, including
orienting horizontally to match typical residential siding. Galvanized metal is
prohibited as the exterior finish material.
C.    Setbacks for accessory buildings shall comply with all requirements
provided elsewhere in this title, unless noted otherwise, including, but not
limited, to Chapter 7, Setback and Bulk Density Regulations.
1.   Accessory buildings, constructed as part of the principal building, or
connected to the principal building by a breezeway or similar structure or
constructed within five feet (5') or less of the principal structure, shall be
considered an attached accessory building and shall meet the primary building
setbacks.
2.   Attached accessory buildings that include a roof (such as a covered porch,
screen room, sunroom, garage, and carport) will be considered part of the
primary building and must meet building setbacks as provided elsewhere in this
title, including Chapter 7 of this title.
3.   On corner lots, except in situations in which the secondary frontage meets
the definition of a street side yard or as noted otherwise, detached accessory
buildings shall meet the front yard along each street frontage as required for
the principal structure.
4.   Driveway and parking areas that lead to accessory buildings, which are
utilized by motorized vehicles licensed for use on public roadways, shall be
concrete, asphalt, or a similar paved surface. New gravel driveways and parking
areas are prohibited.
5.   Except for single family zoned or used properties that access a side-load
garage from an alley, a parking area that measures a minimum of twenty-five
feet (25') in length shall be provided from the street right-of-way line, or
curb of a private roadway, or interior edge of a sidewalk or trail, whichever
is closer to the building façade and/or garage entry. This setback shall be
increased accordingly in length in situations in which the typical vehicles or
equipment parked adjacent to the building exceed twenty-five feet (25'). A
vehicle parked adjacent to a building shall not extend into and impede either
vehicle or pedestrian pathways. This setback minimum shall not preclude other
yard setback or easement requirements.
6.   All light fixtures mounted on, or in proximity to, accessory buildings or
structures shall be downcast or shielded and located to eliminate glare and
spillover lighting beyond the property line.
7.   In non-residential zoning districts, detached accessory building(s) may
only be located in a front yard or placed forward of the front plane of the
principal building when the accessory building is consistent in design with an
adjacent principal structure on the subject property and visually present as a
primary structure. These structures shall emulate the exterior architecture and
characteristics of buildings in the specific district in which the facility is
located, including four-sided design, materials and colors. One (1) entrance
and one (1) exit overhead door shall be allowed. Whenever possible, these
features shall not be located on the façade(s) facing a roadway and/or which
face residentially zoned or developed property, especially single-family
dwellings.
8.   Single-family Residential zoning districts:
a.   Detached accessory buildings may not be located in a front yard or forward
of the main plane of the principal residential dwelling. Street side yards are
not considered a front yard.
b.   Detached accessory buildings may occupy up to ten percent (10%) of the
total lot area in which it is located, except, in RS, R-1, SF-VJ, and SF-CR
Zoning Districts and for religious, institutional, or civic uses within
residential districts, the square footage for an accessory building, or the
combined square footage of all detached accessory buildings on the property,
shall not exceed one thousand (1,000) square feet.
c.   When the exterior wall parallel to the property line of a detached
accessory buildings exceeds eight and one-half feet (8 ½’) in height, including
the foundation or retaining wall, or exceeds twenty-four feet (24') in length,
that wall shall be set back from the property line a distance equal to the
total exterior wall height. This setback minimum shall not preclude other yard
setback or easement requirements.
d.   Exterior walls of detached accessory buildings shall not exceed twelve
feet (12') in height. The wall height shall be measured from existing grade,
and the height of retaining walls or the foundation shall be included in the
height measurement.
e.   The height of detached accessory buildings shall be measured from the
maximum roof peak. The height of retaining walls or the foundation shall be
included in the height measurement.
f.   Existing detached garages with a side or rear yard setback of at least
three feet (3'), which meet all of the other provisions of this section, may be
repaired or reconstructed with the same setback requirements; however, any
additions must meet the current setback requirements.
g.   When the vehicle entrance for a garage faces (is parallel to) an alley,
the setback from the alley shall be a minimum of twenty feet (20').
h.   Carport(s): A carport is considered an accessory building and shall meet
the requirements for accessory structures set elsewhere in this title. Carports
are not considered enclosed garage space for residential uses.
i.   A carport cannot exceed one story in height and must be entirely open on
two (2) or more sides except for structural supports.
ii.   No enclosed use may be located above a carport.
iii.   No other items other than a motor vehicle may be kept in the carport
unless those items are kept in an enclosed section of the carport and are not
visible from a roadway or adjoining property.
iv.   The design of a carport shall be in keeping with the character of the
zoning district it is located in, with comparable architectural design,
materials and details to the principal structure, including roof slope,
overhangs, etc. Fabric materials including tarps are not allowed as a wall or
roof material.
v.   Exposed metal structure is prohibited. Any metal cladding shall be
prefinished and have the appearance of the materials used on the primary
building, including orienting metal façade materials horizontally consistent
with typical residential siding materials.
i.   The following accessory structures: dog runs, dog pens and housing, play
sheds, play structures, swing sets, and similar, shall abide by the setback and
height provisions for detached accessory buildings. (Ord. 2248, 9-18-2017; amd.
Ord. 2391, 12-2-2019; Ord. 2540, 9-19-2022; Ord. 2567, 6-5-2023; Ord. 2622, 8-
5-2024)
9-14-7: BUS STOP SHELTERS:
Bus stop shelters may be allowed in all districts subject to receiving approval
of a permitted conditional use permit, as defined elsewhere in this title, and
the following:
A.   One sign on each side of the bus shelter indicating that the shelter is a
bus stop and including the logo of the bus company is allowed up to ten inches
by twenty four inches (10" x 24") each in size.
B.   One (1) 2-sided display ad may be placed on the bus shelter, limited in
size to no larger than two feet by three feet (2' x 3').
C.   All bus stop shelters shall be located on private property and shall not
be located within any vision triangles or otherwise unnecessarily or unsafely
obstruct the flow of traffic, as determined by the City. Bus stop shelters
shall be set back a minimum of five feet (5') from side and rear property
lines, and shall have no minimum setback from the ultimate right-of-way.
D.   All shelter walls shall be predominantly translucent.
E.   Sidewalks shall be installed to connect the bus stop shelter to the street
and adjacent pedestrian walkways.
F.   Vandalism, decay, deterioration, or other damage to, unto, on, or around
the bus stop shelter shall be cleaned and/or repaired by the shelter owner
within forty eight (48) hours of notification by the City.
G.   A building permit is required for construction of any bus stop shelters.
H.   All power lines connected to a bus shelter must be buried underground.
(Ord. 1354, 3-22-1999)
9-14-8: DRIVE-UP AND FREESTANDING AUTOMATED TELLER MACHINES (ATM):
A.   Setbacks: Drive-up and freestanding automated teller machines (ATM) shall
be set back a minimum of twenty five feet (25') from the ultimate right-of-way,
except in PCP zoned areas, which shall be set back a minimum of thirty feet
(30') from the ultimate right-of-way.
B.   Signage: Any signage displayed on a drive-up or freestanding automated
teller machine (ATM) and the housing structure is subject to the requirements
of the West Des Moines sign ordinance.
C.   Construction: Drive-up and freestanding automated teller machines (ATM)
are subject to all other requirements related to the construction and operation
of automatic teller machines (ATM) elsewhere in this title. (Ord. 1354, 3-22-
1999)
9-14-9: FUEL PUMP ISLANDS AND ISLAND CANOPIES:
In the applicable zoning districts, the installation of fuel pump islands and
fuel pump island canopies may be allowed by the City Council following their
review and approval through the appropriate development review process as noted
in the commercial use matrix 1. See subsection
9-6-6C of this title. 1 of this title, if the petitioner meets the following
requirements:
A.   Fuel Pumps And Canopies Related To Ultimate Right-Of-Way Setbacks: All
fuel pump island canopies shall be set back a minimum of fifty feet (50') from
the ultimate right(s)-of-way line as measured to the extreme edge of the
canopy. Canopies need to meet the normal side yard and rear yard setbacks for
its respective zoning district as set elsewhere in this title under setback and
bulk density regulations 2. See chapter 7 of this title.2. Fuel pump canopies
in existence prior to the ordinance codified herein will not be made
nonconforming by this section.
B.   Height: No fuel pump island canopies shall exceed a maximum height of
twenty feet (20'), however, all fuel pump island canopies must provide a
minimum clearance of fourteen feet (14') to accommodate the overhead clearance
required for emergency vehicles.
C.   Signage: Any signage displayed on a fuel pump island or fuel pump island
canopy is subject to the requirements of the West Des Moines sign ordinance.
D.   Lighting: All light fixtures attached to a fuel pump island canopy must be
recessed into the canopy with flush mounted lenses and designed to illuminate
downward to eliminate glare and spillover lighting beyond the property line.
E.   Fuel Pumps: The following table shows the maximum number of fuel pumps
allowed per site by zoning district.
 
                                              RC CMC NC CVC SC VJC VJHB
Maximum number of fuel pumps allowed per site 12 8   6  6   12 4   4
 
Note: A "fuel pump" can supply fuel to not more than 2 vehicles at the same
time.
 
RC   Regional Commercial District      CMC Community Commercial District
NC   Neighborhood Commercial District  CVC Convenience Commercial District
SC   Support Commercial District       VJC Valley Junction Commercial District
VJHB Valley Junction Historic Business
     District
 
F.   Design standards for fuel pump island canopies are found in title 9,
"Zoning", chapter 10, "Performance Standards", section 4-A, "Specific Use
Regulations", subsection 29. (Ord. 1354, 3-22-1999; amd. Ord. 2112, 9-8-2015;
Ord. 2182, 11-14-2016; Ord. 2307, 6-11-2018; Ord. 2493, 10-4-2021)
9-14-10: SWIMMING POOLS:
A.   Setbacks: All swimming pools or spas shall maintain a minimum five foot
(5') setback from the side or rear property line and meet the front yard
setback as required for the specific zoning district. Setback and separation
distances are measured from the pool deck edge, or if there is no pool deck,
from the pool edge.
B.   Area Occupied: For purposes of calculating the total property or lot area
occupied by accessory buildings, the total water surface area of a swimming
pool shall not be included in the calculation.
C.   Exceptions: The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the
following:
1.   Any pond, lake, creek, or other natural occurring bodies of water.
2.   Any constructed body of water, similar in nature to a pond, lake, or
creek, created for stormwater detention, or other comparable uses, provided it
is approved as part of a development permit.
3.   Any body of water, not in an artificial container, including decorative
landscape pools not used for swimming, wading or similar recreational uses.
(Ord. 1354, 3-22-1999; amd. Ord. 2248, 9-18-2017)
9-14-11: FENCES:
The following standards shall apply to all fences and other similar structures
built for landscaping or screening purposes in any zoning district unless
otherwise provided for a specific zoning district:
A.   Fences:
1.   Materials Permitted; With the exception of temporary fences as provided
herein, and fences internal to a property around the perimeter of a garden or
animal enclosures, permanent fences shall comply with the following:
a.   Be constructed of customarily used materials such as, but not limited to:
wrought iron, aluminum, metal and wood as provided below, polyvinyl chloride
(PVC), composite and other similar materials that are durable and can be
installed in such a way as to provide a clean finished appearance. Chain-link
is permitted in Single Family Residential zoning districts, however, may not be
appropriate for all zoning districts and therefore will be reviewed on a case
by case basis.
(1)   Natural wood fences shall be constructed of treated lumber, cedar,
redwood, bamboo (not to include reed or bamboo grasses) or similar species that
are resistant to decay.
(2)   Welded wire and other metal mesh materials of an architectural grade or
which are of a thickness/gauge that does not easily bend, and which holds a
uniform shape, grid and/or pattern when vertical may be allowed with the proper
attachment and/or framing.
(3)   The use of chain-link fence must be installed to make a complete and
uniform fencing system utilizing industry standard round metal posts, top
rails, connectors, gates, or similar parts. Alternate materials to frame chain-
link to provide a clean, non-sagging appearance may be allowed with specific
city approval.
b.   All sides of fences easily visible from outside of the property upon which
they are located must be of an earth tone, neutral, or natural color such as
white, black, gray (silver), tan, or brown, unless otherwise specifically
approved by the City for a designated and apparent design theme.
c.   Single faced fences shall have the unfinished side (side with exposed
posts) facing toward the property on which the fence is erected.
2.   Materials Prohibited: Permanent fences are not to be constructed of or
include the following:
a.   Temporary construction or snow fencing.
b.   Metal wire or other mesh materials that are sold in rolls or can be folded
or rolled, which are traditionally used for the penning of animals and which
typically cannot be pulled taught without sag or sway. This should not be read
to prohibit the use of these materials for fencing for the purpose of garden or
animal enclosures interior to a property.
c.   Bright or fluorescent colors.
d.   Slats, strips or other materials intended to increase opacity attached to
or weaved through openings within a fence material, with the exception of sun
and/or wind screen material designed for and directly associated with a sports
or recreation facility, subject to the provisions of
9-10-4 A.21.
e.   Copy, pictures, images, lettering, logos, graphics, or artwork on any side
of a permanent fence visible at the ground level from outside of the property
upon which it is located, unless approved as a permitted sign.
f.   With the exception of barbed wire and electrical fences as provided
elsewhere in this Code, materials and the fence design may not such so as to
cause pain or injury to humans or animals.
3.   Fences for the protection of gardens or penning of animals in single
family zoning districts may be allowed interior to the site when setback a
minimum of five feet (5') from a side or rear property boundary. Fencing for
gardens and penning of animals shall not be allowed within the front yard of a
property.
4.   Temporary fences installed to provide site security and/or safety in
conjunction with construction work shall be allowed to be comprised of cloth
screening fabric and plastic snow fence type materials. Copy, pictures, images,
lettering, logos, graphics, or artwork shall be allowed in accordance with
Chapter 18: Signs, within this title. Unless otherwise approved by the City,
any such temporary fences shall be removed if construction ceases for a period
of six (6) months or upon issuance of an occupancy permit, including temporary
occupancy.
5.   Temporary fences comprised of snow fence material, moveable gates or
panels, barricades, railings, or other shall be allowed as part of an approved
special event or temporary use permit. Any such temporary fences shall be
removed from the site upon conclusion of the event.
6.   All fences shall be constructed in a sound and sturdy manner and shall be
maintained in an upright and non-sagging manner and in a good condition,
including the replacement of defective or missing parts, painting, and other
acts required for maintenance.
7.   Provisions for landscaping to soften the presence of the fence and provide
additional buffering or screening may be required and will be reviewed on a
case by case basis. Not applicable between individual single-family lots.
8.   Any fence that does not conform to this section, but is considered by the
Director of Development Services, or his/her designee, to satisfy the spirit
and intent of the ordinance may be approved at their discretion.
B.   Height and Setback Requirements:
1.   For the purposes of determining height and setback allowances:
a.   The front yard shall be considered that side of a lot that lies forward of
the main plane of the structure towards the street.
b.   The side yard shall be considered that portion of the lot beginning at the
rear lot line extending to a point formed by a line projected along the same
plane as the front plane of the structure to the nearest side lot line.
c.   The street side yard shall be the same as a side yard except that the side
borders a street instead of another private lot.
d.   The rear yard shall be considered to be that lot boundary generally
parallel to the rear plane of the structure.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5dd626f68508237cd281a645678e92f34786b23f/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4691.jpg]
2.    Unless minimum setback requirements are otherwise specified herein, or
specifically approved by the City Council, all fences may be located on the
property line or ultimate street right-of-way line, whichever is more
restrictive.
3.   Measuring Fence Height:
a.   The height of the fence shall be determined by a measurement from the
ground beneath the fence as follows:
(1)   On a street side yard, the total effective height above the finished
grade shall be measured on the side nearest the street. If a property or
premises is lower than an adjacent street, then the effective height of the
fence shall be determined by a measurement from the street grade at a ninety-
degree (90°) angle from the fence. Up to an additional two feet (2') of height
may be allowed to achieve an effective height of six feet (6'); however, the
total vertical measurement from the ground beneath the fence to the top of the
fence shall not exceed eight feet (8'). (See figure #4 of this section.)
(2).   In any other yard the allowable height shall be the vertical measurement
from the ground beneath the fence to the top of the fence.
Figure 4:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5dd626f68508237cd281a645678e92f34786b23f/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3126.png]
b.    The intentional implementation of earthen berming, retaining wall, or
raised planter for the sole purpose of achieving a height above that provided
herein shall not be allowed in Single Family Residential districts. Fences may
be located on top of retaining walls or raised planters in Single Family
Residential as long as the top of the fence as measured from the bottom of the
retaining wall or planter does not exceed eight feet (8') in total allowable
height in the Residential Estate district or six feet (6') in total allowable
height in all other Single Family Residential zoning districts.
4.   Fence Height and Required Setback:
a.   Upon issuance of a building permit, lawfully established legal non-
conforming fences along the street side yard which existed prior to 2000 (as
determined by aerial photographs, permit records, etc.) may be reconstructed/
replaced only once in its current location, except that modifications to
provide visual clearance, if necessary, must be made. Any subsequent
reconstruction/replacement at its current location shall be prohibited and must
meet the current setback requirements.
(1)   City staff shall record a copy of the building permit for the rebuild.
b.    All Districts, except as otherwise provided below in this section:
(1)   Visual clearance as provided and illustrated elsewhere in this chapter
shall be maintained at intersection of two (2) streets and at intersections of
a street and private driveway. Provision of visual clearance may require the
fence to be angled, reduced in height or of a design that allows visibility
through the fence at the corner.
(2)   The placement of a fence along the street side yard or rear lot line
adjacent to a street does not negate the property owner’s responsibility of
maintenance of the right of way (area between the fence and curb) or snow
removal from public sidewalk(s) adjacent to the property.
(3)   A fence, up to but not exceeding four feet (4') in allowable height may
be placed up to the property line in the front yard and a street side yard.
(4)   Fences up to but not exceeding the zoning district allowed height are
allowed up to the property line within the limits of side and rear yards not
adjacent to a street.
(5)   Except as provided in
9-14-11B.3.a.(1) herein, fences up to but not exceeding the zoning district
allowed height may be placed along the lot boundary adjacent to a street
(street side yard or rear yard) when the fence maintains a minimum setback from
the ultimate right-of-way of no less than fifteen feet (15'). However, on
existing properties zoned Single Family Residential where the dwelling is
located at a legal non-conforming side yard setback of less than fifteen feet
(15') from the ultimate right of way, a fence up to but not exceeding the
zoning district allowed height may be placed at the same plane as the dwelling,
but in no instance shall the fence be located closer than five feet (5') to the
lot line.
(6)   Double Frontage Lots: For the purposes of this section, the regulations
below relate only to placement of fences within the rear yard of a double
frontage lot.
(A)   On double frontage lots with a required landscape buffer (also see
9-19-8.E) with no plat restriction to the contrary:
i.   No fence shall be located within the buffer itself unless specifically
approved by the City Council.
ii.   A opaque or privacy fence up to but not exceeding the zoning district
allowed height compliant with this section (
9-14-11) may be located on the private side of the buffer (dwelling side).
iii.   An open fence up to but not exceeding the zoning district allowed height
and generally consistent with that provided in Chapter 19, Section 8, may be
located on the public side of the buffer (street side) with the approval of the
City Council. The City Council shall have the authority to approve an alternate
open fence design than that indicated in Chapter 19.
(B)   On double frontage lots without a required landscape buffer and no plat
restriction to the contrary:
i.   Except as provided in
9-14-11B.3.a.(1) herein, opaque or privacy fences up to but not exceeding the
zoning district allowed height may be placed in a rear yard and a street side
yard when the fence is located no less than fifteen feet (15') from the
ultimate right-of-way line. Open fences consistent with that provided in
Chapter 19, Section 8 for ‘double frontage lots with a buffer’ may be located
up to the ultimate right-of-way line by right.
ii.   An opaque or solid fence up to but not exceeding a maximum four-foot (4')
in height may be allowed up to the property line (fifteen-foot (15') setback
not required).
(7)   Footprint Lots: For the purposes of this section, the regulations below
relate to placement of fences within footprint lots only.
(A)   Fences for an individual dwelling shall not be placed in common areas or
encroach onto a neighboring footprint lot. Fences may be located in common
areas of the development for purposes that benefit the development (i.e., dog
parks, recreational areas, visual screening of negative elements).
(B)   No fence shall be placed forward of the front plane of the dwelling unit
and no fences regardless of height are allowed in the front yard.
(C)   Up to a six-foot (6') open fence which is of a design that is at least
50% open and generally consistent with that provided in Chapter 19, Section 8,
may be located up to the footprint lot boundary line of individual dwelling
lots. Fences may only be located within one side yard and the rear yard of a
lot.
(D)   Fenced yards within footprint lots shall include gates to allow for
emergency services access and maintenance.
(E)   Fences shall not be placed in public utility easements without the
approval of the city and shall not impeded storm water drainage paths.
(F)   Fence design, including color for individual footprint lots shall be
determined by the developer or owner’s association and shall be consistent
throughout the development.
(7)   Swimming Pool Enclosures: Regardless of if a pool has an operational
powered safety cover, barriers constructed for the purpose of enclosing
swimming pools are subject to the height requirements of section 9-14-11 of
this chapter, adopted building codes and Iowa Department of Public Health
regulations, as applicable.
c.   Unless otherwise provided elsewhere in this title, the following shall be
allowed in the specified zoning districts:
(1)    All Residential zoning districts except Residential Estate: Fences up to
but not exceeding six feet (6') in height are allowed in the side, including
street side and rear yard in accordance with setbacks as provided in this title
for the type of fence installed and compliant with all other regulations in
this Chapter.
(2)   Residential Estate (RE):
(A)   Fences up to but not exceeding eight feet (8') in height shall be allowed
within the limits of side, including street side and rear yards on lots that
exceed forty thousand q(40,000) square feet in size and when the fence is
constructed of decorative metal and provides seventy-five percent (75%)
openness for the full length of said fence. The openness percentage shall be
provided at the time of a fence permit application. The use of chain link for
this purpose shall be prohibited. Opaque or solid privacy fencing up to but not
exceeding six feet (6') in height shall be allowed in the side, including
street side and rear yards compliant with all other regulations in this
Chapter.
(B)   Woven wire and electrified fencing shall only be allowed at the property
line on side and rear yards to contain livestock or to protect crops and
plantings.
(3)   Industrial Districts:
(A)   Fences up to but not exceeding eight feet (8') in height are allowed
within the limits of side, including street side and rear yards.
(B)   The use of barbed wire or other no-climb barrier elements acceptable to
the city may be allowed as part of a site plan approval process, provided the
barbed wire or barrier is not located less than six feet (6') above the ground.
(C)   All outdoor storage yards shall be surrounded with an opaque enclosure up
to but not exceeding eight feet (8') in height.
(4)   Warehouse Retail District: Fences up to but not exceeding twelve feet
(12') in height are allowed within the limits of the side, including street
side and rear yards.
(5)   Agriculture/Open Space Districts (OS): Whether designated as such on the
zoning map or ‘unzoned’ but designated on the comprehensive plan land use map
as open space. Barbed wire, woven wire and electrified fencing may be allowed
at the property line to contain livestock or to protect crops and plantings.
C.   Overland Flowage Easements:
1.   Fences may encroach into an overland flowage easement provided measures
are taken to make certain that design and maintenance of the fence does not
impede or alter the flow path of water, cause siltation or debris buildup, etc.
2.   Solid fencing shall be elevated a minimum of six inches (6") above the
ground plane through the swale part of the easement to allow water flowage.
(See figure #5 of this section.)
3.   Fences which are not elevated at the base shall be of a design that is at
least seventy-five percent (75%) open to allow for water flow. Chain link shall
be allowed on single-family properties. Regular maintenance by the resident to
remove debris build-up shall be done to ensure the flow of water is not impeded
or water flow path altered.
Figure 5: Fences within Overland Flowage Easements
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5dd626f68508237cd281a645678e92f34786b23f/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3128.png]
D.   Other Regulations: Fences not normally allowed or a fence height above
what is permitted for the specific zoning district may be allowed as noted
below. Fence design and materials shall comply with the requirements otherwise
contained in this section.
1.   Additional fence height required by federal, state, or local regulations
shall be allowed to exceed the maximum fence height noted for the zoning
district up to the minimum height required per the applicable regulation.
2.   Additional fence height needed to protect the public health, safety, and
welfare shall be allowed to exceed the maximum fence height noted for the
zoning district upon demonstrating to the Development Services Director, or
designee, that the additional height is necessary to protect public safety.
Fence height will be allowed up to the maximum for that district plus up to
three (3) additional feet if the additional three feet (3') is no less than
eighty percent (80%) transparent above the allowed height. (Ord. 2464, 4-5-
2021; amd. Ord. 2493, 10-4-2021; Ord. 2540, 9-19-2022; Ord. 2548, 12-5-2022;
Ord. 2631, 9-16-2024)
9-14-12: WALLS:
The following standards shall apply to walls including free-standing walls,
retaining walls and screen walls in any zoning district unless otherwise
provided for a specific zoning district:
A.   Retaining Walls: Retaining walls shall be defined as a structure for
holding in place a mass of earth at the edge of a terrace or excavation and
shall comply with the following:
1.   Be constructed of materials such as brick, stone, textured concrete,
precast concrete, tile block, timbers, railroad ties, utility poles and other
wood materials. Hard materials are preferred over wood due to longevity and
potential for rot and decay of wood materials.
2.   Retaining walls shall be set back from the property line one foot (1') for
every one foot (1') of visible height, unless a written agreement on the height
and location of the retaining wall has been made with the adjoining property
owner(s) whose property the retaining wall is built near, said document is
filed with the applicable County and a copy of the recorded agreement provided
to the City.
3.   There shall be no height limit for retaining walls; however, no single
exposed wall face shall be greater than six feet (6') in height without
terraces to break up the wall expanse. A minimum one foot (1') of terrace shall
be provided for each two feet (2') of exposed wall height. In non-single-family
residential zoning districts, each terrace shall contain shrubs and ground
cover vegetation necessary to serve as a barrier to prevent falls and to
provide visual interest to the terrace.
4.   Safety rails, fencing, vegetation of sufficient size and quantity or other
barrier acceptable to the City may be required on walls that exceed thirty
inches (30") in height.
B.   Free-Standing Walls: Free-standing walls constructed for privacy, area
enclosure or decorative purposes shall comply with the following:
1.   Be constructed of brick, stone, textured concrete, precast concrete, tile,
block, railroad ties, timbers, power poles, or similar material.
2.   Shall not to be designed to cause pain or injury to humans or animals.
3.   All sides of walls easily visible from outside of the property upon which
they are located must be of an earth tone, neutral, or natural color such as
white, black, gray (silver), tan, or brown unless otherwise specifically
approved by the City for a designated and apparent design theme.
4.   Single faced walls shall have the unfinished side, if applicable facing
toward the property on which the wall is erected.
5.   Heights and setbacks for free-standing walls shall follow the same
regulations as provided for fences within
9-14-11. No wall shall be allowed on the public side of a buffer located on a
double frontage lot.
C.   Screen Walls: Screen walls for the protection and visual mitigation of
mechanical equipment, dumpsters and generators shall comply with the following:
1.   Allowed in non-single-family residential districts only.
2.   Shall be of materials and colors consistent with the architecture and
materials of the principal building.
3.   May exceed height limitations of the specific zoning districts in order to
effectively screen the equipment, dumpster or generator when located in direct
proximity to the equipment, dumpster or generator; however, shall be no taller
than necessary to effectively screen views of mechanical equipment or to meet
minimum security requirements. The design of the screen wall and the height
required for full screening shall be provided at the time of a building permit
or site plan application.
4.   Any openings within the wall material itself (mesh, louvers, etc.) or
other openings within the wall required for ventilation of the equipment shall,
to the greatest extent possible, be designed to prevent view of the equipment.
D.   All Types of Walls:
1.   Regardless of type, no wall that by design would impede or alter the flow
of water shall be allowed without approval of the City of a plan to manage and
direct water flow.
2.    Retaining walls which exceed four feet (4') in height shall be
structurally engineered to ensure proper design. The design specifications,
elevations and site plan showing the exact location of the wall shall be
provided to the City prior to construction, either with the Site Plan
Development application or submittal of the Building Permit for the subject
property.
3.   For purposes of calculating the total property or lot area occupied by
accessory structures, the total area occupied by a wall shall not be included
in the calculation.
4.   All walls shall be constructed in a sound and sturdy manner and shall be
maintained in good condition, including addressing any tilting of the wall.
5.   Provisions for landscaping to soften the presence of the wall may be
required and will be reviewed on a case by case basis. Not applicable between
individual single-family lots.
6.   Any wall that does not conform to this section, but is considered by the
Director of Development Services, or his/her designee, to satisfy the spirit
and intent of the ordinance may be approved at their discretion.
E.   Other Regulations: Walls not normally allowed or a wall height above what
is permitted for the specific zoning district may be allowed as noted below.
Wall design and materials for these walls shall comply with the requirements
otherwise contained in this section.
1.   Additional wall height required by federal, state, or local regulations
shall be allowed to exceed the maximum wall height noted for the zoning
district up to the minimum height required per the applicable regulation.
2.   Additional wall height needed to protect the public health, safety, and
welfare shall be allowed to exceed the maximum wall height noted for the zoning
district upon demonstrating to the Development Services Director, or designee,
that the additional height is necessary to protect public safety. Wall height
will be allowed up to the maximum for that district plus up to three (3)
additional feet, if the wall is setback one foot (1') for each additional foot
above the maximum height allowed. (Ord. 2464, 4-5-2021; amd. Ord. 2493, 10-4-
2021)
9-14-13: SMALL WIND ENERGY CONVERSION SYSTEMS:
A.   Intent: The intent of this section is to balance the need for clean,
renewable energy resources and the necessity to protect the public health,
safety and welfare of the community. The City finds these regulations are
necessary to ensure that small wind energy conversion systems are appropriately
designed, sited and installed. (Ord. 1866, 5-17-2010)
B.   Definitions:
HEIGHT, TOTAL SYSTEM: The height above grade of the system, including the
generating unit and the highest vertical extension of any blades or rotors.
HEIGHT, TOWER: The height above grade of the fixed portion of the tower,
excluding the generation unit and attached blades or rotors.
OFF GRID: An electrical system that is not connected to a utility distribution
grid.
SHADOW FLICKER: Changing light intensity caused by sunlight through the moving
blades of a wind energy conversion system.
SMALL WIND ENERGY CONVERSION SYSTEM (SWECS): A wind energy conversion system
which has a nameplate rated capacity of up to fifteen kilowatts (15 kW) for
residential, office, industrial and open space uses and districts and which is
incidental and subordinate to a principal use on the same parcel. A system is
considered an SWECS only if it supplies electrical power solely for use by the
owner on the site, except that when a parcel on which the system is installed
also receives electrical power supplied by a utility company, excess electrical
power generated and not presently needed by the owner for on site use may be
used by the utility company in accordance with section 199, chapter 15.11(5) of
the Iowa Administrative Code, as amended from time to time.
SMALL WIND ENERGY CONVERSION SYSTEM, BUILDING MOUNTED: An SWECS which is
securely fastened to any portion of a principal building in order to achieve
desired elevation, whether attached directly to the principal building or
attached to a tower structure which is in turn fastened to the principal
building.
SMALL WIND ENERGY CONVERSION SYSTEM, FREESTANDING: An SWECS which is elevated
by means of a monopole tower only and is not located on another supporting
structure except that the tower shall have an appropriately constructed
concrete base. Guyed, lattice, or other nonmonopole style towers shall not meet
this definition.
SMALL WIND ENERGY CONVERSION SYSTEM, HORIZONTAL AXIS: A small wind energy
conversion system that has blades which rotate through a horizontal plane.
SMALL WIND ENERGY CONVERSION SYSTEM, VERTICAL AXIS: A small wind energy
conversion system that has blades which rotate through a vertical plane.
TOWER: The vertical component of a wind energy conversion system that elevates
the wind turbine generator and attached blades above the ground.
WIND ENERGY CONVERSION SYSTEM (WECS): An aggregation of parts including the
base, tower, generator, rotor, blades, supports, guywires and accessory
equipment such as utility interconnect and battery banks, etc., in such
configuration as necessary to convert the power of wind into mechanical or
electrical energy, e.g., wind charger, windmill or wind turbine.
WIND TURBINE GENERATOR: The component of a wind energy conversion system that
transforms mechanical energy from the wind into electrical energy. (Ord. 1866,
5-17-2010; amd. Ord. 2287, 3-19-2018)
C.   General Regulations:
1.   Conditional Use: A small wind energy conversion system (SWECS) shall be
allowed only as a conditional accessory use to a permitted principal use or
approved permitted conditional principal use.
2.   Permit Required:
a.   It shall be unlawful to construct, erect, install, alter or locate any
SWECS within the City of West Des Moines, unless a permitted conditional use
permit has been obtained from the Board of Adjustment. The permitted
conditional use permit may be revoked by resolution of the Board of Adjustment
any time the approved system does not comply with the rules set forth in this
chapter and the conditions imposed by the Board of Adjustment. The owner/
operator of the SWECS must also obtain any other permits required by other
Federal, State and local agencies/departments prior to erecting the system.
3.   Tower: Only monopole towers shall be permitted for freestanding SWECS.
Lattice, guyed or towers of any other type shall not be considered to be in
compliance with this section.
4.   Installation: Installation must be done according to manufacturer's
recommendations. All wiring and electrical work must be completed according to
the applicable Building and Electric Codes. All electrical components must meet
code recognized test standards.
5.   Number Of Systems Per Zoning Lot: No more than one SWECS may be placed on
any residential estate or single-family residential zoned lot. Building mounted
SWECS shall be prohibited on any parcel or lot containing a one- or two- family
use.
6.   Engineer Certification: Applications for any SWECS shall be accompanied by
standard drawings of the wind turbine structure, including the tower, base, and
footings. An engineering analysis of the tower showing compliance with the
applicable regulations and certified by an Iowa licensed professional engineer
shall also be submitted.
7.   Location:
a.   No part of an SWECS shall be located within or over drainage, utility or
other established easements, or on or over property lines.
b.   An SWECS shall be located entirely in the rear yard.
c.   An SWECS shall not be located in any required setback.
d.   An SWECS shall be located in compliance with the guidelines of applicable
Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) regulations as amended from time to time.
e.   No SWECS shall be constructed within twenty feet (20') laterally of an
overhead electrical power line (excluding secondary electrical service lines or
service drops). The setback from underground electric distribution lines shall
be at least five feet (5').
f.   No part of an SWECS, including guywires, may be located closer than ten
feet (10') to any property line.
8.   Color: The SWECS shall be a neutral color such as white or light gray.
Other colors may be allowed at the discretion of the Board of Adjustment. The
surface shall be nonreflective.
9.   Shadow Flicker: No SWECS shall be installed and operated so to cause a
shadow flicker to fall on or in any existing residential structure.
10.   Lighting: No lights shall be installed on the tower, unless required to
meet FAA regulations.
11.   Signage: No signage or advertising of any kind shall be permitted on the
tower or any associated structures.
12.   Climbing Apparatus: All climbing apparatus shall be located at least ten
feet (10') above the ground, and the tower must be designed to prevent climbing
within the first ten feet (10'). (Ord. 1866, 5-17-2010)
13.   Maintenance: Facilities shall be well maintained in an operational
condition that poses no potential safety hazard. Should the SES fall into
disrepair and be in such dilapidated condition that it poses a safety hazard or
would be considered generally offensive to the senses of the general public,
the SES may be deemed a public nuisance and may be abated in accordance with
title 4, chapter 4, "Nuisances", of this Code. (Ord. 2287, 3-19-2018)
14.   Displacement Of Parking Prohibited: The location of the SWECS shall not
result in the net loss of required parking as specified in chapter 15 of this
title.
15.   Utility Notification: No SWECS shall be installed until evidence has been
given that the utility company has been informed of the customer's intent to
install an interconnected customer owned generator. Off grid systems shall be
exempt from this requirement.
16.   Interconnection: The SWECS, if interconnected to a utility system, shall
meet the requirements for interconnection and operation as set forth by the
utility and the Iowa Utilities Board.
17.   Restriction On Use Of Electricity Generated: An SWECS shall be used
exclusively to supply electrical power for on site consumption, except that
excess electrical power generated by the SWECS and not presently needed for on
site use may be used by the utility company in accordance with section 199,
chapter 15.11(5) of the Iowa Administrative Code.
18.   Noise: Except during short term events including utility outages and
severe wind events, an SWECS shall be designed, installed and operated so that
the noise generated does not exceed the maximum noise levels established in
title 4, chapter 7 of this Code.
19.   Safety Controls: Each SWECS shall be equipped with both an automatic and
manual braking, governing, or feathering system to prevent uncontrolled
rotation, over speeding, and excessive pressure on the tower structure, rotor
blades, or turbine components. Said automatic braking system shall also be
capable of stopping turbine rotation in the event of a power outage so as to
prevent back feeding of the grid.
20.   Shutoff: A clearly marked and easily accessible shutoff for the wind
turbine will be required as determined by the Fire Marshal.
21.   Electromagnetic Interference: All SWECS shall be designed and constructed
so as not to cause radio and television interference. If it is determined that
the SWECS is causing electromagnetic interference, the operator shall take the
necessary corrective action to eliminate this interference including relocation
or removal of the facilities, subject to the approval of the appropriate City
authority. A permit granting an SWECS may be revoked if electromagnetic
interference from the SWECS becomes evident.
22.   Wind Access Easements: The enactment of this section does not constitute
the granting of an easement by the City. The owner/operator shall acquire
covenants, easements, or similar documentation to assure sufficient wind to
operate the SWECS unless adequate accessibility to the wind is provided by the
site. (Ord. 1866, 5-17-2010)
23.   Insurance: (Rep. by Ord. 2287, 3-19-2018)
24.   Compliance With National Electric Code: Applications for SWECS shall be
accompanied by a line drawing of the electrical components in sufficient detail
to allow for a determination that the manner of installation conforms to the
National Electrical Code. (Ord. 1866, 5-17-2010)
25.   Removal: If the SWECS remains nonfunctional or inoperative for a
continuous period of one year, the system shall be deemed to be abandoned. The
owner/operator shall remove the abandoned system at their expense. Removal of
the system includes the entire structure, transmission equipment and fencing
from the property excluding foundations. Should the owner/operator fail to
remove the system, the SWECS will be considered a public nuisance and will be
abated in accordance with title 4, chapter 4, "Nuisances", of this Code.
D.   Bulk Regulations:
1.   Setbacks: The minimum distance between any SWECS and any property line for
residential uses, residential and open space zoned districts, or office and
industrial zoned districts adjacent to dissimilar land uses shall be a distance
that is equivalent to one hundred fifty percent (150%) of the total system
height.
The minimum distance between any SWECS and any property line within office and
industrial zoned districts adjacent to a like zoning district shall be a
distance that is equivalent to one hundred percent (100%) of the total system
height.
The setback shall be measured from the property line to the point of the SWECS
closest to the property line. (Ord. 2287, 3-19-2018)
2.   Minimum Lot Size: The minimum lot size for an SWECS shall be one acre.
3.   Maximum Height: Height shall be measured from the ground to the top of the
tower, including the wind turbine generator and blades. Manmade earth berms,
terraces, and retaining walls that elevate the wind turbine shall be considered
a part of the turbine.
a.   For lots of more than one and fewer than three (3) acres, the maximum
height shall be sixty five feet (65').
b.   For lots of three (3) acres to seven (7) acres, the maximum height shall
be eighty feet (80').
c.   For lots of more than seven (7) acres the maximum height shall be one
hundred feet (100').
4.   Maximum Blade Diameter: The maximum diameter of the blades for an SWECS
shall be twenty feet (20').
5.   Clearance Of Blade: No portion of a horizontal axis SWECS blade shall
extend within thirty feet (30') of the ground. No portion of a vertical axis
SWECS shall extend within ten feet (10') of the ground. No blades may extend
over parking areas, driveways or sidewalks. No blade may extend within twenty
feet (20') of the nearest tree, structure or aboveground utility facilities.
E.   Application Required:
1.   Application for SWECS shall be made on forms provided by the city of West
Des Moines. No action may be taken regarding requests for SWECS until completed
applications have been filed and fees paid. (Ord. 1866, 5-17-2010)
9-14-14: SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEMS:
A.   Intent: The intent of this section is to balance the need for clean,
renewable energy resources and the necessity to protect the public health,
safety and welfare of the community. The city finds these regulations are
necessary to ensure that solar energy systems are appropriately designed, sited
and installed.
B.   Definitions:
COLLECTOR PANEL: An equipment assembly used for gathering, concentrating or
absorbing solar energy as useful thermal energy or to generate electric energy.
HEIGHT, TOTAL BUILDING MOUNTED SYSTEM: The height above the roof surface
measured perpendicular to the roof specific to the installation on a sloped
roof or the height above the roof surface specific to the installation on a
flat roof.
HEIGHT, TOTAL GROUND MOUNT SYSTEM: The height above grade of the system from
the highest point, including the supporting structure, related equipment and
the collector panels. Adjustable angle systems will be measured from the
highest point when the system is at its maximum vertical extension.
LARGE SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM (LSES): A solar energy system which has a nameplate
rated capacity of over fifteen (15) kilowatts in electrical energy or fifty
(50) KBTU of thermal energy for nonsingle-family residential uses and districts
and which is incidental and subordinate to a principal use on the same parcel.
A system is considered an LSES only if it supplies electrical power or thermal
energy solely for use by the owner on the site, except that when a parcel on
which the system is installed also receives electrical power supplied by a
utility company, excess electrical power generated and not presently needed by
the owner for on site use may be used by the utility company in accordance with
section 199, chapter 15.11(5) of the Iowa administrative code, as amended from
time to time.
OFF GRID: An electrical system that is not connected to a utility distribution
grid.
SMALL SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM (SSES): A solar energy system which has a nameplate
rated capacity of up to fifteen (15) kilowatts in electrical energy or fifty
(50) KBTU of thermal energy for residential uses and districts and which is
incidental and subordinate to a principal use on the same parcel. A system is
considered an SSES only if it supplies electrical power or thermal energy
solely for use by the owner on the site, except that when a parcel on which the
system is installed also receives electrical power supplied by a utility
company, excess electrical power generated and not presently needed by the
owner for on site use may be used by the utility company in accordance with
section 199, chapter 15.11(5) of the Iowa administrative code, as amended from
time to time.
SOLAR ACCESS: A property owner's right to have sunlight shine on his land.
SOLAR ENERGY: Radiant energy received from the sun at wavelengths suitable for
heat transfer, photosynthetic use or photovoltaic use.
SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM, BUILDING INTEGRATED: A solar photovoltaic system that is
constructed as an integral part of a principal or accessory building and where
the collector component maintains a uniform profile or surface with the
building's vertical walls, window openings, and roofing. Such a system is used
in lieu of an architectural or structural component of the building. A building
integrated system may occur within vertical facades, replacing glazing or other
facade material; into semitransparent skylight systems; into roofing systems,
replacing traditional roofing materials; or other building or structure
envelope systems. To be considered a building integrated solar energy system,
the appearance of the collector components must be consistent with the
surrounding materials.
SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM, BUILDING MOUNTED: An SES which is securely fastened to any
portion of a building roof, whether attached directly to the principal or
accessory building.
SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM, GROUND MOUNTED: An SES which is not located on a building
and is ground mounted.
SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM (SES): An aggregation of parts including the base,
supporting structure, photovoltaic or solar thermal panels, inverters and
accessory equipment such as utility interconnect and battery banks, etc., in
such configuration as necessary to convert radiant energy from the sun into
mechanical or electrical energy.
UTILITY SCALE SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM: A solar energy system which supplies
electrical power or thermal energy solely for use by off site consumers.
C.   General Regulations:
1.   Allowances: Allowances for solar energy systems (SES) shall be as follows:
a.   A building integrated system.
b.   A building mounted system attached to the roof of an accessory or primary
structure.
c.   A ground mounted system as a detached accessory structure to a primary
structure.
d.   Large solar energy systems (LSES) are not allowed in the open space zoning
district and single-family residential used or zoned property.
(1)   Exception: A large solar energy system (rated capacity over fifteen (15)
kilowatts in electric energy) is allowed in the open space zoning district and
on parcels used or zoned as single-family residential property as a building
integrated or building mounted system only that is interconnected to the
utility distribution grid (net metered).
e.   Utility scale solar energy systems are not allowed.
2.   Permit Required: It shall be unlawful to construct, erect, install, alter
or locate any solar energy system (SES) within the city of West Des Moines,
unless approved with:
a.   Building permit in the following zoning districts: open space and single-
family residential zoned property.
b.   Site plan, major or minor modification to a site plan permit for all other
zoning districts.
(1)   Exception: A new site plan or a major or minor modification to a site
plan permit is not required within residential medium density or residential
high density zoning districts only when the system is installed on an owner
occupied dwelling unit that is detached or within a horizontally attached
multi-family building.
c.   The owner/operator of the SES must also obtain any other permits required
by other federal, state and local agencies/departments prior to erecting the
system.
3.   Installation: Installation must be done according to manufacturer's
recommendations. All work must be completed according to the applicable
building, fire and electric codes. All electrical components must meet code
recognized test standards.
4.   Number Of Systems Per Zoning Lot: No more than one SES may be placed on
any zoned lot unless otherwise specifically approved by the city council.
5.   Engineer Certification: Applications for any SES shall be accompanied by
standard drawings of the receiving structure if newly constructed, including
the supporting frame and footings. For systems to be mounted on existing
buildings, an engineering analysis showing sufficient structural capacity of
the receiving structure to support the SES per the applicable code regulations,
certified by an Iowa licensed professional engineer shall be submitted.
6.   Color: The SES shall be a neutral color. All surfaces shall be
nonreflective to minimize glare that could affect adjacent or nearby
properties. Measures to minimize nuisance glare may be required including
modifying the surface material, placement or orientation of the system, and if
necessary, adding screening to block glare.
7.   Lighting: No lighting other than required safety lights or indicators
shall be installed on the SES.
8.   Signage: No advertising or signage other than required safety signage and
equipment labels shall be permitted on the SES.
9.   Maintenance: Facilities shall be well maintained in an operational
condition that poses no potential safety hazard. Should the SES fall into
disrepair and be in such dilapidated condition that it poses a safety hazard or
would be considered generally offensive to the senses of the general public,
the SES may be deemed a public nuisance and may be abated in accordance with
title 4, chapter 4, "Nuisances", of this code.
10.   Displacement Of Parking Prohibited: The location of the SES shall not
result in the net loss of required parking as specified in chapter 15 of this
title.
11.   Utility Notification: No SES that generates electricity shall be
installed until evidence has been given that the utility company has been
informed of and is in agreement with the customer's intent to install an
interconnected customer owned generator. Off grid systems shall be exempt from
this requirement.
12.   Interconnection: The SES, if interconnected to a utility system, shall
meet the requirements for interconnection and operation as set forth by the
utility and the Iowa utilities board.
13.   Restriction On Use Of Energy Generated: An SES shall be used exclusively
to supply electrical power or thermal energy for on site consumption, except
that excess electrical power generated by the SES and not presently needed for
on site use may be used by the utility company in accordance with section 199,
chapter 15.11(5) of the Iowa administrative code.
14.   Shutoff: A clearly marked and easily accessible shutoff for any SES that
generates electricity will be required as determined by the fire marshal.
15.   Electromagnetic Interference: All SESs shall be designed and constructed
so as not to cause radio and television interference. If it is determined that
the SES is causing electromagnetic interference, the operator shall take the
necessary corrective action to eliminate this interference including relocation
or removal of the facilities, subject to the approval of the appropriate city
authority. A permit granting an SES may be revoked if electromagnetic
interference from the SES becomes evident.
16.   Solar Access Easements: The enactment of this section does not constitute
the granting of an easement by the city. The owner/operator may need to acquire
covenants, easements, or similar documentation to assure sufficient solar
exposure to operate the SES unless adequate accessibility to the sun is
provided by the site. Such covenants, easements, or similar documentation is
the sole responsibility of the owner/operator. Should the owner/operator pursue
a solar access easement, the extent of the solar access should be defined and
the easement document executed in compliance with the regulations contained in
chapter 564A (access to solar energy) of the Iowa Code.
17.   Compliance With National Electric Code: Applications for SESs shall be
accompanied by a line drawing of the electrical components in sufficient detail
to allow for a determination that the manner of installation conforms to the
national electrical code.
18.   Removal: If the SES remains nonfunctional or inoperative for a continuous
period of one year, the system shall be deemed to be abandoned. The owner/
operator shall remove the abandoned system at their expense. Removal of the
system includes the entire structure, collector panels and related equipment
from the property excluding foundations. Should the owner/operator fail to
remove the system, the SES will be considered a public nuisance and will be
abated in accordance with title 4, chapter 4, "Nuisances", of this code.
19.   Screening:   SESs that are visible from the public thoroughfare or
adjacent properties will require screening in accordance to regulations for
screening of mechanical units noted in section
9-10-4, "Specific Use Regulations", and in chapter 10, "Performance Standards",
of this title. The need for and type of screening to be used shall be
identified as part of the building permit, major or minor modification to a
site plan or site plan permit submittal.
20.   Nonconforming Systems: An SES that has been installed on or before the
effective date of this section and is in active use and does not comply with
any or all of the provisions of this section shall be considered a legal
nonconforming structure and will be regulated by the provisions noted in
section
9-3-4, "Nonconforming Buildings, Structures, Uses, Uses Of Land, Or Uses Of
Buildings Or Structures", of this title.
21.   Unsafe Condition: Nothing in this section shall be deemed to prevent the
strengthening or restoring to a safe condition any SES or associated building
or structure, or part thereof declared to be unsafe by the appropriate
authority.
D.   Bulk Regulations:
1.   Location:
a.   Ground mounted SES:
(1)   No part of an SES shall be located within or over drainage, utility or
other established easements, or on or over property lines.
(2)   The SES shall be located in accordance to the regulations for detached
accessory structures in this chapter or not less than one foot (1') from the
property line for every one foot (1') of the system height measured at its
maximum height, whichever is most restrictive.
(3)   An SSES cannot be located in front of the rear wall of the primary
structure, even if it meets the front yard setback requirements. An LSES cannot
be located in the front yard setback.
(4)   An SES shall not be located in any required buffer.
(5)   The setback from underground electric distribution lines shall be at
least five feet (5').
(6)   No SES shall be located which may obstruct vision between a height of
thirty inches (30") and ten feet (10') on any corner lot within a vision
triangle of twenty five feet (25') formed by intersecting street right of way
lines.
b.   Building mounted SES:
(1)   The solar energy system shall be set back not less than one foot (1')
from the exterior perimeter of the roof for every one foot (1') the system
extends above the parapet wall or roof surface.
(2)   Should the solar energy system be mounted on an existing structure that
does not conform to current setback requirements, the solar energy system shall
be installed to meet the current setback requirements applicable to the
receiving structure.
(3)   Shall be designed to minimize their visual presence to surrounding
properties and public thoroughfares. Panel arrangement shall take in account
the proportion of the roof surface and place the panels in a consistent manner
without gaps unless necessary to accommodate vents, skylights or equipment.
(4)   Access pathways for the SES shall be provided in accordance to all
applicable building, fire and safety codes.
(5)   Shall be located in such a manner that fall protection railings are not
required or are not visible from the public thoroughfare.
c.   Building integrated SES:
(1)   No setback required.
(2)   Access pathways for the SES shall be provided in accordance to all
applicable building, fire and safety codes.
(3)   Shall be located in such a manner that fall protection railings are not
required or are not visible from the public thoroughfare.
d.   No SES shall be constructed within twenty feet (20') laterally of an
overhead electrical power line (excluding secondary electrical service lines or
service drops).
2.   Height:
a.   Ground mounted SES:
(1)   The maximum height of the SES shall not exceed ten feet (10') in height
as measured from existing grade.
b.   Building mounted SES:
(1)   The collector panel surface and mounting system shall not extend higher
than eighteen inches (18") above the roof surface of a sloped roof.
(2)   The collector panel surface and mounting system shall not extend higher
than seven feet (7') above the roof surface of a flat roof.
c.   Building integrated SES:
(1)   The collector panel shall maintain a uniform profile or surface with the
building's vertical walls, window openings, and roofing.
3.   Size:
a.   Size of the SES is calculated by measuring the total surface area of the
collector panels for the system.
b.   Ground mounted SES:
(1)   In single-family residential used or zoned property the SES is restricted
in size to no more than the allowed area for detached accessory structures on
the specific property. The SES would be included in the collective total of all
detached accessory structures.
(2)   In all other zoning districts the SES is restricted in size to no more
than fifty percent (50%) of the area of the primary structure(s) footprint.
c.   Building mounted SES: System size will be determined by the available roof
area subject to the installation minus the required setbacks or access
pathways.
d.   Building integrated SES: System size will be determined by the available
building surface area subject to the installation minus the required access
pathways.
e.   In no case shall an SSES exceed the nameplate rated capacity of fifteen
(15) kilowatts or fifty (50) KBTU.
4.   Application Required: Application for an SES shall be made on forms
provided by the city of West Des Moines. No action may be taken regarding
requests for SESs until completed applications have been filed and fees paid.
(Ord. 2143, 5-2-2016; amd. Ord. 2500, 12-20-2021)
9-14-15: FLAGPOLES:
The following regulations shall apply to permanent flagpoles. Temporary flags
shall be regulated by the provisions in chapter 18, "Signs", of this title,
under the temporary sign regulations.
A.   Bulk Requirements:
1.   Maximum Number Of Flagpoles: Three (3) poles.
2.   Pole Separation: Eight foot (8') minimum separation between flagpoles or
as needed to prevent flag overlap; ten foot (10') minimum separation from a
building or as needed to prevent the flag from hitting the building.
3.   Maximum Height: Thirty feet (30'), except in RC, CMC, and SC zoning
districts the maximum height is forty feet (40') and in PCP, the maximum height
is sixty feet (60').
4.   Setback: Flagpoles shall be set back a minimum of ten feet (10') from any
property line, except that in the VJHB zoning district no setback shall be
required. (Ord. 2169, 9-6-2016)
9-14-16: VARIANCES:
Application for a variance of any of the above provisions shall be made to the
board of adjustment in the manner provided in title 2 of this code. (Ord. 2169,
9-6-2016)
CHAPTER 15
OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING
SECTION:
9-15-1: Title And Citation
9-15-2: Purpose
9-15-3: Applicability
9-15-4: General Off-Street Parking Regulations
9-15-5: Handicapped Parking Regulations
9-15-6: Design Standards
9-15-7: Number Of Parking Spaces Required
9-15-8: General Off-Street Loading Regulations
9-15-1: TITLE AND CITATION:
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the WEST DES MOINES PARKING
REGULATIONS. (Ord. 1213, 11-4-1996)
9-15-2: PURPOSE:
It shall be the intent of this chapter to:
A.   Protect the health, safety and welfare of the citizens.
B.   Prevent traffic congestion and hazards.
C.   Provide for proper traffic safety by preserving the public thoroughfares
for the unimpaired movement of pedestrian, bicycle and vehicular traffic.
D.   Provide attractive, secure, properly lighted, and well screened off-street
parking facilities.
E.   Assure the maneuverability of emergency vehicles.
F.   Provide appropriately designed parking facilities in proportion to the
needs generated by the varying types of land use.
G.   Minimize the negative visual impacts of large expanses of parking by
reducing the glare and hot spots from the parking lots through open space and
landscaping within the parking areas.
H.   Ensure that loading and delivery services are compatible with adjacent
parcels and surrounding neighborhoods.
Therefore, it shall be recognized that the requirements of this chapter are
minimum; and, after review of the site plan and intended land use, additional
restrictions may be imposed in appropriate circumstances to preserve the intent
of this chapter. (Ord. 1213, 11-4-1996)
9-15-3: APPLICABILITY:
In all districts, in connection with every industrial, commercial, business,
trade, institutional, recreational or dwelling use, and all other uses, space
for parking and storage of vehicles shall be provided in accordance with all of
the following regulations except as elsewhere provided herein. (Ord. 1213, 11-
4-1996)
9-15-4: OFF-STREET PARKING REGULATIONS:
Publisher's Note: This Section has been AMENDED by new legislation (Ord.
2566, passed 5-15-2023). The text of the amendment will be incorporated below
when the ordinance is codified.
A.   General Provisions: All of the following standards shall apply to all off-
street parking:
1.   Off-Street Parking Required: No structure or use shall be permitted or
constructed unless off-street parking spaces are provided in accordance with
the provisions of this chapter.
2.   Exceptions: The provision of off-street parking spaces is not required for
uses located within the Valley Junction Historic Business District (VJHB), or
for any second dwelling units, however, any off-street parking that is provided
must comply with the regulations set forth in this chapter.
3.   Arrangement And Identification: All parking areas shall be so arranged and
marked so as to provide for orderly and safe loading or unloading, parking and
storage of self- propelled vehicles.
4.   Calculation Of Spaces: Fractional space requirements shall be rounded up
to the next whole space.
5.   Combined Uses: When two (2) or more tenants which are not part of a
planned commercial center are located in the same building or structure or are
common developments, the parking requirements shall be the sum of the separate
requirements for each use.
6.   Dead-End Parking: Parking lots accessed by only one entrance with only one
drive aisle which is greater than two hundred fifty feet (250') in length shall
provide a second access or a turnaround equal to the dimensions of a cul-de-sac
for a public street at the dead end of the aisle.
7.   Double Counting: A reduction in the number of required parking spaces for
uses with differing business hours which share a parking lot shall not comply
with the requirements of this chapter.
8.   Increase Or Change In Use: When any principal building is enlarged, or
increased in capacity, or when a change in use creates an increase in the
amount of off street parking space required, additional off street parking
spaces shall be required, in conformity with this chapter.
9.   Mixed Use Buildings: For a building where a single tenant has multiple
uses, parking spaces shall be provided in accordance with the parking
requirements of each use. An example of a mixed use building is one containing
a combination of both office and manufacturing uses. The area dedicated to each
use can be calculated at its individual requirement. At the discretion of the
Community Development Director, the tenant may need to demonstrate that the
parking can meet the more restrictive standard if the uses are changed.
10.   Outdoor Areas: Outdoor patron use areas or areas used for assembly shall
be included in the gross floor area (gfa) for calculating parking requirements.
Outdoor dining areas shall be included in the gfa for restaurants when
calculating parking requirements.
11.   Parking Structures: Parking structures are subject to setbacks, building
height, and other development standards of a principal structure in the
respective zoning district.
12.   Reduction In Number Of Spaces: Any required parking spaces displaced by
building expansion shall be provided elsewhere on the site. No required off
street parking facility shall be reduced in capacity below the minimum
requirements of this chapter.
13.   Tandem Parking: Parking spaces in tandem are not allowed in any zoning
district unless otherwise noted for a specific use.
14.   Use Of Parking Spaces: Required parking spaces shall be used only for
parking of vehicles for property owners, guests, renters, patrons or employees.
Required parking spaces shall not be used for sale, display, rental or repair
of motor vehicles on any permanent basis.
B.   Provisions For Residential Uses:
1.   Paving Required: All parking of vehicles, excluding recreational vehicles
and trailers for residential uses that comply with subsection
9-5-4A1 of this title, shall occur on paved areas and on private property only,
and the entire length and width of the vehicles must be on paved surfaces. All
parking of recreational vehicles and trailers for residential uses that comply
with subsection
9-5-4A1 of this title shall occur on hard surfaces other than gravel sufficient
to support the weight of the recreational vehicle or trailer in question and on
private property only, but only the parts of the recreational vehicle or
trailer that contact the ground shall be required to be placed on a hard
surface. The parked recreational vehicles and trailers which only have the
parts that contact the ground placed on a hard surface must be parked adjacent
to the existing driveway, garage, or alley. City right-of-way between the
property line and the street shall not be used for parking vehicles. Gravel
parking areas existing prior to September 1, 1996, may continue in use;
however, in no case shall the total pavement and gravel parking area exceed
twenty percent (20%) of the square footage of the lot. Paved driveways and any
associated off street parking areas within the front yard of a single-family
detached residence shall not occupy greater than fifty percent (50%) of the
area between the primary wall of the front plane of the dwelling structure and
public right-of-way.
2.   Setback: On single-family lots, parking shall not be permitted within
twenty feet (20') of an alley or street. Exception: Accessory garages which
access from the alley may have vehicles parked on the required twenty foot
(20') access directly in front of the garage door provided no portion of the
vehicle encroaches into the alley or right-of-way.
3.   Commercial Vehicles In Residential Zones: Refer to chapter 5,
"Agricultural/Open Space And Residential Zoning District", of this title.
C.   Provisions For Commercial Uses:
1.   Parking Location: Off street parking for commercial uses shall be located
on the same lot, or, with a reciprocal parking, ingress and egress easement on
a lot contiguous to the building, structure or use to be served. The required
parking spaces shall not be located in the rear of commercial buildings unless
direct access for the customers to the facility is provided. Parking shall not
be located across a street unless connected by an approved under or over
crossing.
2.   Racks Not Counting As Parking Spaces: For auto repair shops or other
similar uses, the racks shall not be considered in calculating required parking
spaces.
3.   Spaces Not For Repair, Servicing Or Storage: Required parking spaces shall
not be used or permitted to be used for the repair, servicing or storage of
vehicles, or for storage of materials.
D.   Provisions For Office Uses:
1.   Parking Location: Off street parking for office uses shall be located on
the same lot, or, with a reciprocal parking ingress and egress easement on a
lot contiguous to the building, structure or use to be served. Parking shall
not be located across a street unless connected by an approved under or over
crossing.
E.   Provisions For Industrial Uses:
1.   Parking Location: For industrial uses, off-street parking shall be located
on the same lot, or, with a reciprocal parking, ingress and egress easement on
a lot contiguous to the industrial building, structure or use to be served.
2.   Racks Not Counting As Parking Spaces: For auto repair shops or other
similar uses, the racks shall not be considered in calculating required parking
spaces.
3.   Spaces Not For Repair, Servicing Or Storage: Required parking spaces shall
not be used or permitted to be used for the repair, servicing or storage of
vehicles, or for storage of materials.
F.   Provisions For Public Uses:
1.   Bicycle Parking: Public uses with more than fifty (50) required parking
spaces shall provide a bicycle rack for the purpose of storing and protecting
bicycles from theft. The minimum number of bicycle spaces required shall be one
bicycle space per forty (40) parking spaces, up to a maximum of twenty (20)
required bicycle spaces per use. Such devices shall be located in such a way as
not to interfere with pedestrian or vehicular traffic.
2.   Parking Location: Off-street parking for public uses shall be located on
the same lot, or, with a reciprocal ingress and egress easement on a lot
contiguous to the building, structure or use to be served. Parking shall not be
located across a street unless connected by an approved under- or overcrossing.
(Ord. 1213, 11-4-1996; amd. Ord. 2069, 11-17-2014; Ord. 2327, 10-1-2018; Ord.
2350, 3-4-2019; Ord. 2527, 7-5-2022; Ord. 2662, 7-7-2025)
9-15-5: HANDICAPPED PARKING REGULATIONS:
A.   With respect to handicapped parking, all of the following shall apply:
1.   The owner, contractor and developer shall comply with all Federal, State,
and local laws regarding handicapped parking including, but not limited to,
Iowa Code chapter 321L and the Americans With Disabilities Act.
2.   Handicapped parking spaces required by Federal, State, and local laws
shall count toward meeting the requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 1213, 11-4-
1996)
9-15-6: DESIGN STANDARDS:
Every parcel of land hereafter used as a public or private off- street parking
area shall be developed and maintained in accordance with all of the following
requirements:
A.   Location: All parking spaces shall be located on the same parcel as the
structure or use, unless approved otherwise by the City Council and no parking
space required by this chapter shall be located in the parking lot setback area
of any land use district.
B.   Access: With respect to access, all of the following shall apply:
1.   Width: Where a lot does not abut on a public or private alley or easement
of access, there shall be provided an access drive not less than ten feet (10')
in width in the case of a single- family dwelling, and not less than twenty
four feet (24') in width for all other uses. Except where provided in
connection with a use permitted in a Residential District, such easement of
access or access drive shall not be located in any Residential District.
2.   Flow Of Traffic: Off-street parking or loading facilities shall be
designed so as to permit entrance and exit by a forward movement of the vehicle
for all uses, except single-family detached or townhouse dwellings with direct
driveway access to City classified "collector" streets with projected average
daily traffic (ADT) of less than three thousand (3,000) ADT, which shall be
permitted backward movement from a driveway. The backing or backward movement
of vehicles from a driveway, off-street parking or loading area onto a major
thoroughfare, including all thoroughfares designated as arterial streets or
major collector streets, in the Comprehensive Plan, other than local
residential streets as noted herein, shall be strictly prohibited for all uses.
Driveway approach returns shall not extend beyond the side lot line as extended
into the right-of-way, unless such driveway is of joint usage by the adjoining
lots.
3.   Paving Required: Paving of the alley shall be required whenever a
property, except a single-family detached residence, utilizes an alley as an
ingress to an off-street parking area. The property owner shall be responsible
for paving the alley in accordance with the specifications of the Des Moines
Metropolitan Design Standards, as modified by the City, to provide safe ingress
and egress to the site.
4.   Vertical Clearance: Access driveway vertical clearance shall be at least
fourteen feet (14').
5.   Drive/Street:
a.   Access to four (4) or fewer single-family detached houses shall be
considered a drive. Access to more than four (4) single- family detached houses
shall be considered a street.
C.   Driveways: With respect to driveways, all of the following shall apply:
1.   The number of ingress/egress access points to public streets from off
street parking areas are subject to approval by the City and located to limit
vehicular conflicts, provide acceptable location of driveway accesses to public
streets, preserve proper traffic safety and, as possible, not impair movement
of vehicular traffic on public streets. The permitted number of ingress/egress
driveway approaches to public streets for an off street parking lot shall be
dependent upon the existing and projected future average daily traffic (ADT)
for the public street and, where possible, public street accesses should be
located in alignment with driveway approaches gaining access to the same public
street from property on the opposite side of the street.
2.   Except for single-family detached dwellings, and unless expressly
recommended otherwise by the Director of Public Works, access drives onto
public streets should have a minimum separation of one hundred feet (100')
apart, measured centerline to centerline; on arterial streets, the required
distance should be three hundred feet (300'). No driveway shall be permitted to
access a public street within twenty five feet (25') of the end of radius at a
street intersection.
3.   Individual residential driveways on private property shall not be greater
than twenty feet (20') in width at the street right- of-way line. The driveway
may flare out at an angle on both sides of the driveway toward a point situated
ten feet (10') from the right-of-way line to create additional parking spaces
within the driveway as long as the total paving for the parking of vehicles
does not exceed fifty percent (50%) of the area between the right-of-way line
and the primary wall of the front plane of the dwelling structure. All paving
must maintain a minimum setback of one foot (1') from a side property line. Any
retaining walls must comply with setbacks as defined in chapter 14 of this
title.
4.   Driveways and associated off street parking areas for single- family
residences shall not be located closer than one foot (1') from an adjoining
residential lot line, unless such driveway is jointly used by adjoining
residential lot owners and a joint easement has been recorded.
5.   Except for single-family residences, the minimum width of a one-way drive
without parking stalls shall be fifteen feet (15'). The minimum width of a two-
way drive without parking stalls shall be twenty four feet (24').
D.   Maneuvering/Circulation: Off street parking facilities shall accommodate
the maneuvering and circulation of all vehicles on site, so as not to impair
the movement of vehicles on public streets. There shall be no backing of
vehicles from an off street parking facility into the public street, or backing
from the public street into an off street parking facility.
E.   Parking Lot Setbacks: With respect to parking lot setbacks, all of the
following shall apply:
1.   Screening: The parking lot setback shall provide open space for screening
of the lot and vehicles within the lot through berming, landscaping or other
similar screening in accordance with chapter 19 of this title. No part of any
parking space shall be within the parking lot setback.
2.   Public Street Right-Of-Way:
a.   Residential Districts: In all Residential Districts except for single-
family residences with driveway parking space shall have a minimum of fifteen
feet (15') from the public street right-of- way.
b.   Setbacks: Parking on driveways parallel to a public sidewalk for single-
family residences shall maintain a minimum setback of ten feet (10') from the
public street right-of-way. In all zoning districts, parking on driveways
within the public street right- of-way or across public sidewalks shall not
comply with the requirements of this chapter.
c.   Office And Commercial Districts: Office and Commercial Districts,
including the Warehouse Retail District, except for Professional Commerce Park
and Valley Junction Historic Business Districts, shall have a minimum setback
of fifteen feet (15') from the public street right-of-way.
d.   Valley Junction Historic Business (VJHB) District: If a parking lot is
proposed, a parking lot setback shall be determined through development review
which preserves the intent of the setback.
e.   Light Industrial And General Industrial Districts: Light Industrial (LI)
and General Industrial (GI) Districts shall have a setback of at least ten feet
(10') from the public street right-of-way.
f.   Business Park And Professional Commerce Districts: Business Park (BP) and
Professional Commerce Park (PCP) Districts shall have a minimum setback of
twenty feet (20') from the public street right-of-way.
g.   Parking Lots: Parking lot setbacks shall be measured from the ultimate
right-of-way of an adjacent roadway.
3.   Alley Line: An eight foot (8') setback from the public street right-of-way
is required for all districts.
4.   Adjoining Lot Line: A five foot (5') setback is required along an
adjoining lot line, unless the parking space within the setback is part of a
common parking lot of joint usage between the adjoining lots.
F.   Dimensions: With respect to dimensions, all of the following shall apply:
1.   A parking space reserved for the parking of vehicles shall have a
dimension of not less than nine feet (9') in stall width and nineteen feet
(19') in length for ninety degree (90°) parking without front end overhang,
plus such additional parking bay stall aisle width based on proven traffic
engineering standards, acceptable to the City and conforming to the minimum
standards for parking lot dimensions set forth herein necessary to afford
adequate ingress and egress.
2.   The following dimensions are minimum standards for the design of a parking
lot for parking stalls without an overhang over an open space area:
MINIMUM STANDARDS
 
                  (A)2        (B)3         (C)         (D)     (D)
Angle Of Parking1 Stall Width Stall Length Stall Depth One-Way Two-Way
                                                       Aisle   Aisle
Parallel          9.0'        23.0'        n/a         15.0'   24.0'
30°              9.0'        34.5'        17.25'      15.0'   24.0'
45°              9.0'        28.0'        20.0'       15.0'   24.0'
60°              9.0'        24.0'        21.0'       18.0'   24.0'
90°              9.0'        19.0'        19.0'       24.0'   24.0'
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5dd626f68508237cd281a645678e92f34786b23f/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2582.gif]
Notes:
1.    Any parking stalls proposed at any angle other than those specified above
shall have a width of 9 feet, and a length and depth sufficient to allow a 9
foot by 19 foot rectangular parking area.
2.    Any parking space located parallel to a wall or other solid barrier shall
be widened by an additional 2 feet.
3.    Where there is front end overhang over an open space area of at least 2
feet, the minimum stall length for a parking space may be reduced 2 feet. When
the front of a parking stall abuts a sidewalk, the minimum width of the
sidewalk shall be 6 feet.
G.   Surfacing: With respect to surfacing, all of the following shall apply:
1.   Paving: All off street parking and loading areas and access roadways shall
be paved with asphaltic or portland cement concrete pavement in accordance with
the specifications as herein set forth. The off street parking of automobiles,
vans, campers, trucks, trailers, tractors, recreational vehicles, boats,
construction equipment and any other mobile vehicle equipped for street and
highway travel which is not otherwise located within an approved storage yard
in accordance with subsection
9-10-4A8 of this title, shall be on an asphaltic or portland cement concrete
paved off street parking area as required herein. No parking or storage of
vehicles within the landscaped open space area of the front yard between the
building and public street right of way, shall be allowed unless otherwise
approved by the city council during review of a development request.
2.   Curbing: Except for individual driveways for single-family detached
dwellings and unless otherwise noted in this title, all off street parking
areas and associated driveways, access roadways and frontage roads shall be
constructed with permanent, integrally attached standard portland cement
concrete curbing not less than four inches (4") high at any given time, or
curbing of alternate height as approved by the city council. The parking lot
shall be so graded and drained as to dispose of all surface water accumulation
within the area; and shall be so arranged and marked to facilitate and ensure
the orderly and safe loading or unloading and parking and storage of self-
propelled vehicles. In situations in which there is a pedestrian walkway
immediately adjacent to the curb of a parking space, when the adjoining
pedestrian walkway is less than six feet (6') in width, the depth of the
parking stall shall be increased to accommodate the full required parking stall
depth consistent with code without encroaching over the sidewalk so as to
maintain a minimum four feet (4') clear walkway width.
A curb shall be implemented whenever possible to increase safety and to direct
proper movement of vehicle traffic; however, the curb may be dropped to a zero
curb in the following situations:
a.   Along accessible parking spaces at the building entrance. The segment of
the dropped curb shall extend only for the width of an individual stall or
collective width of adjacent accessible stalls and any associated accessible
walkway, then shall transition back to full height curb at the first regular
stall.
b.   Between driveways of the end units in an attached townhome building when
the spacing between driveways is ten feet (10') or less.
c.   Along the parking lot edge adjacent to a non-residential building on only
those sides of a building which contain a public/patron access into the
building.
d.   Within loading and service areas for only the portion necessary to allow
access to the building for loading and unloading of goods or for access to
refuse dumpsters.
3.   Pavement Thickness: The minimum thickness of pavement of the parking area
shall be as follows:
a.   Portland cement concrete shall have a minimum thickness of five inches
(5") and the subgrade shall have a minimum subgrade modulus (k) of one hundred
fifty (150). Additional thickness of portland cement concrete may be utilized
to create an equivalent subgrade modulus if the existing subgrade modulus is
less than one hundred fifty (150).
b.   Asphaltic concrete shall have a minimum thickness of five and one-half
inches (51/2") and the subgrade shall have a minimum California bearing ratio
(CBR) of 5, or equivalent standard measured in proctor. Additional thickness of
asphaltic concrete may be utilized to create an equivalent CBR if the existing
CBR is less than 5. Pavement shall be designed in accordance with the Asphalt
Institute's "Thickness Design Manual" (MS-1).
4.   Subgrade Material: Material utilized in the subgrade shall be well drained
and not susceptible to frost boils. The part of the parking area utilized for
driveways, access roadways and frontage roads shall be specifically designed to
accommodate the type and load bearing of traffic that will be utilizing the
access roadway.
5.   Driveways:
a.   Driveway approaches and any other area within the city right of way shall
be portland cement concrete per city specifications.
b.   Driveways for individual single-family detached residences shall have a
minimum thickness of four inches (4") of Portland cement concrete or a
thickness of asphaltic concrete of an equivalent strength. All other driveways
shall have a minimum thickness of five inches (5") of Portland cement concrete
or a thickness of asphaltic concrete of an equivalent strength.
6.   Testing: A review and report certified by a third party recognized testing
agency acceptable to the City shall be submitted which documents the thickness
and compaction of the pavement and its compliance with the above standards.
H.   Slope And Drainage: Parking areas shall be designed and improved with
grades not to exceed a six percent (6%) slope. All required off street parking
areas shall be so designed that surface water will not drain over any sidewalk
or adjacent property. Driveways are recommended not to exceed eight percent
(8%) slope and none shall have grades exceeding ten percent (10%) slope.
Driveways shall be graded and drained to dispose of surface water to the street
or public designated stormwater drainage facilities.
I.   Striping: All parking spaces, except individual dwelling unit driveways,
shall be striped in accordance with the Manual On Uniform Traffic Control
Devices (MUTCD) standards. The striping shall be maintained in a clear and
visible manner.
J.   Wheel Stops: Prefabricated curb or wheel stops shall not be considered an
acceptable alternative to curbing. Wheel stops may be used in conjunction with
curbing to define the vehicle parking space to stop bumper overhang over an
adjacent sidewalk thus maintaining a minimum four foot (4') wide unimpeded
pedestrian pathway.
K.   Vehicle Impact Protection Devices: All zero curb segments with pedestrian
walkways immediately adjacent shall install appropriate vehicle impact
protection devices to define the parking area and prevent automobiles from
encroaching into areas which are solely intended for pedestrian use and
movement.
1.   The following standards shall apply to vehicle impact protection devices
immediately adjacent to off-street parking stalls and vehicle drive aisles
within off-street parking fields:
a.   Be of a minimum low-speed crash-rated design that can reasonably stop a
five thousand (5,000) pound vehicle when traveling at slow speeds.
b.   Be a minimum height of two feet (2') to ensure visibility by pedestrians
but shall not exceed four feet (4') in height except in those situations in
which Handicap Parking signage is incorporated into or attached to the vehicle
impact protection device. In these situations, the top of the device shall not
exceed six feet (6') in height.
c.   A minimum of five feet (5') shall be provided between each device.
d.   A minimum of four feet (4') of clear sidewalk shall be provided between
the device and any building or site elements, including such elements as trash
receptacles, outdoor seating areas, etc.
e.    Be decorative and of a design and color that is compatible with the
building architecture or other site amenities. Corporate colors shall be
considered signage, and the square footage of each device will be counted
toward the allowable wall sign area allocated to the building or tenant
frontage. Bollards for protection of building elements shall be of a neutral,
earthtone color that compliments the building but yet contrast with the
surrounding façade for visibility. Unless accommodated as part of the allowed
signage, yellow, orange, red, or other brightly colored bollards are only
allowed in specific situations when required by the fire code or other state or
federal laws/codes, e.g., around utility equipment.
f.   Except when approved under a Temporary Sign Permit, no signage or
advertisements are allowed on the devices.
g.   Devices may have lighting intended to provide illumination to walkways;
however, the design shall be such to avoid glare and spillover to other areas.
Illumination shall be static in color and intensity. The blinking, rotating,
cycling, flashing, or other suggestion of movement of the lighting aspect is
prohibited.
h.   Vehicle impact protection devices designed as and intended as planters
must be filled with vegetation. Seasonal decorations may be allowed in
combination with the vegetation. The irrigation of the devices is strongly
encouraged.
i.   The City Council as part of a site plan development permit shall have
authority to allow alternatives to device standards.
2.   Vehicle impact protection devices within pedestrian plaza areas or along
roadways and drive aisles in non-residential developments/areas which have a
pedestrian pathway immediately adjacent to the curb but no parking along the
curb shall be reviewed and approved as part of the site plan development
permit.
L.   Landscaping, Screening, And Open Space: Refer to chapter 19 of this title.
M.   Lighting: With respect to lighting, all of the following shall apply:
1.   Any lighting used to illuminate any off street parking or loading area
shall be so arranged as to divert the light away from adjoining residential
uses or premises in any Residential District and away from the traveled roadway
of public streets.
2.   Lighting fixtures shall possess sharp cutoff qualities at property lines.
3.   Any project that proposes the use of wall pack lighting on the perimeter
of the property shall be required to prepare an exterior lighting (photometric)
plan for review and approval by the City.
4.   Any lighting which exceeds one foot-candle at the property line shall not
comply with the requirements of this chapter.
5.   Low pressure sodium lighting fixtures are prohibited.
6.   At the discretion of the Director of Community Development, an exterior
lighting (photometric) plan may be required according to the following
standard: point by point foot-candle layout based upon a ten foot (10') grid
center, extending a minimum of twenty feet (20') outside the property lines.
N.   Maintenance And Security: All parking facilities shall be designed,
constructed and maintained with security as a priority to protect the safety of
the users. All required parking facilities shall be permanently maintained,
free of litter and debris.
O.   Waiver Of Requirements: With respect to a waiver of requirements, all of
the following shall apply:
1.   The City Council reserves the right to waive or modify to a lesser
restriction any provision or requirement of off street parking and loading
areas contained in this chapter, provided said waiver or modification does not
adversely affect the intent of these regulations to adequately safeguard the
general public and surrounding property.
2.   Exceptions may be considered for those uses where special circumstances
warrant a change and whereby the modification or waiver is determined to be in
the best interest of the general public.
(Ord. 1213, 11-4-1996; Ord. 1629, 4-25-2005; Ord. 1839, 9-21-2009; Ord. 1860,
3-22-2010; Ord. 2327, 10-1-2018; Ord. 2350, 3-4-2019; Ord. 2663, 7-21-2025)
9-15-7: NUMBER OF PARKING SPACES REQUIRED:
A.   Uses Not Specified: In the case of any building, structure or premises,
the use of which is not specifically mentioned herein, the provisions for a use
which is mentioned, and to which said use is similar shall apply, as determined
by the Development Services Director.
B.   Development With More Than One Use: If more than one use exists in a
building or on a site, each separate use's parking requirements shall be
calculated individually (i.e., restaurant in hotel - restaurant total
calculated for restaurant gross floor area (GFA) and hotel total calculated for
hotel guestrooms and staff).
C.   Parking Spaces Requirements For Land Uses:
Land Use Requirements
Land Use                                        Requirements
Residential:                                     
                                                Efficiency apartment - 1.5
                                                spaces per unit
                                                1 - 2 bedroom units - 1.75
   Multi-family dwelling                     spaces per unit
                                                3+ bedroom units - 2 spaces per
                                                unit
                                                1 visitor space per 10 units
   Townhomes and manufactured or mobile home 2 spaces per dwelling unit
park                                            Tandem parking allowed
                                                1 visitor space per 10 units
                                                2 spaces per dwelling unit
                                                Tandem parking allowed
   Single-family dwelling                    Attached units and manufactured
                                                housing - 1 visitor space per
                                                10 units
Service and commercial:                          
   Animal services                           3.5 spaces per 1,000 square
                                                feet of GFA
   Assembly spaces                           20 spaces per 1,000 square feet
                                                of GFA
                                                1 space per 4 fixed seats or 20
   Auditoriums, theaters, stadiums, and arenaspaces per 1,000 square feet of
                                                GFA, whichever is greater
                                                3 spaces per 1,000 square feet
Banks                                           of GFA
                                                3 queuing spaces per drive-
                                                through lane
Bar                                             1.5 spaces per 100 square feet
                                                of GFA
                                                2 spaces per 1,000 square feet
Bar/Restaurant Class 1 or 2 - Takeout only      of GFA
                                                1 space per employee
Bar/Restaurant Class 1 or 2 - Sit down          10 spaces per 1,000 square feet
                                                of GFA
Bowling centers                                 3 spaces per lane
                                                4 spaces per 1,000 square feet
                                                of GFA
Car, boat, and recreational vehicle dealers     Paved surface area shall be
                                                provided for each automobile on
                                                display for sale
                                                Full service: 1 space per
                                                employee on maximum shift
Car washes                                      Self-service: 2 spaces per
                                                stall
                                                2 space queuing lane for each
                                                stall
                                                3 spaces per 1,000 square feet
Child day care services                         of GFA
                                                1 space per employee
                                                1 space per van or bus
                                                10 spaces per 1,000 square feet
                                                of GFA
                                                 
Coffee Shop, with or without drive-through      11 queuing spaces per drive-
                                                through (5 of which shall be
                                                designated for the ordering
                                                station if it is separate from
                                                the pickup window)
Colleges, universities, vocational, and trade   1.5 spaces per employee
schools                                         1 space per 3 student desks or
                                                classroom seating capacity
                                                5 spaces per 1,000 square feet
Convenience store                               of GFA
                                                With gas sales - 1 space per
                                                pump
Driving range or miniature golf course          3 spaces
                                                1 space per tee/hole
                                                1 space per employee
                                                1 space per 5 seats in
Elementary and middle schools                   gymnasium and auditorium
                                                25 space pickup/drop off
                                                queuing lane
Golf courses                                    6 spaces per hole
                                                5 spaces per classroom
High schools                                    1 space per 10 students
                                                10 space pickup/drop off
                                                queuing lane
Hospitals and nursing and personal care         1 space per 3 beds
facilities                                      1 space per employee on maximum
                                                shift
                                                1 space for each guestroom
                                                1 space per employee - dwelling
Hotels/motels                                   parking may be used for this
                                                requirement in cases of bed and
                                                breakfasts
                                                2 spaces per 1,000 square feet
Laundry services                                of GFA
                                                3 queuing spaces per drive-
                                                through lane
Libraries or cultural exhibits                  3.5 spaces per 1,000 square
                                                feet of GFA
Manufacturing and industrial                    2 spaces per 1,000 square feet
                                                of GFA
Medical office                                  5 spaces per 1,000 square feet
                                                of GFA
Motion picture theaters, except drive-in,       1 space per 2 seats
single screen
Motion picture theaters, except drive-in,       1 space per 4 fixed seats
multi-screen
Office                                          3.5 spaces per 1,000 square
                                                feet of GFA
                                                5 spaces per 1,000 square feet
                                                of GFA
Physical fitness facilities/health club         4 spaces per netted court (such
                                                as tennis)
                                                1 space per 40 square feet of
                                                swimming pool area
Planned commercial center                       4.5 spaces per 1,000 square
                                                feet of GFA
                                                20 spaces per 1,000 square feet
Religious organizations and funeral services/   of assembly area
crematories                                     3 spaces per 1,000 square feet
                                                for non-assembly GFA
                                                1 space per 2 units or 0.5
                                                spaces per bed for a facility
Residential Care                                without dwelling units, and one
                                                spacer per employee on maximum
                                                shift
Restaurant                                      10 spaces per 1,000 square feet
                                                of GFA
                                                10 spaces per 1,000 square feet
                                                of GFA
                                                11 queuing spaces per drive-
Restaurant with Drive Thru                      through (5 of which shall be
                                                designated for the ordering
                                                station if it is separate from
                                                the pickup window
Retail                                          3.5 spaces per 1,000 square
                                                feet of GFA
                                                0.5 spaces per 1,000 square
                                                feet of GFA
                                                Interior access facilities -
Self-storage facilities                         demonstrate parking
                                                availability for reuse of the
                                                building for a common use in
                                                the zoning district in which it
                                                is located
                                                1 space per 2 seats, plus one
Theatrical procedures (except motion pictures)  space for each anticipated
and miscellaneous theatrical services           employee, volunteer, and actor
                                                present for a theatrical
                                                production
                                                3 spaces per service bay
Vehicle service station                         1 space per service vehicle
                                                1 space per employee on maximum
                                                shift
Warehousing, storage lots, and construction     0.75 spaces per 1,000 square
yards                                           feet of GFA
                                                1 space per employee
 
(Ord. 2350, 3-4-2019; amd. Ord. 2442, 10-5-2020; Ord. 2523, 6-20-2022; Ord.
2531, 7-18-2022; Ord. 2535, 8-15-2022; Ord. 2566, 5-15-2023; Ord. 2662, 7-7-
2025)
9-15-8: GENERAL OFF STREET LOADING REGULATIONS:
No off street loading spaces are required. If off street loading spaces are
provided, they shall be in accordance with all of the following standards:
A.   Each loading space shall be not less than ten feet (10') in width and
twenty feet (20') in length for loading spaces not requiring loading dock
access, and fifty feet (50') in length for loading dock access for trucks. They
shall be designed in a manner acceptable to the City providing adequate space
for loading access.
B.   Such loading area may occupy part of a rear yard, side yard or court
space, provided the loading area and access roadways meet all setbacks required
of off street parking areas as set forth in this chapter.
C.   Loading yards and loading docks shall be buffered from general public
view, public streets, public buildings, recreation facilities, parks, schools,
places of assembly for worship, Residential Zoned Districts and uses, and
screened from all other adjoining properties of contrasting and conflicting
uses.
D.   All loading yards and accesses to loading yards and loading docks shall be
paved with asphaltic or portland cement concrete pavement in accordance with
surfacing requirements set forth in the design standards of this chapter.
E.   Loading areas shall have lighting capable of providing adequate
illumination for security and safety. Lighting fixtures shall be energy
efficient and in scale with the height and use of the structure. Any
illumination, including security lighting, shall be directed away from
adjoining properties and public rights-of-way.
F.   Loading areas shall be striped indicating the loading spaces and
identifying the spaces for loading only. The striping shall be permanently
maintained in a clear and visible manner.
G.   Continuous concrete curbing of at least six inches (6") high and six
inches (6") wide shall be provided for all loading spaces, and shall be set at
least three feet (3') from any wall, fence, property line, walkway, or
structure. Wheel stops are not allowed as a substitute for curbing.
H.   Loading areas and docks shall be permitted only in rear and side lot
areas.
I.   Loading doors shall not open toward public streets.
J.   Sufficient space for turning and maneuvering loading vehicles shall be
provided on the site.
K.   Loading spaces shall be located and designed so that trucks shall not back
into or from a public street or alley.
L.   No part of an alley or street shall be used for loading except as
designated by the City for loading.
M.   No area may be utilized and counted both as a required parking space and a
loading dock. (Ord. 1213, 11-4-1996)
CHAPTER 16
TEMPORARY USE PERMITS
SECTION:
9-16-1: Regulations
9-16-2: Purpose And Intent
9-16-3: Application And Permit Processing
9-16-4: Prior Determination For Temporary Use Permit Approval
9-16-5: Uses Permitted With A Temporary Use Permit
9-16-6: General Regulations
9-16-7: Specific Requirements
9-16-8: Use Of Tents And Canopies
9-16-9: Conditions Of Approval
9-16-10: Fees
9-16-11: Appeal Procedure
9-16-12: Permit Revocation
9-16-13: Violations And Penalties
9-16-1: REGULATIONS:
The following regulations shall apply to temporary use permit applications
submitted to the City. (Ord. 2008, 10-14-2013, eff. 1-1-2014)
9-16-2: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
These regulations prescribe the conditions through which temporary uses of
limited duration may be permitted to occur within the City on private property,
such as agricultural, commercial, and civic activities (e.g., Christmas tree
sales, pumpkin sales, landscape material sales, sidewalk and tent sales, grand
openings, and planned events held on private properties that do not create
anticipated significant impacts to City property or right-of-way), and for
which it is unnecessary to include City staff in the preparation, planning, and
coordination of the requested temporary use.
The intent is to allow certain uses and activities on an interim or limited
basis that would not be allowed on a permanent basis on private property. This
chapter establishes minimum standards for the operation of temporary uses in a
manner which will promote the health, safety, and welfare of the patrons,
employees, and general public, which utilize or would be affected by the
establishment of the temporary use. (Ord. 2008, 10-14-2013, eff. 1-1-2014)
9-16-3: APPLICATION AND PERMIT PROCESSING:
A temporary use permit shall be required for all temporary uses that relate to
the stated purpose and intent of this chapter. A temporary use permit must be
applied for and issued by the City prior to the commencement of any temporary
use. It shall be unlawful for any person or organization to engage, sponsor, or
participate in any temporary use described herein without having first applied
for and obtained a permit in accordance with this chapter. Applications are to
be submitted not less than ten (10) calendar days prior to the proposed start
date of the temporary use, unless the City decides to waive the deadline. The
City reserves the right to reject any applications that have not been timely
submitted to the City.
Receiving approval of a temporary use permit from the City shall not preclude,
supersede, circumvent, or waive the applicant’s responsibility to obtain any
additional permits, licenses, and approvals for other applicable local, State,
and Federal regulations. The City reserves the right to impose special
guidelines and restrictions for any temporary use based upon the nature of the
proposed use, the proposed location of the use, and the anticipated attendance
of the use. City staff shall be responsible for the issuance of temporary use
permits. (Ord. 2008, 10-14-2013, eff. 1-1-2014; amd. Ord. 2570, 7-5-2023)
9-16-4: PRIOR DETERMINATION FOR TEMPORARY USE PERMIT APPROVAL:
The Director of Development Services or designee shall only approve an
application for a temporary use permit if all of the following findings can be
made:
A.   The proposed temporary use will be compatible with adjacent uses and will
not adversely affect the surrounding neighborhood by means of odor, noise,
dust, or other nuisance.
B.   The additional parking required by the temporary use will be provided on
site, if applicable, or adequate street parking is available in the immediate
area.
C.   Increased traffic caused by the temporary use will not adversely affect
the surrounding neighborhood or City at large.
D.   The proposed temporary use is consistent with the City's Comprehensive
Plan, this Code, and any other applicable, local, State, or Federal
regulations. (Ord. 2008, 10-14-2013, eff. 1-1-2014)
9-16-5: USES PERMITTED WITH A TEMPORARY USE PERMIT:
A.   The following uses are eligible for a temporary use permit, provided they
satisfy the following criteria specified in section 9-16-7 of this chapter:
Drive-in theater, seasonal.
Grand openings and planned events held on private properties that do not create
anticipated significant impacts to City property or right-of-way.
Group assembly activities (e.g., carnivals, fairs, rodeos, sport events,
concerts, worship services, and shows).
Parking lot sales, sidewalk sales (private sidewalks only), clearance sales, or
other temporary uses which, in the opinion of the Director of Development
Services or designee, are similar to the uses listed in this section. Parking
lot sale of fireworks is not permitted under a temporary use permit (see Title
13, Chapter 14).
Retail sales of Christmas trees.
Retail sales of landscape nursery material.
Retail sales of pumpkins.
Stands for the sale of agricultural produce and crops, including agricultural
specialties.
Temporary concrete and asphalt mixing and storage facilities in accordance with
regulations elsewhere in this chapter.
Temporary food and beverage uses not regulated as a mobile food unit under the
provisions of title 3, “Business And Licensing”, of this Code.
Other temporary uses which, in the opinion of the Director of Development
Services or designee, are similar to the uses listed in this section.
B.   Garage sales are exempt from these provisions, provided they do not occur
any more frequently than one (1) 3-day event per one hundred eighty (180) day
period. Garage sales occurring more frequently shall be considered a commercial
retail sales business in a residential zone, which is prohibited.
C.   A “temporary use” may be defined as short term or long term. A “short
term” use shall be defined as those uses with a maximum duration of two (2)
consecutive days or less. A “long term” use shall be defined as those uses with
a duration of more than two (2) consecutive days. The City may issue multiple
short term temporary use permits for consecutive two (2) day periods without
declaring the use to be long term, subject to, not to exceed eight (8) events
within a calendar year limitation provided in this chapter. (Ord. 2166, 8-22-
2016; amd. Ord. 2225, 5-30-2017; Ord. 2474, 6-7-2021; Ord. 2621, 8-5-2024)
9-16-6: GENERAL REGULATIONS:
Each temporary use shall:
A.   Permit: Be described in a permit thereby issued by the Director of
Development Services or designee prior to commencement of the use. This permit
shall be in addition to all other licenses, permits, or approvals otherwise
required by any governmental entity.
B.   Parking Spaces:
1.   The number of additional parking spaces required, if any, and the location
of such additional parking spaces, for the temporary activity shall be
determined by the Director of Development Services or designee. The number of
permanent parking spaces allowed to be used under the short term temporary use
permit shall be reviewed and determined by the Director of Development Services
or designee. (Ord. 2008, 10-14-2013, eff. 1-1-2014)
2.   The maximum number of permanent parking spaces allowed to be used for the
operation of a long term temporary use shall not exceed twenty percent (20%) of
the parking included on a site plan that was approved by the City to be counted
toward the allowable size of the proposed use or twenty percent (20%) of the
site area, whichever is more restrictive. (Ord. 2166, 8-22-2016)
C.   Preventing Dust: All unimproved parking areas and main walk areas shall be
kept damp or shall be covered with a material to prevent the rise of dust.
D.   Clean Sites: All sites shall be completely cleaned of debris and temporary
structures including, but not limited to: trash receptacles, signs, stands,
poles, electric wiring, or any other fixtures and appurtenances or equipment
connected therewith, within five (5) days after the termination of the
temporary use. (Ord. 2008, 10-14-2013, eff. 1-1-2014)
E.   Cleanup Bond: Except as provided in this section, a bond or cash deposit
shall be deposited with the Department of Development Services to assure
adequate cleanup of temporary uses that occur on vacant or undeveloped lots,
and/or involving the construction or placement of temporary structures. The
amount of the bond or cash deposit shall be determined by resolution of the
City Council. Temporary uses located in fully developed shopping centers will
be exempt from bonding or cash deposit, with the exception of uses that involve
construction or placement of a temporary structure, and any long term temporary
food and beverage facilities shall be required to post a bond or cash deposit.
F.   Sanitary Facilities: When determined necessary, sanitary facilities,
either portable or permanent, shall be made available to all employees,
attendants, customers, and participants of the temporary use during its
operational hours, as approved by the Director of Development Services or
designee, in concurrence with the City Engineer and the County Health
Department, unless stipulated otherwise in this chapter. If the restroom
facilities are located within an adjacent building, the written authorization
of the owner of the adjacent building shall be required, specifically stating
that the restroom facilities will be made available to the employees,
attendants, customers, and participants at all times during the hours of
operation of the temporary use. (Ord. 2166, 8-22-2016)
G.   Proof Of Ownership Or Permission Required: Proof of ownership, or a signed
letter from either the property owner or their authorized representative, for
the property on which the activity is to take place, shall be presented at the
time the temporary use permit is requested.
H.   Conform To Setback Requirements: All temporary structures including, but
not limited to, greenhouses, trailers, and mobile homes, shall conform to the
zoning setback requirements unless stated otherwise in this chapter.
I.   Multiple, Concurrent Temporary Uses: Multiple concurrent temporary uses on
the same property shall be prohibited. (Ord. 2008, 10-14-2013, eff. 1-1-2014)
9-16-7: SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS:
A.   Retail Sales Of Christmas Trees:
1.   Permitted zone locations: All commercial districts and the agricultural/
open space district (OS).
2.   Maximum duration: Forty (40) calendar days prior to December 25.
B.   Retail Sales Of Pumpkins:
1.   Permitted zone locations: All commercial districts and the agricultural/
open space district (OS).
2.   Maximum duration: October 1 through November 1.
C.   Lot And Sidewalk Commercial Activities:
1.   Permitted Zone Locations: All commercial districts. (Ord. 2008, 10-14-
2013, eff. 1-1-2014)
2.   Maximum Duration: Two (2) consecutive days, not to exceed eight (8) events
within a calendar year. This time limitation shall be accordingly reduced if
any grand openings or planned events, pursuant to subsection D of this section,
have occurred within the same calendar year. (Ord. 2166, 8-22-2016)
3.   Setbacks: All merchandise, trucks, trailers, and other equipment shall be
set back a minimum number of feet equal to the parking lot setback, and none of
these items shall be placed closer to the right of way than the parking lot. In
an area where there is no parking lot, the distance shall be equal to or
greater than the parking lot setback required by the zoning ordinance for that
district.
4.   Area Of Operation: The area of the temporary use operation shall not
exceed eight hundred (800) square feet and no dimension shall exceed forty (40)
linear feet.
D.   Grand Openings And Planned Events Held On Private Properties That Do Not
Create Anticipated Significant Impacts To City Property Or Right Of Way:
1.   Permitted zone locations: All zoning districts. (Ord. 2008, 10-14-2013,
eff. 1-1-2014)
2.   Maximum duration: Two (2) consecutive days, not to exceed eight (8) events
within a calendar year. This time limitation shall be accordingly reduced if
any lot or sidewalk commercial activities, pursuant to subsection C of this
section, have occurred within the same calendar year. (Ord. 2166, 8-22-2016)
3.   Other: All such events shall be conducted by a business located on the
property.
E.   Group Assembly Activities:
1.   Permitted Zone Locations: Any zoning district.
2.   Maximum Duration: Fourteen (14) consecutive days, not to exceed four (4)
events within a calendar year.
3.   Exception: Upon approval of the director of development services or
designee, the number of events in the Valley Junction historic business
district may exceed four (4) within a calendar year.
4.   Hours Of Operation: Residential zones, seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. to ten
o'clock (10:00) P.M. except on Fridays and Saturdays to twelve o'clock (12:00)
midnight with approval of the chief of police; all other zones as determined by
the director of development services or designee.
F.   Real Estate Sales Offices And Model Homes: (Rep. by Ord. 2166, 8-22-2016)
G.   Agricultural Produce Stands:
1.   Permitted zone locations: Any zoning district.
2.   Termination: Stands and displays shall be removed when not used for a
period of thirty (30) consecutive days.
H.   Construction Yards And Offices: (Rep. by Ord. 2166, 8-22-2016)
I.   Caretaker's Dwelling: (Rep. by Ord. 2166, 8-22-2016)
J.   Retail Sales Of Landscape Nursery Materials:
1.   Permitted Zone Locations: All commercial districts.
2.   Maximum Duration:
a.   Spring sales: March 15 - July 15.
b.   Fall sales: September 1 - October 31.
3.   Restrictions Of Merchandise And Products: This use is limited to the
display of green goods, i.e., living plants and associated garden products.
Associated garden products may include:
a.   Bagged bulk materials such as topsoil, mulch, compost, peat, and
fertilizer.
b.   Garden pavers, stone, and prefabricated stepping stones.
c.   Birdbaths or similar lawn ornaments as a minor portion of the products
displayed.
d.   Other products determined to be consistent with the intent of this
subsection J with the approval of the director of development services or
designee.
4.   Prohibited Merchandise And Products: The following items and products are
strictly prohibited as part of the merchandise for sale or displayed as part of
a temporary garden center:
a.   Garden tractors, lawn mowers, or other motorized lawn/garden equipment.
b.   Fencing, deck materials, landscape timbers, and concrete.
c.   Trailers, wagons, carts, and wheelbarrows.
d.   Lawn furniture, patio furniture, grills, benches, hot tubs, and play
structures.
e.   Sheds, playhouses, storage cabinets, and swimming pools.
f.   Any other products or merchandise that the director of development
services or designee determined to be inconsistent with the intent of this
subsection J.
5.   Safety Standards: In order to promote the safety of the patrons of these
facilities, the following shall be required:
a.   Bulk material shall be neatly stacked no higher than forty eight inches
(48") above the pavement.
b.   All sales areas shall be separated from vehicular uses by the placement of
a fence, or barrier acceptable to the director of development services or
designee to prevent pedestrian and vehicular conflicts. If a barrier is of an
open nature where patrons can reach through and obtain access to the
merchandise, a four foot (4') walkway shall be located adjacent to the barrier
to prevent patrons from standing outside the barrier in trafficways to shop.
c.   The door openings for any greenhouses, shade structures, or similar
enclosure shall have a minimum ten foot (10') setback from drive aisles where
an opening in the barrier is provided aligned with the door of the structure.
d.   Where openings in the barriers occur for pedestrian access, sight
visibility shall be maintained so that vehicles can clearly see pedestrians
approaching the opening from a distance of no less than fifty feet (50').
e.   Temporary drive aisles shall be maintained at a minimum twenty four feet
(24') width for two-way traffic and shall be delineated by the placement of
traffic barriers, fencing, or some other physical marker that clearly informs
drivers of the end of the parking area and the start of the drive aisle. A
clear line of sight shall be maintained at the entrance and exit of the
temporary drive aisles.
f.   Vehicle loading areas shall be located in an area that minimizes
pedestrian and vehicle conflict and provides for the safe loading of
merchandise and vehicle access to and from the traffic lanes to the loading
area, preferably without backing movements.
6.   Application For Temporary Garden Center Permit: Application for a
temporary garden center permit shall be made on the prescribed form(s) provided
by the department of development services. The application shall be accompanied
by the prescribed number of copies of a project plan and such other detailed
elevations, plans, and other information as may be required to adequately
evaluate the proposed use.
A plan of the layout of the proposed use shall be submitted to the development
services department with the application on a base plan prepared in accordance
with the site plan requirements of the city. The proposed layout of the garden
center area may be drawn onto a copy of a previously approved site plan for the
temporary use permit submittal. The layout plan shall identify the following:
a.   The area on the site proposed to be utilized as part of the temporary
garden center and associated sales areas.
b.   The areas dedicated to the display of green goods, i.e., flowers, trees,
and shrubs and the area of the site dedicated to bulk material storage.
c.   Proposed modifications to the traffic patterns and methods proposed to
notify patrons and identify the temporary traffic pattern changes, i.e.,
signage, traffic cones, fencing, and barriers.
d.   Proposed vehicle loading zone.
e.   Proposed temporary barriers or corral with an architectural elevation,
photo, or sketch of the barriers' proposed construction.
f.   Location of electrical connection and water connection, if applicable.
7.   Waste Disposal: The applicant shall provide, as determined by the director
of development services or designee, adequate facilities for disposal of trash,
waste, pallets, dead plants, broken bags, and empty plant transport and display
racks.
8.   Restroom Facilities: Permanent restroom facilities shall be provided in an
adjacent building at all times during the temporary use activity. No portable
restroom facilities shall be allowed.
9.   Indemnification And Proof Of Insurance: If the garden center is on public
property, the owner or operator of any long term temporary use shall provide
evidence of comprehensive general liability coverage and contractual liability
insurance by an insurance company licensed to do business in the state of Iowa
in the limits of at least one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) for each personal
injury accident and/or death; one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) for each
aggregate personal injury and/or death; and one million dollars ($1,000,000.00)
for each property damage accident. The evidence shall name the city as a
coinsured and shall state that it cannot be canceled or materially altered
without giving the city at least thirty (30) days' written notice by registered
mail, return receipt requested.
If the garden center is on public property, Tthe owner or operator of a
temporary garden center shall execute an agreement, acceptable to the city,
which indemnifies and holds harmless the city from any and all liability,
damages, claims, costs, expenses, interest, and reasonable attorney fees
relating to the garden center and associated facilities on the property.
10.   Electrical Service: Any electrical service shall be provided as follows:
a) overhead power connection with a minimum clearance above grade of fourteen
feet (14'); b) installation of an underground conduit; or c) other method
acceptable to the city. The use of an overhead connection shall only be allowed
in those areas where overhead electrical service currently exists in the area.
Use of extension cords, cables or wires laying on the ground or otherwise
connected to a power source is expressly prohibited for long term garden center
uses. An electrical permit shall be obtained prior to any electrical
installation or connection.
11.   Removal: At the expiration of the temporary use permit, any structures,
barricades, shelving, pallets, leftover merchandise, or other facilities
associated with the temporary use shall be removed from the site in accordance
with provisions stated in section
9-16-6, "General Regulations", of this chapter.
K.   Temporary Food And Beverage Facilities: Short term temporary food and
beverage facilities that are not regulated as a mobile food unit shall comply
with the regulations stated elsewhere in this chapter for lot and sidewalk
commercial activities, grand openings, and planned events held on private
properties that do not create anticipated significant impacts to city property
or right of way.
Long term temporary food and beverage facilities are temporary facilities that
dispense food or beverages from a specific location for a period longer than
would be allowed under the short term temporary use regulations and which are
not on wheels and are not easily portable or movable, such as a shed or kiosk.
Mobile or movable temporary food and beverage facilities (i.e., mobile food
units and pushcarts) are regulated under title 3, "Business And Licensing", of
this code.
Long term temporary food and beverage facilities shall comply with the
following standards:
1.   Permitted Zone Locations: All nonresidential zoning districts.
2.   Maximum Duration: April 1 through October 31 of a calendar year,
inclusive.
3.   Maximum Square Footage Of Structure: One hundred sixty (160) square feet.
4.   Health Standards And Licensing: The applicant must obtain licensing,
certificates of inspection, or any other documentation necessary to comply with
all applicable requirements of the state, county, or municipality regarding
health standards whenever applicable.
5.   Electrical Service: Electrical service shall be provided as follows: a)
overhead power connection with a minimum clearance above grade of fourteen feet
(14'); b) installation of an underground conduit; or c) other method acceptable
to the city. The use of an overhead connection shall only be allowed in those
areas where overhead electrical service exists. Use of an extension cord, cable
or wire laying on the ground or otherwise connected to a power source is
expressly prohibited for long term temporary food and beverage uses. An
electrical permit shall be obtained prior to any electrical installation or
connection.
6.   Signage: No detached or freestanding signage shall be permitted except
with the issuance of a short term temporary sign permit. The maximum amount of
allowed wall signage shall be based upon one foot (1') of sign for each foot of
length on the longest side of the structure. All other provisions of the city's
sign code shall apply.
7.   Removal: At the expiration of the annual temporary use permit, all things
associated with the temporary use shall be removed from the site in accordance
with provisions stated in section
9-16-6 of this chapter. No temporary food and beverage facilities shall be
allowed to be stored on a site that is not zoned appropriately for storage and
warehousing, screened in accordance with city code requirements, and/or having
received prior city council approval through an entitlement process for storage
and warehousing.
L.   Temporary Concrete And Asphalt Mixing And Storage Facilities (Temporary
Plant): The erection and operation of facilities which manufacture, mix, and
prepare concrete or asphalt for the construction of roads, bridges, retaining
walls, parking lots, and other large structures on a temporary basis, which are
generally to be in operation for periods of time longer than thirty (30) days
and used to fill trucks for transport to the project site, may be allowed
subject to the following:
1.   Zoning Districts: Allowed in all zoning districts.
2.   Separation Requirements: The areas of operation within the facility shall
not be located within one thousand feet (1,000') from an existing residential
dwelling, unless all owners and tenants, if any, of the dwellings have
submitted written consent to the city with the application for approval. Areas
of operation shall include any buildings, structures, or equipment used in the
mixing, transporting, loading, or storage of materials used in the operation.
3.   Site Access: Access to the site shall only be allowed from an arterial
street or major collector as identified on the city's comprehensive plan.
4.   Other Applicable Laws, Rules, And Regulations: Any operation shall be
conducted in accordance with all applicable city, county, state, and federal
laws, rules, and regulations (i.e., air quality, water pollution, and erosion
control).
5.   Permit: Permits are issued for the calendar year and may be issued or
renewed on an annual basis at the discretion of the director of development
services or designee. The director's decision shall be based upon the following
findings:
a.   The proposed use is consistent with the city's comprehensive plan and any
applicable subarea plan.
b.   All applicable standards and conditions have been imposed which protect
the public health, safety, and welfare.
c.   There is adequate on site and off site public infrastructure to support
the proposed use.
d.   The proposed use has satisfied all the requirements contained in this
code.
e.   The proposed use shall not adversely affect the surrounding neighborhood
which will be subjected to the use, including the haul routes, in a way that
would affect the stability or integrity of the zoning ordinance and the quality
of the existing neighborhood.
6.   Conditions Of Approval: The director of development services or designee
may impose any such conditions on the permit as deemed necessary to meet the
purpose and intent of this chapter.
7.   Request Referral: The director shall have the discretion to refer any
temporary plant request to the city council for its review and action.
8.   Submittal Requirements: The applicant shall file an application and be
required to submit the following information with the temporary use permit
application for consideration:
a.   A map showing the proposed location of the facilities and the existing
land uses within one thousand feet (1,000') of the perimeter of the facility.
b.   Site plan showing the layout of the facility, material stockpile areas,
access points to the site, washout areas, truck staging and parking areas, and
any other applicable information needed for the director to make the
appropriate findings.
c.   A map showing the proposed haul routes for incoming materials and for
trucks to and from the project site.
d.   Explanation of the method(s) to ensure the control of noise and dust at
and around the site.
e.   Proposed method for the containment of site runoff and washout areas to
protect surrounding properties and drainageways.
f.   Method for providing, when weather and site conditions necessitate, daily
cleaning of streets to and from the job site to remove dirt, mud, and other
debris from streets and roads. A contact person shall also be named to
facilitate cleanup, if necessary.
g.   Explanation of reclamation of the site following the completion of the
use.
h.   Proposed hours of operation and expected duration of the use.
9.   Removal And Reclamation: Upon completion of the project or the expiration
of the permit, the applicant shall be responsible for the removal and
reclamation of the property in accordance with the approved reclamation plan.
All equipment, trailers, debris, unused materials, and temporary structures
shall be removed from the plant site within thirty (30) days of the completion
of the operation. The soil restabilization and postoperation erosion control
measures shall be established as soon as possible and maintained until
permanent erosion measures have been established in accordance with the
reclamation plan.
10.   Revocation And Suspension Of Permit: The city may, for just cause,
suspend, revoke, or not allow for the renewal of a permit, upon serving the
owner of the operation with written notice of the charges forming the basis for
the proposed penalty. Just cause shall include, but not be limited to:
a.   Obtaining the permit through fraud or misrepresentation; or
b.   Operating contrary to the terms of this code and any conditions of
approval imposed; or
c.   Suspending doing business for a period of ninety (90) consecutive days,
unless permission is applied for and approved by the director of development
services or designee.
M.   Drive-In Theater, Seasonal:
1.   Permitted Zone Locations: All nonresidential zoning districts except a
short-term Temporary Use shall be allowed on a non-residentially used property
such as a school or religious facility. Such short-term temporary use
activities of this purpose shall not exceed four events within a calendar year
and shall be considered part of the total number of allowable short-term events
within a calendar year for the property/establishment.
2.   Maximum Duration:
a.   Daily Hours of Operation: Two (2) hours before the start of the movie/film
and maximum of one (1) hour upon conclusion of the movie/film.
b.   Seasonal Days of Operation: April 1 through November 1.
3.   A site plan illustrating the intended layout of the site and all
components of the operation shall be provided as part of the temporary use
permit application. Said plan shall illustrate at a minimum vehicle circulation
routes, including entrances and exits, entrance queuing, parking arrangement,
pedestrian use areas and pathways, concessions and restroom locations,
temporary storage, special lighting and any and all other ancillary components.
Said site layout and operation shall be acceptable to the City, including
Emergency Response agencies and Traffic Engineer.
4.   Setbacks: All trucks, equipment, temporary structures, barriers, etc.
shall be set back a minimum number of feet equal to the parking lot setback,
and none of these items shall be placed closer to the right of way than the
parking lot. In an area where there is no parking lot, the distance shall be
equal to or greater than the parking lot setback required by the zoning
ordinance for that district.
5.   Video displays create concern for public safety due to the potential
distraction to the motoring public viewing the movie screen from adjacent
roadways and the potential intrusion of light and sound onto adjacent
properties. Every effort should be made in the placement of the screen to limit
the view from the general public on adjacent roadways and near-by properties.
Views of any movie screen shall be mitigated to the satisfaction of the City to
prevent a continuously unobstructed view from the street of more than five (5)
seconds.
6.   Amplified Sound: Other than the transmission of audio to the vehicles in
attendance via transmitter, the use of amplified sound will require the
issuance of a sound permit.
7.   Waste Disposal: The applicant shall provide, as determined by the director
of development services or designee, adequate facilities for disposal of trash.
8.   All merchandise, trucks, equipment, barricades, etc. that are not secured
to the site shall be removed within one (1) hour of the end of the last
screening. At the expiration of the temporary use permit, all things associated
with the temporary use shall be removed from the site in accordance with
provisions stated in section 9-16-6 of this chapter. (Ord. 2008, 10-14-2013,
eff. 1-1-2014; amd. Ord. 2472, 6-7-2021; Ord. 2166, 8-22-2016; Ord. 2613, 6-3-
2024)
9-16-8: USE OF TENTS AND CANOPIES:
Tents and canopies may be used for promotional and recreational functions,
provided they comply with subsections A through E of this section as listed
herein:
A.   Permit Required: All tents and canopies are required to be issued a
permit. The tent permit fee will be established by resolution of the city
council. The application for a permit shall include the following information:
1.   Plot plan showing exact location of the tent or canopy and traffic
circulation when located in a parking lot. Adjacent parking areas must also be
shown.
2.   Size of the tent.
3.   Fire retardancy certificate.
4.   Dates and time of use.
B.   Fire Protection And Existing Requirements: Tents and canopies of any size
shall conform in all respects with the fire code adopted by the city.
C.   Anchorage: Tents shall be anchored so that they resist the wind loads as
specified in the building code adopted by the city.
D.   Location: The location of tents and canopies shall be in accordance with
the fire code adopted by the city.
E.   Size: Tents and canopies shall be limited to four thousand (4,000) square
feet in area. (Ord. 2008, 10-14-2013, eff. 1-1-2014)
9-16-9: CONDITIONS OF APPROVAL:
The director of development services or designee may impose such conditions on
a temporary use permit as is necessary to meet the purposes of this chapter and
protect the public health, safety and welfare and adjacent uses. Conditions
which may be imposed may include, but are not limited to:
A.   Yard setback and open space requirements.
B.   Parking.
C.   Fences, walls, or other screening.
D.   Signs.
E.   Vehicular and pedestrian ingress and egress.
F.   Property maintenance during the course of the temporary use.
G.   Control of illumination, noise, odor, vibration, or other nuisances.
H.   Hours of operations. (Ord. 2008, 10-14-2013, eff. 1-1-2014)
9-16-10: RESERVED:
Reserved by Ord. 2570.
9-16-11: APPEAL PROCEDURE:
A.   City staff's decision to approve or deny a temporary use permit may be
appealed to the city council by making a written request to the city clerk. The
appeal will be placed on the agenda for the next available city council
meeting.
B.   After receiving the appeal and considering any submitted comments, the
city council shall affirm, reverse, or modify the decision of city staff. The
decision of the city council shall be the final determination as to whether or
not the city approves the temporary use permit. (Ord. 2008, 10-14-2013, eff. 1-
1-2014)
9-16-12: PERMIT REVOCATION:
A temporary use permit for any event in progress may be revoked and the event
terminated by the chief of police or the fire chief, or their respective
designees, if the safety of the public is imminently endangered by activities
generated by the event, the event has caused injury to persons or damage to
property, or if there is a major violation of the conditions of the permit such
that the standards of issuance have not been satisfied. (Ord. 2008, 10-14-2013,
eff. 1-1-2014)
9-16-13: VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES:
The operation of a temporary use is a privilege allowed by this chapter.
Failure to maintain a temporary use in compliance with the conditions of
approval and the regulations of this chapter may be punished as set forth in
section
1-4-1 of this code.
A written notice of a minor violation of the temporary use permit shall be sent
to the operator of the temporary use and the property owner, if different than
the operator, and the operator shall have a minimum of five (5) calendar days
and a maximum of ten (10) calendar days, as determined by the director of
development services or designee, to bring the site into compliance. If the
operator fails to correct the violation in the prescribed time, the city may
revoke the temporary use permit and issue a cease and desist order for the
temporary use. There shall also be a one year moratorium from that date on the
issuance of any other temporary use permits on the property and a one year
probationary period for the second year following the violation. During the
probationary period, if the operator of a temporary use fails to maintain the
premises and the use in conformance with the conditions of approval and this
code, after the notification procedures noted above, the city may revoke the
temporary use permit and no other temporary use permits shall be issued on the
property for a period of two (2) years. (Ord. 2008, 10-14-2013, eff. 1-1-2014)
CHAPTER 17
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT FACILITIES
SECTION:
9-17-1: Purpose
9-17-2: Definitions
9-17-3: Location of Adult Bookstores, Movie Theaters, Nightclubs, Motels, Adult
Businesses and Newsracks
9-17-4: Identification of Newsracks
9-17-5: Impounding of Adult Newsracks
9-17-6: Penalty
9-17-7: Minimal Distance Violations
9-17-8: Permitted Areas
9-17-1: PURPOSE:
In adopting this Chapter, it is recognized that adult entertainment facilities
have certain objectionable side effects which render these adult facilities
incompatible with residential and family-oriented uses, when the adult
facilities are located directly adjacent to such uses. This Chapter seeks to
ensure that residential and family-oriented uses, and adult entertainment
facilities will be located in separate and compatible locations. It is a
subject of legitimate concern for the City to use its zoning power to preserve
the quality of life, preserve the City's neighborhoods and to meet effectively
the increasing encroachments of urbanization upon the quality of life within
the City. (Ord. 1054, 7-6-1993)
9-17-2: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this Chapter, the following terms shall have the following meanings:
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT FACILITIES: Includes but is not limited to the following:
A.   Adult Bookstore: An establishment having as the primary portion of its
stock in trade, books, magazines and other periodicals which are substantially
devoted to the depiction of "specified sexual activities" and "specified
anatomical areas".
B.   Adult Business: Any business or establishment where a "specified sexual
activity" or a "specified anatomical area" is displayed.
C.   Adult Motel: A motel or similar establishment offering public
accommodations for any form of consideration which provides patrons with closed
circuit television transmissions, films, motion pictures, video cassettes,
slides or other photographic reproductions which are characterized by an
emphasis upon the depiction or description of "specified sexual activities" or
"specified anatomical areas".
D.   Adult Movie Theater: Any theater, arcade or similar establishment where
enclosed building or open air facility is used for presenting material in the
form of motion picture film, video tape or other similar means which is
substantially devoted to the depiction of "specified sexual activities" and
"specified anatomical areas" for observation by persons therein.
E.   Adult Newsrack: Any coin-operated machine or device which dispenses
material substantially devoted to the depiction of "specified sexual
activities" and "specified anatomical areas".
F.   Adult Nightclub: Any club, cabaret, nightclub, bar, or similar
establishment where an enclosed building or open air facility is used for live
performances which are characterized by the exposure of "specified sexual
activities" and "specified anatomical areas" for observation by persons
therein.
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS:
A.   Less than completely and opaquely covered:
1.   Human genitals;
2.   Mature human buttocks;
3.   Mature human female breast below a point immediately above the top of the
areola; and
B.   Human male genitals in a discernible turgid state, even if completely and
opaquely covered.
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES:
A.   Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal;
B.   Acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse or sodomy;
C.   Fondling or other touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttock or
female breast; and
D.   Minors engaged in a prohibited sexual act or simulation of a prohibited
sexual act. (Ord. 1054, 7-6-1993; amd. Ord. 2566, 5-15-2023)
9-17-3: LOCATION OF ADULT BOOKSTORES, MOVIE THEATERS, NIGHTCLUBS, MOTELS, ADULT
BUSINESSES AND NEWSRACKS:
No person, whether as principal or agent, clerk or employee, either for himself
or any other person, or as an officer of any corporation, or otherwise, shall
place, maintain, own or operate any adult bookstore, adult movie theater, adult
nightclub, adult motel, adult business or adult newsrack in the following
locations:
A.   Locations:
1.   In any residential area in the City including upon any sidewalk abutting
upon such residential area;
2.   Within one thousand feet (1,000') of any residentially zoned or used
property, or any property designated on the City's Comprehensive Plan as
residentially oriented;
3.   Within one thousand feet (1,000') of any parcel of real property upon
which is located any of the following facilities:
a.   An elementary school, junior high school or senior high school;
b.   A church which conducts religious programs;
c.   Park or recreational facilities operated and improved by the City, Polk or
Dallas County, the Polk or Dallas County Conservation Board or the State of
Iowa;
d.   Federal, State, County, City or special district governmental offices;
e.   Supermarket or convenience market primarily engaged in the sale of food;
f.   Restaurant, fast-food or food establishment catering to family trade;
4.   Within two thousand feet (2,000') of any other adult entertainment
facility, as defined in Section
9-17-2 of this Chapter. "Adult newsrack" for the purpose of this Section means
a single coin-operated device, and not a machine with double or triple
dispensing capacity.
B.   Measurement of Distance: The distance between any two (2) adult
entertainment facilities shall be measured in a straight line, without regard
to intervening structures, from the closest exterior structure wall of each
business. The distance between any adult entertainment facilities and any
religious institution, school or public park, government office, supermarket,
restaurant or bar/restaurant or any property designated for residential use or
used for residential purposes shall be measured in a straight line, without
regard to intervening structures, from the closest property line of the adult
entertainment facilities to the closest property line of the religious
institution, school, public park, government office, supermarket, restaurant or
bar/restaurant or the property designated for residential use or used for
residential purposes.
C.   Signs: All on-site signage shall conform to the Sign Ordinance1. See
Chapter 18 of this Title.1 of this Title.
D.   Viewing Area:
1.   It is unlawful to maintain, operate or manage or permit to be maintained,
operated or managed any adult theater or arcade in which the viewing areas are
not visible from a continuous main aisle or are obscured by a curtain, door,
wall or other enclosure. For purposes of this Section, "viewing area" means the
area where a patron or customer would ordinarily be positioned while watching
the performance, picture, show or film.
2.   It is unlawful for more than one person at a time to occupy any
individually partitioned viewing area or booth.
3.   It is unlawful to create, maintain or permit to be maintained any holes or
other openings between any two (2) booths or individual viewing areas for the
purpose of providing viewing or physical access between the booth or individual
viewing area.
4.   The opening to the viewing area shall be from the main aisle. (Ord. 1054,
7-6-1993; amd. Ord. 1380, 7-26-1999; Ord. 2566, 5-15-2023)
9-17-4: IDENTIFICATION OF NEWSRACKS:
The owners of adult newsracks shall have their name, address and telephone
number clearly visible on each newsrack located within the City. If the
identification is not clearly visible that shall be grounds for immediate
impoundment of the newsrack by the City. (Ord. 1054, 7-6-1993)
9-17-5: IMPOUNDING OF ADULT NEWSRACKS:
A.   Impoundment:
1.   The provisions of this Code dealing with nonconforming uses shall not be
applicable to the location of adult newsracks existing on the effective date
hereof, but thereafter the location of adult newsracks shall be subject to the
nonconforming use provisions of this Code.
2.   An adult newsrack found in violation of this Chapter may be impounded by
any police officer or Code enforcement officer of the City after the following
actions have occurred:
a.   A notice of violation has been affixed to the adult newsrack stating the
section of this Chapter which has been violated and stating that the adult
newsrack will be impounded if the violation is not abated within seven (7)
days;
b.   A notice of violation has been sent by certified mail, return receipt
requested, to the owner of the adult newsrack as identified on the newsrack, if
readable, stating the section of this Chapter which has been violated and
stating that the adult newsrack will be impounded if the violation is not
abated within seven (7) days; (Ord. 1054, 7-6-1993)
c.   The violation has not been abated within seven (7) days of the posting of
the notice of violation or the mailing of the certified letter, whichever
occurs later; (Ord. 1380, 7-26-1999)
d.   The Police Department or Code enforcement office has presented to any
magistrate affidavits or other evidence sufficient to show a prima facie
violation of this Chapter;
e.   A magistrate has issued a written order permitting the impounding of the
adult newsrack pursuant to this Chapter.
3.   Whenever an adult newsrack is impounded, a complaint for violation of
Section
9-17-3 of this Chapter must be filed within fourteen (14) days of the
impounding. If a final appealable decision in such action is not rendered
within sixty (60) days from the filing of the action, the complaint shall be
dismissed; provided, however, that no complaint shall be dismissed because a
final appealable decision was not rendered within sixty (60) days of the filing
of the action if the defendant named therein is responsible for extending the
judicial determination beyond the allowable time limit.
4.   The person who provides sufficient proof of ownership of such adult
newsrack may have such adult newsrack, together with all monies, if any,
impounded, returned immediately after the filing of a complaint for violation
of Section
9-17-3 of this Chapter upon application to the Police Department or Code
enforcement officer. The person who provides sufficient proof of ownership of
such adult newsrack may have the contents of such newsrack returned upon the
date that a final appealable decision in such action is rendered or upon the
date the action is dismissed, upon application to the Police Department or the
Code enforcement officer. (Ord. 1054, 7-6-1993)
9-17-6: PENALTY:
Any person who violates the provisions of this Chapter upon conviction shall be
punished as set forth in Section
1-4-1 of this Code. (Ord. 1380, 7-26-1999)
9-17-7: MINIMAL DISTANCE VIOLATIONS:
It is recognized that adult newsracks may be jostled or inadvertently moved
minor distances by third persons with a resulting violation of the provisions
of Section
9-17-3 of this Chapter. Notwithstanding any other provision of this Chapter,
such a minimal distance violation, not exceeding five feet (5'), shall not
constitute a violation of this Chapter, and the City's Police Department or the
City's Code enforcement officer shall notify the owner of the adult newsrack by
certified mail, return receipt requested, of the existence of the minimal
distance requirements. Notwithstanding the provisions of this Section, all
adult newsracks shall comply with the encroachment permit provisions of this
Code. (Ord. 1054, 7-6-1993)
9-17-8: PERMITTED AREAS:
The areas in the City in which adult entertainment facilities are permitted are
defined in the Commercial Use Matrix1. See Section
9-6-6 of this Title.1 of this Title. (Ord. 1380, 7-26-1999)
CHAPTER 18
SIGNS
SECTION:
9-18-1: Title
9-18-2: Purpose
9-18-3: General Statement Of Intent And Recommended Practices
9-18-4: Definitions
9-18-5: Permits
9-18-6: License Fee, Bond And Insurance
9-18-7: Inspections
9-18-8: Maintenance
9-18-9: Legal Nonconforming Signs
9-18-10: Commercial And Noncommercial Signs And Messages
9-18-11: Exempted Signs
9-18-12: Prohibited Signs
9-18-13: Areas Of Special Character
9-18-14: Illumination
9-18-15: Ground Signs
9-18-16: Wall Signs
9-18-17: Special Signs
9-18-18: Enforcement
9-18-19: Appeal Procedure
9-18-20: Variances
9-18-21: Penalties
9-18-1: TITLE:
This chapter shall be known and may be cited and referred to as the SIGN
ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF WEST DES MOINES, IOWA. (Ord. 2210, 4-17-2017)
9-18-2: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to provide a comprehensive and balanced legal
framework for the regulation of signs and graphics. These regulations preserve
the right of free speech and expression, protect the public safety and welfare,
preserve the visual character of the City of West Des Moines and protect
property values. It is the intent of this chapter to:
A.   Set standards and provide uniform controls that permit a reasonable use of
signs that are compatible with their surroundings; and
B.   Prohibit the erection of signs in such numbers, sizes, designs,
illumination and locations as may create a hazard to pedestrians, bicyclists
and motorists; and
C.   Avoid excessive signage and visual competition, so that legal signs
provide adequate avenues of free speech and communication, while minimizing
clutter, unsightliness, confusion and blighting influences; and
D.   Ensure that sign design builds on the image, character and visual
environment that the City of West Des Moines seeks to promote and protects
property values; and
E.   Protect and prevent possible damage or obstruction to public utilities and
infrastructure. (Ord. 2210, 4-17-2017)
9-18-3: GENERAL STATEMENT OF INTENT AND RECOMMENDED PRACTICES:
Signs are an integral part of the community and a necessary method for
communication for many types of messages and information. As technology
evolves, so do the methods and means of communication in the sign industry. It
is difficult to anticipate all the possible scenarios where signs will be
utilized. This chapter intends to outline minimum standards for signs and
associated structures, but also recognizes that more restrictive standards may
be necessary to protect and guide users in the community's desires for
sensitive sign design and placement, as well as to enhance and protect specific
areas of the community. The provisions of this chapter are not intended to
prevent the installation of any material or to prohibit any design or method
not specifically prescribed by this Code, provided that any such alternative
material, design, or method can be shown to meet the intent of the provisions
of this Code and is at least equivalent to that prescribed by this Code. The
Director of Development Services shall have the authority to grant minor
exceptions and render interpretations of these regulations for individual cases
where the strict letter of this chapter would not be possible and an
alternative solution can be identified that would still comply with the intent
of this Code. The following provisions should be used as a guide to the overall
design and development of sign proposals within the community and provide a
minimum basis for interpretations that may be required in the application of
the regulations of this chapter:
A.   Integral Design Element: All signs should be an integral design element of
a building's architecture, and be compatible with the project's overall
character and building design in terms of size, shape, color, texture, and
lighting. Signs should not visually compete with the architecture of the
building and design of the site. Wherever possible, signs within new
developments should also complement the character and style of existing
developments within the context area of the new development. Signs should be
integrated so that they become a natural part of the building facade and the
site design.
B.   Balance: Commercial signs should reflect a balance between allowing
adequate signage for business identification while protecting the visual
aesthetic of West Des Moines streetscapes and natural environment.
C.   Business Identity: Business identity, either by awnings, accent bands,
paint or other applied color schemes, signage, parapet details, decorative roof
details or materials should not be the dominant architectural feature of a
building. Accent colors should be used judiciously.
D.   Logical Sign Areas: New building design should anticipate signage
locations. Building elevations should provide logical areas for signs and allow
flexibility for new users as the building is re-used over time.
E.   Integrate Sign Locations: Sign locations should be integrated with the
overall design of the site with significant landscape elements to enhance the
appearance or the sign structure.
F.   Multiple Tenant Signs: When more than one (1) tenant shares a development
site, signs should be integrated as one (1) unit to create a shared identity
for the property or be located and/or designed as a unified package so that
signs do not visually compete with each other.
G.   Safe Location: Signs should be carefully located for safety, not blocking
the views of oncoming traffic at street intersections or driveways. Placement
should also consider the safety of pedestrians and other modes of
transportation, such as bicycles and maintain clear lines of site where
conflicts may occur on and around a site.
H.   Landscaping: Signs should be placed so they will not be obstructed by
landscaping when the growth reaches maturity. Sign locations should be
considered as a part of the design of a site and landscaping used to enhance
the appearance of the sign and aid in drawing attention to the sign.
I.   Lighting: Illumination of signs should be accomplished in a manner to
minimize glare, intensity, light spillage and trespass to prevent distractions
to drivers and impacts to adjacent streets and properties to the greatest
extent possible. Sign design and lighting methods should respect and maintain
consistency with the ambient light levels of the area.
J.   Readability: Signs should be located to promote ease of readability and
serve their intended function. The scale of the sign should relate to the
intended viewer; signs for pedestrians would therefore be of a smaller scale
than signs for moving vehicles. Design simplicity is a key factor in good
design and readability. Individual, dimensional letters are preferred and
required in most locations. Exceptions may be granted if the design of the sign
cannot be reasonably accomplished through typically accepted standards, as long
as the intent of the overall regulations can be addressed.
K.   Materials: Materials used in signs and their structures should be
compatible with those used on the site and associated buildings and designed to
be a unifying feature that is relevant to the overall site.
L.   Color: On most signs, no more than three (3) colors (excluding black and
white) should be used. Any illustration or graphic incorporated into the sign
should use complementary colors that are in harmony with the general
architecture and color palette of the building. Light colored graphics on a
dark background are preferred as this makes the signs more readable. (Ord.
2210, 4-17-2017)
9-18-4: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and terms as used in this chapter shall be deemed to mean
and be construed as follows, unless the context specifically indicates
otherwise:
ABANDONED SIGN: Any sign remaining in place for a period of ninety (90) days or
more which no longer advertises, identifies, promotes or draws attention to an
activity, business, product, or service available on the premises on which the
sign is located.
ADMINISTRATIVE DECISION: A decision made by the Director of Development
Services.
ARCHITECTURAL DETAIL: Any projection, relief, cornice, column, change of
building material, window, or door opening on any building.
AWNING: Flexible, non-structural coverings over a structural frame that
projects from a building wall for the purpose of shielding a doorway or window.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5dd626f68508237cd281a645678e92f34786b23f/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2584.jpg]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5dd626f68508237cd281a645678e92f34786b23f/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2586.jpg]
BACKER PANEL: A background behind the graphics of a sign that is made from a
solid opaque material on which the graphics may be attached and intended to
hide a wireway or minimize the number of potential penetrations into the
surface that the sign is being mounted onto.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5dd626f68508237cd281a645678e92f34786b23f/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2588.jpg]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5dd626f68508237cd281a645678e92f34786b23f/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2590.jpg]
BANNER: A temporary sign on a lightweight material which may be mounted between
posts, on or in a ridged frame, secured to a structure or hung from a bracket
or pole.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5dd626f68508237cd281a645678e92f34786b23f/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2592.jpg]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5dd626f68508237cd281a645678e92f34786b23f/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2594.jpg]
BILLBOARD: An off premises sign that identifies or communicates a message or
information related to an activity conducted, a service rendered, or a
commodity available at a location other than where the sign is located.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5dd626f68508237cd281a645678e92f34786b23f/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2596.jpg]
BILLBOARD EXTENSION: Any structure used as a continuation of a billboard sign
face.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5dd626f68508237cd281a645678e92f34786b23f/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2598.jpg]
BUILDING: Any structure used or intended for supporting or sheltering any use
or occupancy.
BUILDING FRONTAGE: That wall or side of a building which is adjacent and most
nearly parallel to a street.
CANDELA: The standard unit of luminous intensity in the International System of
Units.
CANOPY: A rigid, multifaced, permanent structural roof like element that
projects from a building wall for the purpose of shielding a doorway or window.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5dd626f68508237cd281a645678e92f34786b23f/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2605.jpg]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5dd626f68508237cd281a645678e92f34786b23f/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2603.jpg]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5dd626f68508237cd281a645678e92f34786b23f/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2600.jpg]
CHANGEABLE GRAPHIC: The visual display, which can be changed or altered through
manual, mechanical or electrical means.
COMMERCIAL: Any activity or communication done on behalf of an entity, company
or individual with the intent of engaging in commerce, where the activity has
the intent of convincing the audience to partake in a particular action, often
purchasing a specific product or service.
CONTOURED: Used to describe the shaping of a background, raceway, or other
material to closely outline the shapes of the graphics of a sign.
COPY: The graphical content of a sign surface in letter or alphabetical form.
DEVELOPMENT: Any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate,
including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging,
filling, grading, paving, excavation, or drilling operations.
DIRECTOR OF DEVELOPMENT SERVICES: The Director of Development Services
Department or his/her designee in the City of West Des Moines, Iowa.
DYNAMIC ELEMENT: Any characteristic of a sign that has or appears to have
movement or that appears to change, caused by any method other than physically
removing and replacing the sign face or its components, whether the apparent
movement or change is in the sign, the sign structure itself, or any other
component of the sign. This definition includes a display that incorporates a
technology or other method allowing the sign face to change the image without
having to replace the sign face or its components physically or mechanically.
This definition also includes any rotating, revolving, moving, flashing,
blinking, or animated graphic or illumination, and any sign that incorporates
rotating panels, LED lights manipulated through digital input, "digital ink" or
any other method or technology that allows the sign face to present a series of
images or displays.
EASEMENT: The portion of a property for which access or use is allowed by a
person or agency other than the owner.
ERECT: To build, construct, attach, hang, place, suspend or affix. Shall also
include the painting of wall graphics.
FACADE: The side of a building below the eaves.
FOOTCANDLE: The basic unit of illuminance used to determine the amount of light
falling on a surface. One (1) footcandle is equivalent to the illuminance
produced on one (1) square foot of surface area by a source of one (1) candle
at a distance of one foot (1'). Footcandle measurement is taken with a hand
held light meter.
FRONTAGE: See definition of street frontage.
GRADE, AVERAGE FINISHED: The average final elevation of the ground level
surrounding a sign, wall, or building after development.
GRAPHIC: Any display, including copy, logos or images that are an announcement,
declaration, demonstration, illustration or insignia used to advertise,
promote, or draw attention to the interests of any person or firm when the same
is placed in view of the general public.
GROUND SIGN: A sign supported by one (1) or more uprights, posts or bases
placed upon or affixed in the ground and not attached to any part of a
building.
HANGING SIGN: Ground sign where the sign is hung from a bracket or arm mounted
on a single post.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5dd626f68508237cd281a645678e92f34786b23f/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2607.jpg]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5dd626f68508237cd281a645678e92f34786b23f/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2609.jpg]
HEIGHT, SIGN: The vertical measurement from the average finished grade nearest
the supporting base or columns of the sign to the highest point of said sign.
No mounding of earth (except berms required otherwise by this Code for
buffering) may be permitted to achieve a greater sign height.
ILLUMINATION: A source of any artificial or reflected light, either directly
from a source of light incorporated in or indirectly from an artificial source.
INDIRECT ILLUMINATION: A light source of external illumination, located away
from the sign that lights the contents of the sign, but which itself is not
visible to persons viewing the sign from any street, sidewalk or adjacent
property. For the purposes of this chapter, indirect illumination shall also
include halo lighting, reverse channel letters or similar reflected lighting
used to illuminate a graphic.
LANDMARK: Any site, permanent structure, or natural feature, unaccompanied by
graphic or copy to identify a particular use or business, located in a
conspicuous place to draw attention to or identify a particular locality and to
act as a point of orientation when locating other structures or uses.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5dd626f68508237cd281a645678e92f34786b23f/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2611.jpg]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5dd626f68508237cd281a645678e92f34786b23f/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2613.jpg]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5dd626f68508237cd281a645678e92f34786b23f/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2615.jpg]
LEGAL NONCONFORMING SIGN: Any sign which does not conform to the requirements
of this chapter, but which was lawfully erected in accordance with this Code in
effect at the time it was erected.
LUMEN: A unit used to measure the actual amount of light that is produced by a
bulb and quantifies the amount of light energy produced by a lamp at the lamp,
as compared to wattage which is the energy input to light a lamp.
MARQUEE: A permanent roof like structure, other than a building canopy or roof
that projects from the facade of the building and is typically used to
highlight the entrance to the building. Marquees are often ornate and
incorporate lighting and signage to attract attention and identify activities
associated with the business, such as theaters, convention centers, concert
halls or hotels.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5dd626f68508237cd281a645678e92f34786b23f/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2617.jpg]
MONUMENT SIGN: A ground sign anchored to the ground which has a monolithic or
columnar line and which essentially maintains the same contour from grade to
top.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5dd626f68508237cd281a645678e92f34786b23f/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2619.jpg]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5dd626f68508237cd281a645678e92f34786b23f/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2622.jpg]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5dd626f68508237cd281a645678e92f34786b23f/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2624.jpg]
MOVING SIGN: Any sign or part of a sign that changes physical position or light
intensity by any movements or rotation or that gives the visual impression of
such movement or rotation.
NONCOMMERCIAL: Any activity or communication that does not have the intent of
promoting or encouraging the viewer to engage in commerce, involve monetary
compensation, or the purchase of a specific product or service.
OFF PREMISES SIGN: Any sign, for which the purpose is to advertise, identify
and/or direct attention to a profession, business, service, activity, product,
campaign, or attraction which is not carried on, sold, offered or manufactured
in or upon the premises.
ON PREMISES SIGN: A sign that advertises, identifies and/or directs attention
to a profession, business, service, activity, product, campaign or attraction
which is carried on, sold, offered or manufactured in or upon the premises.
PANEL SIGN: A sign consisting of a frame covered by a translucent material
which may be internally illuminated. The entire sign structure is one (1) unit
and the copy is not intended to include three-dimensional individual letters.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5dd626f68508237cd281a645678e92f34786b23f/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2626.jpg]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5dd626f68508237cd281a645678e92f34786b23f/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2628.jpg]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5dd626f68508237cd281a645678e92f34786b23f/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2631.jpg]
PENNANTS AND/OR STREAMERS: A long, narrow ribbon like flag or tapering flag
used individually or attached to a rope or structure to allow movement caused
by the atmosphere.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5dd626f68508237cd281a645678e92f34786b23f/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2633.jpg]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5dd626f68508237cd281a645678e92f34786b23f/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2635.jpg]
POLE SIGN: A freestanding ground sign that is permanently supported in a fixed
location by one (1) or more visible uprights that are narrow and less than the
width of the sign and are more than one-fourth (1/4) of the entire height of
the sign and sign structure.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5dd626f68508237cd281a645678e92f34786b23f/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2639.jpg]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5dd626f68508237cd281a645678e92f34786b23f/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2637.jpg]
PORTABLE SIGN: A freestanding sign that is movable and self- supporting, and is
not permanently attached to the ground or a building or designed to be
permanently attached to the ground or a building.
POST AND PANEL SIGN: A freestanding sign that is not portable, with a solid
panel mounted to two (2) or more supporting posts. These types of signs are
typically used for temporary signs or specifically allowed in certain districts
as permanent signs with design considerations.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5dd626f68508237cd281a645678e92f34786b23f/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2641.jpg]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5dd626f68508237cd281a645678e92f34786b23f/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2643.jpg]
PREMISES: The lot or lots, plots, portions, or parcels of land considered as a
unit for a single use or development, whether owned or leased, and not located
in a shopping center or multi- use building.
PROJECTING SIGN: A sign attached to and projecting away from the wall of a
building and not in the same plane as the wall.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5dd626f68508237cd281a645678e92f34786b23f/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2645.jpg]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5dd626f68508237cd281a645678e92f34786b23f/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2647.jpg]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5dd626f68508237cd281a645678e92f34786b23f/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2649.jpg]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5dd626f68508237cd281a645678e92f34786b23f/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2652.jpg]
RACEWAY: An enclosed visible conduit or physical pathway for housing electrical
wiring, transformers, and other non-visible sign components and used to protect
these elements from environment factors. Usually mounted between the sign
graphics and the mounting surface.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5dd626f68508237cd281a645678e92f34786b23f/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2654.jpg]
RIGHT-OF-WAY: A strip of land acquired by reservation, dedication, prescription
or condemnation and intended to be occupied by a road, trail, pedestrian way,
public (and private) utilities and/or other public uses.
ROOF SIGN: A sign that is displayed upon or above a roof or parapet of a
building and visible from adjacent roadways, properties or ground level.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5dd626f68508237cd281a645678e92f34786b23f/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2656.jpg]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5dd626f68508237cd281a645678e92f34786b23f/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2658.jpg]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5dd626f68508237cd281a645678e92f34786b23f/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2660.jpg]
SETBACK: The minimum horizontal distance between a sign and the property lines,
street right-of-way, or right-of-way easements if abutting a public street, or
the distance from the back of curb on a private street.
SIGN: Any visual display or graphics, visible from a street or in view of the
general public and designed to identify, announce, direct, draw attention,
promote or inform.
SIGN AREA: That area of a sign as determined by the Director of Development
Services using actual dimensions where practical, or approximate dimensions
when irregularity of a sign shape warrants.
SIGN WALKER: A person (or persons) holding, wearing, or waving signs, graphics,
or wearing costumes at entrances to major highways, at corners of high traffic
intersections, or on the premises of the commercial activity being promoted to
actively attract attention and direct customers to the event. Also called sign
twirlers, sign holders, human billboards, sign events. This definition is not
intended to include logos and graphics that are incidentally worn or carried by
individuals who are not "actively" attempting to attract attention to
themselves or the message of the graphic.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5dd626f68508237cd281a645678e92f34786b23f/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2662.jpg]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5dd626f68508237cd281a645678e92f34786b23f/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2665.jpg]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5dd626f68508237cd281a645678e92f34786b23f/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2667.jpg]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5dd626f68508237cd281a645678e92f34786b23f/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2669.jpg]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5dd626f68508237cd281a645678e92f34786b23f/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2671.jpg]
STREET: For the purpose of sign regulations, a street shall be defined as any
public roadway that is dedicated to the City or the State, and any private,
non-City owned streets which serve the same purpose as a public roadway. This
definition does not include alleys, controlled access interstate highways,
private drives and drive aisles in parking lots.
STREET FRONTAGE: That boundary of a lot or parcel abutting a street. Each side
of a lot or parcel so abutting a street shall be considered as a separate
frontage.
STRUCTURE: Anything built that requires a permanent or temporary location. This
term includes a building.
TEMPORARY SIGN: A sign intended to be displayed for a transitory or temporary
period. Portable signs, or any sign not permanently embedded in the ground or
not permanently affixed to a building or sign structure that is permanently
embedded in the ground, are considered temporary signs.
VARIANCE: A discretionary entitlement as determined by the Board of Adjustment
which permits the departure from the strict application of the standards
contained in this Code.
VEHICLE SIGN: Any graphic placed, painted, attached to or displayed on a
vehicle, including trailers, used to promote or advertise a company, business
or service.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5dd626f68508237cd281a645678e92f34786b23f/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2673.jpg]
VISION TRIANGLE: That area bounded by the street right-of-way lines of a corner
lot and a straight line joining points on said right-of-way lines located
twenty five feet (25') from the point of intersection of said right-of-way
lines. Greater dimensions may be required on streets with higher traffic
volumes, based upon the standards of the Institute of Transportation Engineers
or the Association of American State Highway Officials.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5dd626f68508237cd281a645678e92f34786b23f/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2675.jpg]
WALL SIGN: Any permanent sign or graphic attached to, erected against, or
applied to the surface of the exterior wall of a building or an interior sign
that is primarily placed to be viewed from outside of the building.
WARNING AND REGULATORY SIGNS: Traffic control or other governmental signs,
legal notices, railroad crossing signs, danger and such temporary emergency or
non-advertising signs.
WINDOW SIGN: Any graphic that is installed, adhered to, or painted upon an
individual glazed surface panel for purposes of viewing from outside the
building. This term does not include merchandise located in a window holiday
display.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5dd626f68508237cd281a645678e92f34786b23f/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2679.jpg]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5dd626f68508237cd281a645678e92f34786b23f/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2677.jpg]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5dd626f68508237cd281a645678e92f34786b23f/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2681.jpg]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5dd626f68508237cd281a645678e92f34786b23f/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2683.jpg]
WIREWAY: An enclosed conduit less than three inches (3") in depth that forms a
screened physical pathway for electrical wiring between sign components and the
mounting surface to allow for a method for protected connections and a means to
minimize the number of wall penetrations necessary. Used in conjunction with a
backer panel to screen the visibility of the wireway from the viewer.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5dd626f68508237cd281a645678e92f34786b23f/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2685.jpg]
(Ord. 2210, 4-17-2017)
9-18-5: PERMITS:
A.   Permits Required: Unless specifically noted otherwise in this chapter, it
shall be unlawful for any person to erect, alter or relocate within the City
any sign without first obtaining a sign permit from the Department of
Development Services and making payment of the permit fee. No sign shall be
erected on a property without the authorization of the property owner or
authorized agent.
B.   Application For Permit: Application for permits shall be made upon forms
provided by the Director of Development Services. Additional information may be
required to clarify the submittal including, but not limited to, the following
information:
1.   Plans And Specifications: Drawings of the plans and specifications of the
sign and method of construction and attachment to the building or in the
ground.
2.   Location Plan: Drawing showing the location of the sign or sign structure,
setbacks, the distance from other signs and signs on adjacent properties,
location of the sign on a building, and any other information needed to
determine compliance with Code provisions.
3.   Calculations: Copy of stress sheets and calculations showing the sign is
designed for dead load and wind pressure in any direction in accordance with
Building Code regulations as adopted by the City of West Des Moines.
4.   Other: Such other information as the Director of Development Services
shall require to show full compliance with this and all other laws and
ordinances of the City.
C.   Application Review: It shall be the duty of the Director of Development
Services upon the filing of an application for a permit, to examine such plans
and specifications and other data and make a determination of compliance with
the Code within twenty (20) business days. The applicant shall be notified of
any additional information or clarifications required, any modifications or
suggestions to make the proposed sign compliant with the Code, or if the permit
is rejected with the reasons for the rejection. Should the City be unsuccessful
in contacting the applicant through other methods of communication, written
notification shall be sent within the twenty (20) business days stipulated by
this section.
D.   Approval Or Denial: If the proposed sign is in compliance with all the
requirements of this chapter, approved site plans, and all other requirements
and laws of the City, the Director of Development Services shall issue a
permit. If the permit is denied, the applicant may resubmit a modified proposal
in response to the comments which shall initiate a new twenty (20) business day
response time outlined in subsection C of this section.
E.   Expiration Date: If the work authorized under an erection permit has not
been completed within six (6) months after the date of issuance, the said
permit shall become null and void and refund of the fee shall not be allowed.
F.   Permit Fees: Every applicant, before being granted a permit hereunder,
shall pay the permit fee, as determined by City Council resolution, for each
such sign. Failure to obtain a valid permit prior to the installation of a
sign, may cause the fee to be doubled, require the removal of the sign, or any
other enforcement remedies available to the City.
G.   Revocation Of Permits: The Director of Development Services is hereby
authorized and empowered to revoke any permits issued upon failure of the
holder thereof to comply with any provisions of this chapter or conditions of
approval included with the issuance of said permit. (Ord. 2210, 4-17-2017)
9-18-6: LICENSE FEE, BOND AND INSURANCE:
A.   Licenses Required And Fees:
1.   Erector License: Any person engaging in the act of erecting, maintaining,
servicing, installing or removing signs, regardless of size or weight, must
first apply to the City for a license. The fee for said license shall be in the
amount determined by City Council resolution. This license shall expire two
years from the date of issuance.
2.   Proration Of Fees: Proration will be calculated on a semiannual basis for
renewal.
B.   License Exception: No license is required for the following:
1.   A nonelectrical sign erected by an owner on their property which is exempt
from the owner’s insurance or certificate of liability.
2.   Installation of a temporary ground sign not exceeding six (6) square feet
in area.
C.   Erector’s Bond: Any person making application for an erector’s license
shall execute and file with the application a surety and performance bond in
the amount determined by the City Council resolution and duly executed by
sureties.
D.   Insurance: Any person making application for an erector’s license shall
furnish to the City a certificate of liability insurance with a Municipality
endorsement included, either as a single policy or as a rider to a blanket
policy showing the City as additional insured in the amount of one hundred
thousand dollars/three hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00/$300,000.00)
bodily injury and fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) property damage or a
single limit liability of three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00). In
addition, the City shall receive at least thirty (30) days’ prior written
notice of any cancellation or change in any of the required insurance policy or
policies under this provision.
Said certificate of insurance shall be so conditioned as to defend, indemnify,
protect and save harmless the City and its employees from and against any and
all liability, claims, losses of whatsoever kind or nature, arising out of or
by reason of the erection, hanging, repair or maintenance of such sign or
signs.
E.   Revocation Of Licenses: The Director of Development Services is hereby
authorized and empowered to revoke any license issued by the City upon failure
of the holder thereof to comply with any provisions of this chapter. (Ord.
2210, 4-17-2017; amd. Ord. 2623, 8-5-2024)
9-18-7: INSPECTIONS:
A.   It is the applicant's responsibility to insure that all materials,
designs, workmanship and methods are done in such a manner so as to be in
compliance with manufacturer's specifications and any Federal, State, County
and local regulations and codes.
B.   All illuminated signs shall be subject to the provisions of the Electrical
Code of the City and shall be approved and labeled by a nationally recognized
testing lab and the permit fees required thereunder. If in the opinion of the
City, there are extenuating circumstances that cause concern that the scope of
work may require a greater level of understanding or expertise, some work may
require a separate electrical permit and the work to be done by a licensed
electrical contractor.
C.   All construction or work for which a permit is required may be subject to
inspection by the Director of Development Services. All such construction or
work including footings and foundations (structural and location), electrical
connections, etc., shall be verified to be in compliance with Code, or be made
available for inspection upon request by the City. Neither the Director of
Development Services nor the City shall be liable for expense entailed in the
removal or replacement of any material required to allow inspection.
D.   Approval as a result of an inspection shall not be construed to be an
approval of a violation of the provisions of this Code or of other City
ordinances. Inspections presuming to give authority to violate or cancel the
provisions of this Code or other City ordinances shall not be valid. (Ord.
2210, 4-17-2017)
9-18-8: MAINTENANCE:
The conditions of this section are applicable to all signs in this chapter.
A.   All existing legal signs shall be kept in good repair and in proper state
of preservation and working order. The display surfaces of all signs shall be
kept neatly painted or posted at all times.
B.   No sign shall be erected, relocated or maintained so as to prevent free
ingress to or egress from any door, window or fire escape. No sign of any kind
shall be attached to a standpipe or fire extinguisher. No sign shall obstruct
or interfere with any opening required for ventilation.
C.   Signs and their supporting structures shall not interfere with any
equipment or lines for utilities including, but not limited to water, sewage,
gas, electricity, or communications.
D.   All signs and the premises surrounding the sign shall be maintained by the
sign owner thereof in a clean, sanitary condition, and free and clear of
rubbish and weeds.
E.   Failure to maintain a legally approved sign, sign structure, and area
around the sign in good order may deem the sign unsafe or unlawful, and the
City may cause action against the owner of the sign, or the property owner
where the sign is located in accordance with any enforcement actions available
to the City. (Ord. 2210, 4-17-2017)
9-18-9: LEGAL NONCONFORMING SIGNS:
A.   Intent: It is the intent of this chapter to allow existing legal
nonconforming signs to continue to be maintained and used until they are
removed under the terms of this chapter, but not to encourage their survival.
B.   Change And Modification: A legal nonconforming sign or sign structure
shall be brought into conformity with this chapter if it is altered,
reconstructed, replaced, expanded, or relocated. A mere change in copy, or the
replacement of a sign face, is not an alteration or replacement for purposes of
this subsection, but conditions may be placed on the approval to bring the sign
closer to compliance with the intent of the provisions of this chapter.
C.   Maintenance: Legal nonconforming signs must be maintained in good
condition. Maintenance required by this subsection shall include replacing or
repairing of worn or damaged parts of a sign or sign structure in order to
return it to its original state, and it is not a change or modification for
purposes of subsection D1 of this section.
D.   Removal: Removal of a nonconforming sign or replacement of a nonconforming
sign with a conforming sign is required when:
1.   A legal nonconforming sign, or a substantial part of a legal nonconforming
sign, is blown down, destroyed, or for any reason or by any means taken down.
As used in this subsection, "substantial" means fifty percent (50%) or more of
the entire sign structure; or
2.   The condition of the legal nonconforming sign or legal nonconforming sign
structure has deteriorated without maintenance as required by this section; or
the legal nonconforming sign structure or building it is mounted on is
destroyed or damaged by a fire, flood, windstorm, or similar abnormal event;
and the cost of restoration of the sign to its condition immediately prior to
such deterioration or event exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the cost of
reconstruction of the sign structure; or
3.   The use of the legal nonconforming sign, or the property on which it is
located, has ceased, become vacant, or been unoccupied for a period of thirty
(30) consecutive days or more. An intent to abandon is not required as the
basis for removal under this subsection.
E.   De Minimus Differences: For purposes of this chapter, a sign conforms to
the size, height, and setback regulations of this chapter if its size, height,
and setback do not exceed the size, height, and setback regulations in this
chapter by more than one hundred one percent (101%).
F.   Sign Permit Application: For any new sign permit applications filed under
this chapter, the City may review all signs within the subject property for
compliance with the current City Code. Should it be determined that there are
legal nonconforming signs on the premises, the City may require that any
nonconforming sign displayed on the premises that would affect the compliance
of the new sign with the current Code be altered or removed before that new
permits may be issued under the provisions of this chapter.
G.   Development Permit: Any permit that authorizes the development of a
premises, any building addition, an increase in gross floor area of twenty five
percent (25%) or more, or any exterior structural remodeling of a building
facade on which a nonconforming sign is located shall require all nonconforming
signs on the premises for which the permit is issued to be brought into
conformity with the provisions of this chapter.
H.   Amortization Period: Any legal nonconforming sign which violates or does
not conform to this chapter shall be brought into conformance by alteration or
removal within the following time schedule:
1.   Up to and including two hundred dollars ($200.00) within thirty (30) days.
2.   Two hundred one dollars ($201.00) to nine hundred ninety nine dollars
($999.00) within one (1) year.
3.   One thousand dollars ($1,000.00) to one thousand nine hundred ninety nine
dollars ($1,999.00) within two (2) years.
4.   Two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) to two thousand nine hundred ninety nine
dollars ($2,999.00) within three (3) years.
5.   Three thousand dollars ($3,000.00) to three thousand nine hundred ninety
nine dollars ($3,999.00) within four (4) years.
6.   Four thousand dollars ($4,000.00) and over within five (5) years.
The determination of the time schedule according to the value shall rest with
the Director of Development Services.
If the sign is not removed or altered in accordance with the provisions of this
section, the Director of Development Services shall give notice of
noncompliance to the owner of the building or land where such sign or
advertising structure is located, and to the owner of the sign, if same can be
determined, to remove or alter said sign or advertising structure within thirty
(30) days to conform to the provisions of this chapter.
Within fifteen (15) days after receipt of said notice, the owner of the
building or land on which said sign is located may present documentary proof to
the City's Building Inspection Division that the value of the sign or
advertising structure is of such value that it should fall within a longer time
schedule for removal or alteration as required herein. If after presentation of
documentary proof to the City of the value of the sign, the owner is
dissatisfied with the determination as reconsidered by the Director of
Development Services, the owner may proceed in District Court of Polk County,
Iowa, in law or in equity to determine the value of such.
If the owner fails to present documentary proof to the City's Building Division
within the fifteen (15) day period prescribed herein, it shall be concluded
that the value of the sign falls within the time schedule as determined. (Ord.
2210, 4-17-2017)
9-18-10: COMMERCIAL AND NONCOMMERCIAL SIGNS AND MESSAGES:
This chapter is primarily intended to address and regulate commercial messages
and advertising, however it is recognized that noncommercial messages hold an
equal, or greater obligation to allow and to protect free speech. Nonetheless,
there is also a need to balance these rights with the need to maintain order
and safety in the community. Commercial signs and messages are only permitted
in the zones explicitly authorized elsewhere in this chapter; therefore, the
following regulations have been adopted to address noncommercial signs:
A.   In all zoning districts, on-premises, temporary signs under six (6) square
feet in sign area and less than four feet (4') in height, shall be allowed. No
permit is required for these signs but they are limited to one (1) sign, per
street frontage, per parcel or tenant in the case of multiple tenant occupancy.
B.   In any single family residential district (RE, RS, R-1, SF-CR, SF-VJ and
MH) and any RM District that has been developed with single family detached
residential units, each parcel or lot shall be allowed to display on premises
noncommercial signs up to sixteen (16) square feet in size and no taller than
five feet (5') high without obtaining a permit; however, the total aggregate
amount of noncommercial signage allowed per street frontage under this section
shall not exceed sixty four (64) square feet. The aggregate amount may be
accomplished by any combination of individual noncommercial signs up to sixteen
(16) square feet each, however no more than six (6) signs shall be allowed on
any one (1) street frontage. Any signs allowed under this section shall
maintain a minimum separation of ten feet (10') from another sign on the same
property.
C.   In any nonresidential district (OS, RC, CMC, NC, CVC, SC, SO, HC, VJC,
VJHB, WR, BP, VJLI, LI, GI, OF, and PCP) and in the RH District and any RM
District that has not been developed with single family detached residential
units, each parcel or lot shall be allowed to display on premises noncommercial
signs up to thirty two (32) square feet in size and no taller than five feet
(5') high without a permit. The total aggregate amount of noncommercial signage
allowed per street frontage under this section shall not exceed one hundred
(100) square feet. The one hundred (100) square feet may be a combination of
any number of individual noncommercial signs up to thirty two (32) square feet
each, however no more than eight (8) signs shall be allowed on any one (1)
street frontage. An additional thirty two (32) square feet of signage, and an
additional two (2) signs, shall be allowed for each additional one hundred feet
(100') of street frontage over five hundred feet (500') on any one (1) street
frontage. Any signs allowed under this section shall maintain a minimum
separation of ten feet (10') from another sign on the same property.
D.   Any noncommercial sign that exceeds the provisions listed above, may be
allowed in accordance with the provisions for temporary signs listed elsewhere
within this chapter. Any sign authorized to be displayed by this chapter may
contain a noncommercial graphic or message. (Ord. 2210, 4-17-2017)
9-18-11: EXEMPTED SIGNS:
The following signs are exempted from the regulations in this chapter:
A.   Any sign required by the International Fire Code or the International
Building Code.
B.   Warning and regulatory signs approved by the Director of Development
Services. (Ord. 2210, 4-17-2017)
9-18-12: PROHIBITED SIGNS:
These regulations are intended to be exclusionary. Any type of sign not
specifically listed in this chapter is prohibited. In addition, the following
signs are specifically prohibited:
A.   Animated signs.
B.   Off-premises signs, except billboards as provided by this chapter.
C.   Spinners, balloons, pennants and streamers, except as permitted elsewhere
in this chapter.
D.   Flashing or moving lights.
E.   Structurally or otherwise unsafe or dilapidated signs.
F.   Pole signs, except where allowed through specific district regulations.
G.   Portable signs, including signs on wheels, trailers, and truck beds,
except as permitted elsewhere in this chapter.
H.   Roof signs visible from adjacent roadways, properties or ground level.
I.   Signs with dynamic elements or movement, except as permitted elsewhere in
this chapter.
J.   Signs containing obscenity or pornography.
K.   Vehicle signs. No vehicle, including trailers, shall be parked in such a
way that it functions primarily as a sign. It shall be a violation if such
vehicle is conspicuously parked in a prominent location for more than three (3)
hours and there are no other stated or apparent reasons, other than signage
purposes.
L.   Abandoned signs.
M.   Unlawful signs.
N.   Signwalkers, sign spinners, sign holders, human billboards, or similar
human advertisements.
O.   Signs that obstruct vision, are in the vision triangle on private property
or erected at or near the intersection of any streets or near a private access
to a street in such a manner as to obstruct free and clear vision.
P.   Signs at any location where, by reason of the position, shape or color, it
may interfere with, obstruct the view of, or be confused with any authorized
traffic sign, signal or device.
Q.   Signs which make use of the words "STOP", "LOOK", "DANGER" or any other
word, phrase, symbol or character in such manner as to interfere with, mislead
or confuse the motoring public.
R.   Signs on City property not installed by agents of the City, except as
permitted elsewhere within this chapter. (Ord. 2210, 4-17-2017)
9-18-13: AREAS OF SPECIAL CHARACTER:
A.   Designation: This chapter cannot adequately regulate all signs in an area
as diverse as the City of West Des Moines. The City Council after public notice
and hearing, may by ordinance designate a contiguous area as an area of special
character, if it contains unique architectural, historic, scenic, or visual
features that require special regulations so that signs will enhance its
character. Areas of special character may include, but are not limited to:
1.   Architecturally significant, history and scenic areas.
2.   Planned unit developments.
3.   Specific plan areas.
4.   Development overlay districts.
B.   Zoning Map: The Director of Development Services shall maintain and
continually revise a zoning map of the City which shall identify the boundaries
of all designated areas of special character.
C.   Special Regulations: The City shall adopt special regulations for signs in
areas of special character which shall be consistent with the character of
existing development and/or the proposed development within the area of special
character.
D.   Effect Of Special Regulations: Special regulations for areas of special
character shall supersede and may be either more or less restrictive than the
regulations for signs contained in this chapter. Any regulations for areas of
special character shall respect the intent of this chapter as it would apply to
the specific properties regulated within the designated area. (Ord. 2210, 4-17-
2017)
9-18-14: ILLUMINATION:
The intent of sign illumination is to provide a method for viewing the message
during periods when it is dark or weather conditions may reduce visibility, but
not create glare, light spillage or trespass with a large illuminated area or
excessive brightness. Unless otherwise specified herein, a sign may be
illuminated with a number of methods depending upon the type of sign and the
district in which the sign is located.
To the greatest extent possible, signs shall be designed to minimize the
illumination of excess unused areas of a sign and to reduce the amount of light
glow. Unless noted otherwise, direct or unprotected light sources used to
illuminate a sign shall neither be visible from any street, nor cause glare,
hazardous light trespass or distraction to pedestrians, drivers, or adjacent
properties.
A.   General Sign Illumination Standards:
1.   All illuminated signs are subject to the provisions of the Electrical Code
as adopted by the City of West Des Moines.
2.   A balance should occur between the ambient light levels of the area,
project or development and the illumination of a sign. The lighting design of a
sign must take into account background lighting levels, lighting from other
sources and the characteristics of the surrounding area. If the area has
relatively low night lighting levels, like in or adjacent to residential
properties, sign illumination should be reduced or designed to lessen the
impact and light trespass. In no event shall any illuminated sign exceed a
maximum illumination of five thousand (5,000) candelas per square meter during
daylight hours and a maximum illumination of five hundred (500) candelas per
square meter between dusk to dawn as measured from the sign's face at maximum
brightness.
3.   All sign illumination shall be static in color and intensity, unless noted
otherwise within this chapter. Blinking, rotating, cycling, flashing, moving,
hanging, or reflecting lights are prohibited.
4.   Signs in residential areas, or which face residential dwellings within
three hundred feet (300') of the light source, shall be designed to comply with
one (1), or a combination of the following illumination options:
a.   First consider if the sign needs to be lighted at all. Lights in the
window display may be sufficient to identify the business, which is
particularly true if good window graphics are used or the patrons are primarily
pedestrians. There may also be businesses that have hours of operation that are
primarily daytime hours or have limited patron traffic that could be adequately
served with window graphics or other non-illuminated signage.
b.   Use external illumination that is down cast, or uses full cut off or fully
shielded fixtures that are designed and aimed so the light falls entirely upon
the sign and are positioned so the light source is not visible from any point
off the property or from roadways to reduce glare.
c.   Illuminate the sign with halo lighting or comparable indirect lighting
method.
d.   Any sign surface so situated shall not exceed a maximum of two (2)
footcandles as measured at ground level.
B.   Hours Of Operation: Internally illuminated signs on non- residential
properties may be illuminated from five o'clock (5:00) A.M. until eleven
o'clock (11:00) P.M., or one (1) hour past the close of business of the
facility being identified or advertised, whichever is later. Signs shall
provide an automatic timer to comply with the intent of this section.
C.   Illumination Methods:
1.   External illumination, is where the light source that illuminates the sign
content is remote or separate from the sign and aimed at the face of the sign,
i.e., spot lights, gooseneck lighting, or similar. External illuminated signs
are subject to the following regulations:
a.   The source of the light must be concealed by translucent covers or
positioned in such a manner that they are not visible to the general public and
glare is minimized.
b.   External illumination shall be a stationary light source, shielded and
directed solely at the sign.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5dd626f68508237cd281a645678e92f34786b23f/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2687.jpg]
2.   Internal illumination, is when the sign or sign structure, includes light
sources that are contained within the sign or structure to produce light
through or around the graphics of the sign. The following descriptions define
the types of internal illumination and sign design that will be used to
identify what signs are acceptable in what areas of the City:
a.   Reverse Channel Letters: Also known as halo lighting, channel letter with
opaque face and side walls where the individual graphic has an opaque face and
a light source inside of the sign that projects the illumination back onto the
surface behind the sign with softer, indirect light. The light source is
shielded from view by returns on the sign. This type of sign would comply with
sections that limit lighting to indirect lighting.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5dd626f68508237cd281a645678e92f34786b23f/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2689.jpg]
b.   Individual Face Lit Channel Letters: Three-dimensional letters illuminated
from behind or containing a light source, with translucent face that conveys
light forward. These types of signs may be in combination with halo lighting.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5dd626f68508237cd281a645678e92f34786b23f/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2691.jpg]
c.   Opaque Face With Push Through Sign: Lettering or graphic image is cut
through the sign face and backing material and mounted or inlaid so the sign
looks as if the lettering or image had been pushed through, up, and out of the
sign face and the lettering is translucent to allow lighting the imagery from
behind.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5dd626f68508237cd281a645678e92f34786b23f/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2694.jpg]
d.   Contoured Panel Sign: Three dimensional graphic where the edges are
fabricated to closely follow and form an outline of the letter, word or
graphic. This type of sign may be a viable option for script lettering and
complex logos where more preferred options would not be possible because of the
graphic being presented. Where this option is determined to be an acceptable
alternative, the image shall be designed to minimize the illumination of the
background so that only the copy or graphic are illuminated.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5dd626f68508237cd281a645678e92f34786b23f/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2696.jpg]
e.   Panel Sign/Cabinet Sign/Box Sign: A sign consisting of a frame covered by
a translucent material where the entire sign structure is one (1) unit with a
common internal lighting source and the graphics are not intended to include
three-dimensional individual images. This type of sign is prohibited in most
districts in the City except as gasoline canopy signage. In situations in which
they are allowed, the image shall be designed to minimize the illumination of
the background so that only the copy or graphic are illuminated.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5dd626f68508237cd281a645678e92f34786b23f/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2698.jpg]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5dd626f68508237cd281a645678e92f34786b23f/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2700.jpg]
f.   Exposed Neon Sign: Sign fashioned from continuous hollow tubing filled
with gases that glow when an electrical current is passed through the tubing,
where the tubing is visible to the viewer. The tubing is bent in the shape of
letters or images and is only allowed to convey an architectural theme, period
signage, or a unique sign design that is only possible with the use of exposed
neon.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5dd626f68508237cd281a645678e92f34786b23f/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2702.jpg]
g.   Exposed LED Sign: Illumination through the use of exposed LEDs is allowed
only as specified for electronic changeable graphic. All signs using LEDs must
have installed ambient light monitors and must at all times allow such monitors
to automatically adjust the brightness level of the electronic sign based on
ambient light conditions. At no time shall the sign be operated at a brightness
level greater than allowed by this Code.
(1)   Time and temperature signs: Where allowed, shall be limited to a maximum
of twelve (12) square feet of sign area and shall be counted toward the
allowable sign area established for the method of display (wall or ground) for
the property. The sign shall be a static display that changes no more
frequently than once every eight (8) seconds.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5dd626f68508237cd281a645678e92f34786b23f/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2704.jpg]
(2)   Digital readerboards: Electronic, changeable message displays of static
graphics for which the change sequence is determined by computer software or
similar means and the image change may be accomplished by means of fade,
dissolve or scrolling the message. These types of signs are prohibited.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5dd626f68508237cd281a645678e92f34786b23f/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2706.jpg]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5dd626f68508237cd281a645678e92f34786b23f/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2708.jpg]
(3)   Video display boards: A programmable, electronic graphic display that has
the capacity for signage that features changeable text, illustrations or
animation, using computer software or other technology to automate the
messages. These types of signs are prohibited.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5dd626f68508237cd281a645678e92f34786b23f/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2710.jpg]
h.   Architectural Lighting: There are a variety of lighting options that are
sometimes used to accent the architecture features of a building and can be
creatively used in attractive and effective ways, but there are also lighted
architectural elements that can be used to draw attention to the uses and be
considered signage, even without words or graphics. As part of the Planning
Division's architectural review of a building, these lighting features may be
allowed as part of the architectural theme of a building or tenant space.
Architectural lighting must be identified on the site plan building plans. Any
such lighting, (not intended to include seasonal holiday lighting displays),
that is not approved as a part of the architecture of a project during the site
plan review, shall be considered signage and be included in the wall signage
calculations. The following are examples of architectural lighting that should
be presented and reviewed as part of the architecture of the building:
(1)   Neon, LED banding, illuminated accent bands, or similar application.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5dd626f68508237cd281a645678e92f34786b23f/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2712.jpg]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5dd626f68508237cd281a645678e92f34786b23f/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2714.jpg]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5dd626f68508237cd281a645678e92f34786b23f/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2716.jpg]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5dd626f68508237cd281a645678e92f34786b23f/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2718.jpg]
(2)   Festoon lighting or similar draped or outline lighting.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5dd626f68508237cd281a645678e92f34786b23f/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2720.jpg]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5dd626f68508237cd281a645678e92f34786b23f/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2722.jpg]
(3)   Backlit facades, architectural lighted facades or similar lighted
building faces (this is not intended to include normal interior room lighting
seen through windows).
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5dd626f68508237cd281a645678e92f34786b23f/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2724.jpg]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5dd626f68508237cd281a645678e92f34786b23f/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2726.jpg]
(4)   Accent lighting and projected images.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5dd626f68508237cd281a645678e92f34786b23f/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2728.jpg]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5dd626f68508237cd281a645678e92f34786b23f/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2730.jpg]
(5)   Specialty lighting, such as illuminated site or building features or
changing colors.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5dd626f68508237cd281a645678e92f34786b23f/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2732.jpg]
TABLE 9-18-1
ILLUMINATION METHODS AND SIGN DESIGN OPTIONS
 
• Allowed in this districAllowed with design considerations X Prohibited
                   Internal Illumination Source
Districts External Reverse  Channel Push    Contoured Panel Or Exposed Exposed
                   Channel/ Letters Through Panel     Cabinet  Neon    LED
                   Halo
                       Internal Illumination Source
Districts     External Reverse  Channel Push    Contoured Panel   Exposed Exposed
                       Channel/ Letters Through Panel     Or      Neon    LED
                       Halo                               Cabinet
OS, RE, RS,
R-1, SF-CR,   •      •      X       X       X         X       X       X
SF-VJ, MH
RM, RH        •      •      X       X       X         X       X       X
RC, CMC, SC,  •      •      •     •               X
WR
PCP, BP       •      •      •     •               X       X
NC, CVC, VJC, •      •      •     •               X               X
OF
VJHB          •               X       X       X         X               X
LI, GI, VJLI  •      •      •     •                               X
Institutional •      •                      X         X       X       X
uses
Areas of
special
character
 
(Ord. 2210, 4-17-2017)
9-18-15: GROUND SIGNS:
A.   Ground signs are defined as any permanent sign that is installed on posts
or other supports that are placed on, or anchored into the ground and is
independent and detached from any building or other structure. Also called
freestanding signs.
B.   The intent of a ground sign is primarily to provide on- premises
information to the general public, typically away from the building, near a
street, thoroughfare or entrance to the site. They are generally placed in a
location and manner necessary to identify the name of the development,
subdivision or identify the users within the site, or to provide information
needed to navigate and locate a business or uses within the site.
C.   Billboards are ground signs that are an exception as they are off-premises
signs that are intended to identify or communicate a commercial or non-
commercial message related to activity or events conducted, services rendered,
or a commodity sold at a location other than where the sign is located.
D.   Specific criteria for various ground signs:
1.   Access Identification And Directional Signs: Signs intended to provide
instruction and/or information to the motoring public to move them into and
around a site. These signs do not include logos or business identification, and
are limited to generic information for the viewer's needs, such as: enter,
exit, main entrance, employee parking, deliveries, drive thru, etc.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5dd626f68508237cd281a645678e92f34786b23f/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2734.jpg]
a.   Maximum dimensions for these signs, including the support structure, is
four feet (4') high and four feet (4') wide.
b.   A minimum ten foot (10') setback from the public right-of-way line shall
be required and a minimum twenty foot (20') setback from the back of curb for
any private street or drive. Consideration should be given to the placement of
these signs so as to not obstruct visibility and create potential safety
hazards.
c.   There is no restriction as to the number of these signs allowed per site,
but a layout plan and design need to be submitted to the City for review and
approval. The City retains the authority to determine the appropriateness and
need for the signs with the intent of preventing visual clutter.
d.   No permit required for these signs.
e.   Raised copy or lettering shall not be required for this sign type.
f.   Illumination shall be allowed as outlined in subsection
9-18-14C,
table 9-18-1 of this chapter.
2.   Ground Directory Signs: Pedestrian scale ground signs located near a
building entrance intended to identify and provide information on the tenants
within the building.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5dd626f68508237cd281a645678e92f34786b23f/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2736.jpg]
a.   Limited to one (1) ground directory sign per building entrance located
within fifty feet (50') of the building entrance.
b.   No lettering on a directory sign shall be larger than four inches (4")
high.
c.   No permit is required if the sign is set back more than one hundred feet
(100') from a street frontage or the face of the sign is not visible from the
public street. If set back one hundred feet (100') or less and/or the ground
sign face is visible from the street, a sign permit will be required and it
will be considered one (1) of the allowed monument or landscape signs for the
property.
d.   Maximum size for a ground directory sign shall be twenty (20) square feet.
e.   Raised copy or lettering shall not be required for this sign type.
f.   Illumination shall be allowed as outlined in subsection
9-18-14C,
table 9-18-1 of this chapter. As these signs are intended to be viewed at a
closer distance, the lighting should be minimized as much as practical.
3.   Interstate Signs: Elevated ground sign allowed on private properties
adjacent to the interstate to be viewed by and directed towards the motoring
public on the interstate. These signs are intended to identify on-premises
businesses or services. May also be referred to as freeway or highway signs.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5dd626f68508237cd281a645678e92f34786b23f/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2738.jpg]
a.   Where Allowed: Any non-residential use with a minimum of three hundred
feet (300') of interstate frontage is eligible to have an interstate sign. Each
parcel shall be limited to one (1) interstate sign, unless the parcel has more
than nine hundred feet (900') of interstate frontage, in which case a second
interstate sign may be allowed provided that there is a minimum five hundred
foot (500') separation between the two (2) ground signs. No business or tenant
shall be identified on more than one (1) interstate sign within a parcel.
b.   Height Allowed: The maximum height of the interstate sign structure as
measured to highest element shall be thirty feet (30'). In those situations in
which it can be proven through an engineer's survey that the elevation at the
base of the intended interstate sign structure at the closest edge of
interstate pavement is lower than the roadway surface of the interstate, the
height of the sign structure may be increased to achieve a maximum height of
thirty feet (30') above the height of the adjacent interstate pavement
elevation. In no case shall the highest element of interstate sign structure
exceed sixty feet (60') in height.
c.   Setbacks: Interstate signs shall be set back a minimum of ten feet (10')
from the interstate right-of-way but no greater than one hundred feet (100')
parallel and adjacent to the interstate frontage. Interstate signs shall also
be set back a minimum of one hundred feet (100') from the property line of any
adjacent parcels.
d.   Sign Area Allowed: The total sign area shall be measured based upon the
actual square footage of a square or rectangle that encloses the copy, logos,
and graphics of one (1) sign face. Double sided signs may be permitted with the
maximum square footage permitted on each side. The maximum sign area for a
single tenant sign shall be one hundred (100) square feet. If the interstate
sign is to have two (2) or more tenants, the sign area may be increased to a
maximum of two hundred (200) square feet.
e.   Structure Design: The interstate sign structure shall be monolithic in
design which maintains essentially the same dimension from grade to top.
However, up to one-third (1/3) of the upper base area may be open to decrease
the visual mass and surface area affected by wind loads while maintaining
structural integrity. In no situation shall the base of the structure appear as
a single post as that would be considered a pole sign, which is prohibited. The
interstate sign structure shall be constructed with similar building materials
and colors used on the principal building on the parcel where the structure is
located. The maximum width of an interstate sign structure shall be twelve feet
(12').
f.   Sign Design: All interstate signs shall be composed of individual
dimensional letters (channel letters, reverse channel letters or solid
letters), routered face or designed in a similar manner such that only the
text, copy or graphic content of the sign is illuminated and the background is
opaque. Panel and box signs with letters painted or adhered to the face of the
sign shall be prohibited, except as follows as determined by the Director of
Development Services:
(1)   A panel sign is the only reasonable type of signage that will preserve
the integrity of a known and identifiable corporate logo or trademark, and
(2)   The panel sign is installed so that the box of the sign is hidden and the
panel face is mounted flush with the surface of the interstate monument sign
structure, and
(3)   The sign is designed such that only the text, copy or graphic content of
the sign is illuminated and the background is opaque.
4.   Landscape Signs: Signs that are incorporated into a landscape feature such
as a retaining wall, decorative fence, fountain, etc., and allowed in lieu of a
monument sign. The intent of this section is to encourage creative designs and
unique entry features and to establish a method to allow for the incorporation
of signage in these features that would not normally comply with regulations
for monument signs. It is not the intent to allow for a larger monument sign
surrounded with a limited number of landscape plantings to qualify as a
landscape sign. A landscape sign requires a more significant site enhancement
of which the sign is integrated into the overall landscape feature or theme.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5dd626f68508237cd281a645678e92f34786b23f/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2740.jpg]
a.   Allowed: In lieu of a monument sign.
b.   Minimum Lot Frontage: A minimum one hundred fifty feet (150') of lot
frontage on a street is required.
c.   Number Allowed: One (1) landscape sign is allowed per street frontage that
has the minimum frontage requirement. A sign may be reallocated from a
qualifying frontage to a frontage that is less than the minimum required, or
elsewhere on the property, but no additional sign would be allowed on the
qualifying frontage. On a nonresidential property, one (1) additional landscape
sign shall be allowed for a lot with frontage in excess of five hundred feet
(500') on any one (1) street, but must maintain a minimum three hundred feet
(300') separation from any other landscape or monument sign on the same
property.
d.   Minimum Separation: There must be a minimum separation of one hundred
fifty feet (150') from another landscape or monument sign on the same parcel.
e.   Height Allowed: The maximum height of any structure associated with a
landscape sign is eight feet (8') as measured to highest element of the
structure.
f.   Setbacks: A minimum setback of ten feet (10') from a public right-of-way
line and twenty feet (20') from the back of curb of a private street or drive
shall be required. Consideration should be given to the placement of the sign
and landscape features so as to not obstruct visibility and create potential
safety hazards.
g.   Sign Area Allowed: The total sign area shall be measured based upon the
actual square footage of one (1) square or rectangle that encloses the copy,
logos, and graphics of one (1) sign face. The maximum sign area allowed at the
minimum setback shall be forty five (45) square feet. Signs with two (2) equal
sized sign faces that are back to back, or have an interior angle of less than
forty five degrees (45°) between the sign faces, shall be allowed and only one
(1) face shall be counted towards the total sign area. Signs where the interior
angle between two (2) equal sized sign faces is greater than forty five degrees
(45°), each sign face shall be counted independent of the other to calculate
the total sign area.
h.   Non-Residential Uses: For non-residential uses, an additional fifteen (15)
square feet of sign area shall be allowed if an additional setback of ten feet
(10') or greater is provided.
i.   Nine Hundred Thousand Square Feet GFA: A building with a minimum of nine
hundred thousand (900,000) square feet of gross floor area (GFA) is allowed a
maximum of one hundred fifty (150) square feet of sign area for a landscape
sign. Said sign must be set back a minimum of twenty feet (20') from the public
right-of- way line and thirty feet (30') from the back of curb of a private
street or drive.
j.   Structure Design: Since the design requirements for these signs require
that they be incorporated into the landscape features of the site, it would be
difficult to define specific criteria without limiting creative options. The
structure needs to be designed to create visual interest and be integrated
into, or at a minimum, complement the surroundings, incorporating architectural
elements and unique design elements consistent with the materials and colors of
site and building elements of the site. A plan for the proposal needs to be
submitted to the City for review and, if the feature has not been previously
approved as a part of a site plan review, an amendment to the approved site
plan may be required if the change is determined to be a significant departure
from the approved plan.
k.   Sign Design: A three-dimensional appearance of the copy, graphics, or
design elements is required and may be achieved by individual dimension letters
or graphics, cut out, push through, engraved, embossed, pin mounted with stand-
offs, or alternative acceptable to the City.
l.   Sign Illumination: Sign illumination shall be allowed as outlined in
subsection
9-18-14C,
table 9-18-1 of this chapter.
m.   Special District Regulations:
(1)   Residential Subdivision Signs: A landscape sign may be allowed in lieu of
a monument sign at each entrance into a defined residential development or
subdivision, however, an easement shall be recorded for the sign and acceptable
documentation, as determined by the City, that outlines the responsibility and
strategy for the long term maintenance of the sign and removal, or repair at
such time that the sign is no longer desired or being maintained appropriately.
Illumination shall be allowed as outlined in subsection
9-18-14C,
table 9-18-1 of this chapter.
5.   Monument Signs: A permanent sign structure, typically located near the
street and directed at the motoring public to identify businesses, complexes,
centers, and tenants within the property on which the sign is located.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5dd626f68508237cd281a645678e92f34786b23f/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2742.jpg]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5dd626f68508237cd281a645678e92f34786b23f/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2744.jpg]
a.   Minimum Lot Frontage: A minimum one hundred fifty foot (150') lot frontage
on a street is required to qualify for a monument sign.
b.   Number Allowed: One (1) monument sign is allowed per street frontage that
has the minimum frontage requirement. A sign may be reallocated from a
qualifying frontage to a frontage that is less than the minimum required, or
elsewhere on the property, but no additional sign would be allowed on the
qualifying frontage. On a nonresidential property, one (1) additional monument
sign shall be allowed for a lot with a frontage in excess of five hundred feet
(500') on any one (1) street, but must maintain a minimum three hundred feet
(300') separation from any other monument or landscape sign in the same
property.
c.   Minimum Separation: Signs must maintain a minimum separation of one
hundred fifty feet (150') from another monument sign on the same parcel and
fifty feet (50') from a sign on an adjacent property.
d.   Height Allowed: The maximum height of a monument sign at the minimum
setback, including the structure, is five feet (5') as measured to highest
element of the structure. Additional height may be allowed with additional
setback as outlined below.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5dd626f68508237cd281a645678e92f34786b23f/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2746.jpg]
e.   Setbacks: A minimum setback of ten feet (10') from a public right-of-way
line or twenty feet (20') from the back of curb of a private street or drive
shall be required, unless noted otherwise in this section. Consideration should
be given to the placement of the sign and landscape features so as to not
obstruct visibility and create potential safety hazards.
f.   Sign Area Allowed: The sign area for a monument sign shall be the area of
one (1) rectangle or square that encloses the extreme edges of the entire
structure of said sign of one (1) sign face. The maximum size for a monument
sign at the minimum setback is thirty five (35) square feet, unless noted
otherwise within this section. Signs with two (2) equal sized sign faces that
are back to back, or have an interior angle of less than forty five degrees
(45°) between the sign faces, shall be allowed and only one (1) face shall be
counted towards the total sign area. Signs where the interior angle between two
(2) equal sized sign faces is greater than forty five degrees (45°), each sign
face shall be counted independent of the other to calculate the total sign
area.
g.   Non-Residential Uses: For non-residential uses, the sign area may be
increased up to maximum of sixty four (64) square feet and the height of the
structure may be increased to a maximum of seven feet (7') with an additional
ten feet (10') of setback provided in all required setbacks.
h.   Structure Design: The intent of this section is to have regulations that
require that a monument sign be designed to create visual interest and be
unified with the architecture, colors and materials that are relevant to the
overall site. Monument signs need to be more than just a box with tenant names
placed on a slab in the ground; they need to be an attractive feature,
incorporating architectural elements on the sides, bottom and top to frame the
sign area. These elements are to help provide unification with the
architectural theme of the site.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5dd626f68508237cd281a645678e92f34786b23f/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2748.jpg]
Monument signs shall be designed to include a solid base at least twelve inches
(12") high, along with columns, pilasters, cornices, or similar details to
provide design interest. The design of the structure needs to be consistent
with the materials and colors of site and building elements of the site. The
signage portion of a monument sign may be elevated above the base on exposed
posts but the height of the exposed posts shall not be greater twelve inches
(12"), or one-quarter (1/4) of the total height of the structure and sign,
whichever is more restrictive.
i.   Sign Design: A three-dimensional appearance of the copy, graphics, or
design elements is desired and may be achieved by individual dimension letters
or graphics, cut out, push through, engraved, embossed, pin mounted with stand-
offs, or an alternative acceptable to the City. Panel and box signs with
letters or graphics painted or adhered to the face of the sign shall be
prohibited.
j.   Sign Illumination: Sign illumination shall be allowed as outlined in
subsection
9-18-14C,
table 9-18-1 of this chapter.
k.   Special District Regulations:
(1)   Residential Subdivision Signs: A monument sign may be allowed in lieu of
a landscape sign at each entrance into a defined residential development or
subdivision. However, an easement shall be recorded for the sign and acceptable
documentation, as determined by the City, that outlines the responsibility and
strategy for the long term maintenance of the sign and removal, or repair at
such time that the sign is no longer desired or being maintained appropriately.
Illumination shall be allowed as outlined in subsection
9-18-14C,
table 9-18-1 of this chapter.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5dd626f68508237cd281a645678e92f34786b23f/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2750.jpg]
(2)   Valley Junction Historic Business (VJHB) District: Due to the small lots
and minimal building setbacks in the district, any lot within the VJHB District
with a minimum frontage on a public street of fifty feet (50') may qualify for
a ground/monument sign.
(A)   A minimum setback of five feet (5') from the public right-of-way shall be
required. The maximum square footage of the sign and structure shall not exceed
twenty (20) square feet.
(B)   Post and panel signs may be allowed as a monument sign if the maximum
height of any exposed post, or similar support structure, is not greater than
one- quarter (1/4) of the total height of the sign. All other requirements for
a monument sign shall be met for these types of signs.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5dd626f68508237cd281a645678e92f34786b23f/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2752.jpg]
(C)   Hanging signs on a single post shall be allowed as a monument sign with
the maximum post height of seven feet (7'). Sign shall be set back a minimum of
five feet (5') from the public right-of-way. The maximum sign area of a hanging
sign shall be ten (10) square feet.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5dd626f68508237cd281a645678e92f34786b23f/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2754.jpg]
(D)   All signs in the Valley Junction Historic Business District should be
designed to reflect the unique character and eclectic nature of the district.
6.   Project Directory Sign: A permanent, diagramed representation of the
complex located near the entrance of a multiple building complex which shows
the location and address of the building or unit designations within the
complex. This sign is intended to help emergency service and visitors with a
visual map of the complex to determine how to get to a particular building or
unit most efficiently. These signs are not intended to be additional signs or
graphics to promote, advertise or identify the complex for motorists on a
roadway.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5dd626f68508237cd281a645678e92f34786b23f/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2756.jpg]
a.   May be required at the discretion of the City's Fire Marshal.
b.   No sign permit is required.
c.   Maximum sign area shall be thirty five (35) square feet.
d.   Maximum height shall be eight feet (8') above grade.
e.   Post and panel sign design shall be allowed but the height of the exposed
post shall not be more than three feet (3'), or one- quarter (1/4) of the total
height of the sign, whichever is more restrictive.
f.   A three-dimensional appearance of the copy, graphics, or design elements
is not required for this sign type.
7.   Billboards: An off premises sign, that identifies or communicates
commercial or noncommercial messages related to an activity conducted, a
service rendered, or a commodity sold at a location other than where the sign
is located.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5dd626f68508237cd281a645678e92f34786b23f/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2758.jpg]
a.   General Provisions: No billboard shall be permitted within one hundred
feet (100') of any dwelling unit, public park or property line of public or
parochial school site, church site, hospital site, cemetery, similar
institution or zoning district not permitting billboards or off premises signs.
Furthermore, no billboard sign shall be permitted to face and be located within
three hundred feet (300') of a residential zoned district or use.
b.   Documentation: Any off-premises signs along an interstate and primary
highway must provide documentation that the sign has been approved by the Iowa
Department of Transportation (IDOT) prior to review by the City.
c.   Districts Permitted In: Billboards which conform to the provisions of this
section shall be permitted in the following zoning districts:
(1)   General Industrial District (GI).
(2)   Agricultural/Open Space District (OS).
d.   Minimum Setback: No billboard shall be established closer than one hundred
feet (100') from a public right-of-way or one hundred twenty feet (120') from
the back of curb of a private street.
e.   Size And Height Standards: The following size and height standards shall
apply to all billboards regardless of zoning district:
 
                   Maximum Size    Maximum Height Extensions
Single billboard   350 square feet 35 feet        1 sign extension shall be
                                                  allowed per sign at no more
                                                  than 10 feet outside the area
Double billboard 1 675 square feet 35 feet        of the sign and no more than
                                                  100 additional square feet in
                                                  size
 
Note:
1.    A double billboard is 2 sign faces mounted on the same structure and
shall only be allowed on parcels of 10 acres or more.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5dd626f68508237cd281a645678e92f34786b23f/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2760.jpg]
f.   Structure Design: A minimum distance of ten feet (10') between ground
level at the base of the supporting uprights and the bottom of the sign face
shall be provided.
g.   Spacing Of Billboard Signs:
(1)   On Federal and State highways, Federal and State regulations for spacing
and setbacks shall apply; provided, however, if the regulations of this chapter
are found more restrictive, the more restrictive requirement shall apply.
(2)   No billboard shall be established within three hundred feet (300') of any
other billboard sign facing the same direction.
h.   Prohibited: Electronic changeable graphics on billboards shall be
prohibited.
i.   Three-Dimensional: A three-dimensional appearance of the copy, graphics,
or design elements is not required for this sign type.
j.   Building Permit Required: For any new billboard structure, or any
structural alteration of an existing billboard, a building permit shall be
required prior to the commencement of work.
k.   Illumination: Interior illumination shall be prohibited. External
illumination shall be allowed but must be designed to minimize light spillage
onto adjacent properties and roadways.
TABLE 9-18-2
FREESTANDING SIGN DESIGN AND ILLUMINATION METHODS
 
• Allowed in this districAllowed with design considerations or X Prohibited
                           as needed
          Sign Design                                                            Illumination
          Access ID Ground                                  Project              External
Districts And       Directory Interstate Landscape Monument Directory Billboards Or       Internal
          Directory Signs     Signs      Signs 2   Signs2   Signs                Indirect
          Signs
              Sign Design                                                            Illumination
              Access ID Ground                                  Project              External
Districts     And       Directory Interstate Landscape Monument Directory Billboards Or       Internal
              Directory Signs     Signs      Signs 2   Signs2   Signs                Indirect
              Signs
OS            X         X         X                             X         •        •
RE, RS, R-1,  X         X         X                             X         X          •      X
SF-CR, SF-VJ
MH                      X         X          •                          X          •      X
RM (SF)       •       X         X          •                X         X          •      X
RM                      X         X          •                X         X          •      X
RH                      X         X          •       •      •       X          •      X
PCP, BP       •       •       •        •       •                X          •      •
RC, CMC, SC,  •       •       •        •       •                X          •      •
WR
NC, CVC, VJC, •       •       X                             X         X          •      •
OF
VJHB                              X                             X         X          •      X
LI, VJLI      •       •       X          X                            X          •      •
GI            •       •                            •                •        •      •
Institutional           X                                       X         X
uses
PUD or
Specific                                                                  X
Plan1
 
Notes:
1.    Specific regulations are identified in the applicable PUD or Specific
Plan. If nothing is noted in the language of the PUD or Specific Plan, the
regulations of the underlying zoning for any parcel shall apply.
2.    Landscape and monument signs are allowed as an either/or sign option and
must meet specific design criteria to be allowed in any of the noted districts.
(Ord. 2210, 4-17-2017)
9-18-16: WALL SIGNS:
A.   Wall Signs Generally: Wall signs are defined as any permanent sign
attached to, erected against, or applied to the surface of the exterior wall of
a building or an interior sign that is placed primarily for viewing outside of
the building. The intent of a wall sign is to provide identification for the
occupants of a building so that motoring traffic can locate the user or
business they seek to find. There are also pedestrian scale wall signs that are
designed to communicate information to foot traffic, or close up viewing, and
not design to attract the attention of a viewer traveling in a motor vehicle or
seeing the information from a greater distance. It is the intent of these
regulations to facilitate these intents by establishing design criteria that
will guide the design of signage to provide opportunities for creative design
options while minimizing sign clutter, excessive illumination, and possible
annoyances to the general public.
B.   Specific Criteria For Various Wall Signs:
1.   Awning Signs, Building Canopy Signs And Marquee Signs:
Awning Signs: Signs attached to or adhered to an awning (awnings are flexible,
non-structural coverings over a structural frame that projects from a building
wall for the purpose of shielding a doorway or window).
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5dd626f68508237cd281a645678e92f34786b23f/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2762.jpg]
Building Canopy Signs: Signs that are attached to, or constructed into a
building canopy (building canopies are permanent, rigid, structural, roof like
elements that project from a building wall for the purpose of shielding a
doorway or window).
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5dd626f68508237cd281a645678e92f34786b23f/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2764.jpg]
Marquee Signs: Any sign attached to or supported by a marquee structure. (A
marquee is a permanent roof like structure, other than a building canopy or
roof, that projects from the facade of the building and is typically used to
highlight the entrance to the building. Marquees are often ornate and
incorporate lighting and signage to attract attention and identify activities
associated with the business, such as theaters, convention centers, concert
halls or hotels.)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5dd626f68508237cd281a645678e92f34786b23f/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2766.jpg]
Under Awning Sign: A sign which is attached beneath the structural support
frame of an awning or hangs below an awning, canopy, or marquee and is designed
to provide business identification information for pedestrians walking under
these overhead structures.
a.   Awnings, canopies or marquees without lettering or other advertising are
not regulated as signage, unless back lit (see below), but may require review
for compliance with the approved architecture of the building and/or a building
permit.
b.   Shall maintain a minimum clearance of eight feet (8') about the grade
below.
c.   Sign copy will count towards the allowable wall signage for the tenant/
building.
d.   Sign copy may be placed on the top of a building canopy or marquee,
provided that the top of the sign is still below the principal roof line of the
building.
e.   No awning, canopy or marquee shall located closer than three feet (3') to
a public right-of-way line or easement, with the exception of the VJHB District
(see below).
f.   Exterior illumination, such as gooseneck down lighting, or interior
lighting which only illuminates the copy of the sign, shall be allowed. If an
awning, canopy or marquee is back lit, the entire awning, canopy, or marquee
will be considered signage.
g.   No awning, building canopy or marquee shall be mounted on a building wall
so that it extends above the parapet or roof line of a single story building,
or the bottom of the second story windows.
h.   Due to the minimal setback of the buildings in the VJHB District, awnings
may be allowed over the public right-of-way, but a hold harmless agreement,
indemnification of the City, and proof of insurance must be provided in
accordance with section
7-1-1, "Use Of Public Ways Restricted", of this Code.
i.   Under awning signs are limited to one (1) per tenant frontage with a
maximum sign area of three (3) square feet. A minimum clearance of eight feet
(8') between the bottom of the sign and the grade below shall be maintained.
2.   Projecting Sign (Also Called A Blade Sign): A double-sided sign with two
(2) faces that is generally mounted perpendicular to the building wall by way
of brackets or hanging supports. This type of sign does not include awning,
canopy, or marquee signs.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5dd626f68508237cd281a645678e92f34786b23f/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2768.jpg]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5dd626f68508237cd281a645678e92f34786b23f/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2770.jpg]
a.   One (1) projecting sign, per building frontage, per tenant is allowed.
b.   A minimum fifty feet (50') of separation shall be provided from any other
projecting sign.
c.   Shall not be less than eight feet (8') from the bottom of the sign to the
grade below. If the sign is erected over a driveway or street, it shall not be
less than fifteen feet (15') from the bottom of the sign to grade below.
d.   No sign shall extend away from the building wall greater than five feet
(5') as measured to the furthest edge; however, no projecting sign shall be
closer than five feet (5') to a public right-of-way line or easement, with the
exception of the VJHB District as prescribed below.
e.   The dimension between the principal sign faces of a projecting/blade sign
shall not exceed twelve inches (12").
f.   One (1) square foot of sign area for each linear foot of building or
tenant frontage may be used for a projecting sign, up to a maximum of twenty
(20) square feet. Only one (1) face of a projecting sign shall be counted
towards the allowed wall signage of a building or tenant frontage.
g.   No projecting sign shall be located so as to extend above the parapet or
roof line of a single story building, or the top of the second story windows.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5dd626f68508237cd281a645678e92f34786b23f/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2772.jpg]
h.   Projecting sign shall be designed to adhere to structural and load
capacities of the West Des Moines area and of the building that it is attached.
Structural and load calculations may be required prior to sign approval.
i.   Unless restricted elsewhere in this chapter, projecting signs may be
externally or internally illuminated. If internally illuminated, all projecting
signs shall be designed in such a manner that only the text, copy or graphic of
the sign is illuminated and the background is opaque. This may be accomplished
with individual channel letters, halo lit letters, routered face with push
through letters, or comparable design acceptable to the City.
j.   Complex shapes are encouraged for projecting signs rather than simple
rectangle, square and circle shapes.
k.   Due to the minimal setback of the buildings in the VJHB District,
projecting signs may be allowed over the public right- of-way, but a hold
harmless agreement, indemnification of the City, and proof of insurance must be
provided in accordance with section
7-1-1, "Use Of Public Ways Restricted", of this Code; however, renewal and
provision of proof of insurance annually is not required.
3.   Facade Wall Signs: Any permanent sign attached to, erected against, or
adhered onto the exterior surface of the wall of a building with the exposed
face of the sign in a plane parallel to the plane of said wall.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5dd626f68508237cd281a645678e92f34786b23f/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2774.jpg]
a.   All facade wall signs shall have a three-dimensional appearance with a
minimum dimensional depth of three-quarters of an inch (3/4") for the copy,
graphics, or design elements. The dimensional depth may be achieved by
individual dimension letters or graphics, cut out, push through, engraved,
embossed, pin mounted with stand-offs, or alternative acceptable to the City.
b.   Raceways shall be prohibited, except in situations where the architecture
of a building would prevent any other alternative as determined by the City. In
such situations, the visibility of the raceway shall be minimized through one
(1) or more of the following options:
(1)   Contoured raceway as a design element of the sign proposal; or
(2)   Concealed behind a backer panel or similar architectural feature.
(3)   When no other option exists, the raceway shall be minimized in size and
painted to blend in with the building it is mounted onto.
In an effort to accommodate desires to minimize wall penetrations for signage,
an acceptable alternative is the installation of a wireway. The wireway shall
have a maximum depth of three inches (3") and be located behind a contoured
backer panel upon which individual channel letters can be mounted. The backer
panel must screen the wireway from visibility and become a design element of
the entire sign. If the backer panel is a contrasting color from the wall
behind, the backer panel will be included in the sign area calculation.
c.   If internally illuminated, all facade wall signs shall be designed in such
a manner that only the text, copy or graphic content of the sign is
illuminated, and the background is opaque. This may be accomplished with
individual channel letters, halo lit letters, routered face with push through
letters, or comparable design acceptable to the City.
d.   Where allowed elsewhere in this Code, panel sign shall be contoured around
the copy of the sign with an opaque background.
4.   Other Wall Signs:
a.   Building Directory Sign: A sign internal to a site and not intended to
attract people off a street, but intended to provide information on the tenants
within the building to the public once they are within the site.
(1)   No lettering shall be larger than four inches (4") high.
(2)   No permit is required if the sign is set back more than one hundred feet
(100') from a street or the sign face is not visible from the street. If one
hundred feet (100') or less and the sign face is visible from the street, a
sign permit will be required and the sign area will be counted towards the
allowable wall signage for the building.
(3)   Maximum size is thirty two (32) square feet.
(4)   Limited to one (1) sign per building entrance.
b.   Icon Sign: A unique, three-dimensional object or sign that describes a
business's product or services. As a three dimensional sign, these signs will
be treated as a projecting sign and must comply with those requirements. The
square footage of an icon sign will be measured by the smallest rectangle that
outlines the entire sign on the largest dimension of the sign.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5dd626f68508237cd281a645678e92f34786b23f/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2776.jpg]
c.   Freestanding Structure Sign: Any sign that is not attached to a building,
but rather is attached to a canopy, or similar open- air, overhead structure,
such as a gasoline canopy, or a freestanding structure, such as a kiosk, or
ATM.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5dd626f68508237cd281a645678e92f34786b23f/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2778.jpg]
(1)   If the freestanding structure is associated with a principal use in a
building on the same site, any signage on the structure shall be counted
towards the wall sign area earned by the building or tenant frontage of the
principal use.
(2)   For structures described in subsection B4c(1) of this section, a maximum
of one (1) sign per freestanding structure face shall be allowed with a maximum
of fourteen (14) square feet per structure face.
(3)   If the freestanding structure is the principal use (no principal use in
an associated building), the maximum amount of signage per structure face shall
be no greater than five percent (5%) of the structure face, or fourteen (14)
square feet, whichever is more restrictive.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5dd626f68508237cd281a645678e92f34786b23f/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2780.jpg]
(4)   No sign shall extend about the parapet or roof line of the canopy or
structure.
(5)   A panel sign is allowed as a freestanding structure sign, but shall be
designed in such a manner that only the text, copy or graphic content of the
sign is illuminated and the background of the sign face is opaque.
d.   Incidental Wall Signs: Signs on a building that display general site
information, dates of construction, instructions, directives, or restrictions
that are primarily oriented to pedestrians or motor vehicle operators who have
entered the property from the street. These signs are not intended to contain a
commercial message or advertising.
(1)   Maximum of six (6) square foot per sign.
(2)   No permit required.
e.   Murals: An image, picture or representation painted on or adhered to the
exterior surface of a building that is intended to serve as an artistic and/or
historic function, and is not related by language, logo or graphic to the
advertisement of any product, service or identification of any business. It is
designed and intended to serve as public art, to enhance public spaces, but is
not necessarily publicly owned.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5dd626f68508237cd281a645678e92f34786b23f/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2782.jpg]
(1)   Any graphic that includes a commercial message would be considered a wall
sign and must comply with wall sign regulations. The City shall make this
determination and notify the applicant of that finding.
(2)   If the City determines that the graphic would qualify as a mural, then
the applicant shall be directed to submit a minor modification proposal to the
Planning Division for a facade change on private property, or to the West Des
Moines Arts Advisory Commission for review and recommendation if on public
property.
f.   Window Signs: Any graphic installed, adhered to, or painted upon an
individual glazed surface panel. This term does not include merchandise located
in a window and holiday displays.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5dd626f68508237cd281a645678e92f34786b23f/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2785.jpg]
(1)   Permanent window signs, which are graphics that are expected to remain in
place for more than thirty (30) days and are not easily changed, such as window
vinyl, shall be allowed for non- residential uses. Said graphics shall not
exceed twenty five percent (25%) of the window area of that facade of the
building. Up to one hundred percent (100%) of the window area may be covered
for the purpose of privacy or sunscreen, but only a maximum of twenty five
percent (25%) may include a graphic with the balance of the background being a
solid neutral color.
(2)   Temporary window signs, which are graphics that are short term and
intended to be in place less than thirty (30) days, such as posters, temporary
painted signs, etc., shall be allowed for non-residential uses on an additional
fifteen percent (15%) of the window area of that facade of the building.
(3)   For permanent window signs, if the amount exceeds the allowed twenty five
percent (25%), the entire sign shall be counted as wall signage and regulated
as such.
(4)   No permit is required for window signs but, proof may need to be provided
to the City of the calculations to show compliance upon request.
(5)   Any sign that is not window signage that is placed inside a building for
the primary purpose of being viewed from outside of the glazed surface and
cannot be easily read from within the building, shall be considered wall
signage and included in the count for allowable wall signage.
g.   Special District Regulations:
(1)   Residential Wall Signs: Wall signs are not allowed in single family
residential districts, however, there is the potential for a need for wall
signage in a multifamily residential development. A multifamily project shall
be allowed one (1) wall sign per street frontage, including frontage on an
interstate, at a rate of one (1) square foot per linear foot of building
frontage facing the street up to a maximum of sixty four (64) square feet.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5dd626f68508237cd281a645678e92f34786b23f/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2787.jpg]
Illumination of the sign shall be allowed with external or indirect lighting as
shown in
table 9-18-3 of this subsection B. Signs shall be allowed to be illuminated
from five o'clock (5:00) A.M. until eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M. and shall
provide an automatic timer to comply with the intent of this section.
TABLE 9-18-3
WALL MOUNTED SIGN DESIGN AND ILLUMINATION METHODS
 
• Allowed in this districAllowed with design considerations or X Prohibited
                           for specific types of signs
                   Internal Illumination Source
Districts External Reverse  Channel Push    Contoured Panel Or Exposed Exposed
                   Channel/ Letters Through Panel     Cabinet  Neon    LED
                   Halo
                       Internal Illumination Source
Districts     External Reverse  Channel Push    Contoured Panel   Exposed Exposed
                       Channel/ Letters Through Panel     Or      Neon    LED
                       Halo                               Cabinet
OS, RE, RS,
R-1, SF-CR,   •      •      X       X       X         X       X       X
SF-VJ, MH
RM, RH        •      •      X       X       X         X       X       X
RC, CMC, SC,  •      •      •     •               X
WR
PCP, BP       •      •      •     •               X       X
NC, CVC, VJC, •      •      •     •               X       X       X
OF
VJHB          •               X       X       X         X               X
LI, GI, VJLI  •      •      •     •                       X       X
Institutional •      •                      X         X       X       X
uses
PUD or
Specific Plan
1
 
Note:
1.    Specific regulations are identified in the applicable PUD or Specific
Plan. If nothing is noted in the language of the PUD or Specific Plan, the
regulations of the underlying zoning for any parcel shall apply.
C.   Sign Area Formula For Wall Signs:
1.   Sign Area Formula: The area of a wall sign is determined by the City using
actual dimensions, where practical, or approximate dimensions when irregularity
of a sign shape warrants. The area of each sign is to be measured by adding the
sum of the area of two (2) rectangles or squares that enclose the extreme
points or edges of all copy, logos, and graphics of said sign.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5dd626f68508237cd281a645678e92f34786b23f/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2789.jpg]
2.   Sign Area Allowed:
a.   One (1) square foot of sign area is earned for every linear foot of
building, or tenant, frontage facing a street when said building is set back a
distance of two hundred fifty feet (250') or less from the right-of-way line or
back of curb of a private street.
b.   One and one-half (11/2) square feet of sign area is earned per linear foot
of building, or tenant, frontage facing a street when said building is set back
a distance of two hundred fifty one feet (251') to five hundred feet (500').
c.   Two (2) square feet of sign area is earned per linear foot of building, or
tenant, frontage facing a street when said building is set back greater than
five hundred feet (500').
d.   If the front of a building faces away from the street frontage, or there
is an intervening building between the applicant building and the street, that
wall area for the front of the building would earn signage at a rate of one-
half (1/2) square foot of sign area per linear footage of said wall, unless the
building has no other building frontage facing a public street. In these
situations, the building or tenant would earn one (1) square foot of sign area
for every linear foot of building, or tenant, frontage for the wall that
contains the primary entrance into the building or tenant space.
e.   For multiple story buildings, those tenants located on the second or
higher floors, shall earn signage at a ratio of one- half (1/2) square footage
per linear footage of the exterior wall of their leasable area facing a street.
f.   At no time shall more than two (2) walls be used to compute allowable
signage.
3.   Limit: There is no limit on the number of signs allowed on a building,
unless restricted elsewhere within this Code, however the total amount of sign
area earned, based upon the formulas above, shall not be exceeded.
Additionally, the total amount of sign area that may be placed on any one (1)
wall shall not exceed what that wall would earn at a one (1) square foot per
linear foot of frontage.
4.   Maximum Size Of Letters, Graphics, And Logos: No letter, graphic or logo
dimension greater than six feet (6') shall be allowed, except in those
situations in which a use occupies in excess of one hundred thousand (100,000)
square feet of building area. The calculation of total square feet of a single
use shall include the gross leasable area (GLA) of the building dedicated to
the use and if applicable, the square footage of an immediately adjacent
recreational area associated with the use which is located such to act as an
extension of the building and defined on all sides by a human-made physical
barrier such as a fence. In these instances, a use occupying one hundred
thousand (100,000) square feet shall be allowed individual letters, graphics or
logos up to eight feet (8') in height and/or width. For every additional
fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet that a single use occupies, an additional
one foot (1') of height and/or width shall be allowed up to a maximum letter,
graphic or logo size of twenty feet (20') in height or width. All building
signage, including increased size of letter, graphic and/or logo shall not
exceed the total allowable square footage for the building as calculated per
9-18-16.C.2; nor shall the total amount of sign area that may be placed on any
one (1) wall exceed what that wall would be allowed at one (1) square foot per
linear foot of frontage. (Ord. 2210, 4-17-2017; amd. Ord. 2590, 12-4-2023)
9-18-17: SPECIAL SIGNS:
A.   Changeable Graphics Sign: These are permanent signs which have graphic
content that can be changed or altered through manual, mechanical or electrical
means.
1.   Where allowed, changeable graphics signs shall be counted as part of the
wall or ground signage allowed elsewhere in this chapter.
2.   The changeable graphics area shall be no more than one-third (1/3) of the
total allowable sign area of the sign, up to a maximum of twenty (20) square
feet.
3.   Manually changeable graphics are characterized by the letters or graphics
being placed in a holder on the sign face either individually, with slide in
panels with the message, or as a complete sign panel face that gets changed
manually. This type of changeable graphic may be included as a part of any
allowed sign.
4.   Electronically changeable graphics and video displays, shall be
prohibited, except for time and temperature signs.
a.   Time and temperature signs: Where allowed, shall be limited to a maximum
of twelve (12) square feet of sign area and shall be counted toward the allowed
sign area established for the method of display (wall or ground) for the
property. The sign shall be a static display that changes no more frequently
than once every eight (8) seconds.
B.   Institutional Signs: Since an institutional use, such as a government,
church or school, can be allowed in any zoning district under certain
conditions, standards need to be adopted that define what signage will be
allowed in the event that the use is placed in a district that may not allow a
particular sign. To the greatest extent possible, signage for an institutional
use should blend in with the underlying zoning district standards. Should the
use be located in a district that has less stringent standards that those
listed in this section, the more lenient standards may be utilized.
1.   Zones Allowed: Institutional signs shall be allowed in all zones in
accordance with the following:
a.   Ground Signs:
(1)   Monument/Landscape Signs: A freestanding monument/landscape sign shall be
allowed for any parcel with a minimum of one hundred twenty five feet (125') of
street frontage. The Director of Development Services may grant an exception of
the minimum frontage requirement if the site has no frontage that would comply
with the minimum and they determine that identification of the institutional
use by other available sign options may not clearly identify the use to the
motoring public. One (1) sign shall be allowed per vehicle entrance. A minimum
separation of one hundred twenty five feet (125') between signs along the same
street frontage shall be provided. The standards established in the table below
shall be the minimums allowed. If the institutional use is located in a zoning
district that would allow greater signage, the monument/landscape signs may be
allowed in accordance with the applicable zoning district.
(2)   Bulletin Board Signs: A bulletin board sign may be an independent ground
sign, combined with a monument/landscape sign, or may be attached to the
building as a wall sign. As the information for a bulletin board sign is
considered temporary and changes over time, the method of providing changeable
graphics shall comply with all City regulations regarding changeable graphic/
reader board signs.
(A)   Freestanding Bulletin Board Sign: One (1) freestanding bulletin board
sign shall be allowed per street frontage in addition to any allowed monument/
landscape sign. Separation requirements for monument/landscape signs shall not
apply to bulletin board signs. If a freestanding bulletin board is allowed in
addition to a monument sign, the use of any other temporary signs, such as
banners, bandit signs, etc., shall be prohibited on the site. The intent of the
bulletin board sign is to establish a permanent location for the display of
temporary signage for activities, events and announcements for the use.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5dd626f68508237cd281a645678e92f34786b23f/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2791.jpg]
(B)   Combination Monument/Landscape Sign And Bulletin Board Sign: In the event
that the bulletin board sign is combined with a monument/landscape sign, the
additional sign area provided under this Code for the bulletin board may not be
utilized to increase the sign area allowed for the identification of the
institutional use, i.e., the combined sign is allowed to be sixty four (64)
square feet total, fifty (50) square feet of a combined sign for identification
of the institutional use and fourteen (14) square feet for the changeable
graphics for the bulletin board. The area dedicated to the permanent
identification of the institutional use shall not exceed the total allowed for
a monument/landscape sign under this Code.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5dd626f68508237cd281a645678e92f34786b23f/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2793.jpg]
(C)   Wall Mounted Bulletin Board Sign: The square feet allowed for the
bulletin board sign shall be in addition to allowed building/wall signage.
(3)   Access Identification And Directional Signs: These signs shall comply
with Sign Code provisions for access identification and directional signs.
b.   Building Signage: Institutional uses shall be allowed one (1) square foot
of building (wall) signage per linear foot of building frontage facing a
street. In the event that an institutional use is located on a parcel with no
public street frontage, the frontage of the building with the primary entrance
shall be used to determine the maximum allowed square footage of signs. In no
case shall more than two (2) building frontages be allowed to be counted toward
allowed signage. The maximum letter height shall be six feet (6') high.
c.   Site Plan Approval: Landmark, statue, mural, or non-commercial symbol may
be allowed but shall be presented to the City Council for approval as part of a
site plan.
d.   Illumination: Signs may be illuminated in a manner allowed based upon the
zoning district the use is located in (see subsection
9-18-14C, table
9-18-1 of this chapter). However consideration shall be given to sign design
and type of illumination to keep in character with the surrounding
neighborhood.
e.   Standards: The following standards shall apply to institutional signs:
TABLE 9-18-4
 
Type Of Sign   Permit/    Maximum Sign Maximum Sign Sign Setback Other
               Approval 1 Area         Height                    Requirements
Bulletin board                                                   See "signs not
- freestanding S          32 sq. ft.   5 ft.        10 ft.       needing a
or building                                                      permit"
sign
Combination
monument/      S          64 sq. ft.   10 ft.       20 ft.       See "bulletin
landscape and                                                    board signs"
bulletin board
Directional    A          8 sq. ft.    4 ft.        10 ft.
Landmark,                                                        Must be
statue, mural, C          -            -            -            approved as
or religious                                                     part of a site
symbol                                                           plan
Landscape      S          30 sq. ft.   8 ft.        10 ft.       In lieu of
                                                                 monument sign
Monument       S          35 sq. ft.   5 ft.        10 ft.       In lieu of
                                                                 landscape sign
Note:
1.    Sign permit (S), administrative review (A), City Council approval (C).
C.   Landmarks, Sculptures And Statuary: These items are not intended to
communicate a commercial message and therefore would not include commercial
messages, business identification, logos or other identifying graphics. They do
not require a sign permit but would be approved as part of a site plan or minor
modification process through the Planning Division. An allowed sign may be
placed on a separate structure in close proximity to the site feature with the
issuance of a sign permit, provided that the placement of the sign near the
site feature would not change the perception of the landmark, sculpture or
statuary to be a commercial message (i.e., a coffee cup as a sculpture may be
considered artwork, but if you place a sign near it identifying a coffee shop
business, that would change the artwork into a promotional piece that would be
identified with the coffee shop).
D.   Lots Without Street Frontage:
1.   A buildable lot without lot frontage on a private or public street is
allowed one (1) off premises sign per entrance to the street.
2.   The sign must be located within fifteen feet (15') of the roadway and the
private easement that provides access to the lot.
3.   Setback shall be a minimum of ten feet (10') from the public street right-
of-way or back of curb of a private street.
4.   The maximum dimensions for a sign under this section is four foot (4')
tall and two feet (2') in width.
5.   Illumination of the sign shall be allowed in accordance with the zoning
district in which the sign is located.
6.   If more than one (1) sign is allowed under this section, the signs must be
located at least fifty feet (50') away from another sign allowed by this
section.
7.   The provision of written consent of the owner of the property upon which
the sign is located is required.
8.   Only allowed in all zoning districts that have not been developed with
single family detached residential units.
E.   Signs On Public Property: It shall be unlawful for any person or entity to
place, affix, or erect any "sign", defined in this chapter, on any property
owned by the City or on any easement granted to the City, except in accordance
with the provisions herein. Any sign that overhangs, protrudes over, or has
been posted on any structure on property owned by the City or easement granted
to the City shall also be considered unlawful, except as otherwise provided
herein or as allowed in section
7-1-1 of this Code.
F.   Temporary Signs: Temporary signs are signs that are erected for a limited
duration and not to be continued after the expiration of the allowed time
period. The intent of this section is to prescribe the conditions in which
temporary commercial signs, or attention attracting devices, may be allowed for
a limited duration in addition to any permanent permitted signs. All temporary
signs allowed under this section must be located on-premises of the activity,
product, service or event that is the subject of the sign.
1.   Allowed With No Permit: In all zoning districts, temporary, on-premises,
commercial signs under six (6) square feet in sign area and less than four feet
(4') in height, are allowed with no permit required. No more than one (1)
temporary commercial sign per street frontage per parcel, or tenant in the case
of multiple tenant occupancy, shall be allowed unless otherwise allowed within
this chapter. The use of more than one (1) commercial sign per street frontage
requires the approval of a sign permit and will be regulated under the
provisions provided for short term temporary signs. In a situation where there
is temporary activity on a site, such as a contractor doing work on a home or
lawn care, a temporary sign would be allowed on the property only at those
times there is someone on site actively working. Signs under this provision
would be expected to be removed upon completion of the work and in instances in
which there are three (3) or more consecutive days in which no work is being
performed on-site.
2.   Short Term Temporary Signs: A sign permit shall be required for any on
premises temporary commercial sign which is larger than six (6) square feet in
size or taller than four feet (4') in height, or when the aggregate total of
the signs per street frontage for one (1) entity or event exceeds six (6)
square feet. Short term temporary signs include all freestanding or ground
mounted banners, temporary flags, aerial signs and balloons tethered over a
site, inflatable signs and attention attracting devices, such as searchlights.
Building mounted and hard material signs may also be allowed under the
provisions of a short term temporary sign.
a.   These signs are allowed on private property in any non- residential
district, and in the Residential High Density (RH) District and any Residential
Medium Density (RM) District that has not been developed as detached single
family residential units.
b.   At the minimum setback, the maximum height for any short term temporary
sign shall be ten feet (10') above grade.
c.   Shall be set back a minimum of ten feet (10') from a public street right-
of-way and/or twenty feet (20') from the back of the curb for a private street
or drive. The setback shall be increased equal to the height of the proposed
sign for any sign exceeding ten feet (10'). Aerial signs are an exception and
are limited to one (1) per site and shall be tethered in such a way that the
sign remains wholly located on or above the site for which the permit is
issued. Signs taller than ten feet (10') may be allowed with additional setback
above the minimum required equal to the height of the proposed temporary sign.
d.   All signs shall be securely anchored in such a way to comply with the wind
pressure and dead load regulations outlined within the Building Code as adopted
by the City of West Des Moines.
e.   The maximum duration of each sign permit per property or tenant, in the
case of a multi-tenant building, shall be four (4) consecutive days or any
portion thereof. Permits may be issued for consecutive events but shall not
exceed four (4) events in a calendar year, and a maximum of sixteen (16) days
per year.
f.   The maximum size for any individual sign shall not exceed sixty four (64)
square feet and the aggregate total of the combination of signs allowed under
any one (1) short term temporary sign permit allowed under this section shall
not exceed one hundred (100) square feet.
g.   No illumination, amplified sound, animation, dynamic elements, or
attachments, including, but not limited to, balloons, ribbons, streamers,
pennants or speakers, shall be allowed.
3.   Long Term Temporary Signs: A permit is required for any temporary sign
over six (6) square feet in size that is proposed to be installed for longer
than the maximum sixteen (16) days allowed under short term temporary sign
regulations. Long term temporary signs are on premises commercial signs
constructed of a hard material, such as plywood or similar rigid material, or
soft material (e.g., banner) if the sign is mounted onto a hard surface, such
as the wall of a building.
a.   These signs are allowed in any nonresidential district, Residential High
Density (RH) District, and any Residential Medium Density (RM) District which
has not been developed with detached single family residential units.
b.   The maximum height shall not exceed ten feet (10') in height.
c.   Signs must be set back a minimum of ten feet (10') from a public street
right-of-way and twenty feet (20') from the back of the curb of a private
street or drive. Building mounted temporary signage shall not be allowed above
the roof or parapet of the building.
d.   All signs shall be securely anchored in such a way to comply with the wind
pressure and dead load regulations outlined within the Building Code as adopted
by the City of West Des Moines.
e.   The owner of a lot of record shall have the authority to determine who may
use a long term temporary sign for on premises uses allowed by this section.
The authorization by the owner shall be required prior to the issuance of a
permit by the City. A new permit shall be required anytime a sign is proposed
or altered. Long term temporary sign permits expire one year after issuance and
must be renewed for the sign to remain in place.
f.   A maximum of one (1) 32-square foot sign per street frontage shall be
allowed per property or tenant, in the case of a multi- tenant building. An
additional thirty two (32) square foot sign shall be allowed for each
additional one hundred feet (100') of any one (1) street frontage over five
hundred feet (500'). Signs allowed under this section shall have a minimum
separation of ten feet (10') from another sign, temporary or permanent, on the
same property.
g.   No illumination, amplified sound, animation, dynamic elements, or
attachments, including but not limited to balloons, ribbons, streamers,
pennants or speakers, shall be allowed.
4.   Sites With Active Development: Sites with active development are
construction projects in which construction activities are visible to the
general public and for which there has been a site plan, permitted conditional
use permit, plat or similar development entitlement approved by the City. At
such time that a building permit has been issued, a temporary sign(s) shall be
allowed in all zones and are subject to the following size, number and location
restrictions:
a.   One (1) temporary ground sign per property frontage of a street (including
interstate highways) shall be allowed.
b.   Signs shall not exceed ten feet (10') in height and a maximum sign graphic
area of sixty four (64) square feet.
c.   Illumination of these signs shall be prohibited.
d.   A ten foot (10') setback from the property line of the development shall
be required.
e.   Post and panel signs or printing on a construction fence shall be allowed.
f.   Three-dimensional lettering is not required.
g.   For individual project sites, signs shall be removed within seven (7) days
after issuance of a certificate of occupancy, completion of the final
inspection by the City or upon the expiration of the building permit for the
project.
h.   For development sites with multiple individual or unrelated construction/
development projects, signs permitted under this section shall be allowed to
remain in place on the site until all tenant spaces have been occupied
initially or all individual parcels within the development have been built
upon.
i.   Sign(s) shall be separated by a minimum of one hundred fifty feet (150').
(Ord. 2210, 4-17-2017; amd. Ord. 2623, 8-5-2024)
9-18-18: ENFORCEMENT:
A.   Abandoned Signs: Any sign or part of a sign remaining in place for a
period of ninety (90) days or more after it is no longer an on-premises sign
shall be considered abandoned. An abandoned sign shall be taken down and
removed by the owner, agent or person having the beneficial use of the building
or land upon which such sign may be found within thirty (30) days after written
notification from the Director of Development Services. Upon failure to comply
within the time specified in such order, the Director of Development Services
is hereby authorized to cause removal of such sign, and any expense thereto
shall be paid by the owner of the building or structure upon which the sign is
located or attached.
B.   Unsafe Signs: If the Director of Development Services finds that any sign
regulated herein is unsafe, unsecured, and/or deemed a potential hazard to the
public, the Director of Development Services shall promptly give written notice
by mail or personal service to the entity to which the sign applies or to the
owner of premises or building upon which the sign is located. If measures are
not taken to remove or alter the sign so as to comply with the standards herein
set forth within twenty four (24) hours after such notice, the Director of
Development Services, at the expense of the permittee or owner of the property
upon which it is located may initiate removal or alteration of the sign.
However, if the owner of the sign has promptly ordered the necessary parts to
repair the sign and has not received them or has promptly ordered the repair
work done by an authorized erector and the erector has failed to respond within
the twenty four (24) hour period, then a further extension of time may be
granted by the Director of Development Services upon a verified statement that
such delay is not the result of any act of the permittee or owner of the
premises.
C.   Unlawful Signs: If the Director of Development Services finds that any
sign regulated herein has been maintained, constructed, or erected in violation
of the provisions of this chapter, they shall promptly give written notice by
mail or personal service to the owner of the premises upon which the sign is
located to remedy the violation. If the permittee or owner fails to remove or
alter the structure so as to comply with the standards herein set forth within
one (1) business day after such notice, the Director of Development Services,
at the expense of the permittee or owner of the property upon which it is
located may initiate removal or alteration of the sign. The Director of
Development Services may refuse to issue a permit to any permittee or owner who
refuses to pay costs so assessed provided such authority is confined to the
premises where the violation occurred.
D.   Signs On City Property: Any sign unlawfully placed on any property owned
by the City, or any easement granted to the City shall be forfeited and subject
to confiscation. The City may issue a municipal infraction in an amount as
determined by the city for repeat offenders of placing signs on property owned
by the city. Citations may be issued to any person, or entity identified on the
unlawful sign or property owner upon which the sign is located. There is a
prima facie presumption that any person, property, or entity identified on the
sign is responsible for the placement of the sign.
E.   General Maintenance: The Director of Development Services, after ten (10)
days’ notice to the sign owner, may order the removal of any sign that is not
maintained in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. All costs
associated with the removal of a sign may be assessed against the property or
building upon which the sign is located. However, if the owner of the sign has
promptly ordered the necessary parts to repair the sign and has not received
them or has promptly ordered the repair work done by an authorized erector and
the erector has failed to respond within the twenty four (24) hour period, then
a further extension of time may be granted by the Director of Development
Services upon a verified statement that such delay is not the result of any act
of the permittee or owner of the premises. (Ord. 2210, 4-17-2017; amd. Ord.
2623, 8-5-2024)
9-18-19: APPEAL PROCEDURE:
A.   Appeal Procedure: The individual or entity affected by any decision,
interpretation, or order made by the Director of Development Services or their
designee regarding the enforcement of this chapter may file an application for
an appeal to the Board of Adjustment in the manner provided in title 2 of this
code.
B.   Public Hearing: The Board of Adjustment shall, upon the filing of an
appeal, fix a reasonable time for a hearing on same, giving public notice
thereof as well as due notice to the parties in interest. All interested
persons may offer oral or written testimony at the public hearing on the appeal
and every variation and exception granted or denied by the Board of Adjustment
shall be written testimony or evidence submitted in connection therewith. A
vote of three (3) members of the Board of Adjustment may affirm, modify or
reverse the order, requirement, decision or determination of the Director of
Development Services.
C.   Appeal To District Court: Any person or any officer, department, board or
bureau of the City jointly or severally aggrieved by any decision of the Board
of Adjustment on matters subject to this chapter may within thirty (30) days
from date of the filing of the decision by the Board of Adjustment, appeal
therefrom to the District Court of Polk County in accordance with the rules of
civil procedure. (Ord. 2210, 4-17-2017; amd. Ord. 2623, 8-5-2024)
9-18-20: VARIANCES:
A.   Variance Procedure: The individual or entity affected by any decision,
interpretation, or order made by the Director of Development Services or their
designee regarding the enforcement of this chapter may file an application for
a variance of any of the above provisions shall be made to the Board of
Adjustment in the manner provided in title 2 of this code. (Ord. 2210, 4-17-
2017; amd. Ord. 2623, 8-5-2024)
9-18-21: PENALTIES:
Any person in violation of this chapter shall be subject to the provisions of
section
1-4-1 of this Code. After a conviction of violation of any of the provisions of
this chapter, each day that a violation is permitted to exist constitutes a
separate and distinct violation. (Ord. 2210, 4-17-2017)
CHAPTER 19
LANDSCAPING
SECTION:
9-19-1: Title And Citation
9-19-2: Purpose
9-19-3: Definitions
9-19-4: Applicability
9-19-5: Interpretation
9-19-6: Preparation Of The Landscape Plan
9-19-7: Approval Process
9-19-8: Landscape Provisions
9-19-9: Plant Substitutions
9-19-10: Warranty And Maintenance
9-19-1: TITLE AND CITATION:
This chapter shall be known as and may be cited and referred to as LANDSCAPE
ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF WEST DES MOINES, IOWA. (Ord. 1839, 9-21-2009)
9-19-2: PURPOSE:
A.   The landscaping requirements specified herein are intended to foster
aesthetically pleasing development which will preserve, protect, and enhance
the appearance, character, general health, safety and welfare of the citizens
of the city of West Des Moines. Through this chapter the following objectives
will be achieved:
1.   Promotion of responsible land use and development;
2.   Mitigation of the negative environmental consequences of development
including noise, heat transfer, glare, erosion, sedimentation, and stormwater
runoff;
3.   Protection, conservation, and regeneration of natural and renewable
resources;
4.   Enhancement of our community's environmental and visual character;
5.   Safeguarding and enhancement of property values and protection of public
and private investment;
6.   Screening between and buffering of incompatible land uses and undesirable
views;
7.   Promotion of the retaining of natural and creation of manmade landscapes
that encourage the natural percolation and filtration of water and the recharge
of aquifers. (Ord. 1839, 9-21-2009)
9-19-3: DEFINITIONS:
BERM: A mound of earth, either natural or manmade, designed and used to provide
visual interest and/or aid in the buffering or screening of undesirable uses or
views.
BUFFER: A combination of horizontal space (land) and vertical elements (plants,
berms, fences, walls) used to physically separate and partially or wholly
screen views of incompatible adjacent land uses or undesirable features.
BUILDING STREET WALL: A building wall that is more or less parallel to an
adjacent public street. Such building wall line shall follow and include
irregular indentations or juxtapositions in the building, excluding steps and
unenclosed porches.
CALIPER: Trunk diameter measurement taken six inches (6") above the ground for
trees up to and including four inches (4") in diameter, measured twelve inches
(12") above the ground for trees ranging between four (4) and twelve inches
(12") in diameter, and measured four and one-half feet (41/2') above the ground
for trees over twelve inches (12") in diameter.
DECIDUOUS TREE - OVERSTORY: A plant with one vertical stem or main trunk that
generally begins branching at a height of six feet (6'), which has an elevated
and distinct crown, and which reaches a mature height of at least thirty feet
(30').
DECIDUOUS TREE - UNDERSTORY: A plant with one or more stems or trunks which has
an elevated and distinct crown and which reaches a mature height of less than
thirty feet (30'). Understory trees are usually planted for aesthetic reasons
such as flowers, interesting bark, or colorful fall foliage. Smaller understory
trees may be suitable for planting under overhead utility lines.
DIAMETER AT BREAST HEIGHT (dbh): The tree trunk diameter measured in inches at
a height of four and one-half feet (41/2') above the ground.
DIRECTOR OF DEVELOPMENT SERVICES: The director of the department of development
services for the city of West Des Moines or his/her designee.
EVERGREEN/CONIFER: A cone bearing seed plant that retains its foliage year
round. Evergreens are good for screening purposes and providing year round
color and substance to the landscape.
FOUNDATION PLANTING: Plants placed in near proximity to the foundation of a
building. Usually arranged within planting beds.
GROUND COVER: A plant other than turf grasses which grows more horizontally
than vertically. Ground covers are an alternative to turf grasses and may
provide erosion control on slopes.
LANDSCAPED ISLAND/POD: An unpaved area located within or adjacent to a parking
lot and used to guide traffic, separate lanes, and provide protection to parked
vehicles and to pedestrians and which are also used to promote green within
parking areas by providing trees, shrubs, and ground covers. Landscaped islands
are used to promote green within parking areas by providing trees, shrubs, and
ground covers.
MULCH: A protective layer of materials, either organic or inorganic, placed
around plants to prevent erosion, aid in soil moisture retention, prevent
freezing of roots, and control weeds thus providing an environment suitable for
growth of selected vegetation.
OPEN SPACE: That portion of the lot which is free of buildings, parking lots or
other vehicle use areas.
SCREENING: Vegetation, walls, fencing, or berms used individually or in
combination to obstruct or conceal views of undesirable elements.
STREETSCAPE: Combination of vegetation or other special visual features along
either side of vehicular travel lanes for purposes of aesthetics or
environmental mitigation.
VEGETATION: Living plant material including trees, shrubs, grasses, and
flowers. (Ord. 1839, 9-21-2009)
9-19-4: APPLICABILITY:
A.   These regulations apply to all new development or redevelopment of land
including expansions or major modifications of an existing development on any
parcel of land located within the corporate limits of the City, or outside the
corporate limits of the City as provided by law.
1.   The requirements herein shall not apply to:
a.   Individual detached single-family structures;
b.   Structures and sites existing at the effective date of this Code that do
not undergo a land use change or major modification;
c.   Reconstruction of existing structures suffering less than fifty percent
(50%) loss of the total value by destruction from natural or unnatural causes;
d.   Proposed structures that have received development approval prior to the
effective date of this chapter. (Ord. 1839, 9-21-2009)
2.   The requirements herein do apply to:
a.   All new nonresidential structures;
b.   All new developments in Multi-Family Zoning Districts;
c.   Major modifications to structures or sites;
d.   All subdivision plats where buffers are required;
e.   Minor modifications except that the requirements of this chapter shall
only apply to the area of the site impacted by the minor modification. (Ord.
2357, 5-6-2019)
B.   Phased projects shall implement the required landscaping for that portion
of the site being implemented or phased, except for buffers required of single-
family detached residential developments. Said buffers shall be installed in
their entirety in conjunction with the associated final platting of the parcel.
Fulfillment of any missing or replacement of dead landscaping in any portion of
the site will be required to be implemented when the last area is phased or
complete site build out is achieved. (Ord. 1839, 9-21-2009)
9-19-5: INTERPRETATION:
A.   Where a question arises as to the applicable standards to be applied, the
Director of Development Services shall review the proposed use when requested
to do so by letter, and based upon the characteristics of the use; determine
which performance standards shall apply. (Ord. 1839, 9-21-2009)
9-19-6: PREPARATION OF THE LANDSCAPE PLAN:
A.   Landscape plans shall be required to be prepared by a State licensed
landscape architect, certified nurseryman, or other qualified professional
knowledgeable in plant materials as acceptable to the Director of Development
Services. Said requirements are to ensure the long term viability of plant
materials chosen and to ensure landscape plans fulfill the desired outcomes
described above. (Ord. 1839, 9-21-2009)
9-19-7: APPROVAL PROCESS:
A.   Landscape plans are required to be submitted for review as part of the
development application process as denoted in the entitlement chapter of this
title. Landscape plans shall be approved by the City Council following the
recommendation of the Plan and Zoning Commission except for landscape plans
associated with variance requests which shall be approved by the Board of
Adjustment. Landscape plans associated with minor modification requests may be
reviewed and approved administratively provided no reduction to the standards
presented herein is proposed. (Ord. 2274, 2-5-2018)
B.   No building permit shall be issued or any development, master, or
subdivision plan or plat be recommended for approval without compliance with
all provisions and requirements set forth in this chapter.
C.   Lack of compliance with this chapter may result in the withholding or
revocation of a building permit or certificate of occupancy.
D.   Prior to final plat approval for any single-family detached residential
plats and prior to issuance of a final occupancy permit for any buildings or
structures, the Development Services Department shall inspect installed
landscaping for compliance with the approved landscaping plan. Said final plat
approval shall not be given nor shall a final occupancy permit be issued if
landscaping is not in accordance with the approved plan or if landscape
materials are dead, unhealthy, or demonstrate lack of proper maintenance.
Landscaping must be installed by November 1 to be counted as fulfilling
landscaping requirements. A temporary occupancy permit may be issued to
projects ready for occupancy after November 1 with provision of surety as
stated below with expiration of the permit being May 31 of the following
calendar year to allow the developer time to bring the landscaping into
compliance with approved development plans. If a developer desires to receive
final plat approval for any single-family detached residential plat prior to
installation of landscaping or a builder or property owner desires to receive a
temporary occupancy permit prior to the installation of landscaping then the
developer, builder, or property owner shall be required to provide to the City
surety in an amount one and one-half (11/2) times the cost of landscaping
installation. Failure to complete required landscaping by May 31 following
receipt of final plat approval or of a temporary occupancy permit may result in
forfeiture of surety provided and/or revocation of the final plat approval or
temporary occupancy permit. (Ord. 1839, 9-21-2009)
9-19-8: LANDSCAPE PROVISIONS:
A.   General Landscape Provisions:
1.   Harmonious With Existing Environment: Landscape plans shall be harmonious
with the existing environment and architectural design and shall demonstrate a
recognizable pattern or theme through the choice and location of materials for
the overall development of the project.
2.   Easements: Overstory trees and large upright evergreen trees shall not be
planted within public utility easements. Understory trees, shrubs, and ground
covers are permissible within said easements except that a corridor wide enough
for truck access to utility lines must be preserved through the easement.
Whenever possible, buffers should not overlap utility easements.
3.   Existing Vegetation And Natural Features: Existing significant and
worthwhile vegetation and natural features such as land forms shall be
preserved and incorporated into development to the greatest extent possible.
a.   At the discretion of the Director of Development Services, credit for the
preservation of existing vegetation and natural land forms may be given towards
fulfilling the planting requirements of this chapter. Credit for said
preservation must be requested at the time of development application and all
such vegetation to be preserved must be clearly identified on the landscape
plan. Vegetation must be of a desirable variety and in an overall healthy
condition and form to be considered suitable for preservation.
b.   Credit for preservation of vegetation may only be given for required
landscaping in the area of the vegetation being preserved. For example,
vegetation in the middle of a site could be counted towards open space
landscaping requirements but would not be counted towards fulfilling buffering
requirements.
4.   Pedestrian Linkage: Whenever possible, pedestrian linkages shall be
provided to public open spaces and/or the City trail system.
5.   Visibility At Street Intersections: Landscaping, berms, walls and fences
shall not obstruct pedestrian, bicycle or vehicular traffic visibility at
street intersections or access points to/from streets.
6.   Minimum Vegetation Requirements: Minimum vegetation requirements for one
category or landscaping purpose are in addition to another.
7.   Landscaped Areas: All areas of a site not intended for buildings,
permanent water bodies, or paved surfaces for off street parking areas,
sidewalks, or pedestrian trails shall be vegetated.
a.   Vegetation shall be of turf or plants. Turf shall be of a species suitable
to the area. All vegetation, including turf, must be well established and
healthy at the time of inspection by development services in order to receive a
final occupancy permit.
b.   Areas around permanent water bodies, including stormwater detention
facilities shall not become unkempt and unmaintained areas. Such areas shall be
treated with appropriate landscaping to enhance their presence. In addition,
measures such as the use of jets to move the water shall be implemented to aid
in preventing the buildup of algae on the water surface.
c.   A three inch (3") thickness of mulch material shall be installed around
all plants. The implementation of mulch shall be limited to planting beds and
the area immediately around base of trees and shrubs as allowed below. Organic
mulch materials such as fibrous wood are preferred over inorganic mulches.
Large expanses of mulched areas without plants are not acceptable. The mulching
of plants shall adhere to the following guidelines:
(1)   Deciduous trees shall have a ring of mulch up to a distance of twenty
four inches (24") beyond the trunk.
(2)   Evergreen trees shall have a ring of mulch up to a distance of twelve
inches (12") beyond the widest spreading branches of the plant.
(3)   Shrubs shall have a ring of mulch up to a distance of eight inches (8")
beyond the widest spreading branches of the plant.
(4)   Areas with ground covers and/or planting beds shall be mulched until such
time that the plants have grown together to completely cover any bare soil.
(5)   When possible, plants within lawn areas should be grouped and mulched as
one bed for ease of mowing.
8.   Mulch Materials: More extensive use of mulch materials for design intent
may be allowed with the specific approval of the city council or board of
adjustment as applicable. All use of organic or inorganic mulch materials shall
be shown and identified on the landscape plan.
B.   Vegetation: The use and incorporation of plant materials shall adhere to
the following guidelines, standards, and design principles:
1.   Vegetation should be located to simulate nature with groupings and massing
rather than linear or symmetrical lines unless such lines are for intentional
design intent.
2.   Plant size at maturity should dictate spacing, however, spacing may be
altered for design intent provided care is given not to overcrowd plants.
3.   All plants shall be commercially grown and shall meet all requirements set
forth by the current edition of the "American Standards For Nursery Stock"
(ANSI).
4.   As much as possible, plant materials that are native or adaptable to local
climactic and moisture conditions should be implemented.
5.   For visual interest and to limit the spread of disease or insects,
multiple plant species and genus shall be used. Unless otherwise specifically
allowed by the appropriate approval body for design intent, each type of
vegetation (deciduous overstory, deciduous understory, evergreen, shrubs, etc.)
required shall be comprised of a minimum of three (3) varieties to limit the
spread of disease or insects and prevent the total loss of a vegetation type
within a site.
6.   At least thirty five percent (35%) of trees required on site (sum of open
space, buffer, parking lot trees required) shall be evergreen species to ensure
year round visual interest and aid in the effectiveness of screening.
7.   Trees shall not be planted in any space with less than five feet (5')
clearance in any direction with the exception of trees planted in tree wells in
paved areas and specifically designed for such purpose.
8.   Trees shall not be planted within six feet (6') to the back of curb of any
vehicle travel lane or four feet (4') to any paved area, including sidewalks
and trails.
9.   No plants other than ground covers or perennials with a maximum height of
fifteen inches (15") shall be planted within five feet (5') of fire hydrants.
Fire hydrants shall be shown on the landscape plan.
10.   No plants other than ground covers or perennials with a maximum height of
fifteen inches (15") shall be planted within five feet (5') of fire department
connections. Fire department connections shall be shown on the landscape plan.
11.   Trees that will overhang pedestrian areas shall be pruned to provide a
minimum clear height of eight feet (8').
12.   Trees that will overhang vehicle travel areas shall be pruned to provide
a minimum clear height of fourteen feet (14').
13.   The following minimum plant sizes and dimensions are required at the time
of planting:
a.   Deciduous overstory trees shall have a minimum trunk diameter of two
inches (2") measured six inches (6") above the root collar and shall have a
minimum five feet (5') of clear trunk. Clump varieties (2 or more stems) are
allowed and each stem shall measure a minimum diameter of two inches (2").
b.   Deciduous understory trees shall have a minimum trunk diameter of one and
one-half inches (11/2") measured at six inches (6") above the root collar and
shall have a minimum three and one-half foot (31/2') clear trunk. Clump
varieties (2 or more stems) are allowed and each stem shall measure a minimum
diameter of one inch (1").
c.   Deciduous shrubs that reach a mature height greater than five feet (5')
shall be installed at a minimum of three feet (3') in height.
d.   Deciduous shrubs that reach a mature height between three (3) and five
feet (5') shall be installed at a minimum of two feet (2') in height.
e.   Deciduous shrubs that reach a mature height of less than three feet (3')
shall be installed at a minimum height of fifteen inches (15").
f.   Evergreen trees shall be installed at a minimum height of six feet (6').
g.   Evergreen shrubs shall be installed at a minimum height of two feet (2').
h.   Evergreen ground covers (mat evergreens) shall measure a minimum spread of
fifteen inches (15").
i.   Climbing vines and ornamental grasses shall have been grown in a quart
container for a minimum of one year.
j.   Ground covers and perennials shall be a minimum of a four inch (4")
container, #SP4, round or square.
k.   Annuals may be as "plug" or "pack".
C.   Berms: Berms shall adhere to the following guidelines, standards, and
design principles:
1.   Berms shall be designed in an undulating manner so as to give the
appearance of being naturally formed unless nonundulating forms are for
intentional design intent and approved by the appropriate reviewing body.
2.   Berms shall not have a negative impact on stormwater management for a
development or the surrounding area. The requirement for stormwater management
does not negate the requirement for berms.
3.   Berms required for screening purposes shall be an average of three feet
(3') in height and may be required to be higher if berm height and associated
landscaping is deemed to not be sufficient to adequately provide required
screening.
4.   Berms shall have a slope no greater than three to one (3:1).
5.   Berms shall be planted with permanent ground cover (turf or other plants)
to stabilize the slope and prevent erosion. Rocking of berms as a ground cover
material is prohibited; however rock boulders (8 inches or greater in size) may
be implemented within the side slopes to aid in stabilizing the soil, obtain
additional berm height, and/or for visual interest.
D.   Fences: See subsection E, "Buffers", of this section and see also section
9-14-11, "Fences And Walls", of this title, in the accessory structures
chapter.
E.   Buffers: Landscape buffers are intended to visually screen and mitigate
the impacts of development on adjacent properties including headlight glare,
noise, and unsightly views.
1.   General Buffer Provisions:
a.   No off street parking area, drive aisle, or building may encroach into any
buffer area with the exception of a drive aisle connection from a street to an
off street parking area. Said connection shall be the shortest path possible
and shall impact the least amount of buffer area possible.
b.   Required front, rear and side yard setbacks for single-family detached
residential lots shall be measured from the interior or private side of a
buffer boundary.
c.   Required front, rear and side yard setbacks for all development except
single-family detached residential shall be measured from the ultimate right-
of-way line of adjoining roads or property boundary if no road; however,
buildings and other structures may not be located within a buffer area.
d.   All buffer components shall be located outside of the comprehensive plan
ultimate right-of-way.
e.   Of the required number of trees within a buffer, a minimum of fifty
percent (50%) shall be evergreen.
f.   The design of the buffer shall simulate natural tree stands with groupings
and masses rather than linear or symmetric lines, unless the overall landscape
design is of a more formal nature and deemed appropriate by staff during the
development review process.
g.   Vegetation should be thoughtfully placed to create the maximum amount of
screening from the maximum number of viewpoints. Care should be taken to ensure
that through views under tree canopies are appropriately mitigated.
h.   Whenever practical, existing worthwhile trees and shrubs should be
preserved and incorporated into the design of the buffer. Existing vegetation
appropriate for preservation can be included to meet the total number of
required trees and shrubs, if it is determined during the development review
process that the existing trees will provide the necessary screening and
buffering.
i.   Earth berming may be required within buffers to achieve appropriate
screening.
j.   Care should be taken to avoid placing utilities in buffers and in not
overlapping buffer areas with public utility easements. (Ord. 1839, 9-21-2009)
2.   Conditions For Requiring A Buffer: The following conditions shall require
a buffer between abutting districts and uses:
a.   Any multi-family residential development greater than four (4) dwelling
units per building and all commercial, office and industrial uses or any
undeveloped Residential High Density District (RH), Residential Medium Density
District (RM), Manufactured Housing District (MH) and all Commercial and
Industrial Districts which abut any Single Family Residential Zoning District
or single-family detached uses shall be buffered as required in this section.
b.   Any multi-family residential and all commercial, office and industrial
uses or any undeveloped Residential High-Density District (RH), all Commercial,
Office and Industrial Districts which abut any Residential Medium-Density
District (RM) or Manufactured Housing District (MH) shall be buffered as
required in this section. (Ord. 2357, 5-6-2019)
c.   Any commercial, office or industrial use and all Commercial, Office and
Industrial Districts which abut any Residential District or residential use
shall be buffered as required in this section.
d.   All Industrial Districts which abut any Commercial District shall be
buffered as required in this section.
e.   Any property that is zoned Valley Junction Light Industrial District
(VJLI) that abuts a residential property shall be buffered as follows:
(1)   A ten foot (10') buffer park with a six foot (6') fence shall be required
between residential and light industrial properties.
(2)   Said buffer park shall be landscaped at one-third (1/3) of the
landscaping requirements of a thirty foot (30') buffer park.
f.   Any lot in any Single-Family Detached Residential District having both its
front and rear lines abutting a public street or a private street (a double
frontage lot) or a corner lot which is adjacent to a double frontage lot shall
be buffered from the thoroughfare along its rear yard for a double frontage lot
and its corner yard for a corner lot adjacent to a double frontage lot by one
of the buffer methods set forth in this section and shall be required to
include a berm within the buffer.
g.   Any lot in any Residential District which abuts the interstate right-of-
way or railroad right-of-way shall be buffered as required in this section.
3.   Methods Of Providing Buffers: Buffers adjacent to single- family detached
residential lots shall be established as easements unless otherwise established
within a platted outlot. Buffer easements shall be recorded with the County at
the time of establishment, prior to, or concurrent with the recordation of a
final plat or the final approval and issuance of the building permit on site
plans and special use permits. Buffers required under the provisions of this
section or elsewhere in this title shall be accomplished by any one of the
following methods:
a.   Sixty Foot Buffer: A landscaped and bermed area of not less than sixty
feet (60') in width comprised of landscape plantings.
The equivalent of one overstory or upright evergreen tree and three (3) shrubs
shall be required per thirty five (35) linear feet of the sixty foot (60')
buffer.
b.   Thirty Foot Buffer: A landscaped and bermed area of not less than thirty
feet (30') in width comprised of landscape plantings.
The equivalent of one overstory tree or upright evergreen tree, two (2)
understory trees and six (6) shrubs shall be provided per thirty five (35)
linear feet of the buffer park.
4.   Platted And/Or Zoned Prior To Adoption Date: On lots that have been
platted and/or zoned prior to the adoption date hereof that can present
evidence that the above buffer provisions would render the property
unbuildable, the City Council may grant a waiver of the buffer requirements and
permit a screen wall or fence of not less than six feet (6') in height.
5.   Burden Of Provision Of A Buffer: The burden of provision and selection of
the buffer shall be as follows:
a.   Where two (2) different districts or uses, requiring a buffer between
them, are both in an existing improved condition, the above requirement is not
retroactive. Should a buffer be desired, it shall be by mutual agreement
between property owners or as otherwise provided by law. However, in the event
any or all of the improved property is abandoned, destroyed, demolished, etc.,
for the purpose of renewal, redevelopment, etc., that portion of such property
being renewed, redeveloped, etc., shall be considered vacant land subject to
the requirements herein.
b.   Where districts or uses require a buffer between them, the burden of the
buffer shall be assumed by the developer of the more intense land use and shall
be installed when said property develops. The developer of the less intense
land use may choose to provide a buffer in order to provide more effective
screening to the more intense land use but shall not be required to provide a
buffer. In the event a landowner adjacent to an already developed property
changes the land use designation or zoning of their land to a less intensive
use and therefore causes a buffer to be required where none would have been
required before then the required buffer shall be shifted away from the owner
of the already developed property and shall be placed upon the landowner whose
actions are causing the need for a buffer.
6.   Buffer Waiver: Where the line between two (2) districts or uses requiring
a buffer follows a public street right-of-way, stream or other similar barrier,
the requirement for a buffer may be waived by the City Council so long as the
width of the barrier is at least equivalent to the width of buffer required and
providing such waiver does not permit the exposure of undesirable
characteristics of the land use to the public view.
7.   Single-Family Residential Subdivisions: For single-family residential
subdivisions, the plans for a landscape buffer shall be submitted for review
and approval at the same time as the preliminary plat. (Ord. 1839, 9-21-2009)
8.   Site Plan Review: For any type of development that requires a site plan
review, the buffer plans shall be submitted as a part of the site plan
submittal. (Ord. 2274, 2-5-2018)
9.   Fences: Fences may be allowed in lieu of a buffer or within buffers as
indicated below. Fences shall be reviewed for aesthetic quality and for
sturdiness of materials as described in section
9-14-11 of this title and must comply with all other code requirements.
a.   An opaque fence may be allowed in lieu of a buffer if said buffer is
located between two (2) dissimilar land uses and is not located alongside a
public or private street.
b.   With specific approval by the City Council, up to a maximum six foot (6')
metal ornamental fence to be substantially similar to the example image below
shall be permitted along the public side of a buffer (street side), as long as
the associated final plat does not specifically restrict fences within a
buffer. There shall be no other types of fences or materials (i.e. chicken
wire, temporary fencing, etc.) attached to the fence. The right of way area
between the fence and curb, including the public sidewalk, shall still be
maintained by the property owner installing the fence.
The intent of this allowance is to allow fencing while controlling the visual
clutter that can result in varying fence designs and materials. Therefore, for
visual consistency, the same fence shall be installed for the length of the
block. The first fence installed within the block shall determine the design
and color of the fence.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5dd626f68508237cd281a645678e92f34786b23f/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3130.png]
Three Rail Flat Top
F.   Streetscape And Building Wall Plantings:
1.   A landscaped edge or streetscape should be provided along all streets upon
which the public is permitted to travel regardless of whether they are public
or private. There are no minimum landscaping requirements for streetscapes,
however, landscaping placed along streetscapes shall be allowed to count
towards required open space landscaping unless said landscaping is part of a
required buffer.
2.   Streetscapes are intended to be ornamental in nature bringing needed green
to the City, shade and visual softening of pavement expanses.
3.   Streetscapes should attempt to have a recognizable pattern that
establishes a sense of place for a particular neighborhood or development.
4.   Blank building walls uninterrupted by architectural features should be
visually broken by vegetation.
G.   Screening: The implementation of landscaping, berms, decorative walls and
fences shall be used to screen undesirable views such as headlight glare,
mechanical equipment, outdoor storage, loading areas, off street parking areas,
etc.
1.   Off street parking areas: See subsection H of this section.
2.   Outdoor storage: See chapter 10, "Performance Standards", of this title.
3.   Mechanical units: See chapter 10, "Performance Standards", of this title.
4.   Trash enclosures: See chapter 10, "Performance Standards", of this title.
5.   Satellite dishes: See chapter 10, "Performance Standards", of this title.
6.   Additional screening measures may be required at the discretion of the
Director of Development Services to mitigate impacts and views not otherwise
covered by this section.
H.   Off Street Parking Areas: Vegetation in off street parking areas not only
provides needed visual relief from large expanses of parking but also provides
shade reducing the heat glare from parking areas thus improving pedestrian
comfort. Views of off street parking areas from public rights-of-way shall be
screened to a height of at least three feet (3'). Screening shall be as near to
one hundred percent (100%) opacity as possible with careful attention paid to
eliminate "through views" under tree canopies. In addition to the general
landscaping regulations above, the following off street parking area
landscaping requirements shall also apply:
1.   The use of multiple small parking lots shall be encouraged rather than one
large parking lot.
2.   Multiple landscaped islands shall be used and combined with vegetation to
effectively break up large expanses of parking. Location of islands should be
carefully considered to provide shade to as much of the parking area as
possible.
3.   The location of islands shall allow for the easy and free movement of all
emergency vehicles.
4.   Landscaped islands shall be placed, at a minimum, every eighteen (18)
stalls within a row of parking. Landscaped islands shall be, at a minimum, nine
feet (9') wide and thirty four feet (34') in length for dual parking rows or a
minimum of nine feet (9') wide and seventeen feet (17') in width for single
rows.
5.   Landscaped pods (tree diamonds) within a row of parking shall be evenly
spaced between landscape islands, however, shall be spaced no farther than nine
(9) parking stalls from another landscaped pod or landscaped island. Landscaped
pods shall measure no less than six feet (6') to back of curb in each
direction.
6.   Linear islands running the length of a parking row shall be required for
every six (6) rows of parking. Said islands provide visual breaks and may be
used as pedestrian pathways for safe pedestrian movement through the parking
area or as part of stormwater management measures. Linear islands shall measure
a minimum of ten feet (10') from back of curb to back of curb.
7.   The minimum vegetation required in off street parking areas shall be as
follows:
a.   Two (2) trees in each nine foot by thirty four foot (9' x 34') island.
b.   One tree in each nine foot by seventeen foot (9' x 17') island.
c.   One tree in each landscape pod.
d.   Additional shrubs, ground covers, grasses, and flowers may be provided in
landscaped islands or pods but are not required.
e.   Vegetation required in off street parking areas shall be in addition to
open space landscaping required, however, open space landscaping may be placed
within off street parking areas.
f.   Trees and shrubs provided in landscaped islands and pods beyond the number
required for off street parking landscaping shall be counted towards fulfilling
the site's open space landscaping requirements.
I.   Open Space: On each lot there shall be a minimum percentage of open space
unencumbered by buildings, off street parking areas, and other vehicle use
areas as required in chapter 7, "Setback And Bulk Density Regulations", of this
title. Open space areas may include landscaped areas, buffers, pedestrian
sidewalks/trails, athletic fields, water features, open air plazas, pedestrian
courtyards, etc. A minimum of two (2) trees and three (3) shrubs shall be
required per three thousand (3,000) square feet of required open space;
however, in no case shall less than two (2) trees and six (6) shrubs be
provided. Of the required trees, fifty percent (50%) of the trees must be of an
overstory or evergreen variety unless otherwise done for design intent and
specifically approved by the appropriate reviewing body. Additional landscaped
beds, ground covers, and ornamental grasses may be provided but are not
required. Open space landscaping shall be in addition to any landscaping
required for off street parking areas, buffer areas, or screening.
J.   Waiver Of Requirements: A waiver or reduction in any of the requirements
outlined in this chapter may be granted by the board of adjustment through the
variance process. The city council may, following review and recommendation
from the plan and zoning commission, choose to defer installation of required
landscaping with cause provided the applicant has demonstrated how said
landscaping may be installed on site in the future. (Ord. 1839, 9-21-2009; amd.
Ord. 2464, 4-5-2021)
9-19-9: PLANT SUBSTITUTIONS:
A.   Approval; Categories: Plants may be varied from the requirements described
above in the following way; however, no more than fifty percent (50%) of one
required plant type may be substituted for another without specific city
council approval. For example, no more than fifty percent (50%) of required
understory trees could be substituted for with shrubs. The following
substitution categories are exclusive (i.e., 20 shrubs cannot be substituted
for 1 overstory tree):
1.   Two (2) deciduous understory trees equal one deciduous overstory tree or
evergreen.
2.   Ten (10) shrubs equal one understory tree. (Ord. 1839, 9-21-2009)
9-19-10: WARRANTY AND MAINTENANCE:
A.   Warranty And Replacement:
1.   In a single-family detached residential subdivision, the developer shall
have responsibility for the replacement of any vegetative material for a period
of one year or until such time that site maintenance is turned over to an
owners' association or the adjacent property owner in conjunction with the
issuance of a final occupancy permit if no property owners' association.
2.   Replacement is required for any living plant material that was shown on an
approved landscape plan that is removed, dies, or disfigured, including if
removed by the city as part of any city work within a city right of way or
public utility easement. Replacement shall be the responsibility of the owners'
association, however, in the absence of covenants specifically and explicitly
placing replacement responsibility on an owners' association replacement shall
be the responsibility of the property owner.
B.   Maintenance:
1.   Maintenance shall be the responsibility of the owners' association,
however, in the absence of covenants specifically and explicitly placing
maintenance responsibility on a specified association, entity or individual,
maintenance shall be the responsibility of the property owner.
2.   Landscaping areas shall be kept in a neat and orderly manner and shall be
free of trash, litter, debris, dead plants, or weeds.
3.   All maintenance or pruning shall be done in accordance with the most
current standards of the National Arborists Association, American National
Standards Institute, American Association of Nurserymen, or American Society of
Landscape Architects.
4.   The city shall have the right to plant, prune, maintain and remove
vegetation on public property including rights of way. The city may also
perform such maintenance on private property if necessary to protect sanitary
sewers or other public improvements, to prevent the spread of insects or
disease, or to improve site visibility at intersections of two (2) vehicles
and/or pedestrian pathways. (Ord. 1839, 9-21-2009)
CHAPTER 20
MEDICAL CANNABIDIOL
SECTION:
9-20-1: Purpose
9-20-2: Definitions
9-20-3: Location Of Premises
9-20-4: Security Requirements
9-20-5: Signage
9-20-1: PURPOSE:
In adopting this chapter, it is recognized that medical cannabidiol facilities
could have certain objectionable side effects which render these facilities
inharmonious with residential and uses related to minor children. This chapter
seeks to ensure that residential and child-oriented uses, and medical
cannabidiol facilities will be located in separate and compatible locations.
It is a subject of legitimate concern for the City to use its zoning power to
protect and provide for the public health, safety, and general welfare of the
City and to establish reasonable standards of design and procedures for medical
cannabidiol facilities. (Ord. 2285, 3-5-2018)
9-20-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this title, the definitions provided in Iowa Code (2018)
section 124E (Medical Cannabidiol Act) and Iowa Administrative Code chapter 154
(Medical Cannabidiol Program) are adopted and shall govern the meaning of
language in this chapter unless such term is specially defined elsewhere within
this Code. In addition, the following definitions are adopted for this chapter:
CHILDCARE CENTER: A facility that provides childcare or preschool services as
defined by Iowa Code (2005) section 237A.I(4), which is adopted by reference.
PRESCHOOL: A facility as defined by Iowa Code (2005) section 237A.I(14) which
is adopted by reference.
RELIGIOUS FACILITY: Any building or site whose primary use is public religious
worship.
SCHOOL: A public or private elementary, middle, junior or senior high school.
(Ord. 2285, 3-5-2018)
9-20-3: LOCATION OF PREMISES:
A.   Medical Cannabidiol Manufacturer: A medical cannabidiol manufacturer must
be located where the applicable zoning ordinance allows such land use. In
addition, a licensed or permitted premises must be in compliance with
applicable Fire and Building Codes. No person, whether as principal or agent,
clerk or employee, either for himself or any other person, or as an officer of
any corporation, or otherwise, shall place, maintain, own or operate any
medical cannabidiol manufacturer in the following locations:
1.   In any single family or multi-family residential zoned area;
2.   Within one thousand feet (1,000') from any single family or multi-family
residentially zoned or used property, or any property designated on the City's
Comprehensive Plan as residentially oriented;
3.   Within one thousand feet (1,000') of any parcel of real property upon
which is located a child care center, preschool, or school.
4.   Within one thousand feet (1,000') of any parcel of real property upon
which is located a religious facility which conducts services and/or programs.
B.   Medical Cannabidiol Dispensary: A medical cannabidiol dispensary must be
located where the applicable zoning ordinance allows such land use. In
addition, a licensed or permitted premises must be in compliance with
applicable Fire and Building Codes. No person, whether as principal or agent,
clerk or employee, either for himself or any other person, or as an officer of
any corporation, or otherwise, shall place, maintain, own or operate any
medical cannabidiol dispensary in the following locations:
1.   Within one thousand feet (1,000') of any parcel of real property upon
which is located a school;
2.   Within one thousand feet (1,000') of any other medical cannabidiol
dispensary.
C.   Measurement Of Distance:
1.   The distance between any two (2) medical cannabidiol dispensaries shall be
measured in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures, from the
closest exterior structural wall of each business.
2.   The distance between any medical cannabidiol facilities and any use
requiring separation, shall be measured in a straight line, without regard to
intervening structures, from the closest property line of the medical
cannabidiol facility to the closest property line of the use requiring the
separation. (Ord. 2285, 3-5-2018)
9-20-4: SECURITY REQUIREMENTS:
Any medical cannabidiol production, manufacturing or dispensary operation shall
be in an enclosed, locked facility and implement security provisions to address
the following and in accordance with Iowa Code (2018) section 124E (Medical
Cannabidiol Act) and Iowa Administrative Code chapter 154 (Medical Cannabidiol
Program).
A.   Protection against unauthorized entrance.
B.   Personnel identification system and facility access control.
C.   Protection against theft of raw product, medical products, waste material
or cash. (Ord. 2285, 3-5-2018)
9-20-5: SIGNAGE:
Any medical cannabidiol production, manufacturing or dispensary operation shall
comply with advertising and marketing provisions in accordance with the Iowa
Code (2018) section 124E (Medical Cannabidiol Act) and Iowa Administrative Code
chapter 154 (Medical Cannabidiol Program) and comply with the regulations
contained in the City's sign ordinance (chapter 18 of this title). (Ord. 2285,
3-5-2018)
TITLE 10
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
General Provisions   1
Plats and Procedures   2
Design Standards and Required Improvements   3
CHAPTER 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
SECTION:
10-1-1: Jurisdiction
10-1-2: Definitions
10-1-3: Fees
10-1-4: Development Application
10-1-5: Variations And Exceptions
10-1-6: Changes And Amendments
10-1-7: Enforcement
10-1-1: JURISDICTION:
This title is adopted by the city of West Des Moines, Iowa, governing the
subdivision of all lands within the corporate limits of the city, and within
two (2) miles adjacent thereto. (1985 Code §6-6.01)
10-1-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this title, certain terms and words are hereby defined.
Words used in the present tense shall include the future, the singular number
shall include the plural, and the plural the singular; the word shall is
mandatory, and the word may is permissive.
ACTIVE RECREATION AREA: That part of a park which can be utilized for the
placement of intensive recreational activities and facilities including
athletic fields; tennis, basketball, or general purpose courts; playground
equipment; wading pools; ice skating rink; etc. An active recreation area shall
have sufficient level areas uninterrupted by streams and drainage ditches to
permit its development with optimum slopes ranging from two percent (2%)
minimum to five percent (5%) maximum.
ARCHITECT: A registered architect authorized to practice architecture as
defined by the laws of the state of Iowa.
AUDITOR'S PLAT: A plat prepared at the request of the county auditor to clarify
property descriptions for the purposes of assessment and taxation.
BLOCK: An area of land within a subdivision that is entirely bounded by
streets, highways, parks, railroad or similar fixed land division and/or the
exterior boundaries of the subdivision. In the case of a planned unit
development, a group of building lots for attached dwellings, said lots
completely surrounded by a combination of public rights of way and/or common
ground controlled by a homeowners' association or other legal entity.
BUILDER: Any person, individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
estate, trust, entity, or agent of same acquiring a building permit from the
city in order to erect or repair a residential structure or structures or any
portion of the same.
BUILDING LINE:
A.   Building lines are synonymous with setback lines and outline the buildable
area of a lot which remains after the required yard areas have been provided
for.
B.   Building lines shall be shown on all lots intended for residential use of
any character and on commercial and industrial lots when required by ordinance.
Such building lines shall not be less than required by the zoning ordinance1.
See title 9 of this code.1. Where the subdivided area is not under zoning
control, the commission shall require building lines in accordance with the
needs of each addition.
CITY: The city of West Des Moines and all lands within its corporate
boundaries.
CITY COUNCIL: The city council of the city of West Des Moines.
COMMISSION: The planning and zoning commission of West Des Moines, Iowa2. See
title 2, chapter 1 of this code.2.
COMMON GROUND: That portion of the property associated with, belonging to, or
under the operational control of a homeowners' association, or other legal
entity, as part of a planned unit or cluster development, and ownership of
which is not exclusive to any one owner, but held in distributive shares or
interests by members of the association.
DEDICATION: The payment of a fee to be used exclusively by the city for park
site acquisition and/or development.
DEVELOPER: Any person, individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
estate, trust, entity, or agent of same acting or proposing to subdivide land
or develop a parcel of land for the construction of a residential building or
buildings.
DEVELOPMENT: A parcel of real estate wherein a developer proposes to subdivide
or develop land for the construction of a residential building or buildings.
DISTRICT: A section or sections of land area depicted on the official zoning
map1. See title 9, chapter 4 of this code.1 within which the regulations
governing the use of buildings and premises or the height of buildings and area
of sites are uniform.
EASEMENT: A grant by the property owner of the use, for special purpose, of a
strip of land by the general public, a corporation, or a certain person or
persons, and within the limits of which the owner of the fee shall not erect
any permanent structures but shall have the right to make any other use of the
land subject to such easement which is not inconsistent with the right of the
grantee. Public utilities shall have the right to trim or remove trees which
interfere with the use of such easements.
ENGINEER: A registered engineer authorized to practice civil engineering as
defined by the laws of the state of Iowa.
EROSION: All of the processes by which soil or rock material is loosened and/or
removed by natural forces.
EROSION CONTROL: Methods implemented to reduce, control or eliminate the
process of erosion.
EROSION CONTROL PLAN: Plan submitted with preliminary plat that addresses the
erosion controls to be implemented where there is the potential for erosion on
a site. Should include existing and proposed grades, existing vegetation and
temporary and permanent erosion control measures.
FAIR MARKET VALUE: A current fair market value of land within the proposed
development at the time of and immediately prior to the developer initiating
subdivision or site plan improvements and shall include all of the land within
the proposed development prior to additional internal improvements but zoned to
permit residential development with access to public streets and public
utilities.
FRONTAGE: The lot width measured on a horizontal plane at the building setback
line, which line shall be drawn at a distance not less than the minimum front
yard setback for the zone district or planned unit development of which the
parcel or lot is a part. In the case of curvilinear lots or lots located along
a cul-de-sac, the frontage measurement shall be taken along a tangent striking
at the center of the lot on the building setback line. Said tangent when struck
shall also be used for building setback purposes. No lot shall have less than
forty feet (40') abutting a public street, except as allowed within the R-
5 multi-family residential district.
GREENWAYS OR GREENBELTS: Strips of open space usually in conjunction with
streams and drainageways which principally serve as both a public access to the
drainage system and as passive recreation areas. These strips can offer
intermittent recreational areas, as well as serving as scenic connections and
trails for pedestrian and bicycle riders between major park facilities.
LOT: A portion of a subdivision or other parcel of land intended for the
purpose, whether immediate or future, of transfer of ownership or for building
development.
MAINTENANCE BOND: A surety bond on terms approved by the city attorney, or cash
deposit made out to the city in an amount equal to the full cost of the
improvements which are required by this title, said cost being estimated by the
city engineer and city council, and said surety bond or cash deposit being
legally sufficient to secure to the city that said improvements shall be kept
in good repair from the time of acceptance by the city of said improvements for
such period of time as is specified by this title.
MASTER PARKS PLAN: An official plan for the development of the city's parks and
open space, consisting of maps, drawings and other documentation to fix and
describe boundaries of neighborhood park districts and the proposed size,
character, location and utilization of land for active and passive recreation.
The master parks plan shall be adopted by the park board with the concurrence
of the city council and shall be compatible and in accordance with the general
intent of the comprehensive plan for the city.
MASTER PLAN: A sketch layout of a general rights of way and alignments of
streets, utility easements and dedicated areas for public use for a land area
intended to be subdivided in conjunction with a preliminary plat. A master plan
shall serve only as a guide for development and shall not be binding on the
city for subsequent plat review and approvals.
MULTI-FAMILY ATTACHED HORIZONTALLY: Dwelling units are attached only
horizontally, no stacked units. Units may be attached along the side walls or
attached along the side and rear wall. Individual unit entry, no common entry
element.
MULTI-FAMILY ATTACHED VERTICALLY: Dwelling units are attached vertically. Units
may also be attached along a side or rear wall. Units may have individual unit
entry or common entry element either conditioned or non-conditioned space.
MULTI-FAMILY DETACHED: Dwelling unit has no attachment and the unit is either
associated with ownership of real property (footprint lot) within common
property (owned jointly or by an association) or is located on a lot that meets
the applicable bulk regulations for the zoning district but is not associated
with ownership of real property.
NEIGHBORHOOD MINIPARK: A specialized neighborhood recreational area to serve a
concentrated or limited population designed for a specific age group such as
preschool or elementary.
NEIGHBORHOOD PARK: A public park established as the center of recreational
activities for a neighborhood park district. Neighborhood parks are designed to
serve all age groups and include passive recreational areas and active
recreational facilities such as children's playground apparatus, athletic
fields, court game facilities, wading pools, ice skating rinks, picnicking
areas and shelter facilities.
NEIGHBORHOOD PARK DISTRICT: A geographical area of the city designated by the
park board with the concurrence of the city council and depicted on an approved
master parks plan for planning and implementation of the neighborhood park
system.
NEIGHBORHOOD PARK SYSTEM: A network of active and passive recreation areas
including neighborhood parks, neighborhood miniparks and greenbelts which are
designed and located to serve a surrounding neighborhood.
PUD (PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT): Any development in which the proposed land
uses, transportation elements, building densities, arrangements and types are
set out in a unified plan. A planned unit development may consist of mixed
residential, commercial, office and public land uses.
PARK BOARD: The park board of the city of West Des Moines, Iowa1. See title 2,
chapter 7 of this code.1.
PARK DEVELOPMENT: Park site acquisition and/or physical improvement of the
neighborhood park system.
PARK LAND: The terms "park land" and "park system" shall include all
classifications of parks as identified and included within the master parks
plan.
PASSIVE RECREATION AREA: Part of a park system that is not intended for intense
recreational use but has been reserved as open space for visual and
psychological relief from the urbanized environment and may act as a greenway
or greenbelt providing a park strip along drainageways and a passive connecting
system between active recreation areas.
PERFORMANCE BOND: A surety bond on forms approved by the city attorney or cash
deposit made out to the city in an amount equal to the full cost of the
improvements which are required by that ordinance; said cost being estimated by
the city engineer and council, and said surety bond or cash deposit being
legally sufficient to secure to the city that said improvements will be
constructed in accordance with this title.
PLAT, FINAL: A map, drawing or chart on which the subdivider's plan or the
subdivision is presented and which he submits for final approval and intends to
record in final form.
PLAT, PRELIMINARY: A map or plan showing all the facts needed to enable the
commission and city council to determine whether the proposed layout of the
land is satisfactory from the standpoint of public interest and conforms to
state statutes and city ordinances.
PUBLIC PATHWAYS: Pathways restricted to pedestrians and nonmotor vehicles for
the purpose of separating automobile traffic from pedestrian and nonmotorized
traffic and linking together public land use.
RETAINING WALL: Any structure designed to stabilize soils on varying elevations
to ensure long term soil stability.
SINGLE-FAMILY DETACHED: Dwelling unit has no attachment and is associated with
ownership of real property (single family lot).
STREET: The entire width between property lines of every way or place of
whatever nature when any part thereof is open to the use of the public, as a
matter of right, for the purposes of vehicular traffic and others, and whether
designated as a street, highway, thoroughfare, parkway, throughway, expressway,
road, avenue, boulevard, lane, place, circle, or however otherwise designated.
SUBDIVIDER: Any person, individual, firm, partnership, association,
corporation, estate, trust or any other group or combination acting as a unit,
dividing or proposing to divide land so as to constitute a "subdivision" as
defined herein and includes any agent of the subdivider.
SUBDIVISION: The term "subdivision" or "subdivided" as used in this title shall
mean a subdivision of land, a plat of a subdivision, a planned unit
development, a master plan or a site plan for residential development.
SURVEYOR: A registered land surveyor authorized to practice "surveying" as
defined by the registration act of the state of Iowa. (1985 Code §6-6.02; amd.
5-22-1991; Ord. 1131, 5-22-1995)
10-1-3: FEES:
Each application request for any purpose, including appeals, shall be
accompanied by the fee specified by city council resolution before it is
accepted for filing and processing. (Ord. 1396, 3-6-2000)
10-1-4: DEVELOPMENT APPLICATION:
A.   Defined: For purposes of this section the term "development application"
shall mean any presentation or filing with the city for residential development
purposes of any subdivision of land over which the city has subdivision review
and approval authority, or the filing or presentation of any site plan, PUD,
PUD specific plan, permitted conditional use plan or development, subdivision
master plan or area development plan, over which the city has approval
authority or a declaration of horizontal property (condominium) regime pursuant
to Iowa Code chapter 499B.
B.   Dedicate Land For Park And Recreational Purposes: All persons making a
development application shall dedicate to the city, within the land covered by
the development application, land for park and recreational purposes sufficient
to meet the requirements of this section.
1.   In each tract of land covered by a development application, there shall be
reserved and dedicated to public use two and thirty-nine hundredths (2.39)
acres of land for park purposes and three and seventy-six hundredths (3.76)
acres of land for greenway use for each one thousand (1,000) people, based upon
the projected population of the completed development application as calculated
in accord with this section. For purposes of this chapter, property subject to
a horizontal property condominium regime under Iowa Code chapter 499B shall be
treated as single-family detached. Such dedication shall be prorated to the
amount indicated by the projected population to the nearest one thousand
(1,000) square feet of land to be dedicated, but in any event, no dedication of
either park or greenway space shall contain a total for combined park and
greenway usage less than ten thousand (10,000) square feet of land to be
dedicated.
2   For purposes of this section, population in the completed area covered by
the development application will be determined by multiplying the number of
housing units projected in the area covered by the development application for
each use category times the anticipated average per unit as given below. The
quantity calculated for each residential type shall be added together and the
sum shall be the projected population for purposes of the development
application. For the purposes of this chapter the following population
estimates per residential type will be used:
a   Single-family or multi-family detached: 2.90 people.
b   Multi-family attached horizontally: 1.63 people.
c   Multi-family attached vertically: 1.73 people.
d   Condominium: 2.90 people.
3.   The city may require that all land dedicated under this section be
configured or located to optimize aggregations of land and thus may require
that the dedicated land be adjacent to the land affected by other development
applications or to otherwise maximize usefulness of the land in accord with the
city's master parks and trails plan. The city may place similar requirements
upon dedications under this section in order to assure useful aggregations of
land for greenways.
4.   For purposes of this section land dedicated for greenway purposes includes
natural resource areas, watershed areas, floodplain, wooded ravines or
hillsides, multipurpose trails, corridors or other open spaces.
5.   This section shall not apply to any development application which does not
include residential development, provided, however, that to the extent any
development includes residential uses within any development application then
park land and greenway dedication shall be required to the extent determined in
accord with subsections B1 and B2 of this section.
6.   For purposes of this section the water area of ponds, streams, retention
basins, detention basins and other bodies of water, or the land area of buffer
park easements and site plan open space requirements, shall not be included in
determining any area dedicated for park or greenway purposes.
7.   The dedication of any land for park or greenway purposes shall include
dedication of a corridor or point of connection for public pedestrian access,
the areas of which shall be included in determining compliance with this
section.
8.   Approval of a development application shall be conditioned upon the
construction of (or providing sufficient surety for the construction of) the
following improvements in accord with city design standards of:
a.   Streets abutting any dedicated land.
b.   Utility services (including hookups) to any dedicated land including storm
and sanitary sewers, drainage structures, water lines, gas lines, electric
lines, communications lines and such other utilities as are (or will be upon
completion) available to adjacent tracts.
c.   Sidewalks (abutting any public street) and trail connections as
appropriate.
d.   Site grading and seeding.
e.   Streetlights.
9.   If land dedication under this section requires an amendment to the master
parks and trails plan the need for such an amendment will be reported to the
park and recreation advisory board which shall make a recommendation to the
city council on the development application.
10.   The required land dedication under this section shall be reduced when the
person making the development application provides public access by easement to
recreational facilities, playgrounds, unobstructed open spaces, ball fields,
soccer fields, tennis courts, basketball courts, volleyball courts, picnic
shelters, recreational trails and other similar nonduplicated recreational
facilities which have been (or will be) constructed and maintained by the
applicant and are not shown on the master parks and trails plan. There shall
not be any credit for swimming pools, clubhouses and other recreational
facilities not provided in neighborhood parks, greenways or miniparks under the
master parks and trails plan. In order to determine the credit the city shall
ascertain the fair market value of the land required to be dedicated under this
section and from such value subtract the cost of the recreational facilities
constructed by the applicant and provided under this section. The person making
the development application shall then only be required to dedicate land equal
in value to the remainder.
11.   Property subject to public easements for multipurpose trails shown on, or
proposed by the city to be shown on, the master parks and trails plan shall be
included in the calculation of park land dedicated under this section. Such
multipurpose trails shall be built by the applicant to city standards and
maintained by the city. Easements for multipurpose trails will include an
easement for access of sufficient width for trail maintenance and
reconstruction. The city shall restore any land disturbed by maintenance or
reconstruction, provided however, the owner of the fee shall be responsible for
all trimming, planting and maintenance of vegetation including the
responsibility to keep the trail unobstructed, and passage unimpeded by
vegetation.
12.   The dedication of land for trail or greenway space required under this
section may include easements to the public of land used or included in the
setbacks required in single- or multi-family developments. The easements shall
be a minimum of ten feet (10') away from any building, other structure or
parking lot on the site.
C.   Alternative To Dedication: As an alternative to dedication under
subsection B of this section, any person filing a development application may
provide jointly with other persons for the dedication of land in an amount at
least equal to the amount required under subsection B of this section, at a
location which is not part of the land for which approval is sought, provided
such alternative is within the same neighborhood park district (as such
districts are established by resolution of the city council) as the land for
which a development application has been made, that the alternative jointly
provided will provide for a park with a total land area of at least five (5)
acres, contiguous connective greenway space consistent with the master parks
and trails plan and that such alternative dedication of land is or has actually
been dedicated to the city and has been accepted by the city for use in accord
with the master parks and trails plan.
D.   Dedication Requirement Less Than Ten Thousand Square Feet: Where
application of the formula set forth in subsection B of this section results in
a dedication requirement of less than ten thousand (10,000) square feet the
person making or filing the development application may elect to dedicate ten
thousand (10,000) square feet of land or fulfill their obligation by
participating in an option provided by subsection C of this section, but such
alternative participation shall be based upon the actual calculation under
subsection B of this section and not upon the equivalent of ten thousand
(10,000) square feet of land.
E.   Alternate Plan: Subsections B and C of this section notwithstanding, any
entity required to comply with this section may present an alternate plan which
meets the purposes of this section as a means of complying herewith. It will be
the burden of the entity presenting such plan to establish that such plan meets
the purposes of this section. Any such plan shall be first reviewed by the park
and recreation advisory board which shall make a recommendation to be presented
to the plan and zoning commission (where plan and zoning commission
recommendation is otherwise required) or where the plan and zoning commission
does not review then to the official or board responsible for review. If the
plan and zoning commission or other official or board recommendation is not
required, such plan and the recommendation of the park and recreation advisory
board shall be submitted to the city council which shall approve or reject such
plan by resolution. Any alternate proposal must directly and proportionately
benefit the development. This subsection, however, does not authorize the
payment of impact fees to the city in lieu of the land dedication requirements.
F.   Single-Family Residential Units: This section shall not apply to any
development application containing three (3) or fewer single-family residential
units. A person making or filing a development application shall not divide
land into separate plats in order to seek a waiver under this provision. Where
a development application is made for multiple contiguous tracts within any two
(2) years the city may treat all the development applications as one for
purposes of this section.
G.   Horizontal Property Regime: No declaration of a condominium regime and
under Iowa Code chapter 499B, nor any conversion of an apartment to a
condominium under Iowa Code section 499B.3 shall be completed before the person
or entity filing the declaration shall have complied with the land dedication
requirements of this chapter. In regard to property converted from apartments
to condominiums, if such property was originally constructed before January 1,
1985, or between November 22, 1999 and March 5, 2004, such property shall meet
the requirements of this section in the same manner as newly constructed
condominiums prior to completion of conversion to a horizontal property regime,
all other conversions shall be deemed to have met the requirements of this
section.
H.   Severability: If any subsection or provision of this section is held
invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such holding shall not affect the
validity of any other provisions of this section which can be given effect
without the invalid portion or portions and to this end each subsection and
provision of this section is severable.
I.   Appeal Procedure:
1.   Notice Of Appeal; Fee: Any person making or filing a development
application or any person, entity, or developer affected by any decision made
by any department acting under this chapter, may appeal to the city council by
filing notice of appeal with the city clerk and a filing fee of one hundred
dollars ($100.00) payable to the city of West Des Moines to be credited to the
general fund of the city. Such appeal shall be taken within ten (10) days from
the decision of the department acting under this chapter and shall set out in
detail the reasons and grounds for the appeal. The city clerk shall forthwith
transmit to the city council all papers constituting the record upon which the
action appeal is taken. An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the
appeal.
2.   Public Hearings: The city council shall upon the filing of an appeal fix a
reasonable time for a hearing, giving public notice thereof as well as due
notice to the parties in interest. All interested persons may offer oral or
written testimony at the public hearing on the appeal. A vote of three (3)
members of the city council may affirm, modify, or reverse any decision of any
department acting under this chapter.
3.   Park And Recreation Advisory Board Review: Prior to the public hearing on
appeal before the city council, the park board shall review the decision of any
department acting under this chapter and shall make a recommendation to the
city council for consideration at the public hearing.
4.   Appeal To The District Court: Any person, entity, or developer aggrieved
by any appeal decision of the city council may within thirty (30) days from the
date of the city council rendering a decision, appeal therefrom to the district
court of Polk County, Iowa, in accordance with the rules of civil procedure,
division XIV, entitled "certiorari". (Ord. 1595, 8-30-2004; amd. Ord. 2376, 8-
5-2019)
10-1-5: VARIATIONS AND EXCEPTIONS:
Whenever the tract proposed to be subdivided is of such unusual topography,
size or conditions shape or is surrounded by such development or unusual that
the strict application of the requirements contained in these regulations would
result in substantial hardships or injustices, the City Council, upon
recommendation of the Planning and Zoning Commission, may vary or modify such
requirements wherever provided within this title so that the subdivider is
allowed to develop his property in a reasonable manner; but so, at the same
time, the public welfare and interest of the City and surrounding area is
protected and the general intent and spirit of these regulations is preserved.
In such cases the use of planned unit development zoning for such site shall be
considered and may be required by the City Council.
With regard to auditor's plats the City Council shall have the right to waive
provisions governing approval and public improvements outlined herein providing
there is on file with the City, a copy of the request of the county auditor
ordering such plat and a letter from the auditor stating that the plat as
submitted meets the requirements for which he has ordered the plat. (1985 Code
§6-6.09; amd. Ord. 2527, 7-5-2022)
10-1-6: CHANGES AND AMENDMENTS:
Any provisions of these regulations may be changed and amended from time to
time by the council; provided, however, that such changes and amendments shall
not become effective until after study and report by the commission and until
after a public hearing has been held, public notice of which shall be given in
a newspaper of general circulation at least fifteen (15) days prior to such
hearing. (1985 Code §6-6.11)
10-1-7: ENFORCEMENT:
The requirements of this chapter shall be enforced by:
A.   Recording: No plat or any subdivision shall be recorded in the county
recorder's office or have any validity until it has been approved in the manner
prescribed herein.
B.   City Funds Or Improvements: The council shall not permit any public
improvements over which it has control to be made from city funds or any city
money expended for improvements or maintenance on any public utility or street
in any area that has been subdivided after the date of adoption of these
regulations unless such subdivision, public utility or public street has been
approved in accordance with the provisions contained herein and accepted by the
council as a public utility or public street. (1985 Code §6-6.10)
CHAPTER 2
PLATS AND PROCEDURES
SECTION:
10-2-1: Procedure
10-2-2: Preliminary Plat; Requirements
10-2-3: Final Plat; Requirements
10-2-4: Plats Of Survey
10-2-1: PROCEDURE:
In obtaining final approval of a proposed subdivision by the Commission and the
Council, the subdivider shall submit a preliminary plat and final plat in
accordance with the following order and procedure:
A.   Presubmission Conference:
1.   Whenever the owner(s) of any tract of land located within the platting
jurisdiction of the City is desirous of subdividing the same, said individual
(s) shall submit to the West Des Moines Planning Department a request for a
preapplication conference. The purpose of said conference shall be to acquaint
the City staff with the proposed subdivision and to acquaint the owner(s) or
developer(s) with procedures and/or any special problems which might relate to
the subdivision and adjoining property.
2.   Whenever a parcel of land submitted for subdivision is contained within a
larger tract held by the owner(s) that is also capable of further division, or
when a tract of land is submitted which contains vacant or developable land
adjoining within two hundred feet (200'), said individual(s) wishing to
subdivide shall supply a master plan showing how the aforementioned properties
could logically be developed in accordance with normal practices of street
design and lot layout, and in accordance with the Comprehensive Plan for the
City.
B.   Preliminary Plat Filed: The subdivider shall prepare and file with the
secretary to the Commission, ten (10) copies of a preliminary plat conforming
in detail to the requirements set forth in this Title.
C.   Referrals: The Commission secretary shall forthwith refer six (6) copies
to assigned City personnel. In case of a subdivision outside the corporate
limits of the City, the Commission shall refer two (2) copies of the
preliminary plat to the County Board of Supervisors and keep the County
Engineer advised of the status of the plat and action taken thereon.
D.   Review And Comment: The Planning Director, the City Engineer and other
City staff personnel shall carefully examine the preliminary plat as to its
compliance with the laws and the ordinances of the City, the existing street
system in relation to the master plan, good engineering practices and upon
completing their investigation, submit their findings and recommendations to
the Commission.
E.   Commission Review And Report:
1.   After reviewing City staff reports, the Commission shall study the
preliminary plat and other material for conformity thereof to these regulations
and other applicable regulations and ordinances of the City. The Commission may
confer with the subdivider on changes deemed advisable and the nature and
extent of such improvements to be made by the subdivider. If changes in the
plat are required, the Commission may request City staff to review the changes.
2.   The Commission, after review of the preliminary plat including any changes
made, shall then send the preliminary plat and any changes, along with its
recommendations to the Council for its consideration.
F.   Public Hearing: Before approving a preliminary plat, the Commission may at
its discretion, hold a public hearing on the proposed plat, notice of which
shall be given by publication in a local newspaper of general distribution, or
by sending notices by mail to affected property owners of record within two
hundred fifty feet (250') of the proposed preliminary plat. Such notice shall
be given within fifteen (15) days prior to the public hearing. If a public
hearing is held, action on the plat shall be taken at the hearing or the first
meeting thereafter; provided, however, the subdivider may agree to an extension
of time not to exceed sixty (60) days. After action by the Commission on the
preliminary plat, City staff shall forward the recommendation of the Commission
to the Council as soon as possible. Failure of owners of record to receive
notification shall not invalidate the proceedings of this Chapter.
G.   Council Action:
1.   Upon submittal of the preliminary plat by the Commission to the Council,
and the Council rejects the preliminary plat, the Council may request the
Commission to reevaluate said plat upon the objections made by the Council and
ask the Commission to resubmit its recommendations.
2.   If the Council denies approval of the preliminary plat as recommended by
the Commission, the Council shall indicate reasons for such denial.
3.   Upon approval of the preliminary plat by the Council, which approval shall
only constitute an authorization to proceed with preparation of the final plat:
a.   The subdivider may proceed with a preparation of final plat as provided
under Section
10-2-3 of this Chapter, together with any detailed construction, drawings and
specifications for the improvements required by this Title, and submit twelve
(12) copies of the final plat to the Council for approval, together with a
certificate from the enforcement officer that the final plat is substantially
in accordance with the preliminary plat as approved by the Council, required
bonds posted in favor of the City, and other accompanying information required
by this Title or other ordinances of the City; provided further, however, if
performance bonds are posted for improvements, the final acceptance of the plat
will not constitute final acceptance by the City of any improvements until the
improvements are inspected by the City Engineer who shall submit a statement
that all improvements authorized by the Council have been completed in
conformance to ordinance specifications and maintenance bond for such
improvements are posted and approved and the Council accepting such
improvements. No public funds need be expended in the subdivision until such
improvements have been completed and accepted by the City; or
b.   The Council may authorize the subdivider to initiate construction of all
improvements according to the specifications, standards and ordinances of the
City. If the Council authorizes construction of the improvements according to
the approved preliminary plat and its specifications, standards, ordinances and
regulations, such approval shall be binding upon the City. If construction of
the improvements of any kind are initiated by the subdivider on the basis of
preliminary plat approval without authorization from the Council, the
subdivider shall be responsible for any changes in these improvements required
by the Council before final plat approval. (1985 Code § 6-6.03)
c.   Preliminary Plat Validity:
(1)   In those situations, in which surety is provided in lieu of construction
of public improvements, the approval of the preliminary plat by Council shall
be null and void unless the final plat is presented to the Council within one
year after date of approval of the preliminary plat.
(2)   In those situations, in which public improvements are constructed,
inspected and being accepted by the City in conjunction with the final plat,
the approval of the preliminary plat by Council shall be null and void unless
the final plat is presented to the Council within eighteen (18) months after
the date of approval of the preliminary plat.
(3)   An extension of one hundred eighty (180) days may be granted by the City
Council upon review of a written request submitted by the subdivider prior to
expiration of the original validity period. Said request shall include an
explanation of the reason for the extension request and the payment of a fifty
dollar ($50.00) filing fee.
H.   Final Plat Submitted: When a final plat is submitted by a subdivider, the
Council may accept or disapprove the same. If the Council disapproves the final
plat, such disapproval shall be pointed out and made of record wherein said
proposed final plat is objectional.
I.   Commission Review: The Council may refer the final plat to the Commission
for review and recommendation, particularly if said plat does not conform to
the preliminary plat previously approved by the Commission. If the Commission
is requested by the Council to review the final plat, the Commission shall then
consider the final plat, make its recommendations of approval or disapproval,
and submit its findings to the Council with appropriate reasoning attached
thereto.
J.   Acceptance: The passage of the resolution by the Council accepting the
final plat shall constitute final approval of the platting of the area as shown
on the final plat, subject to the acceptance of improvements, and the
subdivider shall cause such plat to be recorded in the office of the County
Recorder of Polk County, Iowa, as provided by chapter 409, Code of Iowa, and
amendatory acts thereto before the City shall recognize the plat as being in
full force and effect. No building permits shall be issued by the City's
Building Inspection Department until the extent of street improvements is
adequate for construction equipment, and police and fire equipment. (1985 Code
§6-6.03; amd. Ord. 1131, 5-22-95; Ord. 2455, 12-7-2020)
10-2-2: PRELIMINARY PLAT; REQUIREMENTS:
The preliminary plat of a subdivision is not intended to serve as a record plat
and shall be submitted for review separately and prior to submission of the
final plat. Its purpose is to show on a map all facts needed to enable the
Commission and Council to determine whether the proposed layout of the land in
question is satisfactory from the standpoint of public interest and meets all
ordinances and regulations of the City. The subdivider or his representatives
may call at the office of the Commission in advance of the preliminary plat in
order to discuss the proposed subdivision and in order to obtain information as
to the requirements necessary for approval of the plat.
A.   Number Of Copies And Scale: Ten (10) copies of the preliminary plat shall
be submitted as prescribed for review. The scale of the map shall be one inch
equals fifty feet (1" = 50') on small subdivisions and one inch equals one
hundred feet (1" = 100') on large subdivisions unless otherwise approved by the
Commission and Council. In addition, there shall be submitted three (3) copies
of a reproducible quality photo reduction of the subsection that will be on
paper no larger than eight and one-half inches by eleven inches (81/2" x 11").
B.   Contents Of Preliminary Plat: The preliminary plat shall show:
1.   Areas dedicated for public use, such as schools, parks, pathways,
playgrounds and streets.
2.   Boundaries of the proposed subdivision shall be labelled and indicated by
a heavy line.
3.   Building setback lines for frontage and side streets.
4.   Buffer easement and method where required.
5.   Contour lines at intervals of not more than five feet (5') when the grade
differential over the entire proposed parcel exceeds fifty feet (50'), and
contour lines at intervals of two feet (2') when the contour change over the
entire parcel is less than fifty feet (50').
6.   Both existing and proposed grades shall be shown.
7.   Erosion control measures shall be shown on the preliminary plat or an
erosion control plan shall be submitted with the preliminary plat.
8.   Corner radii.
9.   Easements for public utility and rights of way purposes.
10.   Existing buildings, railroads, underground utilities, other rights of way
and easements.
11.   Location and name(s) of adjoining subdivision(s) or undeveloped land
adjacent to preliminary plats and owners and persons having ownership interest
in all adjoining properties.
12.   Location, names and widths of all existing and proposed roads, alleys,
streets and highways adjoining the area being subdivided.
13.   Lot areas (approximate) of all nonrectangular lots and the area of
smallest rectangular lot.
14.   Lot numbers.
15.   Vicinity sketch.
16.   Name and address of engineer and surveyor.
17.   Name and address of recorded owner and/or developer.
18.   Name of subdivision, date, compass point, scale and official description
and acreage of the property being platted.
19.   Proposed lot lines with approximate dimensions.
20.   Proposed utility service.
a.   Source of water supply.
b.   Provision for sewage disposal, drainage and flood control.
21.   The zoning district, including both uses, height and area, in which the
land to be subdivided falls according to the Zoning Ordinance of the City.
22.   A letter of consent from all persons having an interest in the land to be
subdivided, that they consent to the subdivision of the land; a statement that
the subdivision will comply and conform to all the requirements of the
ordinances and regulations of the City and to platting procedures and
conditions.
23.   All established floodway, floodway fringe, and flood plain overlay lines.
C.   Accompanying Material: (Preliminary Plats) Soil percolation tests,
certification of power supply, certification of ownership and any other
information deemed necessary for preliminary plat review may be required by
City staff. (1985 Code §6-6.06; 5-22-91)
10-2-3: FINAL PLAT; REQUIREMENTS:
The final plat shall conform to the following requirements:
A.   Number of Copies and Scale: When a preliminary plat is approved, the
subdivider shall submit twelve (12) copies of the final plat for review by the
City Council. The scale of the map shall be one inch equals fifty feet (1" =
50') on small subdivisions of under twenty five (25) lots and one inch equals
one hundred feet (1" = 100') on large subdivisions, unless otherwise determined
by the Planning and Zoning Commission or City Council. In addition, there shall
be submitted three (3) copies of a reproducible quality photo reduction of the
final plat on paper no larger than eight and one-half inches by eleven inches
(81/2" x 11").
B.   Contents Of Final Plat: The final plat shall be drawn in India ink on
reproducible tracing mylar on eighteen inch by twenty four inch (18" x 24")
sheet with a border line allowing a three inch (3") binding margin along left
hand narrow width and one-half inch (1/2") margin on the remaining narrow width
and two (2) long sides. The following information shall be shown on the plat:
1.   Block lines shall be designated by heavy solid lines.
2.   Block corners shall be shown rounded by appropriate radius with arch
length, central angle and radius shown.
3.   Boundary lines shall be designated by a heavy line (#3 or #4 pen) of long
dash-two dots, etc., and labelled "plat boundary".
a.   Boundary dimensions from angle point to angle point shall be shown for all
sides of the closed traverse.
b.   Bearings, based on an assumed meridian approximating north, of all
boundary lines or internal angles of all angle points on the boundary shall be
shown.
4.   Building setback lines for frontage and side streets shall be designated
by a fine short dashed line, labelled "building setback line" and dimensioned.
5.   Center line of all street right of ways shall be designated by a fine line
(#0 or #00 pen) of long dash-short dash or dot, etc., and dimensions from angle
point, point of curvature to point of tangency, intersection to intersection,
or any combination thereof between intersections with the appropriate bearings,
angles, curve data, right of way widths and distances clearly shown. Curve data
shall include arc length, central angle, and radius. All points of curvature,
and points of tangency shall be located and labelled.
6.   Certification by a registered engineer and/or land surveyor in accordance
with the Iowa State Law.
7.   Easements for public utilities, public rights of way, and drainage
facilities shall be designated by fine line (#0 or #00 pen) of medium length
dashes, and appropriately labelled with reserved width and type of "easement".
8.   Fractional lines and corners of the government township and section
surveys shall be appropriately labelled and dimensioned as applicable to the
plat. All plats shall be tied to a known section or fractional corners by
distances and bearings and angles.
9.   Legal description of the platted area, including the acreage, shall be
included on the plat.
10.   Lot lines shall be designated by medium fine (#0 or #1 pen) to solid
lines.
11.   All distances shall be shown in feet to the nearest one-hundredth of one
foot (.01'), and in accord with the definition of a foot as adopted by the
United States Bureau of Standards.
12.   Lots shall be numbered consecutively, all sides dimensioned. The bearings
or corner angles of all lot lines which are not parallel to the block lines
shall be shown and lines intersecting a curved line shall be labelled as radial
or not radial as applicable. Dimensions of lots lines which are curved shall
include appropriate curved data: arc length, central angle, and chord, where
the radius is not shown elsewhere it shall be shown. The area of all
nonrectangular lots shall be shown to the nearest ten (10) square feet.
13.   Permanent control monuments shall be labelled (P.C.M) and located.
14.   Scale shall be indicated graphically by a bar graph designated in feet,
and shall be shown in the lower right hand corner accompanied by a northerly
directional arrow.
15.   Lot designation and lot address, street names, location, and rights of
way width for all streets within or abutting the plat shall be shown.
16.   Surveyors notes shall include the following as appropriate or applicable
to the particular plat.
a.   All bearings are based on an assumed meridian for computation purposes.
b.   Block corner radii are twenty five feet (25') unless otherwise noted.
c.   Dashed lines shown at the rear or sides of certain lots are "easements"
reserved for the installation and maintenance of public utilities and drainage
facilities.
17.   Subdivisions shall be designated, by name or as otherwise prescribed, in
bold letters inside the margin at the top of each sheet included in the plat.
18.   Whenever more than one sheet is used to accurately portray the lands
subdivided, each sheet shall display both the number of the sheet and the total
number of sheets included in the plat, as well as clearly labelled match lines
indicating where the other sheets adjoin. An index sheet shall be provided to
show the relationship between the sheets.
19.   All interior excepted parcels shall be clearly indicated and labelled,
"not a part of this plat".
20.   The minimum unadjusted acceptable error of closure for all subdivision
boundaries shall be a ratio of one to ten thousand (1:10,000) and shall be a
ratio of one to five thousand (1:5,000) for any individual lot. The subdividers
land surveyor shall certify on the plat that the error of closure is within the
allowable limits as specified above.
21.   Zoning of all parcels, including the name of the "PUD" Planned Unit
Development if applicable, included within the plat shall be noted on the final
plat.
C.   Accompanying Material: The following material shall accompany the
submission of the final plat:
1.   A deed to the City properly executed for all streets intended as public
streets and for any other property intended for public use. A declaration of
value and groundwater hazard statement shall each be submitted. A release of
any mortgage or encumbrances effecting the property intended for public use.
2.   Any protective covenants or restrictions to be imposed upon the plat shall
be submitted for approval.
3.   Plans and profiles of all streets and alleys at a fifty foot (50')
horizontal scale and five foot (5') vertical scale. Profiles shall show
location, size and grade of all conduits, sewers, pipelines, etc., to be placed
under the streets and alleys. Profiles shall be drawn with north oriented to
the top or left side of the drawing.
4.   The following certificates shall be submitted:
a.   By the owner and his spouse, if any, and any other persons having an
ownership interest that the subdivision is with the free consent and is in
accordance with the desire of the owners. This certificate must be signed and
acknowledged by the owner and spouse before some officer authorized to take the
acknowledgment of deeds.
b.   Maintenance bond, if any, shall be for a period of four (4) years for
concrete paving and two (2) years for sanitary sewer, water main, and storm
sewer.
c.   Certified statement from the county treasurer that the land subdivided is
free from taxes.
d.   Certified statement from the county clerk of the district court that the
land subdivided is free from all judgments, attachments, mechanics' or other
liens as appears by the record in his office.
e.   Certified statement from the County Recorder that the title in fee is in
the owner of the land subdivided, and that it is free from encumbrances other
than those secured by an encumbrance bond.
5.   Drainage plans for the positive removal of storm water.
6.   That proper inspection and approval of all improvements have been made by
the City Engineer or his duly authorized agent and the costs expended for such
inspection services and tests conducted and furnished by the City has been
reimbursed to said City; or posting a cash bond or a certified check with the
City for improvements as required under this Title.
7.   A complete abstract of title and an opinion from an attorney at law
showing that the fee title is in the proprietors and that the land platted is
free from encumbrances or an encumbrance bond filed.
8.   The applicant shall provide all required details and shall describe the
property included in the area being platted; shall state that the associated
preliminary plat had been submitted to the Planning and Zoning Commission and
that they had acted thereon as provided by law; that the owner has complied
with all conditions as set forth in this Chapter or as required by the Code of
Iowa; that all the lands shown on the plat or as described in the resolution
within the platted area which are dedicated for the perpetual use of the public
are acceptable by the City; that any acceptance or approval of the plat is
contingent upon the filing of covenants and conditions, if any, pertaining to
the plat, and that the plat is approved and the Mayor and City Clerk are
directed to certify the resolution affixed to the plat.
The passage of the resolution approving the plat shall constitute final
approval of the platting of the area shown on the final plan. The subdivider
shall be responsible to cause the plat to be recorded in the office of the
County Recorder of Polk County, Iowa, as provided in chapter 409, Code of Iowa,
including any covenants and conditions, if any, relating to the platting
approved by the City, and shall file satisfactory evidence of the recording in
the office of the Building Official before the City shall recognize the plat as
being in full force and effect.
D.   Recording Plat: There shall be three (3) copies stamped as approved by the
Council.
1.   A reproducible Mylar tracing shall be retained for file by the City
Engineer.
2.   One copy shall be filed with the County Recorder.
3.   One copy will accompany resolution by the Council approving and accepting
the plat shall be filed with the County Auditor. This copy must be accompanied
by a certificate by the owner and spouse, if any, that the subdivision is with
the free consent and is in accordance with the desire of the owners. This
certificate must be signed and acknowledged by the owner and spouse before some
officer authorized to take the acknowledgments of deeds. (1985 Code §6-6.07;
amd. 5-22-1991; Ord. 2527, 7-5-2022)
10-2-4: PLATS OF SURVEY:
The following regulations shall apply to any plats of survey which create new
parcels within the jurisdiction of the City:
A.   Recording: No plats of survey for any land within the jurisdiction of the
City shall be recorded in the County Recorder's office or have any validity
until the City Council has adopted a resolution approving and releasing the
plat of survey for recordation.
B.   Application And Processing: Any person, firm or entity, proposing the
division or subdivision by means of a plat of survey of any land into two (2)
or more parts or the creation of a new lot or parcel within the jurisdiction of
the City, including any area outside of the City's boundaries pursuant to
section 354.9 of the Code of Iowa, shall submit an application to the Community
Development Department, on the prescribed forms, for review for compliance with
City Code requirements. The City staff shall review the proposal and formulate
a recommendation to the City Council, which shall be presented to the City
Council in a written report.
C.   Approval Or Denial: The City Council may at their full discretion,
approve, deny or modify, wholly or partly, any application for approval of a
plat of survey. The City Council may impose such conditions and limitations as
it deems necessary to assure that the general purpose and intent of this Title
and all other ordinances or policies enacted or followed by the City Council
will be observed, and that the public interest, health, safety, convenience and
welfare will be served. (Ord. 1400, 3-20-2000)
CHAPTER 3
DESIGN STANDARDS AND REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS
SECTION:
10-3-1: Subdivision Design Standards
10-3-2: Improvements
10-3-1: SUBDIVISION DESIGN STANDARDS:
The standards and details of design for subdivisions shall be in accordance
with the "Des Moines Metropolitan Design Standards Manual", as amended by West
Des Moines, which is on file in the office of the city clerk.
A.   Natural Features And Character Of Ground:
1.   Public Utilities And Improvements: Land to be subdivided shall be of such
character that it can be used safely for building purposes without danger to
health or peril from fire, flood or other menace, and shall not be subdivided
until showing can be made that those public utilities and improvements will be
provided as required by this title and/or other applicable ordinances of the
city, and proper provision has been made for drainage, water, sewage,
transportation facilities and other improvements; to the greatest extent
possible, attention shall be directed to the prevention of pollution of air,
water, including streams, ponds and the subsurface water aquifer(s).
2.   Unsuitable Land Conditions: Land which the city finds to be unsuitable for
subdivision or development due to flooding, improper drainage, steep slopes,
rock formations, adverse earth formations or topography, utility easements, or
other features which will reasonably be harmful to the health, safety and
general welfare of the present or future inhabitants of the subdivision, and
surrounding areas, or both, shall not be subdivided or developed unless
adequate methods are formulated by the subdivider and approved by the council,
upon recommendation of the commission to solve the problems created by the
unsuitable land conditions.
B.   Blocks: Blocks shall conform to the following requirements:
      Length: No block shall be longer than one thousand three hundred twenty
feet (1,320'), except as otherwise approved by the commission and council. (In
residential estate [RE] zoned area, maximum block length shall be 2,006 feet.)
C.   Buffers: Abutting zoning districts or existing conditions of conflicting
use characteristics shall be buffered from one another as specified by section
9-19-8, "Landscape Provisions", of this code.
D.   Lots:
1   Lot Types:
a.    Corner Lot: A lot located at the intersection of two (2) or more streets,
and having the street abut the front and one or more side lines of the lot. For
purposes of this definition, an alley or interstate highway is not considered a
street.
i.   Only one front yard must comply with minimum lot frontage requirements.
ii.   In the case of a lot located in a single-family residential zoning
district:
1)   If the corner lot directly backs the rear yard of another corner lot, the
yard that is fronting the street common to both lots is considered to be a
street side yard. See Illustration #1 below.
2)   If the corner lot abuts a third street, the frontage on the opposite side
of the interior side yard is considered a street side yard. See Illustration #2
below.
3)   If the corner lots abuts an adjacent property where the building setback
line (i.e. front yard setback or yard) is not consistent, a street side yard
may be used.
4)   If the side yard of a corner lot abuts a roadway that is of a
classification that does not allow direct driveway access to a dwelling or
accessory structure, attached or detached, then the side yard is considered a
street side yard.
5)    If the side yard of a corner lot abuts a non-residential use or apparent
natural environmental area or element (i.e. natural areas, parks, schools,
detention, etc.) then the side yard is considered a street side yard.
6)   The street side yard setback for primary and detached accessory
structures, excluding fencing shall be a minimum of twenty feet (20'), except
that any garage along the street side yard must be located to provide a minimum
of twenty-five feet (25') of driveway surface to the garage, as measured from
the right-of-way line of a public street or the interior edge of a sidewalk or
curb of a private street, whichever is closer, to accommodate the parking of
vehicles without overhanging a pedestrian pathway. Any existing street side
yard setbacks indicated on a recorded plat that are greater than twenty feet
(20') shall apply to the lot(s) in question.
7)   In the situation where a landscape buffer is designated along the street
side yard, the street side yard setback will be measured from the property
line, not the buffer line; however, no building or structure may encroach into
the designated buffer.
Illustration #1
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5dd626f68508237cd281a645678e92f34786b23f/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2890.png]
Illustration 2
b.    Double Frontage Lot: A lot other than a corner lot with frontage on more
than one street. The front yard will be determined by the yard that allows
access to the lot or the orientation of the front entry if a building exists.
Double frontage lots shall be buffered from the rear street frontage by the
methods outlined in subsection C of this section. For purposes of this
definition, an alley or interstate highway is not considered a street.
c.    Flag Lot: A lot with access provided to the bulk of the lot by means of a
narrow corridor. Unless noted differently in the frontage requirements of Title
9 (Zoning), Chapter 7 (Setback and Bulk Density Regulations) of this code, the
corridor for a flag lot shall be a minimum of 50 feet wide.
d.    Outlot: When included within the boundary of a recorded plat, an Outlot
can be a lot set aside for purposes other than immediate development or for
land to be dedicated to public use or to provide for common area. An Outlot is
not considered a developable parcel and is not required to meet minimum lot
size requirements unless intended for future development or for a public
purpose such as, parks, greenways, utilities, or other recreational amenities,
excluding enclosed recreation or utility buildings anticipated to be occupied.
Outlots intended for development must be re-platted through the preliminary and
final plat process in accordance with the associated zoning classifications
prior to physical development unless its purpose is to provide for public
utilities or publicly owned or accessible park ground, greenways, or other
recreational amenities. Outlots within a plat shall have the proposed use
clearly designated on the plat document.
e.    Footprint Lot: A lot created to define property associated with the
ownership of a dwelling unit or a commercial, office or industrial space within
common area owned and maintained by a separate entity. If the development as a
whole meets the requirements of the respective zoning district noted in Title 9
(Zoning), Chapter 7 (Setback and Bulk Density Regulations) of this code,
individual footprint lots are not required to meet minimum standard lot area
and width requirements. Buildings within footprint lots are required to meet
the setback and building separation noted for footprint lots as well as setback
requirements for standard lots and setbacks along the development perimeter.
2   Lots shall conform to the following requirements:
a   The dimensions, shape and orientation of the lots shall be determined by
the specific requirements of the applicable zoning district with regard to
solar orientation, topography, land features and circulation.
b   Corner lots shall be not less than twenty-five feet (25') greater in width
than the minimum required lot width for the zoning district so as to permit
adequate building setbacks on both front and side streets.
c   Double frontage lots other than corner lots shall be prohibited except
where such lots back on a municipal arterial or collector street or highway or
except in the case of large commercial or industrial lots. Such double frontage
lots shall be buffered from the rear street frontage by the methods outlined in
subsection C of this section. Ingress-egress for double frontage lots shall be
limited to the front street and is strictly prohibited on the rear street. A
plat covenant shall be provided covering this restriction. For purposes of this
requirement, an alley is not considered a street.
d   Flag shaped lots shall be discouraged.
e   Each lot shall be provided satisfactory access to a paved public street by
means of frontage, private street or drive, or easement. All lots shall conform
to the lot dimensions and area as set forth for the applicable zoning district
in Title 9, "Zoning", of this code.
f   For the purpose of complying with minimum health standards, the following
shall be observed with reference to all new construction, and with reference to
all zoning categories as presently established within the city:
(1)   All lots, except those of ten (10) acres or above shall be provided with
access and connections to public water mains.
(2)   Any lot or lots which cannot be reasonably served by a public sanitary
sewer system shall have a minimum frontage and lot area as permitted by Title 9
(Zoning) or the requirements of the county sanitarian, whichever is greater.
E.   Monuments: Section 355.6 of the code of Iowa, 1993, is hereby adopted by
reference, and shall be considered in full force and effect as if contained
herein.
F.   Streets And Rights Of Way: Streets and rights of way shall conform to the
following:
1   Alleys: Alleys may be required in business areas and industrial districts
for adequate access to block interiors and for off street loading and parking
purposes. Except where justified by unusual conditions, alleys will not be
approved in residential districts. Dead end alleys shall be provided with a
means of turning around at the dead end thereof in a manner acceptable to the
city.
2   Circulation: The street pattern shall provide ease of circulation within
the subdivisions as well as convenient access to adjoining streets,
thoroughfares or unsubdivided land as may be required by the commission. In a
case where a street will eventually be extended beyond the plat, but is
temporarily dead ended, an interim turnaround may be required, in a manner
acceptable to the city, or the subdivider may be required to extend the street
into unplatted land or through adjoining grounds in order to reach a convenient
access to the existing streets or thoroughfares.
3   Comprehensive Plan: All proposed plats and subdivisions shall conform to
the comprehensive plan as amended and to the requirements of the comprehensive
park and recreation plan, as amended, if applicable.
4   Continuation Of Existing Streets: Proposed streets shall provide for
continuation or completion of any existing streets (constructed or recorded) in
adjoining property at equal or greater width, and in similar alignment, unless
variations are recommended by the commission, and approved by the council.
5   Dedication: A deed to the city shall be given for all streets before the
same will be accepted for city maintenance. Acceptance of the deed to any
street shall not constitute acceptance and maintenance of improvements thereto
until such time as certification shall be made to the council in accord with
section
10-3-2 , "Improvements", of this chapter.
6   Half Streets: Dedication of half streets will be discouraged. Where there
exists a dedicated or platted half street or alley adjacent to the tract to be
subdivided, the other half shall be platted if deemed necessary by the
commission and council.
7   Land Not Platted: Where the subdivider of a plat to be submitted abuts any
part of a tract of land owned, under purchase option or other agreements for
deed by the subdivider, the city may require topography and a concept plan of
the entire tract of land under ownership, purchase option, or other agreements
for deed by the subdivider.
8   Arterials And Major Collectors: When a new subdivision, except where
justified by limiting conditions, involves frontage on an arterial or major
collector, the street layout shall provide motor access to such frontage by one
of the following means:
a   A parallel street supplying frontage for lots backing onto the arterial or
major collector.
b   A series of cul-de-sacs or short loops entered from and planned at right
angles to such a parallel street, with their terminal lots backing onto the
arterial or collector.
c   An access drive separated by a planting strip from the highway to which a
motor access from the drive is provided at points suitably spaced.
d   A service drive or alley at the rear of the lots. Where any one of the
above mentioned arrangements is used, plat restriction or other means should
prevent any private residential driveways from having direct access to the
arterial or major collector.
9   Physical And Natural Features: In general, streets shall be platted with
appropriate regard for topography, creeks, wooded areas and other natural
features which would lend themselves to attractive treatment.
10   Railroads: If a railroad is involved, the subdivision plat should:
a   Be so arranged as to permit, where necessary, future grade separations at
highway crossings of the railroad.
b   Border the railroad with a parallel street at a sufficient distance from it
to permit normal lot depth based on existing zoning plus sixty feet (60') if
required by the council after receipt of a recommendation by the planning and
zoning commission.
c   Provide culs-de-sac at right angles to the railroad so as to permit lots to
back thereunto.
d   Whenever any street within a proposed plat involves an at grade railroad
crossing as part of the needs or actions associated with said subdivision, the
subdivider shall be required to obtain all permits or licenses necessary with
said crossing, and pay all costs associated with the construction of the
crossing.
11   Street Intersections: Street intersections shall be as nearly at right
angles as possible.
Where streets do not directly intersect across from each other, a minimum
offset of one hundred twenty five feet (125') may be required.
No driveway shall be permitted to access to a public street within twenty five
feet (25') of the end of radius at a street intersection, unless, this distance
shall be waived by the city engineer after his review and analysis.
12   Street Names: All newly platted public streets, and any named private
streets, shall be named in accordance with the city of West Des Moines roadway
naming and addressing guidelines. Refer to section
7-1-8 , "Street Names", of this code.
13   Street Right Of Way Widths: Street rights of way shall be provided at a
width as shown in the comprehensive plan, as amended and/or at a width
necessary to accommodate all anticipated pavement and utilities within the
right of way based upon the functional use classification of the intended
street. (Ord. 1131, 5-22-1995; amd. Ord. 1839, 9-21-2009; Ord. 1859, 2-22-2010;
Ord. 1999, 8-19-2013; Ord. 2376, 8-5-2019; Ord. 2390, 12-2-2019; Ord. 2541, 9-
19-2022)
10-3-2: IMPROVEMENTS:
The subdivider shall be responsible for the installation and/or construction of
all improvements required by the city, and shall warrant the design, material
and workmanship of such improvements, installation and/or construction for a
period of four (4) years from and after completion for concrete pavement, and
four (4) years from and after completion for sanitary sewer, water main, and
storm sewer. Such warranty shall be by bond or other acceptable collateral; and
shall be subject to review by the city attorney (waterworks legal counsel for
water mains); shall specifically assure the expedient repair or replacement of
defective improvements under warranty; and shall indemnify the city (waterworks
for water mains), from any and all costs or losses resulting from, contributed
to, or arising out of such defective improvements.
Before the council approves the final plat, all of the foregoing improvements,
except water mains, shall be constructed and accepted by formal resolution of
the city council. Water mains shall be constructed in a manner prescribed by
the West Des Moines waterworks and the mains shall be accepted by formal
resolution of the waterworks board of trustees. Before passage of said
resolution of acceptance by the city council, the city engineer shall report
that the improvements to be accepted by the city meet all city specifications
and ordinances or other requirements and agreements between the subdivider and
the city. The waterworks general manager shall prepare a similar report with
respect to water mains, which report shall be the basis for passage of an
acceptance resolution by the waterworks board of trustees.
This requirement may be waived if the subdivider will post a cash bond or
certified check with the city (or waterworks for water mains) guaranteeing that
said improvements will be constructed within a period of one year from final
acceptance of the plat; however, if a certified check or cash bond is posted,
final acceptance of the plat will not constitute final acceptance by the city
(or waterworks for water mains) of any improvements to be constructed.
Improvements will be accepted only after their construction has been completed
and is inspected by appropriate city or waterworks personnel certifying the
improvements have been completed in conformance with specifications, standards,
and ordinances. No public funds will be expended (except in traffic signage) in
the subdivision until such improvements have been completed and accepted by the
city (waterworks for water mains).
The amount of the bond or certified check shall not be less than the estimated
cost of the improvements, including all inspection services and tests conducted
by the city (or waterworks for water mains) and the amount of the estimate of
the bond or certified check must be approved by the city engineer (waterworks
general manager for water mains).
The council may waive the requirements of this chapter for the construction and
installation of some or all of the improvements in cases of resubdivisions
where only the size, shape and arrangement of the lots is being changed;
provided, however, such waiver shall be limited to existing improvements in
good repair as determined by the city engineer. Improvements not existing or in
poor repair shall meet the requirements of this chapter.
A.   Sidewalks And Crosswalks:
1.   Sidewalks:
a.   The intent and purpose of this section is to establish the regulations
regarding the installation of public sidewalks and pathways in the city to
ensure the orderly and harmonious development of a citywide sidewalk system in
existing and new developments in such a manner as to provide a comprehensive
sidewalk system that will safeguard the public's health, safety and general
welfare.
b.   Notwithstanding any other provisions of this code, all dwellings,
nonresidential buildings and uses, whether occupied or unoccupied, shall have,
after adoption of this ordinance, a permanent sidewalk built for the entire
width and/or length of the lot or lots upon which the dwelling, nonresidential
building or use is located, and the sidewalk(s) shall be built for the entire
width and/or length of all sides of any lot or lots which abut a public or
private street or roadway.
(1)   Public Sidewalks: Sidewalks and pathways along public streets shall be
installed on both sides of a roadway in accordance with design standards as
adopted by the city.
(2)   Private Sidewalks:
(a)   Adjacent to Private Streets and Interior Vehicular Roadways: Sidewalks
shall be installed on both sides of a private street or an interior vehicular
roadway in accordance with design standards for public sidewalks except that
said sidewalks shall be allowed to be located a minimum of five feet (5') from
the edge of the roadway.
(b)   Adjacent to Parking: Sidewalks and pathways immediately adjacent to head-
in parking are not required to be located five feet (5') from the curb edge;
however, if the sidewalk or pathway is located immediately adjacent to the
curb, said sidewalk width must be increased to a minimum of six feet (6') to
accommodate vehicle bumper overhang while still providing a minimum of four
feet (4') of clear pedestrian pathway.
c   At such time that eighty percent (80%) of a plat or subdivision is
developed, the property owner(s) of any undeveloped parcels, upon written
notification by the city, shall install the required sidewalk(s) on their
property within one hundred twenty (120) days of the notification by the city.
After expiration of the one hundred twenty (120) day period, the city may take
any legal action necessary to proceed with the installation of the sidewalk(s)
and assess the cost of the installation and any legal expenses, as allowed by
law, as a lien against the property.
d   In the event that no grade has been set or there is no curb and gutter on
the street or roadway upon which the sidewalk(s) is to be placed, the council
may defer the sidewalk requirement on application of the affected property
owner(s) and upon the affected property owner(s) signing an agreement to
install such a sidewalk(s) within one hundred twenty (120) days after the
property owner(s) has been notified that a curb and gutter has been installed
and/or that the grade has been set. The agreement shall be verified and placed
on record in the office of the county recorder of the applicable county, and
shall be a covenant running with the land, and shall be binding upon the heirs,
assigns, and successors of the property owner.
e   At the discretion of the city council, the installation of any required
sidewalk(s) may be deferred or waived when an off street bike/pedestrian trail
has been identified on the comprehensive plan or on the trails master plan
adjacent to the subject property. In the event that the sidewalk installation
is deferred or waived, the property owner shall provide assurances, acceptable
to the city, for the cost equivalent to the cost of installing the public
sidewalk(s), that can be combined with other funding sources available to the
city, for the installation of the off street bike/pedestrian trail.
f   When the strict application of standards or requirements established by
this section would cause substantial hardship or impose unreasonable
restrictions regarding the installation of a sidewalk(s) because of natural or
physical conditions or limitations not created by the property owner, at the
request of an applicant, developer, or property owner, the City Council may
grant such deferrals and/or waivers from these standards or requirements as may
be necessary. At such time when the conditions or limitations are eliminated,
the property owner(s) will be required to install such sidewalk(s) within one
hundred twenty (120) days after written notification by the City.
g.   Any waiver or deferral that is granted by the city council shall be
recorded by the city as a matter of public record at the office of the county
recorder of the applicable county.
h.   The enforcement of this section shall be by special assessment pursuant to
division IV of the Iowa Code chapter 384.
2.   Crosswalks: Where any block in a subdivision shall exceed nine hundred
feet (900') in length, the subdivider may be required, if such is deemed
necessary by the commission and council, to provide an interior pedestrian
walkway of not more than twelve feet (12') in width, near the center and
entirely across the block in its short dimension, for the purpose of access to
schools, commercial areas, churches, parks, and other public facilities.
B.   Sewer: Where a public sanitary sewer is reasonably accessible, the
subdivider shall provide each lot in the subdivision with connection to the
sewer. Further, where the existing sewer may be reasonably extended through the
subdivision so as to provide for continuous future development, such provisions
shall be made.
Prior to issuance of a building permit by the building official, the owner of
any lot not served by sanitary sewer shall cause to be filed, with his permit
application, copies of the soil percolation tests for the private sanitary
disposal system and the approval required of said system by the Polk County
health department. The building official shall retain the Polk County approval
and forward the soil percolation results to the city engineer's office for his
files.
C.   Utility Cables: All utility cables, except for electrical lines of nominal
voltage in excess of fifteen thousand (15,000) volts, shall be required to be
installed underground in residential, commercial, and office park subdivisions
as herein specified.
1.   Residential Subdivisions: Utility cables shall, as a general rule, be
placed at the rear or side of respective lots within an area of perpetual
easements reserved for this purpose. Where, in the determination of the
council, certain conditions of soil, topography, or other circumstances exist
to make the aforementioned easement locations unreasonable or impractical,
utility cables may be installed at the front of the lot in an area dedicated
for perpetual easement or in the public right of way, provided said
installation does not interfere with any other existing or proposed utilities.
2.   Commercial, Office And Apartment Subdivisions: Utility cables shall be
placed underground in such a manner as to maintain ease of service and
accessibility to all lots and structures, but shall not be restricted to
easements abutting property lines. Where said utility cables are located or
proposed to be located in public rights of way, they shall be so placed so as
not to interfere with other existing or proposed utilities.
3.   Waiver Of Underground Provision: Where it is determined that this
provision requiring the installation of underground utilities would not be
practical because of unusual conditions and/or the installation would cause
unnecessary hardship upon a developer and/or individual property owners, the
council may, after receiving a recommendation from staff, waive this provision.
4.   Additional Easement: In RE areas, the subdivider may be required to
provide an additional twenty foot (20') utility easement outside the public
right of way line, if in the determination of the city engineer such is
necessary to protect the roadway, especially ditch sections of rural type
construction.
D.   Water Mains: Public water shall be required on all subdivisions, and in
all zoning classifications, except for lots in excess of ten (10) acres. Public
water shall not be required for any lots already platted and of record as of
April 17, 1978, provided said lots shall meet the minimum space requirements
for the zoning district of which said lots are a part. (Ord. 1131, 5-22-1995;
amd. Ord. 1178, 4-22-1996; Ord. 2527, 7-5-2022; Ord. 2589, 12-4-2023)
 
WEST DES MOINES, IA
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCES
Code current through:
Ord. 2659, passed 6-2-2025
 
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street, Suite 310
Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
1-800-445-5588 * www.amlegal.com
PREFACE
         This publication of the Planned Unit Development Ordinances of the
City of West Des Moines, as supplemented, contains ordinances up to and
including ordinance 2659, passed June 2, 2025, and Resolution 13-06-10-13,
passed June 10, 2013. Ordinances and resolutions of the City adopted after said
ordinance and resolution supersede the provisions of this code to the extent
that they are in conflict or inconsistent therewith. Consult the City office in
order to ascertain whether any particular provision of the code has been
amended, superseded or repealed.
                     American Legal Publishing
                     Cincinnati, Ohio
PUD #1
THE PRESERVE ON GRAND
SECTION:
001-01: Legal Description
001-02: Sketch Plan
001-03: Conditions
001-04: Park Land Dedication
001-05: Double Frontage Lots
001-06: Corner Lots
001-07: Building Restrictions, Easements And Covenants
001-08: All Areas To Be Platted
001-09: Stormwater Management
001-10: Transportation And Access To Grand Avenue
001-11: Definition
001-12: Special Assessments
001-13: Violations And Penalties
001-99: Legislative History
001-01: LEGAL DESCRIPTION:
The legal description for The Preserve On Grand PUD is as follows:
Lots A, B, C, D, G, H, J, and P, Eight Ways Farm, an official plat now in and
forming a part of the City of West Des Moines, Polk County, Iowa.
(Ord. 2098, 6-29-2015; amd. Ord. 2228, 6-12-2017)
001-02: SKETCH PLAN:
On file with the Development Services Department of the City, attached as
exhibit A, and made a part of this rezoning approval for concept description
and delineation is the sketch plan document for The Preserve On Grand PUD. It
is recognized, minor shifts or realignments of roadways may be necessary and
compatible with the need to acquire workable street patterns, grades and usable
building sites, but the General Plan layout, including the relationship of uses
to each other and the relationship of land use and dwelling unit types to the
General Plan framework, traffic layout and development requirements shall be
used as the implementation guide. Wherever conflict occurs between the written
text in this document and the notations on the sketch plan, the written text
shall prevail. (Ord. 2228, 6-12-2017)
001-03: CONDITIONS:
Whereas, title 9, chapter 9, "Planned Unit Development District", of the City
Code, establishes certain regulations and guidelines pertaining to accompanying
information required on plat and site plan documents. Now, therefore, the
following conditions, restrictions, and regulations are adopted as part of this
approval:
   A.   General Conditions: The sketch plan incorporates residential and
commercial/retail land uses which shall be distributed by area, density, types
and location according to the sketch plan as presented. This ordinance, its
conditions, restrictions and regulations adopted herein as a condition to this
rezoning action, is binding on the entire property as legally described above
in section
001-01 of this ordinance and shall run with the land.
In addition, the following general site plan criteria shall be integrated into
and made a part of the planned unit development and sketch plan document:
      1.   All subdivisions, public streets, public street rights-of- way and
general development shall adhere to the standards and design criteria set forth
in the West Des Moines subdivision ordinance pertaining thereto unless
otherwise stated within this ordinance. (Ord. 2098, 6-29-2015)
      2.   Unless otherwise specified herein, the development of The Preserve
On Grand PUD shall comply with titles 9, "Zoning", and 10, "Subdivision
Regulations", of the City Code, and any other applicable codes and regulations.
(Ord. 2098, 6-29-2015; amd. Ord. 2228, 6-12-2017)
      3.   In all areas within a 100-year frequency flood hazard zone, or
adjoining drainageways or detention areas involving potential flood hazards, no
residential structure shall be erected which has a lowest floor, including
basements, less than one foot (1') above the determined level of the 100-year
frequency flood event, no residential structure shall be erected within thirty
five feet (35') of any major drainageway or stormwater detention basin (i.e.,
Parcel D), and no parking lot shall be constructed at an elevation of less than
the 100-year frequency flood event elevation.
      4.   The developers of each parcel, their heirs, successors and assigns,
if any, shall pay all construction and engineering costs for the interior
development of that parcel of the planned unit development, as required by this
ordinance, or the subdivision ordinance of the City of West Des Moines, Iowa,
for all streets, storm sewers, sanitary sewers, drainageway improvements, water
main, buffers and other improvements within the PUD as may be required by the
subdivision and zoning ordinances; except as provided for in subsections B4,
"Parcel D", and B6, "Parcel P", of this section.
   B.   Land Use Design Criteria: In addition to the general conditions as
stated in subsection A of this section, the following land use design criteria
shall apply to the development areas designated on the sketch plan. The sketch
plan document which is made a part of this rezoning action per section
001-02 of this ordinance, delineates nine (9) parcels of the PUD as Parcels A,
B, C, D, E, F, G, H, and P for application of specific development standards of
use and density regulations. The development standards and use regulations
shall apply to each of the individual parcels as applicable: (Ord. 2098, 6-29-
2015)
      1.   Parcel A: This parcel shall encompass single-family detached homes
which shall be located on individual lots complying with minimum lot size and
performance standards of the R-1 Single-Family Residential District, except the
south half of the parcel may have a minimum five foot (5') side yard setbacks.
No residential unit shall be set closer than thirty feet (30') from any
internal public street right-of-way, Lots 13 and 14 (on the north side of the
street) and Lots 25 through 28 (on the south side of the street) are allowed to
be twenty five feet (25') from the internal public street (see the sketch
plan), fifty feet (50') from the Grand Avenue right-of-way for corner lots
adjoining Grand Avenue, sixty feet (60') from the right-of-way of Grand Avenue
for double frontage lots adjoining Grand Avenue, and shall have a minimum
thirty five foot (35') rear yard setback. Lots 29 through 30 shall have a
minimum thirty foot (30') rear yard setback. Driveways access for individual
residential lots to Grand Avenue shall be prohibited and all lots adjoining
Grand Avenue shall be provided a buffer from the industrial zoned district to
the east. A street connection from Parcel A to Grand Avenue shall be provided
in accordance with the approved sketch plan, and no street connection to Scenic
Valley Drive from Parcel A shall be permitted. In lieu of a street connection,
a pedestrian public sidewalk and easement connection from the internal street
system in Parcel A to Scenic Valley Drive shall be provided. (Ord. 1248, 6-2-
1997)
         a.   Parcel A-1: This parcel shall encompass single-family detached
homes which shall be located on individual lots complying with minimum lot size
and performance standards of the R-1-A Single-Family Residential District. This
parcel shall incorporate a maximum of twelve (12) dwelling units and shall be
approximately four and one-tenth (4.1) acres in size. Street access and
location shall be as illustrated on exhibit C on file with the Development
Services Department, an extension of Ridgewood Court located immediately to the
north and terminating as a cul-de-sac within Parcel A-1. (Ord. 1050, 6-14-1993;
amd. Ord. 2098, 6-29-2015)
Pedestrian access shall be provided from Parcel A-1 and single-family homes
north of Parcel A-1 to Scenic Valley Drive located and bordering Parcel A to
the south. Parcel A-1 shall be platted, and public improvements completed and
accepted by the City, prior to the issuance of any building permits within
Parcel A-3. (Ord. 1050, 6-14-1993)
         b.   Parcel A-2: This parcel shall encompass single-family detached
homes which shall be located on individual lots complying with minimum lot size
and performance standards for the R-1 Single-Family Residential District.
Parcel A-2 shall incorporate a maximum of twenty one (21) dwelling units and
shall be approximately five and nine-tenths (5.9) acres in size. Street access
and location shall be as illustrated on exhibit C, on file with the Development
Services Department, a single street extension from Grand Avenue located
immediately east of Parcel A-2 terminating in a cul-de-sac within Parcel A-2.
Pedestrian access shall be provided from Parcel A-2, and all lots and/or
dwelling units therein, to Scenic Valley Drive located and bordering Parcel A
to the south. Parcel A-2 shall be platted, and public improvements completed
and accepted by the City, prior to any building permits being issued within
Parcel A-3. (Ord. 1050, 6-14-1993; amd. Ord. 2098, 6-29-2015)
         c.   Parcel A-3: Development within Parcel A-3 shall comply with the
performance standards and regulations of the RM Residential Medium-Density
District except as noted otherwise herein. Parcel A-3 shall incorporate a
maximum of forty six (46) bi-attached or single-family detached dwelling units.
No building shall exceed two (2) stories within Parcel A-3. No building shall
be located less than ten feet (10') from another building not sharing a common
wall and no bi-attached unit shall be located less than thirty five feet (35')
from the perimeter of the parcel. All dwelling units of buildings containing
individual dwelling units shall be described and included as an integral part
of a single horizontal property regime and in conformity to Code of Iowa
chapter 499B or each unit shall be platted as a separate lot. Each dwelling
unit shall have a separate entrance to the outside. All condominium or
homeowners' association documents must be approved by the City of West Des
Moines and evidence of the filing of the documents in the County Recorder's
Office before issuance of any building permits. Street access and internal
drive locations shall be as illustrated on exhibit C, on file with the
Development Services Department, a single internal drive access from the
internal street located within Parcel A-2 to the north and a single internal
drive access to Scenic Valley Drive located and bordering Parcel A on the
south. The access drive to Scenic Valley Drive may be temporary in nature until
such time that Scenic Valley Drive is extended to or adjacent to Parcel A. No
access shall be permitted from Parcel A-3 to Grand Avenue. Pedestrian access
from Parcel A-3, including access from Parcels A-1 and A-2, shall be provided
to Scenic Valley Drive located to the south. (Ord. 1248, 6-2-1997; amd. Ord.
2098, 6-29-2015)
Parcel A-3 shall incorporate effective and adequate buffering and landscaping
along the entire perimeter of Parcel A-3, including, but not limited to, the
following:
            (1)   A minimum thirty foot (30') landscaped buffer park shall be
established adjacent to the right-of-way of River Ridge Drive and a minimum
thirty foot (30') landscaped buffer park shall be established adjacent to Grand
Avenue which shall each incorporate extensive landscaping and berming, as
required in ordinance 1073, buffers, for the purpose of screening and/or
buffering development within Parcel A-3 from single-family homes to the north
and for the purpose of screening and/or buffering development within Parcel A-
3 from Grand Avenue and industrial uses to the east. No parking areas, fences,
garages or other structures shall be permitted within either buffer park area,
except approved signage in accordance with the Sign Code.
            (2)   A minimum thirty foot (30') landscaped buffer park, shall be
established along the southern and western boundary of Parcel A-3 for the
purpose of screening and/or buffering development with Parcel A-3 from the
single-family detached residential uses, commercial use(s), overhead power
lines, and multi-family use(s) within Parcel C, each located generally to the
south, north and west of Parcel A-3. Said buffer park shall be landscaped in
accordance with ordinance 1073, buffers. No parking areas, fences, garages or
other structures shall be permitted within the buffer park area.
            (3)   All parking and internal drives within Parcel A-3 shall be
effectively screened by the use of berming and landscaping from adjacent
roadways and properties.
Design and use of materials for construction of any building within Parcel A-
3 shall be acceptable to the City and accomplished in a manner compatible with
adjoining residential uses in the neighborhood. Architectural design for bi-
attached or single-family detached dwelling units shall attempt to express a
creative presentation of exterior building materials, exterior details and
texture, treatment of windows and doors, and use of angles and multiplicity of
planes within the wall and roof design to lessen the plainness of appearance
which can be characteristic of larger residential buildings. Any approval of
building design by the City shall not be unreasonably withheld, provided the
developer, with full faith and effort, attempts to fulfill the architectural
design goals set forth herein with said review and approval occurring during
the site plan review process. Review and approval of site lighting should
ensure that unnecessary and/or improper lighting is not cast upon adjacent
roadways and/or properties.
Any single-family detached residential development within this parcel shall
comply with the minimum standards for the R-1 Single-Family Residential
District. (Ord. 1248, 6-2-1997)
      2.   Parcel B: Unless otherwise provided for within this ordinance, the
use regulations and provisions set forth in title 9 of the City Code for the
Medium Density Residential (RM-6) District shall apply to any development
proposal for the property within Parcel B as shown on the sketch plan except as
shall be further provided herein. This parcel shall cover a maximum of five and
one-half (5.5) acres.
Parcel B will consist of single family bi-attached structures e.g., twin homes,
duplexes; each side of the building being one dwelling unit with a common wall
and full depth lots; this does not include attached dwellings with an owners
association or postage stamp lots. All general use regulations, performance
standards, and provisions set forth in title 9, "Zoning", of the City Code for
Residential Medium Density (RM-6) shall apply, except as provided herein:
         a.   Minimum lot area shall be five thousand (5,000) square feet for
each half of the bi-attached dwelling unit.
         b.   Minimum lot width shall be 37.5 feet.
         c.   Front yard setback shall be a minimum of thirty feet (30'), rear
yard setback shall be a minimum of twenty feet (20'), and side yard setback
shall be a minimum of seven feet (7') from the closest portion of the structure
or basement egress window well. The other side yard will be the common wall.
         d.   Maximum height shall be two (2) stories.
         e.   Accessory structures shall be in accordance with R-1 District
standards for such structures and title 9, chapter 14, "Accessory Structures",
of the City Code. (Ord. 2228, 6-12-2017)
      3.   Parcel C: Parcel C may be developed with either single- family
detached residential structures or single-family bi- attached structures (e.g.,
twin homes, duplexes); this does not include attached dwellings with an owners'
association. The two (2) types of structures are not allowed to coexist within
the parcel; the parcel will either be developed with all detached or all bi-
attached structures.
         a.   If Parcel C is developed for single-family detached structures,
all general use regulations, performance standards and provisions set forth in
title 9, "Zoning", of the City Code for the R-1 Single-Family Residential
District shall apply. No structure shall be located within the one hundred foot
(100') easement for the overhead electric power distribution system.
         b.   If Parcel C is developed for single-family bi-attached
structures, all general use regulations, performance standards, and provisions
set forth in title 9, "Zoning", of the City Code for Residential Medium-Density
(RM-6) shall apply, except as provided herein:
            (1)   Minimum lot area shall be five thousand (5,000) square feet
for each side of the bi-attached dwelling unit.
            (2)   Minimum lot width shall be 37.5 feet.
            (3)   Front yard setback shall be a minimum of thirty feet (30'),
rear yard setback shall be a minimum of twenty feet (20'), and side yard
setback shall be a minimum of seven feet (7') from the closest portion of the
structure or basement egress window well.
            (4)   Maximum height shall be two (2) stories.
            (5)   Accessory structures shall be in accordance with R-1 District
standards for such structures and title 9, chapter 14, "Accessory Structures",
of the City Code.
No structure shall be located within the one hundred foot (100') easement for
the overhead electric power distribution system. (Ord. 2098, 6-29-2015)
      4.   Parcel D: Unless otherwise provided for within this ordinance, the
use regulations and provisions set forth in title 9 of the City Code for the
Open Space District shall apply to the property within Parcel D as shown on the
sketch plan, except as shall be further provided herein.
         a.   All land uses other than prairie landscaping or similar natural
areas or stormwater detention shall be prohibited. Improvements such as trails,
walking paths, or other amenities for the nearby residential developments is
encouraged. Ownership and maintenance will remain private; not to be owned or
maintained by the City. (Ord. 2228, 6-12-2017)
      5.   Parcels E, F, G And H: All general use regulations, performance
standards and provisions set forth in title 9, "Zoning", of the City Code for
the R-1 Single-Family Residential District shall apply to any development
proposal for all property within Parcels E, F, G, and H as shown on the sketch
plan of The Preserve On Grand PUD. (Ord. 2098, 6-29-2015; amd. Ord. 2228, 6-12-
2017)
      6.   Parcel P: Reservation of park site. Parcel P as shown on the sketch
plan of The Preserve On Grand PUD is agreed to be reserved for acquisition by
the City for public and park use prior to or within one hundred eighty (180)
days from the time development is initiated within adjoining Parcel C of the
PUD or within five (5) years of the passage of this ordinance, whichever is
first. Parcel P shall be up to six (6) acres in area including drainageways.
The park land shall be conveyed by warranty deed, free and clear of any and all
liens and encumbrances (except special assessments for public projects)
including all judgments, attachments, mechanics and other liens, to the City of
West Des Moines subject to any easements and covenants filed of record on or
prior to January 1, 1990. (Ord. 916, 7-23-1990; amd. Ord. 2098, 6-29-2015; Ord.
2228, 6-12-2017)
         a.   The value of the land to be purchased by the City for park use
shall be established at the time of purchase of said property by the City and
shall be based upon the property's current fair market value as undeveloped R-
1 zoned property. If possible, the current fair market value shall be
determined by mutual agreement between the City Council and owner. If an
agreement on the current fair market value cannot be mutually reached by the
parties, such value shall be determined by the parties appointing a real estate
appraiser with qualifications of an MAI with the cost of the appraisal being
equally shared by the City and the developer. Any part of Parcel P which the
owner shall utilize for stormwater detention or drainageway purposes as
required by the City of West Des Moines shall not be included as part of the
cost to the City for purchase of the park site. The developer of Parcel G shall
be responsible for the cost of drainage channel construction along the west
boundary of this parcel in accordance with engineering plans approved by the
City.
         b.   The owner shall maintain Parcel P substantially in its existing
condition as of the date of the approval of this ordinance. Furthermore the
owner, its successors, transferees and assigns shall agree not to excavate dirt
or soil from Parcel P, or place fill upon Parcel P, except in accordance with
plans approved by the City of West Des Moines. Parcel P shall be free of junk
or debris at the time of transference of ownership and title from the owner to
the City of West Des Moines, Iowa. (Ord. 916, 7-23-1990; amd. Ord. 2098, 6-29-
2015)
001-04: PARK LAND DEDICATION:
In conjunction with development of any residential portion of the PUD, said
area shall be subject to park land dedication requirements per section 10-1-
4 of the City Code. (Ord. 2098, 6-29-2015)
001-05: DOUBLE FRONTAGE LOTS:
All double frontage lots shall be developed in accordance with section 6-6.04,
subsection 5, paragraph B of the West Des Moines subdivision ordinance. A
complete buffer plan shall be submitted to and approved by the City as part of
the platting process for the lots. Final responsibility for provision of the
buffer shall rest with the developer (subdivider) regardless of any pass-
through agreement. The City building inspector shall not issue an occupancy
permit for any of the affected lots until the buffer as required within this
section is properly installed per final site plan specifications. (Ord. 916, 7-
23-1990; amd. Ord. 2098, 6-29-2015)
001-06: CORNER LOTS:
Corner lots shall not be less than twenty feet (20') greater in lot frontage
than the minimum lot frontage required for each development parcel so as to
permit adequate building setbacks on both frontage streets. (Ord. 916, 7-23-
1990; amd. Ord. 2098, 6-29-2015)
001-07: BUILDING RESTRICTIONS, EASEMENTS AND COVENANTS:
The developer may with the approval of the City Council adopt building
restrictions, easements and covenants pertaining to each area developed where
the developer and the City deem appropriate. (Ord. 916, 7-23-1990; amd. Ord.
2098, 6-29-2015)
001-08: ALL AREAS TO BE PLATTED:
In conjunction with development of any portion of the PUD, said area shall be
platted in accordance with the City's subdivision ordinance to delineate within
a plat the parcel to be developed or sold separately or any portion thereof.
(Ord. 916, 7-23-1990; amd. Ord. 2098, 6-29-2015)
001-09: STORMWATER MANAGEMENT:
There shall be submitted to, and approved by, the West Des Moines City
Engineer, a complete stormwater management plan for each separate parcel,
except Parcels D and P, to be prepared by the developer prior to development
within the parcel. A stormwater management plan shall be submitted for all of
Parcels A, B, C, E, F, G and H prior to any development within any of said
parcels to show the manner in which stormwater shall be conveyed to Parcel D or
other determined stormwater drainage outlets from the area. (Ord. 2098, 6-29-
2015)
001-10: TRANSPORTATION AND ACCESS TO GRAND AVENUE:
Upon development of Parcels B, C, E, or H, Scenic Valley Drive shall be
constructed for dedication to the City, from the west boundaries of Parcels E
and H to Grand Avenue. Direct private driveway or roadway access to Grand
Avenue shall be prohibited, except, use of existing agricultural driveway
accesses may be maintained for continued farming operations within the area of
The Preserve On Grand PUD described in section
001-01 of this ordinance. (Ord. 2098, 6-29-2015; amd. Ord. 2228, 6-12-2017)
001-11: DEFINITION:
The term "developer", for the purpose of this ordinance, shall mean any person,
individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation, estate, trust, entity
or agent of same acting or proposing to subdivide land or develop a parcel of
land for the construction of a building or buildings. (Ord. 916, 7-23-1990;
amd. Ord. 2098, 6-29-2015)
001-12: SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS:
The property may be subject to future assessments, including, but not limited
to, the reconstruction of Grand Avenue, as shall be permitted and limited by
the laws of the State of Iowa to be observed by municipalities. (Ord. 916, 7-
23-1990; amd. Ord. 2098, 6-29-2015)
001-13: VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES:
Any person who violates the provisions of this ordinance upon conviction shall
be punished as set forth in section 1-4-1 of the City Code. (Ord. 2098, 6-29-
2015)
001-99: LEGISLATIVE HISTORY:
Ord. 829, 8-3-1987; Ord. 916, 7-23-1990; Ord. 1050, 6-14-1993; Ord. 1248, 6-2-
1997; Ord. 2098, 6-29-2015; Ord. 2228, 6-12-2017.
PUD #2
GRAND WOODS
SECTION:
002-01: Legal Description
002-02: Sketch Plan
002-03: Conditions
002-04: Building Restrictions, Easements And Covenants
002-05: Corner Lots
002-06: All Areas To Be Platted
002-07: Storm Water Management
002-99: Legislative History
002-01: LEGAL DESCRIPTION:
The legal description for the Grand Woods PUD is as follows:
The Southwest Quarter of the Southeast Quarter of Section 16, Township 78
North, Range 25 West of the 5th P.M., except the North 655 feet of the East 931
feet thereof and except public highway.
(Ord. 817, 2-16-1987)
002-02: SKETCH PLAN:
On file with the Community Development Department of the City and made a part
of this rezoning approval for concept description and delineation is the sketch
plan document. It is recognized that minor shifts or realignments of roadways
may be necessary and compatible with the need to acquire workable street
patterns, grades and usable building sites, but the general plan layout,
including the relationship of uses to each other and the relationship of
dwelling unit types of the general plan framework, traffic layout and
development requirements shall be used as the implementation guide. (Ord. 817,
2-16-1987)
002-03: CONDITIONS:
Whereas, Section 6, Ordinance 497 amended Ordinance 430 by creating Article XX
(a), PUD District establishes certain regulations and guidelines pertaining to
accompanying information required on final site plan or final plat documents.
Now, therefore, the following conditions, restrictions, and regulations are
adopted as part of this approval, to wit:
   A.   General Conditions: The sketch plan incorporates maximum of seventy
five (75) residential dwelling units which shall be distributed by types and
location according to the sketch plan as presented:
      1.   All subdivisions, streets, street rights-of-way and general
development shall adhere to the standards and design criteria set forth in the
West Des Moines Subdivision Ordinance pertaining thereto unless otherwise
stated within this Ordinance.
      2.   The development shall comply with Article XX(a) (PUD) Sections 6 and
8. No final building or site plan review by the Planning and Zoning Commission
and City Council shall be required for individual single-family detached lots.
      3.   In all areas adjoining drainageways or detention areas involving
potential flood hazards, no residential structure shall be erected which has a
lowest floor, including basements, less than one foot (1') above the determined
level of the 100-year return frequency rainfall flood event.
      4.   The petitioners seeking this rezoning, their successors and assigns,
if any, shall pay all construction and engineering costs for the interior
development of the planned unit development, as required by this Ordinance, or
the Subdivision Ordinance of the City of West Des Moines, Iowa, for all
streets, storm sewers, sanitary sewers, drainageway improvements, detention
basins, City-owned utilities, buffers and other improvements within the PUD as
may be required by the Subdivision and Zoning Ordinances.
   B.   Land Use Criteria: In addition to the general criteria as stated in
subsection A above, the following land use design criteria shall apply to the
development areas designated on the sketch plan. The sketch plan document which
is made a part of this rezoning section per Section 002-02 herein, delineates
two (2) parcels of the PUD as Parcels 1 and 2, for application of specific
development standards of residential use and density regulations. The following
development standards and use regulations shall apply to each of the two (2)
development parcels:
      1.   Parcel 1: All general use regulations, performance standards and
provisions set forth in Article VIII of Ordinance 430 for the R-1-A Single-
Family Residential District shall apply to any development proposal for the
property within Parcel 1 as shown on the sketch plan of the Grand Woods PUD.
This area shall involve approximately six and one-half (6.5) acres with a
maximum of ten (10) dwelling units permitted.
      2.   Parcel 2: All general use regulations, performance standards and
provisions set forth in Article VII of Ordinance 430 for the R-1 Single-Family
Residential District shall apply to any development proposal for all property
within Parcel 2 as shown on the sketch plan of the Grand Woods PUD. This area
shall involve approximately twenty (20) acres with a maximum of sixty five (65)
dwelling units. (Ord. 817, 2-16-1987)
002-04: BUILDING RESTRICTIONS, EASEMENTS AND COVENANTS:
The developer shall with the approval of the City Council adopt building
restrictions, easements and covenants pertaining to each area developed where
the developer and the City deem appropriate. (Ord. 817, 2-16-1987)
002-05: CORNER LOTS:
Corner lots shall not be less than twenty feet (20') greater in lot frontage
than the minimum lot frontage required for each development parcel so as to
permit adequate building setbacks on both front and side streets. (Ord. 817, 2-
16-1987)
002-06: ALL AREAS TO BE PLATTED:
Prior to development within any portion of the PUD, the area to be developed
shall first be platted in accordance with the City's Subdivision Ordinance.
(Ord. 817, 2-16-1987)
002-07: STORM WATER MANAGEMENT:
With the first development proposal, or prior thereto, there shall be submitted
to, and approved by the West Des Moines City Engineer, a complete storm water
management plan for all storm sewer and drainage systems to remain a portion of
the development. (Ord. 817, 2-16-1987)
002-99: LEGISLATIVE HISTORY:
Ord. 817, 2-16-1987.
PUD #3
HEATHERWOOD
SECTION:
003-01: Legal Description
003-99: Legislative History
003-01: LEGAL DESCRIPTION:
The legal description for the Heatherwood PUD is as follows:
North 655' of the East 931' of the Southwest 1/4 Southeast 1/4 Section 16
Township 78 North Range 25 excluding road now included in and forming a part of
the City of West Des Moines, Polk County, Iowa.
(Ord. 502, 6-18-1973)
003-99: LEGISLATIVE HISTORY:
Ord. 502, 6-18-1973.
PUD #4
HEATHERWOOD 2
SECTION:
004-01: Legal Description
004-02: Sketch Plan
004-03: Conditions
004-99: Legislative History
004-01: LEGAL DESCRIPTION:
The legal description for the Heatherwood 2 PUD is as follows:
A parcel of land in the Northeast 1/4 of the Northwest 1/4 of Section 21,
Township 78 North, Range 25 West of the 5th P.M., City of West Des Moines, Polk
County, Iowa, that is more particularly described as follows:
Beginning at a point of reference at the North 1/4 corner of Section 21; thence
S00°26'09"E, 599.44 feet along the east line of the Northwest 1/4 to the
Southeast corner of Heatherwood Estates Plat 5, an official plat, and the point
of beginning; thence S00°26'09"E, 712.24 feet along said east line to the
Southeast corner of the Northeast 1/4 of said Northwest 1/4; thence
S89°05'14"W, 720.08 feet along the south line of the Northeast 1/4 of said
Northwest 1/4 to a point; thence N00°26'09"W, 346.02 feet to a point; thence
N36°40'07"W, 60.00 feet to a point; thence N00°33'47"W, 154.71 feet to the
Southwest corner of Lot 1, of said plat; thence N53°19'53"E, 286.10 feet along
the south line of said lot; thence N89°33'51"E, 525.09 feet along said south
line to the point of beginning and containing 11.660 acres more or less.
(Ord. 927, 7-9-1990)
004-02: SKETCH PLAN:
On file in the city and made a part of this comprehensive plan amendment and
rezoning approval, for concept description and delineation is the sketch plan
document. It is recognized that the minor shifts or realignments of roadways
may be necessary and compatible with the need to acquire workable street
patterns, grades, and usable building sites but the general plan layout,
including the relationship of uses to each other and the relationship of
dwelling unit types to the general plan framework, traffic layout, and
development requirements shall be used as the implementation guide. (Ord. 733,
6-18-1984; amd. Ord. 1808, 7-14-2008)
004-03: CONDITIONS:
Whereas, section 6 of ordinance 497 amended ordinance 430 by creating article
XX(a), PUD district establishes certain regulations and guidelines pertaining
to accompanying information required on a final site plan and final site plan
documents. Now, therefore, the following conditions, restrictions and
regulations are adopted as part of this approval, to wit:
   A.   General Conditions: The sketch plan incorporates a maximum of sixty
(60) residential dwelling units which shall be distributed by types and
location according to the sketch plan as presented.
In addition, the following general site plan criteria are integrated into and
made a part of the sketch plan document and its recommendation for approval:
      1.   All subdivisions, streets, street right of way and general
development shall adhere to the standards and design criteria set forth in the
West Des Moines subdivision ordinance pertaining thereto unless otherwise
stated within this ordinance. (Ord. 733, 6-18-1984)
      2.   The development shall comply with article XXV (site plans) of the
West Des Moines zoning ordinance, and article XX(a) (PUD) sections 6 and 8. No
final building or site plan review by the planning and zoning commission and
city council shall be required for individual EU-1, R-1 and R-1-A lots. (Ord.
789, 5-27-1986)
      3.   In all areas involving potential flood hazards, no residential,
office, commercial or industrial structure shall be erected which has a lowest
floor, including basements, less than one foot (1') above the determined level
of the 100-year return frequency rainfall event.
      4.   The petitioners seeking this rezoning, their successors and assigns,
if any, shall pay all construction and engineering costs for the interior
development of the planned unit development, as required by this ordinance or
the subdivision ordinance of the city of West Des Moines, Iowa, for all
streets, storm sewers, sanitary sewers, drainageway improvements, creek
crossing structures, City-owned utilities, buffers and other improvements
within the PUD as may be required by the Subdivision and Zoning Ordinances.
   B.   Land Use Design Criteria: In addition to the general criteria as stated
in subsection A above, the following land use design criteria shall apply to
the development areas designated on the sketch plan. The sketch plan document
which is made a part of this rezoning action per Section 004-02 herein,
delineates four (4) parcels of the PUD as Parcels A, B, C and D for application
of the specific development standards and use regulations. The following
development standards and use regulations shall apply to each of the four (4)
development parcels: (Ord. 733, 6-18-1984)
      1.   Parcel A: All general use regulations, performance standards and
provisions set forth in Article VIII of Ordinance 430 for the R-1-A Single-
Family Residential District shall apply to any development proposal for all
property within Parcel A as shown on the sketch plan of Heatherwood Estates 2
PUD; provided, however, the front yard setback may be a minimum of thirty feet
(30'). This area shall involve approximately twenty (20) acres with a maximum
of thirty one (31) dwelling units.
      2.   Parcel B: All general use regulations, performance standards and
provisions set forth in Article VII of Ordinance 430 for the R-1 Single-Family
Residential District shall apply to any development proposal for all property
within Parcel B as shown on the sketch plan of the Heatherwood Estates 2 PUD;
provided, however, the front yard setback may be a minimum of twenty five feet
(25'). The area shall involve approximately twenty four (24) acres with a
maximum of twenty seven (27) dwelling units.
At the time of the final plat review, the developer and City shall agree upon
the appropriate restrictions to be placed on the use of that area of the parcel
south and southwest of the one hundred foot (100') Iowa Power and Light
easement for the preservation of open space and protection of the extreme
topography within said area, which property is to act as a scenic open space
and buffer against the ground southerly, zoned as ICP Industrial Commerce Park.
(Ord. 789, 5-27-1986)
      3.   Parcel C: All general use regulations, performance standards and
provisions set forth in Article IX of Ordinance 430 for the EU-1 Estate Use
Single-Family Residential District shall apply to any development proposal for
all property within Parcel C as shown on the sketch plan of Heatherwood Estates
2 PUD. This area shall involve approximately ten (10) acres with a maximum of
two (2) dwelling units.
      4.   Parcel D: This area shall involve no greater than seventeen (17)
acres and shall be developed in accordance with ICP Industrial Commerce Park
District use regulations, performance standards and provisions as may be set
forth as part of the establishment of said zoning district classification
within the Zoning Ordinance which is proposed by the City's comprehensive plan.
Development within this parcel shall have access and frontage to public streets
which are designed to accommodate a continuity of traffic circulation with ICP
projects that may be proposed to the east and south of this site. (Ord. 733, 6-
18-1984)
   C.   Corner Lots: Within Parcel A and Parcel B corner lots shall not be less
than twenty feet (20') greater in lot frontage than the minimum required lot
frontage for each development parcels so as to permit adequate building
setbacks on both front and side streets. (Ord. 789, 5-27-1986)
   D.   Iowa Power And Light Easement: No residential building shall be located
within the one hundred foot (100') Iowa Power and Light easement which crosses
Parcel A and B of the planned unit development.
   E.   Building Restrictions, Easements And Covenants: Where the City deems
appropriate, and with the approval of the City Council, the developer shall on
each particular area, adopt building restrictions, easements and/or covenants.
   F.   Soil Test Requirements: The developer shall be responsible for
supplying to the City, information prepared by a qualified soils engineering
firm, indicating that existing soil conditions are adequate in stability and
strength for construction of public and private improvements proposed, or if
determined by the soils engineering firm that adequate soils conditions do not
exist, measures shall be taken by the developer to achieve adequate soil
strength and stability for both public and private improvements.
   G.   Cul-De-Sac Lengths: The extreme terrain associated with the development
of this planned unit development has made it necessary to allow for cul-de-sac
streets in Parcels A and B to be longer than the maximum allowed by the City
Subdivision Ordinance. During final plat or site plan review the City shall
determine maximum allowable cul-de-sac lengths.
   H.   Street Design For Fuller Road Access: At the time of the platting of
that part of parcel A located between Fuller Road and parcel B the design of
the street providing access to the development shall be determined. The city
shall determine the proper design and pavement widths for the street in order
to assure adequate year round access for emergency vehicles.
   I.   All Areas To Be Platted: Prior to development within any portion of the
PUD, the area to be developed shall first be platted in accordance with the
city's subdivision ordinance. (Ord. 733, 6-18-1984)
004-99: LEGISLATIVE HISTORY:
Ord. 733, 6-18-1984; Ord. 789, 5-27-1986; Ord. 882, 8-7-1989; Ord. 927, 7-9-
1990; Ord. 1808, 7-14-2008.
PUD #5
BEH
SECTION:
005-01: Legal Description
005-02: Sketch Plan
005-03: Conditions
005-04: Building Restrictions, Easements And Covenants
005-99: Legislative History
005-01: LEGAL DESCRIPTION:
The legal description for the Beh PUD is as follows:
That portion of the Southwest Quarter (SW1/4) of Section 9, Township 78 North,
Range 25 West of the 5th P.M., lying North of the North right-of-way line of
the C&NW Railroad; and except the East 33.0 feet; and except an approximate
7.58 acres in the Northeast (NE) corner of said Lot 2 being 1254 feet East and
West and 15 rods (247.5') North and South; Lot 2 of the Referee's Plat of the
Southeast Quarter (SE1/4) of Section 9, Township 78 North, Range 25 West of the
5th P.M., more particularly described as follows, to-wit: Commencing 7.21
chains (475.86') South of the Northeast corner of said Southeast Quarter (SE1/
4) and on the East line of said Section and running thence West on a line
parallel with the North line of said Quarter Section a distance of 40.28 chains
(2658.48') to the center line of said Section, thence South along the half
section line 20.71 chains (1366.86'), thence East on a straight line to a point
on the East line of said Section 20.59 chains (1358.94') South of the place of
beginning, and thence North along said East line 20.59 chains (1358.94') to the
place of beginning; and Lots 3 and 4 of the partition plat of the Southeast
Quarter (SE1/4) of Section 9, Township 78, Range 25 more particularly described
as follows: Commencing at the Southeast (SE) corner of said Southeast Quarter
(SE1/4) and running thence North along the East line thereof 12.22 chains
(806.52') thence West parallel with the South line of said Quarter Section
40.24 chains (2655.84') to the West line of said Quarter Section, thence South
along said West line 12.22 chains (806.52') to the Southwest (SW) corner of
said Quarter Section, thence East along said South line to the place of
beginning, except the railroad right-of-way running through said land, and
except that portion of the aforementioned property which lies South of the
railroad right-of-way.
(Ord. 717, 2-6-1984)
005-02: SKETCH PLAN:
On file with the Community Development Department of the City and made a part
of this rezoning approval for concept description and delineation is the
revised sketch plan document dated February 5, 1979, all in accord with the
City Council Roll Call No. 963, on December 18, 1978. (Ord. 632, 2-19-1979)
005-03: CONDITIONS:
Whereas Section 6 of Ordinance 497, amending Ordinance 430 by creating Article
XXa, PUD District, establishes certain regulations and guidelines pertaining to
accompanying information required on a final site plan and final site plan
documents. Now therefore, the following conditions, restrictions, and
regulations are adopted as a part of this approval, to wit:
   A.   The Fairmeadows Creek Parkway shall be dedicated to the City without
cost to the City and the developer shall accomplish the following prior to
dedication:
      1.   Define the creek slope, and the velocity, water surface profile and
cross sections for the 100-year return frequency flood, from existing
Fairmeadows Park on the north to Grand Avenue southerly. The owner shall use
standard engineering practices and field surveys to supplement information to
be supplied by the City Engineer. The City Engineer shall supply available data
in his files with regard to discharge quantities, field elevations, profiles
and such additional information as the Department may possess.
      2.   Provide engineering plans to West Des Moines specifications and
construct such improvements as shall be required to bring the channel to a
nonerodable slope and velocity. Nonerodable slope is defined as 0.6%.
Nonerodable velocity is defined as 6-7'/second. This may be achieved with
gabion drop structures, street crossing structures, etc. No bank rip-rapping
shall be required. The City of West Des Moines shall, in conjunction with this
work, investigate outlets of drainage structures in Fairmeadows Park and do
work as necessary to achieve similar performance as to energy dissipation,
slope and velocity from these structures and across the existing Fairmeadows
Parkway drainage area.
      3.   Remove all fallen trees, debris, existing culverts and other similar
obstructions along said creek, exclusive of landscaping to be preserved.
      4.   Plan all building elevations such that all openings in and to
adjoining structures shall remain at a level above the 100-year return
frequency flood occurrence as determined by applicable state, federal or local
law.
      5.   Seed the floodway area before dedication for those areas disturbed
by construction or cleaning.
   B.   As a part of the approval process, any development which shall occur on
planning areas no. 3, 4, and 5 shall be submitted through the site plan review
process, and approved by the city council and planning and zoning commission in
accord with article XXV of ordinance 430 as amended. All commercial and multi-
family developments shall comply with article XII and XXIII of ordinance 430 as
amended.
   C.   Before development shall commence on the patio and zero lot line units
of planning area no. 2, a master plan and unit concept shall be submitted to,
and approved by the planning and zoning commission and city council. Said unit
design concept shall incorporate the following:
      1.   Exterior construction materials.
      2.   Elevations of exteriors of unit(s).
      3.   Unit floor plan concept(s).
   D.   West Des Moines subdivision engineering design standards shall apply to
all sections and areas of the development plan, including outlet storm sewers
to Jordan and Fairmeadows Creeks and all work to be accomplished by the
developer shall be in accordance to the plans and specifications submitted and
approved by the city.
   E.   The developer shall pay all construction and engineering costs for all
interior development, including all streets, storm sewers, sanitary sewers,
creek improvements, creek crossing structures, city owned utilities and other
improvements within the planned unit development, but excluding shared costs of
relocated Delavan Drive including creek crossing structure and railroad
crossing all in accordance with the specifications, ordinances, and adopted
resolutions of the city of West Des Moines.
The city of West Des Moines, upon favorable majority vote of the city council,
may, in its discretion, participate within the limits of the law, to share a
proportionate cost of the relocated Delavan Drive and other improvements but
such cost, if any, shall be only those costs in excess of the cost that can be
legally assessed.
The cost of constructing and improving a new intersection of 19th Street, Grand
Avenue, relocated Delavan Drive, and Railroad Avenue to be borne by the city of
West Des Moines, which construction and improvements will correspond with the
construction and relocation of Delavan Drive within the developed area. (Ord.
632, 2-19-1979)
   F.   The land use plan and concept, in addition to the generalized
geographical boundaries established by the revised sketch plan proposal, shall
incorporate the following:
      1.   Single-Family Detached Parcel - Area #1:
         a.   This area shall involve approximately sixty (60) acres with a
maximum of two hundred fourteen (214) housing units on lots of R-1 character
with a minimum sixty foot (60') frontage except as set out in subsections F2
and F3 of this section.
         b.   Lots bordering the Giles Street properties northerly, shall match
frontages along that street. Lots bordering the Ashawa subdivision westerly
shall have a minimum seventy feet (70') of frontage.
         c.   Lots backing to the public park identified on the PUD sketch as
area #6 and discussed below as area #6 shall be permitted to have rear yard
setbacks of twenty feet (20').
         d.   The street pattern linking 29th Street and Locust to Maple on the
south, shall be designated internally in such a manner as to discourage direct
through traffic, and shall be designed utilizing sound engineering practices
for street grades.
         e.   Within this parcel (area #1) shall be a small neighborhood park
(play area) in the far southwest corner. Said parcel of approximately two (2)
acres, shall be graded, seeded and dedicated without cost to the city by the
developer concurrent with the development of the adjoining lots.
         f.   All corner lots in this area shall be designed with an additional
twenty feet (20') in width. (Ord. 1871, 6-14-2010)
      2.   Single-Family Patio And Zero Lot Line - Area #2:
         a.   This area shall contain a maximum of one hundred fifty five (155)
housing units either detached or bi-attached, all of which shall be designed
for individual occupant, ownership. (Ord. 823, 5-11-1987)
         b.   The northern tier of lots bordering the Fairmeadows Subdivision
area shall be designed for detached units with a minimum of fifty feet (50') in
width, one hundred twenty five feet (125') in depth, and a minimum thirty foot
(30') rear yard setback. Front yard setbacks for patio homes shall be a minimum
of twenty five feet (25'). All corner lots shall incorporate an additional
fifteen feet (15') of width and maintain minimum front yard setbacks on the
corner of twenty feet (20') along one street and twenty five feet (25') of
setback along the other street.
         c.   Within this area, the developer shall provide an addition to
Fairmeadows Park, said addition being approximately one and three-fourths
(1.75) acres, and attached to the boundary of the park as shown on the final
site plan drawing. This park ground shall be graded, seeded and dedicated
without fee to the city at the same time as the first adjoining plat is
developed.
         d.   All patio homes other than those bordering the Fairmeadows
Subdivision shall have a minimum forty foot (40') frontage for detached units,
and seventy feet (70') of frontage for attached units. All side yard setbacks
shall be five feet (5') per side unless a greater setback be required by the
building code. Setbacks shall be measured by criteria set forth in the current
or hereafter amended West Des Moines building code. (Ord. 632, 2-19-1979)
      3.   Townhouse Development - Area #3:
         a.   This area shall encompass single-family detached or townhouse
units, designed for occupant ownership, and with the total number of units not
to exceed one hundred thirty seven (137).
         b.   To the extent possible and practical, all internal streets within
this area shall be public streets.
         c.   No townhouse unit shall set closer than twenty five feet (25') to
Maple, thirty five feet (35') to E.P. True Parkway, or thirty five feet (35')
to the railroad right of way. All other setbacks shall be determined at the
time of final site plan approval.
         d.   All single-family detached units shall have a minimum of forty
five feet (45') of frontage, an area of five thousand six hundred (5,600)
square feet, twenty five foot (25') front yard setback, thirty foot (30') rear
yard setback, thirty five foot (35') setback from the railroad right of way,
five foot (5') side yard setback for each side unless a greater setback is
required by the building code, and all corner lots shall incorporate an
additional twenty feet (20') in width.
         e.   The construction of dwellings within that area west of 30th
Street shall address possible adverse drainage and groundwater conditions, as
shall be verified by a qualified soils engineering firm prior to platting or
development of the area.
         f.   The developer shall be responsible for, and shall plan the far
western corner of this parcel as a natural landscape buffer area if townhouses
are constructed within the area adjoining Ashawa Estates plat 6, and such
landscape buffer plan and development shall be subject to the approval of the
city of West Des Moines.
         g.   If the land southerly of this parcel is maintained as a light
industrial use, at the time of final site plan or plat approval, the developer
and city shall agree upon the appropriate buffer concept for this area.
         h.   Access to Maple Street shall be as limited as possible, and
restricted for all corner lots with frontages on Maple Street and alternative
locations for access to side streets.
         i.   A master development plan shall be required for all of area 3 and
shall be approved by the city of West Des Moines and adequately provide for
orderly development and interrelationship of single-family detached and
townhouse type residential land uses. (Ord. 812, 1-19-1987)
      4.   Townhouse Development - Planning Area #4:
         a.   This area shall incorporate a maximum of seventy eight (78)
townhouse style housing units, excluding an approximate four and eight-tenths
(4.8) acre commercial piece on the south end of this planning area. There shall
be proper planning and adequate land reserved near the north boundary to assure
that the land immediately north of this property can be properly developed and
served with public utilities. (Ord. 735, 6-18-1984)
         b.   No unit shall be located closer than thirty feet (30') to
Nineteenth Street, or twenty five feet (25') to any internal street where a
unit derives access. All other setbacks shall be mutually determined at the
time of site plan approval.
         c.   Where possible, and to the greatest extent practical, all
internal streets shall be designed and dedicated for general public purposes.
         d.   No unit shall be located any closer than thirty feet (30') to the
commercial portion of this planning area, the rear ten feet (10') of which
setback shall be utilized as a solid landscaped buffer in conjunction with a
buffer space of at least fifteen feet (15') which shall be allocated as part of
the commercial development. (Ord. 632, 2-19-1979)
      5.   Commercial/Multi-Family Area - Planning Area #5:
         a.   This area shall be designed as a mixed use development
incorporating commercial uses and a maximum of one hundred eighty one (181)
multi-family residential units. (Ord. 746, 12-31-1984)
         b.   To the extent possible, existing farm buildings are encouraged to
be utilized to form the core theme for the development. (Ord. 632, 2-19-1979)
         c.   All buildings, except existing farm buildings to be preserved,
garages and accessory structures which may have a minimum front yard setback of
thirty feet (30') shall utilize C-1 setbacks, and may incorporate C-1 uses, C-
1-A uses, and the following C-2 category usages:
Animal hospital, or veterinary clinic provided all functions are enclosed and
at least two hundred feet (200') from any residential neighborhood.
Clothes dry cleaning establishment, not to exceed one thousand two hundred
(1,200) gross square feet.
Pet shops. (Ord. 746, 12-31-1984)
         d.   As a part of the plan, all large conifers bordering the railroad
southerly, shall to the extent possible, be preserved as a part of the concept.
         e.   As required by state, federal or local law, any multi- family or
commercial building constructed shall have a first floor elevation above the
level of the 100-year flood for parcel no. 6 adjoining.
      6.   Park Ground - Planning Area #6:
         a.   All park parcels lying north of relocated Delavan Drive as shown
on the final site plan shall be dedicated concurrent with the developments
adjoining or connected with the area to be developed.
         b.   That portion of the park ground south of relocated Delavan Drive
shall be dedicated to the city at the time of paving of the relocated street.
(Ord. 632, 2-19-1979)
005-04: BUILDING RESTRICTIONS, EASEMENTS AND COVENANTS:
The developer shall with the approval of the city council adopt building
restrictions, easements and covenants pertaining to each area developed where
the developer and the city deem appropriate. (Ord. 632, 2-19-1979)
005-99: LEGISLATIVE HISTORY:
Ord. 632, 2-19-1979; Ord. 717, 2-6-1984; Ord. 735, 6-18-1984; Ord. 746, 12-31-
1984; Ord. 812, 1-19-1987; Ord. 823, 5-11-1987; Ord. 1871, 6-14-2010.
PUD #6
BEH II
SECTION:
006-01: Legal Description
006-02: Sketch Plan
006-03: Conditions
006-04: Review Process
006-05: Building Restrictions, Easements And Covenants
006-06: All Areas To Be Platted
006-07: Signage Standards
006-08: Stormwater Management
006-09: Street Right Of Way
006-10: Traffic Reports
006-11: Access
006-12: Violations And Penalties
006-99: Legislative History
006-01: LEGAL DESCRIPTION:
A parcel of land in the southwest 1/4 of section 9, T-78N, R-25W of the 5th
P.M. city of West Des Moines, Polk County, Iowa, that is more particularly
described as follows:
Commencing as a point of reference at the southeast corner of said Section 9;
thence N89°58'30"W, 1483.70 feet along the south line of Section 9 to a point;
thence N00°01'30"E, 33.00 feet to a point on the right-of-way (R.O.W.) line of
Delavan Drive and the point of beginning; thence N89°58'30"W, 1183.65 feet
along said north R.O.W. line to the south 1/4 corner of Section 9; thence
S89°59'10"W, 1328.01 feet along said north R.O.W. line to the southwest corner
of the southeast 1/4 of the southwest 1/4 of Section 9; thence N00°07'36"E,
526.72 feet along the west line of the southeast 1/4 of the southwest 1/4 of
Section 9 to a point on the south R.O.W. line of the C & NW Railroad; thence
S81°46'00"E, 2536.71 feet along said south R.O.W. line to a point; thence
S00°01'30"W, 163.64 feet to the point of beginning and containing 19.889 acres
more or less,
and,
that part of Lot 1 not included in the above described parcel, Lot 2, Outlot
"B" and Outlot "D", of said Delavan Plat 1 an official plat, now in and forming
a part of the City of West Des Moines, Polk County, Iowa
except,
That part of Lots 5 & 6, Country Side Plat 2, an official plat, now in and
forming a part of the City of West Des Moines, Polk County, Iowa that lies
within the above described parcel.
(Ord. 1430, 1-8-2001)
006-02: SKETCH PLAN:
On file with the community development department of the city and made a part
of this rezoning approval for concept description and delineation of three (3)
parcels, labeled A, B, and C for the ease of identification, is the sketch plan
document for the BEH II planned unit development (PUD). It is recognized minor
shifts or realignments of bordering roadways and adjustment to building sites
may be necessary and compatible with the need to acquire workable traffic
patterns, grades and usable building sites, but the general plan layout,
including the relationship of uses to each other and the development
requirements shall be used as the implementation guide. Wherever conflict
occurs between the written text in this document and the notations on the
sketch plan, the written text shall prevail. (Ord. 1430, 1-8-2001)
006-03: CONDITIONS:
Whereas, title 9, chapter 9, "Planned Unit Development District", of the city
code, establishes certain regulations and guidelines pertaining to accompanying
information required on site plan, permitted conditional use permit, and plat
documents.
Now, therefore, the following conditions, restrictions, and regulations are
adopted as part of this approval, to wit: (Ord. 1430, 1-8-2001)
   A.   General Conditions: The sketch plan incorporates multi- family
residential use and approximately 1.86 acres of land reserved for
nonresidential development which shall be distributed by area, type, use and
location according to the sketch plan as presented.
      1.   All subdivisions, public streets, public street rights of way and
general development shall adhere to the standards and design criteria set forth
in the West Des Moines subdivision ordinance and the Des Moines metropolitan
design standards as adopted by the city of West Des Moines pertaining thereto,
unless otherwise stated within this ordinance.
      2.   Unless otherwise specified herein, the development of the BEH II PUD
shall comply with title 9, "Zoning", of the city code.
      3.   In all areas within a 100-year frequency flood hazard zone, or
adjoining drainageways, and detention ponding areas involving potential flood
hazards, no building shall be erected which has a lowest floor, including
basements, less than one foot (1') above the determined level of the 100-year
frequency flood event, and no building shall be located within twenty five feet
(25') of any easement or property boundary of a major drainageway, stormwater
detention basin or pond, unless said location is approved as part of a
development entitlement by the city council and said building is structurally
designed accordingly.
      4.   The developer, their successors and assigns, if any, shall pay all
planning, engineering, and construction costs for the interior development of
the planned unit development, for all streets, storm sewers, sanitary sewers,
drainageway improvements, detention basins, water mains, buffers and other
improvements within parcels A, B, and C of the PUD as may be required by this
ordinance, the subdivision ordinance, the zoning ordinance, or the Des Moines
metropolitan design standards as adopted by the city of West Des Moines. (Ord.
2126, 11-30-2015)
   B.   Land Use Criteria: In addition to the general conditions as stated in
subsection A of this section, the following land use design criteria shall
apply to the development areas designated on the sketch plan. The sketch plan
document which is made a part of this rezoning action per section 006-02 of
this ordinance, delineates three (3) parcels of the PUD as parcels A, B, and C,
for application of specific development standards of land use and the
development regulations. The following development standards and use
regulations shall apply to each of the three (3) development parcels:
      1.   Parcel A: All general use regulations, performance standards and
provisions set forth in title 9, "Zoning", of the city code for the medium-
density residential district (RM) shall apply to any development proposal for
the property within parcel A as shown on the sketch plan, except as shall be
further provided herein and provided only residential uses shall be permitted.
This area involves approximately 16.5 acres.
This parcel shall encompass a maximum of one hundred forty one (141) dwelling
units which shall be developed with residential buildings of no greater than
two (2) stories in height, sixteen (16) units, and of a design, scale and
dwelling unit type as shall be determined as part of a master plan review by
the city for the entire parcel and shall be approved by the plan and zoning
commission and city council. The parcel shall be developed as a single master
planned project with each building compatible in design, scale and use of
materials. Design and use of materials for the construction of any building
within parcel A shall be acceptable to the city and accomplished in a manner
compatible with the adjoining residential uses in the neighborhood.
Architectural design for multi-family materials, exterior details and texture,
treatment of windows and doors, and use of angles and multiplicity of planes
within the wall and roof design to lessen the plainness of appearance which can
be characteristic of large residential buildings.
A master plan for development of the entire parcel shall be approved by the
plan and zoning commission and city council prior to site plan and plat
approval for any portion of the parcel. Residential medium density district
regulations for lot area, frontage, and yard requirements shall apply, except
for no dwelling unit shall be located closer than fifty feet (50') to E.P. True
Parkway, twenty five feet (25') from the west boundary of the parcel and twenty
feet (20') from Chicago Northwestern Railroad right of way. All accessory
structures shall meet minimum setback requirements as set forth in title 9,
chapter 7, "Setback And Bulk Density Regulations", of the city code, provided
garages may be located within thirty feet (30') of E.P. True Parkway. Off
street parking lots shall have a minimum twenty foot (20') setback from public
street rights of way and sufficiently buffered, as practical, from public
street view and surrounding residential properties with the use of landscaping,
earth berming, and/or wall structures as may be required by the city. (Ord.
1430, 1-8-2001)
      2.   Parcel B: All general use regulations, performance standards and
provisions set forth in title 9, "Zoning", of the city code for the medium
density residential district (RM-12) shall apply to any development proposal
for the property within parcel B as shown on the sketch plan, except as
otherwise provided herein. This area involves approximately 2.24 acres.
All nonresidential uses shall be prohibited within parcel B.
This parcel shall encompass a maximum of sixteen (16) horizontal attached
dwelling units (no living above living) which shall be developed with
residential buildings no greater than two (2) stories in height, and of a
design, scale and dwelling unit type as shall be determined as part of a site
plan review by the city for the entire parcel and shall be approved by the plan
and zoning commission and city council.
This parcel shall be developed as a single master planned project with each
building compatible in design, scale and use of cohesive materials. Design and
use of materials for the construction of any building within parcel B shall be
acceptable to the city and accomplished in a manner compatible with the
adjoining residential uses in the neighborhood. Architectural design,
materials, exterior details and textures, treatment of windows and doors, and
use of angles and multiplicity of planes within the wall and roof design shall
be residential in character. All ground mechanical units shall be screened from
view from adjoining residential developments, all streets and private drives.
No building shall be set closer than fifty feet (50') from the right of way of
E.P. True Parkway; thirty five feet (35') from right of way of South 26th
Street; twenty feet (20') from the railroad right of way; twenty five feet
(25') from the east and thirty five feet (35') from the south parcel line. All
detached accessory structures shall meet minimum setback requirements as set
forth in title 9, chapter 7, "Setback And Bulk Density Regulations", of the
city code. Off street parking lots shall be sufficiently set back from E.P.
True Parkway and South 26th Street a minimum of thirty feet (30') and buffered
as practical from all public streets and adjoining residential developments
with the use of landscaping, earth berming and/or wall structures as may be
required by the city.
Buffering and transition methods shall be required as set forth in subsections
9-19-8E and 9-5-7C of the city code unless noted otherwise below:
         a.   Minimum thirty foot (30') buffer shall be required along E.P.
True Parkway and South 26th Street. Plantings shall be equal to that required
per city code for a standard thirty foot (30') wide buffer.
         b.   Minimum twenty foot (20') buffer along the north adjacent to the
railroad tracks. Buffer plantings shall be equal to that required per city code
for a standard thirty foot (30') wide buffer. In lieu of buffer plantings, a
six foot (6') solid fence may be constructed at the property line. Prior to
installation of the fence, the developer shall execute an indemnity/hold
harmless agreement releasing the city of any responsibility for damages,
repair, removal, or reinstallation should access to utilities within the
easement area be necessary.
         c.   No buffer shall be required along the east although mitigation of
the future light industrial use is encouraged.
         d.   No buffer shall be required along the south; however, landscape
vegetation shall be located immediately north of the access drive to interrupt
views from the existing single- family homes. Vegetation in this area shall be
equal to that required per city code for a standard sixty foot (60') wide
buffer.
         e.   The placement of vegetation within any public easement shall be
limited to understory trees, shrubs, grasses and perennials unless otherwise
further restricted per the easement document. No overstory or evergreen trees
are allowed within a public easement.
      3.   Parcel C: The following general use regulations, performance
standards, and provisions shall apply to all development proposals for that
property within parcel C as shown on the sketch plan of the BEH II planned unit
development:
         a.   The following uses shall be allowed within parcel C:
            (1)   All permitted and permitted conditional uses allowed within
the light industrial (LI) zoning district, except the following uses which
shall be prohibited:
Automotive repair, services, and parking (SIC 75)
Bus terminal operations (part of SIC 41)
Construction and contractor's operations and storage yards (SIC 15, 16, and 17)
Fabricated metal products, except machinery and transportation equipment (SIC
34)
Fuel dealers (SIC 598)
Grain mill products (SIC 204)
Guard dogs (part of SIC 7381)
Heavy construction equipment rental and leasing (7353)
Personal services (SIC 72)
Photo finish labs (SIC 7384)
Railroad transportation (SIC 40)
Ready mixed concrete (SIC 3273)
Special warehousing and storage, not elsewhere classified (SIC 4226)
Tank repair and cleaning services, metal reshaping and replating services,
recreation vehicle repair services, agricultural equipment repair services,
miscellaneous automotive repair services (all part of SIC 7694)
Terminal and joint terminal maintenance facilities for motor freight
transportation (SIC 423)
Tobacco products (SIC 21)
Transportation by air (SIC 45)
Transportation services (SIC 47)
Welding repair (SIC 7692)
         b.   Architecture and use of materials for the construction of any
building shall be accomplished in a manner compatible and not conflicting with
the residential uses within the neighborhood.
Architectural design shall be acceptable to the city, with all uses which are
allowed in parcel C being required to use materials which are residential in
character, materials of wood and/or brick exterior veneer and a roof
principally of a gable, mansard or hip style design. Regardless of use, all
heating, ventilation, and air conditioning mechanical units shall be screened
as practical from adjoining residential developments.
         c.   No building shall be set closer than forty five feet (45') from
the ultimate right of way of Delavan Drive; twenty feet (20') from the railroad
right of way; thirty five feet (35') from the west parcel line, and thirty five
feet (35') from the east and south parcel boundary lines. The maximum building
height for any building within parcel C shall be twenty four feet (24'). All
accessory structures shall meet minimum setback requirements as set forth in
title 9, chapter 7, "Setback And Bulk Density Regulations", of the city code.
Off street parking lots shall be sufficiently set back from Delavan Drive a
minimum of ten feet (10') and buffered with the use of landscaping, earth
berming and/or wall structures as may be required by the city. (Ord. 2126, 11-
30-2015)
006-04: REVIEW PROCESS:
As part of the approval process, any development which shall occur on parcels
A, B, and C shall be submitted through the site plan or permitted conditional
use permit review process and approved by the appropriate authority in
accordance with title 9, chapter 1, "Entitlements; Process And Procedures", of
the city code. (Ord. 2126, 11-30-2015)
006-05: BUILDING RESTRICTIONS, EASEMENTS AND COVENANTS:
The developer shall with the approval of the city council adopt building
restrictions, easements and covenants pertaining to each area developed where
the developer and the city deem appropriate. (Ord. 1430, 1-8-2001)
006-06: ALL AREAS TO BE PLATTED:
Prior to, or in conjunction with development of any portion of the PUD, the
entire PUD shall be platted in accordance with the city's subdivision ordinance
to delineate public streets and the areas to be developed separately as parcels
A, B, and C or any portion thereof. (Ord. 1430, 1-8-2001)
006-07: SIGNAGE STANDARDS:
Ground sign standards shall be required for the construction of freestanding
identification signage within parcels A, B, and C. All signage constructed as
wall signs on building fascia shall incorporate aesthetic features compatible
with the overall character of the development and shall not be obtrusive to the
adjoining residential neighborhood. Freestanding identification and wall
signage shall not be internally illuminated or use neon. Each wall sign shall
be composed of solid individual letters; panel signs shall be prohibited. No
neon signs shall be permitted within window or door spaces internally which are
visible from the outside of the building. (Ord. 1430, 1-8-2001)
006-08: STORMWATER MANAGEMENT:
There shall be submitted to, and approved by, the West Des Moines public works
department, a complete stormwater management plan for each parcel of the PUD,
to be prepared by the developer prior to development within each of the
individual parcels of the PUD for all stormwater and drainage systems within
the PUD. (Ord. 1430, 1-8-2001)
006-09: STREET RIGHT OF WAY:
The ultimate street right of way, as identified on the West Des Moines
comprehensive plan, shall be dedicated to the city for all public streets
adjacent to, or within the BEH II PUD at the time of platting, site plan, or
permitted conditional use permit review. (Ord. 1430, 1-8-2001)
006-10: TRAFFIC REPORTS:
Prior to development of any parcel within the PUD, a traffic analysis completed
by the city for the purpose of determining traffic impacts and required
improvements that would be necessary for the safe and orderly movement of
vehicles into and around the proposed development. The developer shall be
responsible for the full cost associated with any improvements necessary to
mitigate additional traffic generated as a result of the development. (Ord.
2126, 11-30-2015)
006-11: ACCESS:
Parcel B shall have access to South 26th Street. The centerline of this access
to South 26th Street shall not be closer than one hundred twenty five feet
(125') from the centerline of E.P. True Parkway. At the time of site plan
review, special consideration shall be given to this driveway location. It is
intended that the driveway to South 26th Street shall be located as far south
as practical from E.P. True Parkway. Parcel C shall have access to Delavan
Drive. In the event that parcels B and C are developed jointly as a single
site, without any light industrial uses, a driveway connection shall be allowed
between parcels B and C, provided that it is an indirect route to discourage
through traffic from Delavan Drive to South 26th Street. (Ord. 1430, 1-8-2001)
006-12: VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES:
Any person who violates the provisions of this ordinance upon conviction shall
be punished as set forth in section 1-4-1 of the city code. (Ord. 2126, 11-30-
2015)
006-99: LEGISLATIVE HISTORY:
Ord. 846, 5-19-1988; Ord. 1430, 1-8-2001; Ord. 2126, 11-30-2015.
PUD #7
PARKHAVEN
SECTION:
007-01: Legal Description
007-02: Sketch Plan
007-03: Conditions
007-04: Conservation Easements
007-05: Corner Lots
007-06: Building Restrictions, Easements And Covenants
007-07: All Areas To Be Platted
007-08: Storm Water Management
007-09: Soil Test Requirements
007-10: Iowa Power And Light Easement
007-99: Legislative History
007-01: LEGAL DESCRIPTION:
The legal description for the Parkhaven PUD is as follows:
All of the SW1/4, NW1/4, and, except the west 33.0 ft., the NW1/4, SW1/4, Sec.
16, T78N, R25W of the 5th P.M., West Des Moines, Polk County, Iowa, said tract
of land being subject to and together with any and all easements of record.
Said tract of land contains 79.85 acres more or less.
(Ord. 919, 5-29-1990)
007-02: SKETCH PLAN:
On file with the Community Development Department of the City and made a part
of this rezoning approval for concept description and delineation is the sketch
plan document for the Parkhaven Planned Unit Development (PUD). It is
recognized minor shifts or realignments of roadways may be necessary and
compatible with the need to acquire workable street patterns, grades and usable
building sites, but the general plan layout, including the relationship of uses
to each other and the relationship of land use and dwelling unit types to the
general plan framework, traffic layout, and development requirements shall be
used as the implementation guide. (Ord. 919, 5-29-1990)
007-03: CONDITIONS:
Whereas, Section 6 of Ordinance 497 amended Ordinance 430 by creating Article
XX(a), PUD Planned Unit Development District, requires the establishment of
certain regulations and guidelines pertaining to accompanying information
required on a final site plan and final site plan documents for development
within the planned unit development. Now, therefore, the following conditions,
restrictions, and regulations are adopted as part of this approval, to wit:
   A.   General Conditions: The sketch plan incorporates a maximum of sixty
(60) residential dwelling units on approximately eighty (80) acres which shall
be distributed by area, density, types and location according to the sketch
plan as presented.
In addition, the following general site plan criteria shall be integrated into
and made a part of the planned unit development and sketch plan document.
      1.   All subdivisions, public streets, public street rights-of-way and
general development shall adhere to the standards and design criteria set forth
in the West Des Moines Subdivision Ordinance pertaining thereto unless
otherwise stated within this Ordinance.
      2.   The development shall comply with Article XXII (Off-Street Parking
and Loading Areas), Article XXIII (Open Space Requirements) and Article XXV
(Site Plans) of the West Des Moines Zoning Ordinance, and Article XX(a) (PUD)
Sections 6 and 8. No final building or site plan review by the Planning and
Zoning Commission and City Council shall be required for individual single-
family detached lots except within Parcel B for development of detached cluster
homes.
      3.   In all areas involving potential flood hazards, no structure shall
be erected which has a lowest floor, including basements, less than one foot
(1') above the determined level of the 100-year return frequency flood event.
      4.   The petitioners seeking this rezoning, their successors and assigns,
if any, shall pay all construction and engineering costs for the interior
development of the planned unit development, as required by this Ordinance, or
the Subdivision Ordinance of the City of West Des Moines, Iowa, for all
streets, storm sewers, sanitary sewers, drainageway improvements, detention
basins, City-owned utilities, buffers and other improvements within the PUD as
may be required by the Subdivision and Zoning Ordinances.
   B.   Land Use Design Criteria: In addition to the general conditions as
stated in subsection A above, the following land use design criteria shall
apply to the development areas designated on the sketch plan. The sketch plan
document which is made a part of this rezoning action per Section 007-02
herein, delineates four (4) parcels of the PUD as Parcels A, B, C and D for
application of specific development standards for development, use and density
regulations. The following development standards and use regulations shall
apply to each of the four (4) development parcels.
      1.   Parcel A: The owner and/or developer shall reserve for dedication to
the City that ground designated as Parcel A for inclusion within the Jordan
Creek Greenbelt for public park and open space use without cost to the City of
West Des Moines. Said area shall be platted and dedicated to the City free of
any liens, encumbrances and assessments with the development of adjoining
Parcels B and C. Furthermore, for the dedication of Parcel A to be included
within the Jordan Creek Greenbelt, the City agrees to waive the developer's
share of the mandatory fee payment for acquisition and/or development of park
system of one hundred dollars ($100.00) per acre, required by Section 6-6.12 of
the City Subdivision Ordinance adopted by Ordinance 777.
      2.   Parcel B: Single-family detached dwelling units shall be permitted
within Parcel B which shall be approximately eleven (11) acres with a maximum
of twenty (20) dwelling units. Dwelling units shall have a minimum two thousand
(2,000) square feet of living area with attached garages for a minimum of two
(2) vehicles. Dwelling units shall be set back a minimum thirty five feet (35')
from any public street right-of-way, twenty five feet (25') from any common
private roadway, thirty feet (30') from any boundary of Parcel B (except public
street rights-of-way), twenty feet (20') from the one hundred foot (100') wide
Iowa Power and Light easement which crosses the parcel and buildings shall be
separated by a minimum of twenty feet (20'). Development of this parcel shall
be based upon a single master plan or site plan with buildings located in a
manner compatible with the setback requirements set forth herein. All woodlands
and areas of extreme topography within said parcel shall be preserved as
possible as part of the development of a master plan or site plan for this
parcel.
      3.   Parcel C: All general use regulations, performance standards and
provisions set forth Residential Estate (RE-1) zoning district shall apply to
any development proposal for all property within Parcel C as shown on the
sketch plan of the Parkhaven PUD. Dwelling units shall be set back a minimum
twenty feet (20') from the one hundred foot (100') wide Iowa Power and Light
Easement which crosses the parcel. Direct driveway access to Fuller Road shall
be prohibited.
      4.   Parcel D: All general use regulations, performance standards and
provisions set forth in Article VIII of Ordinance 430 (Zoning Ordinance) for
the R-1-A Single-Family Residential District shall apply to any development
proposal for all property within Parcel D as shown on the sketch plan of the
Parkhaven Planned Unit Development, except as further provided herein. A
maximum of twenty three (23) single-family residential lots shall be permitted
within Parcel D.
         a.   Dwelling units shall be set back a minimum twenty feet (20') from
the one hundred foot (100') wide Iowa Power and Light easement which crosses
the parcel. Detached garages shall be prohibited within Parcel D. Lots which
have frontage on and permitted driveway access to the South 35th Street
extension north from Fuller Road shall have driveways designed to provide
forward egress from the lots to South 35th Street with the utilization of a
hammerhead or circle turnaround incorporated into the driveway design with only
one driveway approach per lot permitted. Any corner lot with frontages on South
35th Street and an intersecting side street (not including Fuller Road) shall
have their driveway approach on the side street.
         b.   Lots abutting Fuller Road shall be a minimum thirty thousand
(30,000) square feet in area with direct driveway access to Fuller Road
prohibited. Corner lots with frontage on Fuller Road shall have a minimum
setback of fifty feet (50') from Fuller Road, and double-frontage lots with
frontage on Fuller Road shall have a sixty foot (60') landscape buffer setback
from Fuller Road. All double-frontage lots shall be developed in accordance
with Section 6-6.04, subsection 5, paragraph B of the West Des Moines
Subdivision Ordinance with a complete buffer plan submitted to and approved by
the City as part of the platting review of said double-frontage lots. Parcel D
minimum living space requirements for each dwelling unit shall be as follows:
Lots 1-7; a) ranch style - one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet
minimum total; b) one and one-half story - one thousand eight hundred (1,800)
square feet minimum total (1,000 minimum on main floor); c) two-story - two
thousand (2,000) square feet minimum total (1,000 minimum on main floor) and d)
split models - two thousand (2,000) square feet minimum total (1,000 minimum on
main floor). Lots 8-12 and 17-21: a) ranch one thousand five hundred (1,500)
square feet minimum total; 1) one and-one half story - two thousand (2,000)
square feet minimum total (1,250 minimum on main floor); c) two-story - two
thousand (2,000) square feet minimum total (1,250 minimum on main floor; and d)
split models - two thousand (2,000) square feet minimum total (1,500 minimum on
main floor). Lots 13-16: a) ranch style - one thousand eight hundred (1,800)
square feet minimum total; b) one and one-half story - two thousand one hundred
(2,100) square feet minimum total (1,250 minimum on main floor); c) two-story -
two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet minimum total (1,250 minimum on
main floor); and d) split models - two thousand five hundred (2,500) square
feet minimum total (1,500 minimum on main floor). (Ord. 919, 5-29-1990; amd.
Ord. 2536, 9-6-2022)
007-04: CONSERVATION EASEMENTS:
At the time of the final site plan or plat review, the developer and City shall
agree upon the appropriate restrictions to be placed on the use of that area
designated as conservation easement within the planned unit development to
provide for the preservation of woodlands and protection of the extreme
topography within said area. The owner, developer, their heirs, successors and
assigns shall agree to preserve the tree cover, not disturb ground cover within
the conservation easement in a manner which will effect the stability of the
areas extreme slopes, and not permit any construction, placement or erection of
buildings or structures within the conservation easement area, provided decks
or patios may encroach into the easement area a maximum of twenty feet (20'),
if said decks or patios are so constructed and placed maintaining slope
stability and preservation of tree cover. (Ord. 919, 5-29-1990)
007-05: CORNER LOTS:
Corner lots shall not be less than twenty feet (20') greater in lot frontage
than the minimum lot frontage required for each development parcel so as to
permit adequate building setbacks on both frontage streets. (Ord. 919, 5-29-
1990)
007-06: BUILDING RESTRICTIONS, EASEMENTS AND COVENANTS:
The developer shall with the approval of the City Council adopt building
restrictions, easements and covenants pertaining to each area developed where
the developer and the City deem appropriate. (Ord. 919, 5-29-1990)
007-07: ALL AREAS TO BE PLATTED:
Prior to, or in conjunction with development or transfer of ownership of any
portion of the PUD, said area shall be platted in accordance with the City's
Subdivision Ordinance to delineate within a plat the parcel to be developed or
sold separately or any portion thereof. (Ord. 919, 5-29-1990)
007-08: STORM WATER MANAGEMENT:
There shall be submitted to, and approved by the West Des Moines City Engineer,
a complete storm water management plan for the planned unit development to be
prepared by the developer prior to development within the PUD. (Ord. 919, 5-29-
1990)
007-09: SOIL TEST REQUIREMENTS:
If required, the owner and/or the developer shall be responsible for supplying
to the City, information prepared by a qualified soils engineering firm,
indicating that existing soil conditions are adequate in stability and strength
for construction of public and private improvements. If determined by the soils
engineering firm that adequate soils conditions do not exist, the owner and/or
developer shall indicate what measures shall be taken to achieve adequate soil
strength and stability for both public and private improvements. (Ord. 919, 5-
29-1990)
007-10: IOWA POWER AND LIGHT EASEMENT:
No structure or part of any building shall be located within the one hundred
foot (100') Iowa Power and Light easement which crosses Parcels B, C and D of
the planned unit development. At the time of the final site plan or plat
review, the developer and City shall agree upon the appropriate restrictions to
be placed on that area within the parcel located within the one hundred foot
(100') Iowa Power and Light easement to protect and preserve the easement area.
(Ord. 919, 5-29-1990)
007-99: LEGISLATIVE HISTORY:
Ord. 919, 5-29-1990; Ord. 2536, 9-6-2022.
PUD #8
SOMERFIELD
SECTION:
008-01: Legal Description
008-02: Sketch Plan
008-03: Conditions
008-04: Master Planning Required
008-05: Double-Frontage Lots Abutting South 50th Street, Fuller Road And George
M. Mills Civic Parkway
008-06: Signage Regulations
008-07: Lighting
008-08: Buffering
008-09: Pedestrian Orientation
008-10: All Areas To Be Platted
008-11: Storm Water Management
008-12: Street Rights-Of-Way
008-13: Paving Of South 50th Street And George M. Mills Civic Parkway
008-14: Special Assessments
008-15: Traffic Signals At South 50th Street And George M. Mills Civic Parkway
008-16: Sanitary Sewer Service
008-99: Legislative History
008-01: LEGAL DESCRIPTION:
The legal description for the Somerfield PUD is as follows:
The North 553 feet of the SW1/4 of the SW1/4 of Section 17, Township 78 North,
Range 25 West of the 5TH P.M. in West Des Moines, Polk County, Iowa. Except
roads and except the following: the South 20 feet of the West 470 feet of said
North 553 feet except roads. This parcel contains 14.47 acres and is subject to
easements of record.
(Ord. 1358, 4-19-1999)
008-02: SKETCH PLAN:
On file with the Community Development Department of the City and made a part
of this rezoning approval for concept description and delineation is the sketch
plan document for the Somerfield PUD Planned Unit Development. It is
recognized, minor shifts or modifications to general plan layout may be
necessary and compatible with the need to acquire workable street patterns,
grades, and useable building sites, but the general plan layout, including the
relationship of uses to each other and the relationship of land use to the
general plan framework, and development requirements shall be used as the
implementation guide. Wherever conflict occurs between the written text in this
document and the notations on the sketch plan, the written text shall prevail.
The sketch plan is a graphic representation of the property included in the PUD
delineating the approximate location and configuration of the parcels for the
purpose of easier reference for the applicable regulations of this Ordinance.
As a note, the sketch plan is meant to serve as a concept plan and is not meant
to convey the approval for the location of any parking area, buildings, the
number of parking spaces, size of buildings, etc., or any other development
specifics. These aspects are reviewed at the time of site plan or permitted
conditional use permit submittal. (Ord. 1358, 4-19-1999)
008-03: CONDITIONS:
Whereas, Title 9, Zoning, Chapter 9 of the West Des Moines City Code,
establishes certain regulations and guidelines pertaining to the Planned Unit
Development District and accompanying information required on plat and site
plan documents. Now, therefore, the following conditions, restrictions, and
regulations are adopted as part of this approval, to wit:
   A.   General Conditions: The sketch plan incorporates single-family
residential, multi-family residential, and commercial/office/retail land uses
which shall be distributed by area, types and location according to the sketch
plan and this Ordinance.
In addition, the following general development criteria shall be integrated
into and made a part of this planned unit development and sketch plan approval:
      1.   All subdivisions, public streets, public street rights-of-way and
general development shall adhere to the standards and design criteria set forth
in the West Des Moines Subdivision Ordinance pertaining thereto, unless
otherwise stated within this Ordinance.
      2.   Unless otherwise specified herein, the development of the Somerfield
PUD shall comply with the off-street parking and loading areas, open space
requirements and entitlements provisions and all other provisions of the West
Des Moines zoning ordinance. For the purposes of the application of section 9-
9-6, final plan submittal, the submittal of final plan documents for any
parcel, or part of any parcel of the Somerfield PUD within one year after
approval and publication of this ordinance, shall be considered to satisfy the
terms and requirements of section 9-9-6.
      3.   Any regulation, standard, provision or requirement that is not
specifically addressed within this document that is regulated elsewhere in the
city code of West Des Moines, the requirements of the city code shall still be
enforced.
      4.   In all areas within a 100-year frequency flood hazard zone, or
adjoining drainageways, and detention ponding areas involving potential flood
hazards, no building shall be erected which has a lowest floor, including
basements, less than one foot (1') above the determined level of the 100-year
frequency flood event, and no building shall be erected within twenty five feet
(25') of any easement or property boundary of a major drainageway, storm water
detention basin or pond.
      5.   The developer, their successors and/or assigns, if any, shall pay
all planning, engineering, and construction costs for the interior development
of the planned unit development, as required by this ordinance, metropolitan
design standards or the subdivision ordinance of the city of West Des Moines,
Iowa, for all streets, storm sewers, sanitary sewers, drainageway improvements,
detention basins, water mains, buffers and other improvements within parcels A,
B, and C of the Somerfield PUD as may be required by the subdivision ordinance,
zoning ordinance, metropolitan design standards or this ordinance.
   B.   Land Use Design Criteria: In addition to the general conditions as
stated in subsection A above, the following land use design criteria shall
apply to the development areas designated by parcel on the sketch plan. The
sketch plan document which is made a part of this rezoning action per section
008-02 of this ordinance, delineates three (3) parcels of the PUD as parcels A,
B and C for application of specific standards of land use and development
regulations. The following development standards and use regulations shall
apply to each of the individual parcels as applicable. (Ord. 1358, 4-19-1999)
      1.   Parcel A: All general use regulations, performance standards, and
provisions set forth for the support commercial district (SC) shall apply to
any development proposal for the property within parcel A as shown on the
sketch plan, except as shall be further provided herein. This parcel shall
encompass a maximum of 6.20 acres.
         a.   Permitted Uses: Allowed uses within parcel A shall include:
            (1)   All permitted uses and permitted conditional uses listed in
title 9, zoning, for the support commercial district (SC) or the office
district (OF) unless noted otherwise herein. Uses listed under SIC 55
automobile dealers and service stations, and/or facilities selling petroleum
products dispersed from fuel pumping islands, any and all drive-through
facilities shall be prohibited, with the exception of one drive-through
facility for a bank and one drive-through facility for a pharmacy or dry
cleaning. In no case shall a drive-through for restaurant uses be allowed. Any
drive- through facility shall be designed to be buffered from views from the
single-family residential uses and the public street with landscaping or other
methods, as determined at the time of site plan review. Any and all outside
display areas and all auto-related sales and service facilities shall be
prohibited. (Ord. 1424, 10-30-2000)
            (2)   Any building(s) in the eastern one hundred eighty five feet
(185') of parcel A shall be allowed to be developed with a maximum of twenty
one thousand (21,000) square feet of retail use on the first floor. Any retail
uses shall be limited to the first floor of the building(s) and their primary
entrances shall be oriented towards the commercial uses to the west. A maximum
of thirteen thousand five hundred (13,500) square feet of office space shall be
allowed on the west side of the second story mix of retail, office and multi-
family residential uses for which the primary entrance shall be oriented
towards the east provided that adequate parking is provided in accordance with
the requirements of the city code. A maximum of sixteen (16) multi-family
apartments shall be permitted within this mixed-use area. The location and mix
of multi-family units and office space shall be determined at the time of site
plan review. Office uses shall be required to be contiguous with one another
and in no case, where there is a mix of residential uses and office uses, shall
residential uses be intermingled with office space. The office space may be
organized with the office uses located near the center of the building with
residential uses on the ends of the building; however, the office uses shall
not be permitted to be located on the ends of the building with residential
uses sandwiched between the office uses.
The west one-half (1/2) of the second floor of the retail, office and multi-
family residential (transition) building(s) within the east one hundred eighty
five feet (185') may be used as office uses provided that adequate parking can
be provided to meet the minimum city code requirements.
A maximum of twelve (12) detached garage units to be provided in two (2)
buildings shall be allowed to be located to the east of the transition
building. The two (2) buildings containing the detached garages will be
designed to be incorporated into the berm of the required thirty foot (30')
buffer park between parcels A and B to aid in the screening of the transition
building from the townhome units.
Restrictions shall be placed on the commercial activity on the east side of the
transition building such that the following shall apply:
   (A) Commercial Deliveries: Trash removal or similar commercial traffic shall
be prohibited between the hours of 8:00 P.M. to 8:00 A.M.
   (B) Any dumpsters located on the east side of the building, whether they are
enclosed in a garage structure or in an open enclosure shall be limited to
recyclable materials (no food, grease, or any other odor producing materials)
and shall be adequately screened from public view to the satisfaction of staff
and shall be reviewed at the time of site plan submittal. No trash boxes,
delivery carts, delivery trailers or any other type of commercial product or
material shall be allowed to be stored outside of the building on a temporary
or permanent basis (except during the actual process of loading/delivery of
products).
Garages shall be limited to be used by the residential, office and commercial
tenants for the primary purpose of vehicle storage. No garage unit shall be
allowed to be leased to persons other than the tenants on-site. No garage shall
be used principally for storage other than vehicles as described herein.
Any trash dumpsters to be used for waste material other than recyclable paper
products will be restricted to locations on the north and south sides of the
transition building.
         b.   Development Standards: Lot area, lot frontage and yard
requirements shall comply with standards of the SC support commercial district,
unless modified herein. Multiple use of a lot shall comply with SC support
commercial district standards with multiple buildings on a site of minimum lot
area being consistent in architectural design and use of materials and
organized utilizing a compatible planned open space, landscape plan, and
parking plan to serve and maintain a unified master plan concept; multiple
buildings separated by parking areas shall not be considered acceptable if not
complying with the SC support commercial district's minimum sixty thousand
(60,000) square foot lot area standards.
Parking lots, internal drives, buildings and structures of any kind shall be
setback a minimum of sixty feet (60') from the ultimate right-of-way of George
M. Mills Civic Parkway and/or Fuller Road right-of-way and a minimum of sixty
feet (60') from South 50th Street for the first one hundred sixty feet (160')
south of the north property line along South 50th Street, unless noted
otherwise herein. Any parking lot located along South 50th Street beyond the
first one hundred sixty feet (160') will be required to meet a ten foot (10')
setback from the ultimate right-of-way. A minimum ten foot (10') parking lot
and internal drive setback shall be maintained from adjoining properties if
said parking lot is not part of a common parking lot jointly used by adjoining
properties. Parking lots shall be sufficiently screened, as practical, from
public street view and surrounding residential properties with the use of
landscaping, earth berming, and/or wall structures as may be required by the
city.
Adequate open space, landscape plantings, earth berming and/or other landscape
elements shall be designed and constructed at the southeast corner of the
intersection of George M. Mills Civic Parkway and South 50th Street as agreed
to by the city and developer to compliment the open space, landscape plantings,
earth berming and/or other landscape elements which shall also be required at
the other three (3) corners of the intersection of George M. Mills Civic
Parkway and South 50th Street to create an attractive and aesthetically
pleasing intersection and entryway from the future Interstate 35 interchange
into the city of West Des Moines. Said landscape improvements shall be approved
and constructed prior to the occupancy of any use within parcel A of the
Summerfield PUD. (Ord. 1358, 4-19-1999)
No through access drive, parking, or loading area shall be allowed at the rear
of any building adjacent to parcel C in the west three hundred sixty feet
(360') of parcel A. Any area beyond three hundred sixty feet (360') from the
right-of-way line for South 50th Street, may be allowed to have driveways and
parking, but no loading areas shall be allowed due to the area being located
near existing residential properties and concerns about blocking the drive
aisle. All loading and dock areas shall be screened from views from the single-
family residential uses to the south of parcel A and from the public street in
accordance with city code requirements. Minimum building setback from parcel C
shall be twenty feet (20'). A twelve foot (12') parking lot setback and buffer
park measured from the southern property line of parcel A, from the jog in the
southern property line to the east property line within parcel A, with said
buffer park planted at one-half (1/2) of the requirements of a thirty foot
(30') buffer park or some alternative planting schedule that is satisfactory to
staff. A minimum of a sixty foot (60') buffer park shall be required along
George M. Mills Civic Parkway and within the first one hundred sixty feet
(160') from the north property line along South 50th Street. The sixty foot
(60') buffer park shall be measured from the ultimate right-of-way for George
M. Mills Civic Parkway and a fifteen foot (15') dedicated utility easement may
be located within the sixty foot (60') buffer park. The sixty foot (60') buffer
park required along South 50th Street shall be measured from the ultimate
right-of-way. The sixty foot (60') setback/buffer areas shall be appropriately
designed and constructed to include berming, landscaping, and other design
elements in accordance with the buffer ordinance for effective screening of
parking and drive areas as well as providing an aesthetically pleasant view as
it relates to this principal entrance into the city of West Des Moines. (Ord.
1424, 10-30-2000)
         c.   Architecture: The architectural design of any building shall be
acceptable to the city, provided acceptance shall not be unreasonably withheld,
and all buildings within the parcel shall have as a primary element of the
exterior being fascia glass, face brick or stone, with all sides of any
building built within parcel A consistent in design and use of materials. No
wood, masonite, aluminum siding, nonarchitectural sheet metal, concrete block
or other similar materials shall constitute a portion of any building exterior,
except as a trim material, unless the city council of West Des Moines, after
review by the planning and zoning commission of West Des Moines, shall
determine said material when used as a primary element, enhances the physical
appearance. Asphaltic roof material shall be allowed provided the shingle
materials used are of a heavier grade that simulate a shake shingle and is
consistent with the color and materials used for the multi- family residential
development in parcel B. The roof design of any and all buildings within parcel
A shall be pitched or gabled and reflect a residential appearance in nature.
         d.   Buffering: In the event that the detached garage units on parcel
A are built, they shall be designed so that they are incorporated into the
berming of the thirty foot (30') buffer park established along the west
boundary of parcel B. A six foot (6') fence shall be constructed within the
thirty foot (30') buffer park in the area between the garage buildings and on
each end of said buildings for a total of two hundred ten (210) lineal feet.
The fence shall be of a wood construction and designed to blend with the
architectural elements of the residential buildings with brick or stone posts,
to be spaced no more than twenty feet (20') on center per the requirements of
the city code.
In the event that the garage units on parcel A are not built and there are no
commercial activities on the east side of the transition building, then the
required thirty foot (30') buffer park along the west boundary of parcel B
shall suffice as adequate buffering between parcels A and B. However, in the
event that there are commercial activities on the east side of the transition
building and the two (2) buildings containing the twelve (12) detached garage
units on parcel A are not built, then a six foot (6') fence shall be required
to be constructed on the east boundary of parcel A with construction as
described above.
         e.   Height Restrictions: No building in parcel A shall exceed two (2)
stories in height with the maximum allowable height being thirty six feet
(36').
      2.   Parcel B: All general use regulations, performance standards and
provisions set forth in the zoning ordinance for the residential high-density
district, shall apply to any development in parcel B unless modified herein.
Development of parcel B shall be limited to a maximum of eight and five-
hundredths (8.05) acres in size and a maximum of one hundred twenty eight (128)
dwelling units, if developed as multi- family residential uses. In the event
that parcel B is developed as a townhome or attached single-family residential
development, all general use regulations, performance standards, and provisions
set forth in the zoning ordinance for the medium-density residential district,
shall apply to any development in parcel B, unless noted otherwise herein. The
development of parcel B as townhomes or attached single- family units shall be
limited to a maximum of eight and five- hundredths (8.05) acres in size with a
maximum of thirty nine (39) dwelling units with a maximum of three (3) units
per building.
         a.   Development Standards:   APARTMENTS: No parking lot, internal
drive, garage, residential building or structure of any kind shall be located
closer than sixty feet (60') from the ultimate right of way for George M. Mills
Civic Parkway. No structure shall exceed two (2) stories in height with the
maximum permitted height of thirty six feet (36'). The sixty foot (60')
setback/buffer area shall be appropriately designed and constructed to include
berming, landscaping, and other design elements in accordance with the buffer
ordinance for effective screening of parking and drive areas as well as
providing an aesthetically pleasant view as it relates to this principal
entrance into the city of West Des Moines.
Garage buildings shall be located along the southern portion of the property to
provide additional buffering of the single-family residential uses to the south
of this parcel. A twenty foot (20') buffer easement shall be established along
the southern portion of parcel B and no structures shall be permitted within
this easement. Landscaping shall be installed within the buffer easement in
accordance with the buffer ordinance for two-thirds (2/3) the plantings
required for a thirty foot (30') buffer park.
Rock walls that are architecturally designed to complement the landscape
plantings may be allowed to be located within the buffer park easement;
however, no other structures will be allowed to be located or encroach into
said buffer park easement per the requirements of the buffer ordinance. All
buffer parks will be designated as no build areas, unless otherwise modified
herein. All principal buildings shall be set back a minimum of fifty feet (50')
from the southern boundary line of parcel B.
In the event that parcel B is developed as townhomes the following development
standards shall apply: (Ord. 1358, 4-19-1999)
         b.   Development Standards:   TOWNHOMES:
            (1)   Setbacks From Mills Civic Parkway/Fuller Road: No parking
lot, internal drive, garage, residential building or structure of any kind
shall be located closer than sixty feet (60') from the ultimate right of way
for Mills Civic Parkway and/or Fuller Road. The sixty foot (60') setback/buffer
area shall be appropriately designed and constructed to include berming,
landscaping, and other design elements in accordance with the buffer ordinance
for effective screening of parking and drive areas as well as providing an
aesthetically pleasant view as it relates to this principal entrance into the
city of West Des Moines. The sixty foot (60') buffer park shall be measured
from the existing right of way for Mills Civic Parkway and a fifteen foot (15')
dedicated utility easement may be located within the sixty foot (60') buffer
park.
            (2)   Front Yard Building Setbacks Adjacent To Outlot A: A zero
building front yard setback shall be allowed for those buildings constructed
adjacent to outlot A, with the exception that garages shall meet a front yard
setback of twenty five feet (25'), to be measured in the center of the driveway
from the garage opening to the back of the curb with a minimum of twenty two
feet (22') on any side of a driveway.
            (3)   Side Yard Separation Between Buildings: Buildings shall
maintain a minimum separation of fifteen feet (15') to be measured from the
foundation wall. Building entrances shall be staggered to avoid them from being
located directly across from one another with a minimum of a two foot (2') berm
or retaining wall to be landscaped, where grading allows or provide landscaping
that provides comparable screening to serve as a separation between buildings
(see exhibit C on file with the community development department). In no case
shall any part of any building be allowed to be located closer than five feet
(5') from a side yard property line with a minimum of ten feet (10') separation
between buildings.
            (4)   Rear Yard Setback: Buildings constructed on those lots that
share the fifteen foot (15') overland flowage easement centered on their rear
lot line shall maintain a minimum building separation of forty feet (40'), with
the exception of the four (4) westernmost lots which shall maintain a minimum
building separation of thirty five feet (35').
            (5)   Perimeter Setbacks: A perimeter setback of thirty feet (30')
will be required for townhomes, with the exception that any units located
within the northeast corner of parcel B abutting the detention area, will be
allowed a ten foot (10') setback from the property line. Any covered porches or
elevated decks, shall comply with the required thirty foot (30') perimeter
setback. Any deck thirty inches (30") or more in height shall be considered as
an elevated deck.
Uncovered porches or at or near ground level decks may encroach into the thirty
foot (30') perimeter setback, but in no case shall they be located closer than
twenty feet (20') from property lines, provided they shall not encroach into
any required buffer.
            (6)   West Boundary Buffer Park: A minimum thirty foot (30') buffer
park shall be established along the west boundary of Parcel B. Landscaping
shall be installed within the buffer park in accordance with the buffer
ordinance for a thirty foot (30') buffer park. A six foot (6') fence shall be
constructed within the thirty foot (30') buffer park in order to aid in the
screening and provide separation between the townhomes and the village center.
The fence shall be of a wood construction and designed to blend with the
architectural elements of the residential buildings with brick or stone posts,
to be spaced no more than twenty feet (20') on center per the requirements of
the City Code. A minimal encroachment of parking stalls in this buffer park may
be allowed in order to meet interior setback requirements.
            (7)   South Boundary Buffer Park: A minimum twenty foot (20')
buffer park shall be established along the southern portion of Parcel B.
Landscaping shall be installed within the buffer park to include a minimum of
twenty (20) evergreen trees and the required number of shrubs in accordance
with the buffer ordinance for two-thirds (2/3) the plantings required for a
thirty foot (30') buffer park for a townhome development, otherwise a twenty
foot (20') buffer park easement will be required and planting materials
provided in accordance with the buffer ordinance for two-thirds (2/3) the
plantings required for a thirty foot (30') buffer park. Rock walls that are
architecturally designed to complement the landscape plantings will be allowed
to be located within the buffer park, however, no other structures will be
allowed to be located or encroach into said buffer park per the requirements of
the buffer ordinance. All buffer parks will be designated as "no build" areas,
unless otherwise modified herein.
            (8)   East Boundary Buffer Park: A thirty foot (30') buffer park
will be required along the east boundary of Parcel B for the area between the
north property line and the north edge of the Amoco pipeline with a minimum of
four (4) overstory and eight (8) understory trees and twenty four (24) shrubs
provided. An additional ten (10) overstory, twenty (20) understory trees, and
sixty (60) shrubs be provided in the open space areas located from the
northwestern edge of the Amoco pipeline to the southern property line and from
the east property line of outlot A.
            (9)   Building Height: No structure shall exceed two (2) stories in
height with the maximum permitted height of thirty six feet (36'). (Ord. 1507,
2-3-2003)
         c.   Architecture Requirements: The architecture of multiple- family
buildings within Parcel B shall be acceptable to the City and accomplished in a
manner compatible with the adjoining residential uses in the neighborhood.
Architectural design for multi-family buildings shall attempt to express a
creative presentation of exterior building materials, exterior details and
texture, treatment of windows and doors, and use of angles and multiplicity of
planes within the wall and roof design to lessen the plainness of appearance
which can be characteristic of large residential buildings. The use of brick
elements shall be incorporated into the building architecture on all sides of
the structure, unless the City Council, after recommendation by the Planning
and Zoning Commission, shall determine that the use of alternate building
materials enhances the physical appearance. The use of asphaltic roof material
shall be allowed provided the shingle materials used are of a heavier grade
that simulates a shake shingle. Any asphaltic roofing shall be consistent in
color and material with any asphaltic shingles used in Parcel A to assist in
the architectural unity of the development. (Ord. 1358, 4-19-1999)
      3.   Parcel C: All general use regulations, performance standards and
provisions set forth in the zoning ordinance for the RS-10 Residential Single-
Family District with a minimum lot size of ten thousand (10,000) square feet,
shall apply to any development in Parcel C unless modified herein.
         a.   Development Standards: A minimum sixty foot (60') buffer park
easement shall be required for all lots bordering South 50th Street with no
driveway access to individual lots permitted from South 50th Street. Prior to
development within any part of Parcel C, a buffer plan shall be reviewed and
approved by the City which illustrates that use of berms and tree plantings to
effectively buffer the single-family residential uses along South 50th Street
from South 50th Street and projected uses west of South 50th Street. A thirty
foot (30') buffer park easement shall be required along the north boundary of
Parcel C for that portion that borders Parcel A. A thirty foot (30') buffer
park easement shall be required along the north boundary of Parcel C for that
portion that borders Parcel B, where all rear setbacks for lots abutting the
north boundary shall be measured from the buffer park easement. All buffer park
easements shall be designated as no build areas and no structures will be
allowed to encroach or be constructed within said buffer park easement, except
that a six foot (6') fence shall be allowed on the north boundary of Parcel C,
and a six foot (6') fence shall be allowed in Parcel C at a minimum fifteen
foot (15') setback from the ultimate right-of-way line of S. 50th Street. If a
fence is located anywhere within the sixty foot (60') wide S. 50th Street
buffer, minimum landscape vegetation equal to one- half (1/2) of the vegetation
otherwise required per City Code for a thirty foot (30') wide buffer shall be
installed and maintained in that area between the street right-of-way and the
fence. Landscape vegetation within Parcel C along the north boundary shall not
be required. (Ord. 2322, 8-6-2018)
008-04: MASTER PLANNING REQUIRED:
Prior to development within any part of any parcel, a master plan shall be
prepared showing the location of new public streets within or adjoining the
parcel in order to assure workable street patterns, grades and usable building
sites. (Ord. 1358, 4-19-1999)
008-05: DOUBLE FRONTAGE LOTS ABUTTING SOUTH 50TH STREET, FULLER ROAD OR MILLS
CIVIC PARKWAY:
All double frontage lots along South 50th Street, Fuller Road or Mills Civic
Parkway shall be developed in accordance with the West Des Moines subdivision
ordinance. A complete buffer plan shall be submitted to and approved by the
City as part of the platting process for the lots. Final responsibility for
provision of the buffer shall rest with the developer (subdivider) regardless
of any pass through agreement. The City building inspector shall not issue an
occupancy permit for any of the affected lots until the buffer as required
within this section is properly installed per approved plan specifications.
(Ord. 1358, 4-19-1999)
008-06: SIGNAGE REGULATIONS:
No pole sign, as defined by the West Des Moines City Sign Code, shall be
incorporated into any development within the Somerfield PUD. Monument or
landscape sign standards shall be used for the construction of freestanding
signage as set forth within the West Des Moines City Sign Code for the SC
Support Commercial District for Parcel A. A development sign shall be allowed
in the northwest corner of the site which may display the name of the
development, and no more than one tenant. Said development sign, including the
entire structure and any ornamental elements, shall not exceed a mean height of
seven feet six inches (7'6") and a width of twelve feet six inches (12'6"). The
minimum setback shall be twenty feet (20'). If illuminated, the illumination
shall be by external lighting directed away from and not creating a visual
impairment to motoring vehicles, or internal illumination which may be an
opaque metal face with routered letters or halo lit channel letters. No
internally illuminated panel sign shall be allowed. All remaining residential
parcels shall have signage regulated as outlined within the West Des Moines
City Sign Code. (Ord. 1855, 1-25-2010)
All signage constructed as wall signs on building fascia within Parcel A shall
incorporate aesthetic features compatible with the overall character of the
development. All wall signs will be composed of solid individual letters
attached to the building fascia, or individual letters of anodized aluminum,
galvanized metal, illuminated self- contained with translucent plastic faces
set in anodized aluminum returns and trim; panel signs with letters
incorporated or painted upon a panel or wall area shall be prohibited; however,
solid metal panels with routered letters of a consistent font style and size
would be allowed after review and approval by the City. Advertising or
promotional temporary signage attached to exterior windows or walls including
exposed neon lights visible from the exterior of the building shall be
prohibited.
Signage on the transition (office/retail/multi-family) building shall be
limited to the north and west sides of the building. If there is an entrance to
the building or uses on the north side of the transition building, signage for
the north side of the transition building will be calculated at one square foot
of signage for each one linear foot of building frontage. If there are no
entrances to the building on the north side of the building for commercial or
office uses, this will not be calculated towards the total allowed signage for
the commercial and office uses. Signage on the west side of the transition
building will be calculated at one and one-half (11/2) square feet of signage
for each one linear foot of building frontage for the total allowable wall
signage and letters shall be allowed to be a maximum height of twenty four
inches (24") on the lower level and a maximum height of twelve inches (12") on
the upper level. (Ord. 1358, 4-19-1999)
008-07: LIGHTING:
Wall backlighting shall be prohibited. All lighting shall be of a cutoff type
to eliminate glare and spillover lighting beyond a property line.
Any lighting used to illuminate any off street parking or loading area shall be
so arranged as to divert the light away from adjoining residential uses or
premises in any residential district and away from the traveled roadway of
public streets; lighting levels shall be one foot-candle level at the property
lines and a photometric plan may be required by the City at the time of site
plan or permitted conditional use permit review. (Ord. 1358, 4-19-1999)
008-08: BUFFERING:
Adequate treatment or buffering of negative aspects of all buildings (loading
docks, garbage dumpsters and HVAC mechanical units) from any public street and
adjoining properties shall be required. Buildings shall not be located and
designed to expose loading docks or doors, loading areas or the rear of
buildings to public streets. No outside storage of products or materials,
except garbage and products for retail sales purposes, shall be permitted,
unless specified elsewhere herein. Buffering requirements and provisions of
buffer ordinance or elsewhere in the City Code shall be applied to development
within the Somerfield PUD, except if other specific requirements are set forth
elsewhere within this ordinance. (Ord. 1358, 4-19-1999)
008-09: PEDESTRIAN ORIENTATION:
Pedestrian access shall be provided from Parcels B and C to Parcel A to permit
and encourage pedestrian movement between parcels versus utilizing motorized
vehicles for access.
A ten foot (10') wide concrete bike/pedestrian trail is proposed along the
south side of Mills Civic Parkway. At the time of development, the developer
will need to coordinate with the Parks and Recreation Department for the
installation of the trail. The developer shall be responsible for the
equivalent of four feet (4') of the paving costs. (Ord. 1358, 4-19-1999)
008-10: ALL AREAS TO BE PLATTED:
Prior to, or in conjunction with development or transfer of ownership of any
portion of the PUD, said area shall be platted in accordance with the City's
subdivision ordinance to delineate within a plat the parcel to be developed or
sold separately or any portion thereof. (Ord. 1358, 4-19-1999)
008-11: STORMWATER MANAGEMENT:
There shall be submitted to, and approved by the West Des Moines City Engineer,
a complete stormwater management plan for each parcel of the PUD to be prepared
by the developer prior to development within each of the individual parcels of
the PUD and for all storm sewer and drainage systems within the PUD. (Ord.
1358, 4-19-1999)
008-12: STREET RIGHTS-OF-WAY:
   A.   Provided: Adequate street rights-of-way shall be provided for the
construction, reconstruction and widening of adjoining streets adjacent to, or
within the Somerfield PUD. Said right- of-way shall be dedicated to the City at
the time of platting.
   B.   Mills Civic Parkway Interchange: Owner acknowledges that initial
construction of the interchange at Mills Civic Parkway and Interstate 35 may
require a contribution and/or an assessment of special benefits paid by owner
and owners of any benefited properties to accomplish the development of the
interchange. Owner agrees to cooperate in the future with the City and with
owners of any benefited property, which cooperation will not be unreasonably
withheld, toward working out a reasonable and equitable financing plan for the
construction of the Mills Civic Parkway interchange.
   C.   Applicability: This section shall apply to the owner and the parcels
described in this ordinance only if provisions similar to subsections A and B
of this section are made applicable to the property on the other three (3)
corners of the intersection of Fuller Road and South 50th Street generally
described on exhibit C on file with the Community Development Department. (Ord.
1358, 4-19-1999)
008-13: PAVING OF SOUTH 50TH STREET AND MILLS CIVIC PARKWAY:
All costs associated with the construction of South 50th Street and Mills Civic
Parkway (including intersection improvements) adjacent to the site shall be
paid for by the developer up to and not to exceed one-half (1/2) of thirty one
feet (31') of roadway section and other miscellaneous related items. In lieu of
immediately constructing the improvements and with the prior approval of the
City, a bond in the amount to cover said cost may be posted, or an acceptable
alternative in the amount to cover said cost may be utilized, prior to the
recording of the final plat for the subject site. (Ord. 1358, 4-19-1999)
008-14: SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS:
   A.   Fuller Road, Mills Civic Parkway, And South 50th Street: With respect
to any assessments by the City of West Des Moines of special benefits conferred
upon Parcels A, B and C of the property, or any portion thereof, as a result of
the initial paving and widening of that portion of Fuller Road, South 50th
Street, and Mills Civic Parkway adjacent to said parcels, the owner, on behalf
of itself and its successors and assigns (collectively by the "owner"), agrees
that such assessments may be spread against all of said parcels, as said
parcels exist on the date of assessment, by the City of West Des Moines on an
area basis.
The foregoing area assessment provisions are subject to the following
provision: Any assessment shall be reasonable and equitable in comparison to
the special benefits for such initial paving and widening assessed against the
property directly across the street from the owner's parcel being assessed, and
in no event shall any payment by the owner exceed one-half (1/2) the cost of
any such initial paving and widening. (Ord. 1358, 4-19-1999)
008-15: TRAFFIC SIGNALS AT SOUTH 50TH STREET AND MILLS CIVIC PARKWAY:
The developer, their successors and assigns, if any, shall pay twenty five
percent (25%) of all costs associated with the installation of traffic signals
at South 50th Street and Mills Civic Parkway. A bond in the amount to cover
said cost shall be posted, or an acceptable alternative approved by the City,
prior to the recording of the final plat for the subject site. (Ord. 1358, 4-
19-1999)
008-16: SANITARY SEWER SERVICE:
The developer, their successors and assigns, if any, shall pay one thousand
four hundred fifty five dollars thirty cents ($1,455.30) per acre for sanitary
sewer service for the east one-half (1/2) of this parcel (this area was not
included in a current City assessment project). This amount in cash shall be
due and payable during the same thirty (30) day period in which the assessment
on the current project is due. (Ord. 1358, 4-19-1999)
008-99: LEGISLATIVE HISTORY:
Gateway Park: Ord. 1005, 4-13-1992; Ord. 1259, 7-14-1997; Somerfield: Ord.
1358, 4-19-1999; Ord. 1424, 10-30-2000; Ord. 1507, 2-3-2003; Ord. 1855, 1-25-
2010; Ord. 2322, 8-6-2018.
PUD #9
SOUTHWOODS KNOLL
SECTION:
009-01: Legal Description
009-02: Sketch Plan
009-03: Conditions
009-04: Architecture
009-05: Master Planning Required
009-06: Double Frontage Lots Abutting South 50th Street, Fuller Road Or Mills
Civic Parkway
009-07: Signage Regulations
009-08: Buffering
009-09: All Areas To Be Platted
009-10: Stormwater Management
009-11: Street Rights Of Way
009-12: Special Assessments
009-13: Definition
009-14: Violations And Penalties
009-99: Legislative History
009-01: LEGAL DESCRIPTION:
The legal description for the Southwoods Knoll PUD is as follows:
The South 924 feet of the West 1/2 of the Northwest 1/4 of Section 17 (except
legally established highways) and the Northeast 1/4 of the Southwest 1/4 of
Section 17 (except legally established highways) and the Northwest 1/4 of the
Southwest 1/4 of Section 17 (except the East 500 feet of the West 941 feet of
the South 304 feet thereof and except legally established highways); all in
Township 78 North, Range 25 West of the 5th P.M.; now included in and forming a
part of the City of West Des Moines, Iowa.
(Ord. 933, 10-1-1990)
009-02: SKETCH PLAN:
On file with the community development department of the city and made a part
of this rezoning approval for concept description and delineation is the sketch
plan document for the Southwoods Knoll PUD planned unit development. It is
recognized, minor shifts or modifications to general plan layout may be
necessary and compatible with the need to acquire workable street patterns,
grades and usable building sites, but the general plan layout, including the
relationship of uses to each other and the relationship of land use to the
general plan framework, and development requirements shall be used as the
implementation guide. Wherever conflict occurs between the written text in this
document and the notations on the sketch plan, the written text shall prevail.
The sketch plan is a graphic representation of the property included in the PUD
delineating the approximate location and configuration of the parcels for the
purpose of easier reference for the applicable regulations of this ordinance.
(Ord. 1274, 10-20-1997)
009-03: CONDITIONS:
Whereas, title 9, chapter 9, "Planned Unit Development District", of the city
code, establishes certain regulations and guidelines pertaining to accompanying
information required on plat, site plan, and permitted conditional use
documents. Now, therefore, the following conditions, restrictions, and
regulations are adopted as part of this approval, and the following general
site plan criteria shall be integrated into and made a part of the development
criteria for the Southwoods Knoll PUD, to wit:
   A.   General Conditions: The sketch plan incorporates single- family
residential, multi-family residential, public park greenbelt, and commercial/
retail land uses which shall be distributed by area, types and location
according to the sketch plan and this ordinance.
In addition, the following general development criteria shall be integrated
into and made a part of this planned unit development and sketch plan approval.
      1.   All subdivisions, public streets, public street rights of way and
general development shall adhere to the standards and design criteria set forth
in the West Des Moines subdivision ordinance and the Des Moines metropolitan
design standards as adopted by the city of West Des Moines pertaining thereto,
unless otherwise stated within this ordinance.
      2.   Any regulation, standard, provision or requirement that is not
specifically addressed within this document that is regulated elsewhere in the
city code of West Des Moines, the requirements of the city code shall still be
enforced.
Final plan submittal, the submittal of final plan documents for any parcel, or
part of any parcel of the Southwoods Knoll PUD within one year after approval
and publication of this ordinance, shall be considered to satisfy the terms and
requirements of section 009-06 of this ordinance.
      3.   In all areas within a 100-year frequency flood hazard zone, or
adjoining drainageways, and detention ponding areas involving potential flood
hazards, no building shall be erected which has a lowest floor, including
basements, less than one foot (1') above the determined level of the 100-year
frequency flood event, and no building shall be erected within twenty five feet
(25') of any easement or property boundary of a major drainageway, stormwater
detention basin or pond.
      4.   The developer, their successors and/or assigns, if any, shall pay
all planning, engineering, and construction costs for the interior development
of the planned unit development, in accordance with the current city policies
at the time of development, as required by this ordinance, or the subdivision
ordinance of the city of West Des Moines, Iowa, and the Des Moines metropolitan
design standards as adopted by the city of West Des Moines, for all streets,
storm sewers, sanitary sewers, drainageway improvements, detention basins,
water mains, buffers and other improvements within the Southwoods Knoll PUD as
may be required.
   B.   Land Use Design Criteria: In addition to the general conditions as
stated in subsection A of this section, the following land use design criteria
shall apply to the development areas designated by parcel on the sketch plan.
The sketch plan document which is made a part of this rezoning action per
section 009-02 of this ordinance, delineates seven (7) parcels of the PUD as
parcels A, B, C, D1, D2 and E, and F for application of specific standards of
land use and development regulations. The following development standards and
use regulations shall apply to each of the individual parcels as applicable:
      1.   Parcel A: All general use regulations, performance standards and
provisions set forth in title 9, "Zoning", of the city code for the R-1 single-
family residential district of the city of West Des Moines, shall apply to any
development in Parcel A.
         a.   Development Standards: A minimum sixty foot (60') buffer park
easement shall be required for all lots bordering 50th Street with no driveway
access to individual lots being permitted from 50th Street. The minimum thirty
five foot (35') rear yard setback shall be measured from the sixty foot (60')
buffer park easement with no fences or structures permitted within the buffer
park easement. Prior to development within any part of parcel A, a buffer plan
shall be reviewed and approved by the city which illustrates that use of berms
and tree plantings to effectively buffer the single-family residential uses
along 50th Street from 50th Street.
A minimum thirty five foot (35') building setback shall be required from the
one hundred foot (100') power line easement that bisects parcel A with no
structure being permitted within thirty five feet (35') of the established
power line easement as illustrated on the sketch plan. During the platting of
parcel A, the development will be required to, whereas possible, provide
positive drainage away from all structures abutting the power line easement due
to the sixteen inch (16") water trunk main that exists within said easement.
      2.   Parcel B: Parcel B as shown on the sketch plan is agreed to be
dedicated to the city for public and park use and platted with adjoining
subdivision in parcel A for inclusion within the neighborhood greenbelt park
system. Parcel B shall be maintained by the developer prior to dedication to
the city, except drainage storm sewer, sanitary sewer or other required
utilities or improvements may be constructed within parcel B upon review and
approval by the city.
      3.   Parcel C: All general use regulations, performance standards and
provisions set forth in title 9, "Zoning", of the city code for RM residential
medium-density district of the city of West Des Moines, shall apply to any
development in parcel C unless noted otherwise herein.
         a.   Development Standards: Parcel C shall incorporate a maximum of
twenty three (23) acres with a maximum of one hundred forty eight (148)
dwelling units. Shifting of densities shall be allowed within parcel C, however
no development shall be permitted to exceed a density of twelve (12) dwelling
units per acre. The housing type shall be limited to attached single-family
residential dwelling or single-family detached residential structures with
attached garages. No more than six (6) single-family attached dwelling units
side by side in a row shall be permitted on any side of a building. Single-
family detached dwellings and nonresidential uses shall comply with the minimum
requirements established in the RS-10 residential single-family district
regulations. No individual lot driveway access shall be permitted from
individual residential lots within parcel C on to either Fuller Road or Mills
Civic Parkway from this parcel. Access for nonresidential uses, i.e., churches,
shall be reviewed during the permitted conditional use permit or site plan
process.
         b.   Buffer Park Easement: A minimum sixty foot (60') buffer park
easement shall be required along Mills Civic Parkway and the minimum required
building setbacks shall be measured from the sixty foot (60') buffer park
easement with no fences or structures permitted within the buffer park
easement. A minimum thirty foot (30') buffer park easement shall be required
along Fuller Road and the minimum required building setbacks shall be measured
from the thirty foot (30') buffer park easement with no fences or structures
permitted within the buffer park easement. Prior to, or in conjunction with,
development within any part of parcel C, a buffer plan shall be prepared in
accordance with the planting requirements set forth in the buffer ordinance,
for review and approved by the city which illustrates the use of berms and tree
plantings to effectively buffer the single-family residential from Civic
Parkway and Fuller Road.
         c.   Use; Restrictions: The following use listed in the residential
use matrix as permitted conditional (PC) uses for the residential medium-
density district (RM) shall be allowed in this parcel: amateur sports and
recreation clubs (SIC 7997). Since facilities within parcel C share parking and
access with adjacent city and school properties, said use shall abide by the
following restrictions:
            (1)   For any event taking place in parcel C, no tailgating will be
allowed and no alcohol can be sold or consumed on the school district (stadium
and schools) property or the city (city hall and library) property.
            (2)   After any event, the club or organization using a facility is
required to inspect the city and school owned parking areas and remove all
trash and debris generated by event attendees.
            (3)   The club or organization using a facility cannot restrict the
general public from utilizing any city owned parking or charge users a fee to
use that parking. Only areas designated as parking areas can be used. Any
parking in drive aisles, fire lanes, "no parking" areas or unpaved areas
(grass) is prohibited and subject to fine and/or towing.
            (4)   Circulation must allow for emergency vehicle maneuverability
at all times. Site specific traffic control measures detailed in the "Valley
High School Stadium Parking Analysis And Traffic Operations Plan" (Snyder &
Associates, October 2001), such as temporary police officer intersection
control before/after the events at key intersections, temporary blockage of
certain driveway points, and the installation of guide signing, should be
utilized as needed for the proposed event attendance.
         d.   Architecture: The architectural design of any building shall be
acceptable to the city, provided acceptance shall not be unreasonably withheld,
and all buildings within the parcel shall have as a primary element of the
exterior being fascia glass, face brick, concrete panels, metal panels with
stone finish or stone panels with all sides of any building built within the
parcel consistent in design and use of materials. No wood, masonite, visible
asphaltic exterior wall or roof material, plain aluminum siding,
nonarchitectural sheet metal, concrete block, or other similar material, shall
constitute a portion of any building exterior, except as a trim material,
unless the city council of West Des Moines, after review by the planning and
zoning commission of West Des Moines shall determine said material when used as
a primary element, enhances the physical appearance.
         e.   Setbacks: Front yard building setbacks shall be a minimum twenty
five feet (25') from internal private streets and drives for residential uses.
No dwelling unit shall be located closer than thirty five feet (35') from the
boundary of the parcel. Minimum thirty foot (30') building setback shall be
required from the buffer easement.
      4.   Parcel D1: All general use regulations and provisions set forth in
title 9, "Zoning", of the city code for the RM residential medium-density
district shall apply to any development proposal for all property within parcel
D1 as shown on the sketch plan of the Southwoods Knoll PUD, unless noted
otherwise in this ordinance. Only townhomes and single- family detached
structures shall be permitted within parcel D1. Parcel D1 shall include
approximately eleven and eight- tenths (11.8) acres, with a maximum six (6)
units per building shall be permitted within parcel D1 with a maximum of eighty
eight (88) dwelling units. All single-family detached structures shall comply
with the standards established for R-1 single-family residential districts in
title 9, "Zoning", of the city code.
         a.   Development Standards: A minimum sixty foot (60') buffer park
shall be required along Mills Civic Parkway. No parking lot or garage shall be
located closer than sixty feet (60') from the right of way of Mills Civic
Parkway and thirty five feet (35') from parcel B and the northern boundary of
this parcel. No townhouse or single-family structures shall be located closer
than sixty feet (60') from the right of way of Mills Civic Parkway and thirty
five feet (35') from parcel B and the northern boundary of this parcel. All
structures over two (2) stories in height shall be set back a minimum one
hundred feet (100') from said right of way for Mills Civic Parkway, parcel B,
and the northern boundary of this parcel.
      5.   Parcel D2: All general use regulations and provisions set forth in
title 9, "Zoning", of the city code for the RM residential medium density
district shall apply to any development proposal for all property within parcel
D2 as shown on the sketch plan of the Southwoods Knoll PUD, unless noted
otherwise in this ordinance. Parcel D2 shall include approximately nine and
nine-tenths (9.9) acres, with a maximum six (6) units per building being
permitted within parcel D2 with an overall maximum unit density of ten (10)
dwelling units per acre.
         a.   Development Standards: A minimum sixty foot (60') buffer park
shall be required along Mills Civic Parkway. No parking lot or garage shall be
located closer than sixty feet (60') from the right of way of Mills Civic
Parkway residential structures located within sixty feet (60') from said right
of way for Mills Civic Parkway. All structures over two (2) stories in height
shall be set back a minimum one hundred feet (100') from said right of way for
Mills Civic Parkway. Nonresidential uses, i.e., churches, shall conform with
the nonresidential use standards per title 9, "Zoning", of the city code,
unless otherwise noted herein. (Ord. 1274, 10-20-1997)
      6.   Parcel E: All general use regulations and bulk regulations set forth
in title 9, "Zoning", of the city code for the professional commerce park
district (PCP) shall apply to any development proposal for all property within
parcel E as shown on the sketch plan of the Southwoods Knoll PUD, unless noted
otherwise in this ordinance. All land uses as set forth in title 9, "Zoning",
of the City Code for the Professional Commerce Park (PCP) and Community
Commercial (CMC) Districts, as permitted and permitted conditionally, shall be
allowed within Parcel E, except the following which shall be prohibited:
      Distillery, regardless of size (SIC 2085).
      General warehousing and storage (SIC 4225).
      Heliport/helistop (SIC 4581).
      Transportation Services (SIC 47).
      Automotive dealers and service stations (SIC 55).
      Pawnshops (SIC 5932).
      Miscellaneous retail stores, NEC (SIC 5999) - Adult entertainment
establishment (films, books, magazines, sexually oriented merchandise).
      Hospitals (SIC 806).
      Hotels (SIC 701).
      Automotive repair, services, and parking (SIC 75).
      Repair shops and related services, NEC (SIC 7699).
      Eating and drinking places (SIC 58).
         Restaurant with Drive-Thru.
         Bar/Restaurant Class 1 or 2.
         Bar.
         Taproom/beer parlor in conjunction with a brewery or distillery
greater than 5,000 sq. ft. and less than or equal to 10,000 sq. ft.
      Elementary and secondary schools (SIC 821).
      Colleges and universities (SIC 822).
      Vocational schools (SIC 824).
      Child daycare services (SIC 835).
   In addition, parcel E shall be limited to one bank.
         a.   Development Standards: A minimum sixty foot (60') buffer park
shall be required along Mills Civic Parkway and adjacent to parcel B. A thirty
foot (30') buffer park shall be required adjacent to parcel D1. No parking lot
shall be located closer than sixty feet (60') from the right of way of Mills
Civic Parkway and from parcel B, with no structure located within sixty feet
(60') from said right of way for Mills Civic Parkway and sixty feet (60') from
parcel B. All structures over two (2) stories in height shall be set back a
minimum one hundred feet (100') from said right of way for Mills Civic Parkway
and parcel B. Multiple buildings separated by parking areas or drives and lots
less than two (2) acres in size may be considered acceptable if approved by the
plan and zoning commission and city council as an acceptable master development
plan for the property within this parcel. Lots without public street frontage
in accordance with city code requirements, may be allowed provided that the
frontage requirements of the code have been met by an abutting or surrounding
lot which is under common ownership under an owner's association with all
properties within the master development plan being part of the association, or
there have been cross parking and access easements executed which provide for
the unrestricted use and access of the drives for all owners within the master
development plan. No interior setbacks shall be required for interior lot lines
within this parcel; however buildings within this parcel must maintain a forty
foot (40') building separation.
         b.   Architecture: The architectural design of any building shall be
acceptable to the city, provided acceptance shall not be unreasonably withheld,
and all buildings within the parcel shall have as a primary element of the
exterior being fascia glass, face brick, concrete panels, or stone panels, with
all sides of any building built within the parcel consistent in design and use
of materials. No wood, masonite, visible asphaltic exterior wall or roof
material, aluminum siding, nonarchitectural sheet metal, concrete block, or
other similar materials shall constitute a portion of any building exterior,
except as a trim material, unless the city council of West Des Moines, after
review by the plan and zoning commission of West Des Moines shall determine
said material when used as a primary element, enhances the physical appearance.
         c.   Parking: The parking for uses within parcel E shall be calculated
at a multi-tenant office parking ratio of one space per two hundred (200)
square feet of gross floor area (GFA) for the first twenty thousand (20,000)
square feet of GFA plus one space per two hundred twenty five (225) square feet
of gross floor area (GFA) the remaining square feet of GFA over twenty thousand
one (20,001), if any, calculated individually for each lot. Lot 1, Prairie Life
plat 2 shall provide required parking within the boundaries of the individual
lot. Lot 1, Prairie Life plat 3 shall provide the required parking within the
boundaries of the individual lot and shall be allocated twenty five (25) stalls
from lot 2, Prairie Life plat 3 to be counted toward the lot's minimum parking
requirement. The remaining stalls on the lot 2, plat 3 shall be used to meet
the parking requirement of lot 3, Prairie Life plat 2.
         d.   Open Space: The required amount of open space for parcel E shall
be calculated collectively throughout the PUD parcel. Agreement from the owner
of lot 2, Prairie Life plat 3 and lot 3, Prairie Life plat 2 shall be required
prior to any allocation of open space needed from their property to meet the
open space requirements on lot 1, Prairie Life plat 2 and lot 1, Prairie Life
plat 3.
      7.   Parcel F: All general use regulations and provisions set forth in
title 9, "Zoning", of the city code for the SC support commercial district
shall apply to any development proposal for the property within parcel F as
shown on the sketch plan, except as shall be further provided herein. This
parcel shall encompass a maximum of six and eighty eight hundredths (6.88)
acres.
         a.   Allowed Uses: Allowed uses within parcel F shall include:
            (1)   Uses allowed within the SC support commercial district, NC
neighborhood commercial district and medium density district by title 9,
"Zoning", of the city code shall be allowed uses within this parcel; however,
the following uses shall be prohibited within the parcel: automobile dealers
and service stations (SIC 551, 552, 553, 554, 555, 556, 557, and 559) and/or
facilities selling petroleum products dispersed from fuel pumping islands;
hotels and motels (SIC codes 701 and 704); automotive repair, services, and
parking (SIC codes 751 and 753); car washes (SIC code 7542); and eating places
with drive-through (SIC code 5812).
The following uses shall also be permitted within this parcel: floor coverings
store with no warehousing (SIC code 5713); and eating and drink place - coffee
shop with drive-through with no food sales (SIC code 5812-0304) defined as: "An
establishment primarily selling coffee and tea products; the business has a
limited menu within which nothing is considered a meal; there is little or no
table service; the products are for consumption on or off premises; and it is
characterized by a large carryout clientele. The sale of other food, beverages,
or merchandise is incidental to the sale of the specialty beverage. Patrons
generally order at a cash register and pay before they eat. This establishment
is not a stand alone facility, but is generally located within small shopping
centers"; radio, TV, consumer electronic stores (SIC 5731); musical instrument
store (SIC 5736); used merchandise store (SIC 593); luggage and leather goods
stores (SIC 5948); all miscellaneous retail uses (SIC 5999) except for adult
entertainment; electrical repair shop (SIC 762); watch and jewelry repair shop
(SIC 763). Retail establishments or any use which has outside display areas for
retail sales, shall have said outside display area(s) located and buffered as
necessary to screen, as practical, the display area from public street view and
adjoining properties. Temporary use permits shall be required for any such
uses.
            (2)   Any outdoor seating area associated with food or drinking
establishments shall be located in a manner to be away from single-family
residential areas and effectively screened from adjacent properties with noise
levels not to exceed sixty five (65) community noise equivalent level (CNEL)
beyond the property line in any direction.
         b.   Development Standards: Lot area, lot frontage and yard
requirements shall comply with the standards of the SC support commercial
district. Development within parcel F shall have a consistent architectural
design and use of materials and organized planned open space, parking spaces
and landscaping.
Lots without public street frontage in accordance with city code requirements
may be allowed provided that the frontage requirements of the code have been
met by an abutting or surrounding lot which is under common ownership under an
owners' association with all properties within the master development plan
being part of the association. Execution of cross parking and access easements
which provide for the unrestricted use and access of the drives and parking for
all owners within the master development plan shall also be required.
         c.   Buffer Parks: Buffer parks used as a transition between one
district to another district of contrasting and conflicting uses as stated in
the zoning code, shall not be required except as noted below. A sixty foot
(60') landscape buffer park shall be required on Mills Civic Parkway as
required by the comprehensive plan. A forty foot (40') buffer park shall be
required on 50th Street. Landscaping requirements for the 50th Street buffer
park shall be that of a thirty foot (30') buffer park. A thirty foot (30')
buffer park shall be required along parcel B (greenbelt).
         d.   Setbacks: A sixty foot (60') building and parking lot setback
shall be required on Mills Civic Parkway. A forty foot (40') building and
parking lot setback shall be required on S. 50th Street. A sixty foot (60')
building setback and a forty foot (40') parking lot setback shall be required
from parcel B (greenbelt). A twenty five foot (25') building and parking lot
setback shall be required from parcel E.
         e.   Parking: Parking lots shall be sufficiently screened as
practical, from public street view and surrounding residential properties with
the use of landscaping, earth berming, and/or wall structures as may be
required by the city. Underground parking may count towards fulfilling the code
requirements for parking if the underground parking is included in, not an
additional cost of, ownership of a condo unit.
         f.   Architecture: The architectural design of any building shall be
acceptable to the city, provided acceptance shall not be unreasonably withheld,
and all buildings within the parcel shall have as a primary element being
fascia glass, face brick, concrete panels, or stone panels, with all sides of
any building built within the parcel consistent in design and use of materials.
No wood, masonite, visible asphaltic exterior wall or roof material, aluminum
siding, nonarchitectural sheet metal, concrete block, or other similar
materials shall constitute a portion of any building exterior, except as trim
material, unless the city council of West Des Moines, after review by the plan
and zoning commission of West Des Moines shall determine said material when
used as a primary element, enhances the physical appearance. The buildings
located on the two (2) outlots shall have a consistent architectural style and
treatment of materials as the primary mixed use buildings.
         g.   Performance Standards: To help mitigate the commercial impact on
the residential uses within the development, truck deliveries to businesses
within this development shall not be permitted between the hours of ten o'clock
(10:00) P.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) A.M.
         h.   Permissible Sound: Allowing any mixed use development within
parcel F the same level of permissible sound as the commercial districts. (Ord.
1274, 10-20-1997; amd. Ord. 1383, 8-23-1999; Ord. 1636, 6-6-2005; Ord. 1803, 5-
19-2008; Ord. 1900, 12-27-2010; Ord. 1974, 2-4-2013; Ord. 2583, 10-16-2023)
009-04: ARCHITECTURE:
The architecture of multiple-family buildings within parcels D1 and D2 shall be
acceptable to the city and accomplished in a manner compatible with the
adjoining residential uses in the neighborhood. Architectural design for multi-
family buildings shall attempt to express a creative presentation of exterior
building materials, exterior details and texture, treatment of windows and
doors, and use of angles and multiplicity of planes within the wall and roof
design to lessen the plainness of appearance which can be characteristic of
large residential buildings. (Ord. 1421, 9-18-2000)
009-05: MASTER PLANNING REQUIRED:
Prior to development within any part of any parcel, a master plan shall be
prepared showing the location of new public streets within or adjoining the
parcel in order to assure workable street patterns, grades and usable building
sites. (Ord. 1274, 10-20-1997)
009-06: DOUBLE FRONTAGE LOTS ABUTTING SOUTH 50TH STREET, FULLER ROAD OR MILLS
CIVIC PARKWAY:
All double frontage lots along South 50th Street, Fuller Road or Mills Civic
Parkway shall be developed in accordance with section 6-6.04 subsection 5,
paragraph B of the West Des Moines subdivision ordinance. A complete buffer
plan shall be submitted to and approved by the city as part of the platting
process for the lots. Final responsibility for provision of the buffer shall
rest with the developer (subdivider) regardless of any pass through agreement.
The city building inspector shall not issue an occupancy permit for any of the
affected lots until the buffer as required within this section is properly
installed per approved plan specifications. (Ord. 1274, 10-20-1997)
009-07: SIGNAGE REGULATIONS:
No pole sign, as defined by the West Des Moines city sign ordinance, shall be
incorporated into any development within the Southwoods Knoll PUD. Ground sign
standards shall be used for the construction of freestanding signage within
each parcel as set forth within the West Des Moines city sign ordinance for the
SC support commercial district for parcel F. All remaining residential parcels
shall have signage regulated as outlined within the West Des Moines city sign
code.
All signage constructed as wall signs on building fascia within parcel F shall
incorporate aesthetic features compatible with the overall character of the
development. All wall signs will be composed of solid individual letters
attached to the building fascia, or individual letters of anodized aluminum,
galvanized metal, illuminated self- contained with translucent plastic faces
set in anodized aluminum returns and trim; panel signs with letters
incorporated or painted upon a panel or wall area shall be prohibited.
Advertising or promotional temporary signage attached to exterior windows or
walls including exposed neon lights visible from the exterior of the building
shall be prohibited.
The city of West Des Moines may determine during the site plan review process
that the developer must erect a directory sign, subject to the regulations of
the West Des Moines sign ordinance, for any multi-family development within the
Southwoods Knoll PUD. (Ord. 1274, 10-20-1997)
009-08: BUFFERING:
Adequate treatment or buffering of negative aspects of buildings (loading
docks, garbage dumpsters and HVAC mechanical units) from any public street and
adjoining properties shall be required. Buildings shall not be located and
designed to expose loading docks or doors, loading areas or the rear of
buildings to public streets. No outside storage of products or materials,
except garbage and products for retail sales purposes, shall be permitted.
All development within the Southwoods Knoll PUD shall comply with the buffering
provisions of the buffer ordinance of the West Des Moines city code. In
situations where the PUD specifies the provision of a buffer park easement, the
required setbacks shall be measured from the easement line. In situations where
this PUD specifies the provision of a buffer park, the buffer park and the
required setback may be overlapped and whichever is more restrictive shall be
adhered to. (Ord. 1274, 10-20-1997)
009-09: ALL AREAS TO BE PLATTED:
Prior to, or in conjunction with development or transfer of ownership of any
portion of the PUD, said area shall be platted in accordance with the city's
subdivision ordinance to delineate within a plat the parcel to be developed or
sold separately or any portion thereof. (Ord. 1274, 10-20-1997)
009-10: STORM WATER MANAGEMENT:
There shall be submitted to, and approved by the West Des Moines public works,
a complete storm water management plan for each parcel of the PUD to be
prepared by the developer prior to development within each of the individual
parcels of the PUD and for all storm sewer and drainage systems within the PUD.
(Ord. 1274, 10-20-1997)
009-11: STREET RIGHTS OF WAY:
   A.   Provided: Adequate street right of way shall be provided for the
construction, reconstruction and widening of adjoining streets adjacent to, or
within the Southwoods Knoll PUD. Said right of way shall be dedicated to the
city at the time of platting.
   B.   Fuller Road Interchange: Owner acknowledges that initial construction
of the interchange at Fuller Road and Interstate 35 may require a contribution
and/or an assessment of special benefits paid by owner and owners of any
benefited properties to accomplish the development of the interchange. Owner
agrees to cooperate in the future with the city and with owners of any
benefited property, which cooperation will not be unreasonably withheld, toward
working out a reasonable and equitable financing plan for the construction of
the Fuller Road interchange.
   C.   Applicability: This section shall apply to the owner and the parcels
described in this ordinance only if provisions similar to subsections A and B
of this section are made applicable to the property on the other three (3)
corners of the intersection of Fuller Road and South 60th Street generally
described on exhibit C on file in the city. (Ord. 1274, 10-20-1997)
009-12: SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS:
   A.   Fuller Road And South 50th Street: With respect to any assessments by
the city of West Des Moines of special benefits conferred upon parcels A, B, C,
D1, D2 and E of the property, or any portion thereof, as a result of the
initial paving and widening of that portion of Fuller Road, South 50th Street,
and the future boulevard adjacent to said parcels, the owner, on behalf of
itself and its successors and assigns (collectively by the "owner"), agrees
that such assessments may be spread against all of said parcels, as said
parcels exist on the date of assessment, by the city of West Des Moines on an
area basis.
The foregoing area assessment provisions are subject to the following
provision: Any assessment shall be reasonable and equitable in comparison to
the special benefits for such initial paving and widening assessed against the
property directly across the street from the owner's parcel being assessed, and
in no event shall any payment by the owner exceed one-half (1/2) the cost of
any such initial paving and widening. (Ord. 1274, 10-20-1997)
009-13: DEFINITION:
The term "developer", for the purpose of this ordinance, shall mean any person,
individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation, estate, trust, entity,
or agent of same acting or proposing to subdivide land or develop a parcel of
land for the construction of a building or buildings. (Ord. 1274, 10-20-1997)
009-14: VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES:
Any person who violates the provisions of this ordinance upon conviction shall
be punished as set forth in sections 1-4-1 and 1-4-2 of the city code of the
city of West Des Moines, Iowa. (Ord. 1974, 2-4-2013)
009-99: LEGISLATIVE HISTORY:
Ord. 933, 10-1-1990; Ord. 1099, 8-15-1994; Ord. 1149, 8-28-1995; Ord. 1215, 11-
4-1996; Ord. 1274, 10-20-1997; Ord. 1383, 8-23-1999; Ord. 1421, 9-18-2000; Ord.
1460, 10-29-2001; Ord. 1581, 5-24-2004; Ord. 1636, 6-6-2005; Ord. 1695, 6-5-
2006; Ord. 1803, 5-19-2008; Ord. 1900, 12-27-2010; Ord. 1974, 2-4-2013; Ord.
2583, 10-16-2023.
PUD #10
S AND F/KARP
SECTION:
010-01: Legal Description
010-02: Sketch Plan
010-03: Conditions
010-04: Architecture
010-05: Infrastructure
010-06: Master Planning Required
010-07: Double Frontage Lots Abutting Civic Parkway
010-08: Signage Regulations
010-09: Buffers
010-10: All Areas To Be Platted
010-11: Stormwater Management
010-12: Street Rights Of Way
010-13: Special Assessments
010-14: Violations And Penalties
010-99: Legislative History
010-01: LEGAL DESCRIPTION:
The legal description for the S And F/Karp PUD is as follows:
The East Quarter of the Northwest Quarter (except the South 286 feet) and the
West One-half of the Northeast Quarter (except the South 286 feet thereof and
except the South 125 feet of the North 781.3 feet of the East 174 feet thereof)
in Section 17, Township 78 North, Range 25, West of the 5th P.M., Polk County,
Iowa.
and
All that part of the W1/2 of the NE1/4 of Section 17, Township 78 North, Range
25, West of the 5th P.M., now included in and forming a part of the City of
West Des Moines, Iowa, described as follows: Commencing 656.3 feet South of the
North Quarter Corner of the NE1/4 of said Section 17, thence West 174 feet,
thence South 125 feet, thence East 174 feet, thence North 125 feet to the place
of beginning.
and
The West 1/2 of the East 1/2 of the Northwest Quarter of Section 17, Township
78 North, Range 25 West of the 5th P.M., all being more particularly described
as: Commencing at the Northwest Corner of Section 17, Township 78 North, Range
25 West of the 5th P.M., West Des Moines, Polk County, Iowa: thence,
N89°30'50"E, along the North line of the Northwest 1/4 of said Section 17, a
distance of 1312.56 feet, to the Northwest Corner of the NE1/4 of the NW1/4 of
said Section 17, said point also being the Point of Beginning; thence,
continuing along the North line of the Northwest 1/4 of said Section 17,
N89°30'50"E, a distance of 1312.56 feet to the N1/4 Corner of said Section 17;
thence, N89°29'30"E, along the North line of the Northeast 1/4 of said Section
17, a distance of 1313.10 feet, to the NE Corner of the NW1/4 of the NE1/4 of
said Section 17; thence, S00°13'06"E, along the East line of the NW1/4 of the
NE1/4 of said Section 17, a distance of 1319.33 feet to the Southeast Corner of
the NW1/4 of the NE1/4 of said Section 17; thence, S00°11'31"E, along the East
line of the SW1/4 of the NE1/4 of said Section 17, a distance of 1032.44 feet;
thence, S89°23'48"W, a distance of 1320.84 feet: thence, S89°20'56"W, a
distance of 653.56 feet; thence, S00°05'08"E, a distance of 286.00 feet to the
South line of the NW1/4 of said Section 17; thence, S89°20'56"W, along the
South line of the NW1/4 of said Section 17, a distance of 653.24 feet to the SW
Corner of the SE1/4 of the NW1/4 of said Section 17; thence, N00°09'06"W, along
the West line of the East half of the NW1/4 of said Section 17, a distance of
2643.73 feet to the Point of Beginning.
EXCEPT
Commencing at the NE Corner of the NW1/4 of the NE1/4 of Section 17, Township
78 North, Range 25, West of the 5th P.M., West Des Moines, Polk County, Iowa;
thence, S00°13'06"E, along the East Line of the NW1/4 of the NE1/4 of said
Section 17, a distance of 50.00 feet; thence, continuing S00°13'06"E, along the
East Line of the NW1/4 of the NE1/4 of said Section 17, a distance of 749.96
feet, to the Point of Beginning; thence continuing S00°13'06"E, along the East
Line of the NW1/4 of the NE1/4 of said Section 17, a distance of 519.37 feet,
to the SE Corner of the NW1/4 of the NE1/4 of said Section 17; thence
S00°11'31"E, along the East Line of the SW1/4 of the NE1/4 of said Section 17,
a distance of 1032.44 feet; thence S89°23'48"W, parallel with and 286.00 feet
North of the South Line of the SW1/4 of the NE1/4 of said Section 17, a
distance of 1320.84 feet; thence S89°20'56"W, parallel with and 286.00 feet
North of the South Line of the SE1/4 of the NW1/4 of said Section 17, a
distance of 345.68 feet; thence N33°02'48"E, a distance of 1322.45 feet;
thence, Northerly and Easterly, along a 1014.19 foot Radius Curve, Concave
Southeasterly, a distance of 1008.13 feet, said Curve having a Chord Bearing of
N61°31'24"E and a Chord Length of 967.14 feet; thence N90°00'00"E, a distance
of 89.70 feet to the Point of Beginning.
And except the following described tract of land:
Beginning at the NE Corner of the NW1/4 of the NE1/4 of Section 17, Township 78
North, Range 25, West of the 5th P.M., West Des Moines, Polk County, Iowa;
thence S00°13'06"E, along the East Line of the NW1/4 of the NE1/4 of said
Section 17, a distance of 50.00 feet to the South Right-of-Way Line of E. P.
True Parkway, as it is presently established; thence, S89°29'30"W, along the
said South Right-of-Way Line of E. P. True Parkway, and parallel with and 50.00
feet South of the North Line of the NE1/4 of said Section 17, a distance of
5.95 feet to the Northwesterly Line of a 50.00 foot Wide Gas Main Easement as
it is presently established; thence, continuing S89°29'30"W, along said South
Right-of-Way Line of E. P. True Parkway, and parallel with and 50.00 feet South
of the North Line of the NE1/4 of said Section 17, a distance of 390.52 feet;
thence Westerly and Northwesterly along a 1195.92 foot Radius Curve, Concave
Northeasterly and along said South Right-of-Way Line of E.P. True Parkway, a
distance of 347.04 feet to a point that is on the North Line of the NE1/4 of
said Section 17, said Curve having a Chord Bearing of N82°11'42"W and a Chord
Length of 345.82 feet; thence, N89°29'30"E, along the North Line of the NE1/
4 of said Section 17, a distance of 738.91 feet to the Point of Beginning. Said
parcel contains 105.41 acres.
(Ord. 1357, 4-19-1999)
010-02: SKETCH PLAN:
On file in the city and made a part of this rezoning approval for concept
description and delineation is the sketch plan document for the S And F/Karp
PUD planned unit development. It is recognized that minor shifts or realignment
of roadways may be necessary and compatible with the need to acquire workable
street patterns, grades and usable building sites, but the general plan layout,
including the relationship of uses to each other and the relationship of land
use to the general plan framework, traffic layout, and development requirements
shall be used as the implementation guide. Whenever conflict occurs between the
written text in this document and the notations on the sketch plan, the written
text shall prevail. The sketch plan is a graphic representation of the property
included in the PUD delineating the approximate location and configuration of
the parcels for the purpose of easier reference for the applicable regulations
of this ordinance. (Ord. 1357, 4-19-1999; amd. Ord. 1795, 1-2-2008)
010-03: CONDITIONS:
Whereas, title 9 of the city code includes chapter 9, planned unit development
district and establishes certain regulations and guidelines pertaining to
accompanying information required on plat and site plan documents.
   A.   General Conditions: Now, therefore, the following conditions,
restrictions, and regulations are adopted as part of this approval and the
following general site plan criteria shall be integrated into and made a part
of the development criteria for the S And F/Karp PUD planned unit development,
to wit:
      1.   All subdivisions, public streets, public street rights of way and
general development shall adhere to the standards and design criteria set forth
in the West Des Moines subdivision ordinance and the Des Moines metropolitan
design standards as adopted by the city of West Des Moines pertaining thereto,
unless otherwise stated within this ordinance.
      2.   Any regulation, standard, provision, or requirement that is not
specifically addressed within this document that is regulated elsewhere in the
city code of West Des Moines, the requirements of the city code are applicable
and shall be enforced.
      3.   In all areas within a 100-year frequency flood hazard zone, or
adjoining drainageways, and detention areas involving potential flood hazards,
no building shall be erected which has a lowest floor, including basements,
less than one foot (1') above the determined level of the 100-year frequency
flood event or floodproofed to the same elevation in accordance with the West
Des Moines floodplain ordinance, and no building shall be erected within twenty
five feet (25') of any major drainageway, stormwater detention basin or pond.
(Ord. 1357, 4-19-1999)
      4.   The owner, their successors and/or assigns, if any, shall pay all
construction and engineering costs for the interior development of the planned
unit development, in accordance with the current city policies at the time of
development, as required by this ordinance, or the subdivision ordinance of the
city of West Des Moines, and the Des Moines metropolitan design standards as
adopted by the city of West Des Moines, for all streets, storm sewers, sanitary
sewers, improvements, detention basins, water mains, buffers and other
improvements within parcels A, B, C, D, E, F, and Q of the S And F PUD as may
be required.
   B.   Land Use Design Criteria: In addition to the general conditions as
stated in subsection A of this section, the following land use design criteria
shall apply to the development areas designated by parcel on the sketch plan.
The sketch plan document which is made a part of this rezoning action per
section 010-02 of this ordinance, delineates eight (8) parcels of the PUD as
parcels A, B, C, D, E, F, P, and Q for application of specific standards of
land use and development regulations. The following development standards and
use regulations shall apply to each of the individual parcels as applicable.
      1.   Parcel A: All general use regulations and provisions set forth in
title 9, "Zoning", of the city code for the RS-6 residential single-family
district shall apply to any development in parcel A unless otherwise stated
herein. Parcel A shall incorporate a maximum net developable acreage of twenty
two (22) acres. (Ord. 1795, 1-2-2008)
         a.   Development Standards: Allowed uses shall include all permitted
(P) and permitted conditional (PC) uses within the RS residential single-family
district. All building heights and setbacks within parcel A shall be in
accordance with the setback and bulk density regulations of the West Des Moines
zoning ordinance for RS-6 residential single-family district unless otherwise
herein modified.
         b.   Setbacks And Bulk Regulations: For single-family detached
dwellings, the side yard setback shall be a minimum of five feet (5'). Minimum
lot width within parcel A shall be restricted to fifty five feet (55') and the
minimum lot size shall be six thousand (6,000) square feet. All lots within
four hundred feet (400') of the right of way of Civic Parkway having a minimum
sixty foot (60') lot width and a minimum lot size of seven thousand five
hundred (7,500) square feet in size.
A minimum thirty foot (30') building setback shall be required from the one
hundred foot (100') power line easement that bisects parcel A with no structure
being permitted within thirty feet (30') of the established power line easement
as illustrated on the sketch plan. During the platting of parcel A, the
development will be required to, whereas possible, provide positive drainage
away from all structures abutting the power line easement due to the sixteen
inch (16") water trunk main that exists within said easement.
         c.   Nonresidential Uses: Any allowed nonresidential uses regulations:
            (1)   The setback from all property lines, public street right of
way lines and buffer park easements shall be a minimum of fifty feet (50').
Detached garages shall be a minimum of thirty feet (30') from all property
lines, public street right of way lines and buffer park easements.
            (2)   The maximum height shall be two (2) stories a maximum of
thirty five feet (35') in height. Structures with a one hundred foot (100') or
greater setback may be up to three (3) stories, a maximum of sixty feet (60')
in height. The maximum height for garages shall be one story, a maximum of
twenty feet (20') in height.
            (3)   Minimum separation between principal structures shall be
thirty feet (30').
            (4)   Minimum separation between principal and accessory structures
shall be twenty feet (20').
            (5)   Open space requirements shall be a minimum of twenty five
percent (25%) of the site plus an additional ten percent (10%) of the paved
parking area and all open space shall be landscaped as required by city code.
(Ord. 1357, 4-19-1999)
         d.   Architecture: The architecture of any buildings, other than
single-family detached residential structures and their related accessory
structures, shall be acceptable to the city and be accomplished in a manner
compatible with the adjoining residential uses in the neighborhood.
Architectural design for these buildings shall attempt to express a creative
presentation of exterior building materials, exterior details and texture,
treatment of windows and doors, and use of angles and multiplicity of planes
within the wall and roof design. All structures shall have pitched, residential
type roofs with wood shakes or shingles, asphaltic type shingles, or tile
roofing material. Each building shall at a minimum have brick and/or stone as a
major element on all sides of the building structure. (Ord. 1357, 4-19-1999;
amd. Ord. 1795, 1-2-2008)
      2.   Parcel B: All general use regulations, performance standards and
provisions set forth in title 9, "Zoning", of the city code for the high-
density residential district of the city of West Des Moines, shall apply to any
development in parcel B. Parcel B shall be a maximum of fourteen (14) acres
with no more than one hundred sixty eight (168) dwelling units permitted.
         a.   Development Standards: All multi-family units shall be
effectively screened, as reasonably possible, from parcel A through the use of
berming, landscaping and/or buffer wall construction. (Ord. 1679, 3-27-2006)
A minimum thirty five foot (35') building setback shall be required from the
one hundred foot (100') power line easement that borders parcel B with no
multi-family residential structure being permitted within fifty feet (50') of
the established power line easement as illustrated on the sketch plan and no
structure being permitted within thirty five feet (35') of said easement. (Ord.
1357, 4-19-1999)
      3.   Parcel C: All general use regulations, performance standards and
provisions set forth in title 9 of the city code for the support commercial
(SC) district shall apply to any development proposal for the property within
parcel C as shown on the sketch plan, except as shall be further provided
herein. This parcel shall encompass a maximum of three (3.0) acres.
         a.   Permitted Uses: Permitted uses within parcel C shall include all
uses permitted within the support commercial (SC) district, except clothes
cleaning and laundry pick up stations, convenience stores, launderettes, or
variety stores shall be prohibited. Additionally, no drive-through facility or
outdoor display or storage area shall be permitted within parcel C except a
drive-through facility for a financial institution may be permitted.
         b.   Development Standards: Lot area, lot frontage and yard
requirements shall comply with standards of the support commercial (SC)
district unless otherwise stated herein.
Parking lots and buildings and/or structures shall be set back a minimum of
sixty feet (60') from Civic Parkway. Parking lots shall be sufficiently
screened, as practical, from public street view and surrounding residential
properties with the use of landscaping, earth berming, and/or wall structures
as may be required by the city. Particular emphasis shall be placed upon the
open space, landscaping and overall site design to effectively convey an
attractive and aesthetically pleasing image of development within parcel C as
the site relates to the Civic Parkway entryway from the future Interstate 35
interchange into the city of West Des Moines.
         c.   Architecture: The architectural design of any building shall be
acceptable to the city, provided acceptance shall not be unreasonably withheld,
and all buildings within the parcel shall attempt to express a creative
presentation by careful attention to exterior building materials and details,
use of fenestration, and change in building mass within the plan and roof
design to lessen the plainness of appearance which can be characteristic of
commercial buildings. Primary materials of the exterior shall be: curtain wall
glass, face brick or stone or architectural metal panels. All sides of the
building shall receive high quality materials, finishes, and details (360
degree architectural treatment). No wood, masonite, visible asphaltic exterior
wall or roof material, aluminum siding, nonarchitectural sheet metal, concrete
block, or other similar materials shall constitute a portion of any building
exterior except as a trim material, unless the city council of West Des Moines,
after review by the plan and zoning commission of West Des Moines shall
determine said material when used as a primary element, enhances the physical
appearance. (Ord. 2114, 9-21-2015)
      4.   Parcel D: Parcel D as shown on the sketch plan is agreed to be
dedicated to the city for public and park use and platted with adjoining
subdivision in parcel A or E, whichever is platted first, for inclusion within
the neighborhood greenbelt park system. Parcel D shall be maintained by the
developer prior to dedication to the city, except drainage, storm sewer,
sanitary sewer or other required utilities or improvements may be constructed
within parcel D upon review and approval by the city. Parcel D shall be a
minimum of one hundred feet (100') in width and a minimum eight (8) acres in
size unless otherwise approved by the parks and recreation department.
      5.   Parcel E: All general use regulations, performance standards and
provisions set forth in article VII of ordinance 430 for the R-1 single-family
residential district of the city of West Des Moines, shall apply to any
development in parcel E.
         a.   Development Standards: A minimum thirty five foot (35') building
setback shall be required from the one hundred foot (100') power line easement
that bisects parcel E with no structure being permitted within thirty five feet
(35') of the established power line easement as illustrated on the sketch plan.
During the platting of parcel A the development will be required to, whereas
possible, provide positive drainage away from all structures abutting the power
line easement due to the sixteen inch (16") water trunk main that exists within
said easement.
      6.   Parcel F: Parcel F as shown on the sketch plan is agreed to be
dedicated to the city for public and park use and platted with adjoining
subdivision in parcel E for inclusion within the neighborhood greenbelt park
system. Parcel F shall be maintained by the developer prior to dedication to
the city, except drainage, storm sewer, sanitary sewer or other required
utilities or improvements may be constructed within parcel F upon review and
approval by the city. Parcel F shall be a minimum of one hundred feet (100') in
width except at the southwestern corner where it connects to Southwoods Knoll
PUD.
      7.   Parcel P: Parcel P as shown on the sketch plan on file in the city,
is agreed to be reserved for acquisition by the city for public and park use
upon development of adjoining properties within the PUD. Parcel P shall be a
minimum of approximately seven (7) acres in area and be provided a minimum of
sixty feet (60') of public street frontage for vehicular access purposes and a
minimum of fifty feet (50') of frontage onto parcel D for pedestrian access
purposes and a minimum dimension perpendicular to the right of way of Civic
Parkway shall be approximately two hundred fifty feet (250'). Additional
minimum thirty foot (30') pedestrian access corridors extending to adjacent
neighborhood areas may be required by the city as the properties are developed.
The park land shall be conveyed by warranty deed free and clear of any and all
liens and encumbrances including all judgments, attachments, mechanics and
other liens.
The value of the land to be purchased by the city for park use shall be
established at the time of purchase of said property by the city and shall be
based upon the property's current fair market value as undeveloped, plus the
cost of providing paved street frontage, sanitary sewer and water service and
grading. If possible, the current fair market value shall be determined by
mutual agreement between the city council and developer. If an agreement on the
current fair market value cannot be mutually reached by the parties, such value
shall be determined by the parties appointing a real estate appraiser with
qualifications of an MAI with the cost of the appraisal being equally shared by
the city and developer. (Ord. 1357, 4-19-1999)
      8.   Parcel Q: All general use regulations, performance standards and
provisions set forth in title 9, "Zoning", of the city code for the medium-
density residential district of the city of West Des Moines, shall apply to any
development in parcel Q unless otherwise herein modified.
         a.   Development Standards: Parcel Q shall be a maximum of fourteen
(14) acres with no more than fifty (50) dwelling units permitted. Principal
buildings may have no more than two (2) dwelling units per building.
            (1)   Buffers: All units shall be effectively screened as
reasonably possible, from parcel A through the use of a thirty foot (30')
buffer park on parcel Q with berming, landscaping and/or buffer wall
construction by standards set forth in the zoning ordinance.
A thirty foot (30') buffer park is required along the east side of parcel Q to
screen the medium- density residential units from the high-density residential
development on the east side of South 41st Street. Screening shall be
accomplished through the use of berming, landscaping and/or buffer wall
construction by standards set forth in the zoning ordinance.
In addition to any other buffer park or buffer park easement required by city
code, a minimum sixty foot (60') buffer park easement shall be required along
Mills Civic Parkway with no driveway access to individual lots being permitted
from Mills Civic Parkway. The minimum thirty foot (30') front yard setback
shall each be measured from the sixty foot (60') buffer park easement with no
fences or structures permitted within the buffer park easement. Prior to
development within any part of parcel Q, a buffer plan shall be reviewed and
approved by the city which illustrates the use of berms and tree plantings to
effectively buffer the residential uses along Mills Civic Parkway from Mills
Civic Parkway.
            (2)   Setbacks: A minimum thirty foot (30') building setback shall
be required from the one hundred foot (100') power line easement that bisects
parcel Q with no structure being permitted within thirty feet (30') of the
established power line easement as illustrated on the sketch plan. During the
site planning of parcel Q, the development will be required to, whereas
possible, provide positive drainage away from all structures abutting the power
line easement due to the sixteen inch (16") water trunk main that exists within
said easement.
Buildings shall maintain a minimum separation of fourteen feet (14') to be
measured from the foundation wall. In no case shall any part of any building be
allowed to be located closer than five feet (5') from an interior side yard
property line including a postage stamp lot line except where the property line
is a common party wall in which case the setback is zero feet (0'). All
privately owned structures must be contained within the postage stamp lot
unless specifically allowed by the homeowners' association. Uncovered porches
at or near ground level decks may encroach into the thirty foot (30') perimeter
setback, but in no case shall they be located closer than twenty feet (20')
from property lines, provided they shall not encroach into any required buffer.
            (3)   Postage Stamp Lots: Postage stamp lots will be allowed with
the establishment of a homeowners' association of which each lot has an
ownership interest. An operation and easement declaration (OEA) shall be
established by the developer for the property encompassing any development
utilizing postage stamp lots. The OEA shall identify requirements for the
ongoing upkeep and maintenance of any privately owned common grounds,
structures and signs and any other specific development improvements required
by the developer in this ordinance.
         b.   Architecture: The intent is to create building facades that are
varied and articulated to provide visual interest to pedestrians and
homeowners. Buildings shall be proportioned and defined by clear facade
elements such as a base, middle, and top.
         c.   Materials: The use of brick, acceptable stone or masonry shall be
incorporated into the building architecture on all sides of the structure,
unless the director of development services determines that the use of
alternate building materials enhances the physical appearance and accomplishes
a compatible structure with the overall development. Smooth faced concrete
block, tilt up concrete panels, or prefabricated steel panels are prohibited as
the predominant exterior building materials. (Ord. 1795, 1-2-2008)
010-04: ARCHITECTURE:
The architecture of multiple-family buildings within parcel B shall be
acceptable to the city and accomplished in a manner compatible with the
adjoining residential uses in the neighborhood. Architectural design for multi-
family buildings shall attempt to express a creative presentation of exterior
building materials, exterior details and texture, treatment of windows and
doors, and use of angles and multiplicity of planes within the wall and roof
design to lessen the plainness of appearance which can be characteristic of
large residential buildings. (Ord. 1357, 4-19-1999)
010-05: INFRASTRUCTURE:
The developer of the property within the PUD is responsible for the public
improvements that are necessary to serve the property. Those improvements
include, but are not limited to, the paving of public streets, sanitary sewer
extension, water main extension, and storm sewer improvements. In conjunction
with or prior to development within any parcel of the PUD, public water and
sanitary sewer service shall be brought to the site and extended through the
area being developed to adjoining undeveloped properties in a manner acceptable
to the city and properly designed with sizes and materials compatible with the
city's plans for areawide water and sanitary sewer service. (Ord. 1357, 4-19-
1999)
010-06: MASTER PLANNING REQUIRED:
Prior to development within any part of any parcel, a master plan shall be
prepared showing the location of new public streets within or adjoining the
parcel in order to assure workable street patterns, grades and usable building
sites. (Ord. 1357, 4-19-1999)
010-07: DOUBLE FRONTAGE LOTS ABUTTING CIVIC PARKWAY:
All double frontage lots along Civic Parkway shall be developed in accordance
with section 6-6.04 subsection 5, paragraph B of the West Des Moines
subdivision ordinance. (Ord. 1357, 4-19-1999)
010-08: SIGNAGE REGULATIONS:
All signage shall comply with the West Des Moines sign ordinance regulations.
All signage constructed as wall signs on building fascia within parcel C shall
incorporate aesthetic features compatible with the overall character of the
development. Advertising or promotional temporary signage attached to exterior
windows or walls including exposed neon lights visible from the exterior of the
building shall be prohibited. (Ord. 1357, 4-19-1999)
010-09: BUFFERS:
All development within the S And F/Karp PUD shall comply with the buffering
provisions of the buffer ordinance of the West Des Moines city code except if
other, specific requirements are set forth elsewhere within this ordinance. In
situations where the PUD specifies the provision of a buffer park easement, the
required setbacks shall be measured from the easement line. In situations where
this PUD specifies the provision of a buffer park, the buffer may be included
within the setback.
A complete buffer park planting plan shall be submitted to and approved by the
city as part of the platting process for the lots. The city building inspector
shall not issue a final occupancy permit for any of the affected lots until the
buffer as required within this section is properly installed per approved plan
specifications.
Adequate treatment or buffering of negative aspects of buildings (loading
docks, garbage dumpsters and HVAC mechanical units) from any public street and
adjoining properties shall be required. Buildings shall not be located and
designed to expose loading docks or doors, loading areas or the rear of
buildings to public streets unless adequately screened from public view by
berming and landscaping. (Ord. 1357, 4-19-1999)
010-10: ALL AREAS TO BE PLATTED:
Prior to, or in conjunction with development or transfer of ownership of any
portion of the PUD, said area shall be platted in accordance with the city's
subdivision ordinance to delineate within a plat the parcel to be developed or
sold separately or any portion thereof. (Ord. 1357, 4-19-1999)
010-11: STORMWATER MANAGEMENT:
There shall be submitted to, and approved by the West Des Moines city engineer,
a complete stormwater management plan for each parcel of the PUD to be prepared
by the developer prior to development within each of the individual parcels of
the PUD and for all storm sewer and drainage systems within the PUD. (Ord.
1357, 4-19-1999)
010-12: STREET RIGHTS OF WAY:
Adequate street rights of way shall be provided for the construction,
reconstruction and widening of adjoining streets adjacent to, or within the S
And F/Karp PUD. Said rights of way shall be dedicated to the city at the time
of platting. (Ord. 1357, 4-19-1999)
010-13: SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS:
   A.   Civic Parkway: With respect to any assessments by the city of West Des
Moines of special benefits conferred upon parcels A, B, C and E of the
property, or any portion thereof, as a result of the initial design and paving
of that portion of Civic Parkway proximate to said parcels, the owner, on
behalf of itself and its successors and assigns (collectively by the "owner"),
agrees that such assessments may be spread against all of said parcels, as said
parcels exist on the date of assessment, by the city of West Des Moines on an
area basis.
   B.   Sanitary Trunk Sewer: With respect to any assessments by the city of
West Des Moines of special benefits conferred upon parcels A, B, C and E of the
property, or any portion thereof, as a result of the design and construction of
sanitary trunk sewer improvements within the area the owner, on behalf of
itself and its successors and assigns (collectively by the "owner"), agrees
that such assessments may be spread against all of said parcels, as said
parcels exist on the date of assessment, by the city of West Des Moines on an
area basis.
   C.   Stormwater Detention: With respect to any assessments by the city of
West Des Moines of special benefits conferred upon parcels A, B, C and E of the
property, or any portion thereof, as a result of the design and construction of
potential area wide stormwater detention improvements as determined by
engineering studies approved by the city of West Des Moines, the owner, on
behalf of itself and its successors and assigns (collectively by the "owner"),
agrees that such assessments may be spread against all of said parcels, as said
parcels exist on the date of assessment, by the city of West Des Moines on an
area basis.
The foregoing area assessment provisions are subject to the following
provision: Any assessment shall be reasonable and equitable in comparison to
the special benefits for such initial paving and widening assessed against the
property directly across the street from owner's parcel being assessed, and in
no event shall any payment by the owner exceed one-half (1/2) the cost of any
such initial paving and widening. (Ord. 1357, 4-19-1999)
010-14: VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES:
Any person who violates the provisions of this ordinance upon conviction shall
be punished as set forth in section 1-4-1 of the city code. (Ord. 2114, 9-21-
2015)
010-99: LEGISLATIVE HISTORY:
Ord. 947, 4-29-1991; Ord. 1118, 2-27-1995; Ord. 1357, 4-19-1999; Ord. 1679, 3-
27-2006; Ord. 1795, 1-2-2008; Ord. 2114, 9-21-2015.
PUD #11
SOUTHWOODS EAST 2
SECTION:
011-01: Legal Description
011-02: Conditions
011-03: Building Restrictions, Easements And Covenants
011-04: Soil Test Requirements
011-05: Double-Frontage Lots
011-06: Corner Lots
011-07: All Areas To Be Platted
011-08: Storm Water Management
011-09: Sanitary Sewer Connection Impact Fees Or Assessments
011-10: Definition
011-11: Special Assessments
011-99: Legislative History
011-01: LEGAL DESCRIPTION::
The legal description for the Southwoods East 2 PUD is as follows:
The W1/2 of the NW1/4 Section 17 T78N R25W of the Fifth P.M. except the south
924 feet and except that part platted as Southwoods East Plat 1 and Southwoods
East Plat 2, West Des Moines, Polk County, Iowa, more particularly described as
follows:
Commencing at the West 1/4 corner of Section 17 T78N R25W of the Fifth P.M.;
thence N00°01'37"E along the west line of the NW1/4 of said Section 17 and
being the centerline of South 50th Street for 924.00 feet to the point-of-
beginning; thence continuing N00°01'37"E along said west line for 1062.32 feet
to the southwest corner of Southwoods East Plat 1, an Official Plat of West Des
Moines: thence N89°49'06"E along the south line of said Southwoods East Plat 1
for 624.32 feet: thence N60°00'00"E along said south line for 122.68 feet;
thence N89°49'06"E along said south line for 581.29 feet to the east line of
the W1/2 NW1/4; thence S00°06'09"W along said east line for 1119.99 feet;
thence S89°40'20"W for 1310.37 feet to the point-of-beginning. This parcel
contains 32.81 acres.
(Ord. 935, 11-26-1990)
011-02: CONDITIONS:
Whereas, Section 6 of Ordinance 497 amended Ordinance 430 by creating Article
XX(a), PUD District, establishes certain regulations and guidelines pertaining
to accompanying information required on a final site plan and final site plan
documents. Now, therefore, the following conditions, restrictions, and
regulations are adopted as part of this approval, to wit:
   A.   General Conditions: A maximum of one hundred twenty six (126) single-
family detached residential dwelling units.
In addition, the following general site development criteria shall be
integrated into and made a part of the planned unit development:
      1.   All subdivisions, streets, street rights-of-way and general
development shall adhere to the standards and design criteria set forth in the
West Des Moines Subdivision Ordinance pertaining thereto unless otherwise
stated within this Ordinance.
      2.   In all areas adjoining drainageways or detention areas involving
potential flood hazards, no residential structure shall be erected which has a
lowest floor, including basements, less than one foot (1') above the determined
level of the 100-year return frequency rainfall flood event and no residential
structure shall be erected within forty feet (40') of said 100-year frequency
flood elevation.
      3.   The petitioners seeking this rezoning, their successors and assigns,
if any, shall pay all construction and engineering costs for the interior
development of the planned unit development, as required by this Ordinance or
the Subdivision Ordinance of the City of West Des Moines, Iowa, for all
streets, storm sewers, sanitary sewers, bridges and culverts, drainageway
improvements, detention basins, City-owned utilities, buffers and other
improvements within the PUD as may be required by the Subdivision and Zoning
Ordinances.
   B.   Land Use Design Criteria: In addition to the general criteria as stated
in subsection A above, the following land use design criteria shall apply to
the development as legally described herein:
      1.   All lots bordering the south and east boundaries of the property as
legally described herein shall conform to the R-1 Single-Family District
regulations including a minimum lot width of sixty feet (60').
      2.   A minimum lot width of fifty feet (50') shall be maintained with the
average lot width for all lots within the property being a minimum fifty five
feet (55') in width. (Ord. 935, 11-26-1990)
      3.   Except for lots bordering the south and east boundaries of the
property as legally described herein, no residential unit shall be set closer
than twenty five feet (25') from any internal public street right-of-way and
thirty feet (30') from the right-of-way of South 50th Street and shall have
minimum thirty five foot (35') rear yard and five foot (5') side yard setbacks.
The lots bordering the south and east boundaries of the property shall have a
minimum thirty foot (30') building setback from public street rights-of-way.
(Ord. 985, 12-23-1991)
011-03: BUILDING RESTRICTIONS, EASEMENTS AND COVENANTS:
Where the City deems appropriate, the owner and/or developer shall on each
particular area, adopt building restrictions, easements and/or covenants in a
form approved by the City. (Ord. 935, 11-26-1990)
011-04: SOIL TEST REQUIREMENTS:
If required, owner and/or the developer shall be responsible for supplying to
the City, information prepared by a qualified soils engineering firm,
indicating that existing soil conditions are adequate in stability and strength
for construction of public and private improvements. If determined by the soils
engineering firm that adequate soils conditions do not exist, the owner and/or
developer shall indicate what measures shall be taken to achieve adequate soil
strength and stability for both public and private improvements. (Ord. 935, 11-
26-1990)
011-05: DOUBLE-FRONTAGE LOTS:
All double-frontage lots shall be developed in accordance with Section 6-6.04,
subsection 5, paragraph B of the West Des Moines Subdivision Ordinance. A
complete buffer plan shall be submitted to and approved by the City as part of
the platting process for the lots. Final responsibility for provision of the
buffer shall rest with the developer (subdivider) regardless of any pass
through agreement. The City building inspector shall not issue an occupancy
permit for any of the affected lots until the buffer as required within this
Section is properly installed per final site plan specifications. (Ord. 935,
11-26-1990)
011-06: CORNER LOTS:
Corner lots shall not be less than twenty feet (20') greater in lot frontage
than the minimum lot frontage required for each lot so as to permit adequate
building setbacks on both frontage streets. (Ord. 935, 11-26-1990)
011-07: ALL AREAS TO BE PLATTED:
In conjunction with development of any portion of the PUD, said area shall be
platted in accordance with the City's Subdivision Ordinance. (Ord. 935, 11-26-
1990)
011-08: STORM WATER MANAGEMENT:
There shall be submitted to, and approved by the West Des Moines City Engineer,
a complete storm water management plan for the development of the property as
part of the preliminary platting process. (Ord. 935, 11-26-1990)
011-09: SANITARY SEWER CONNECTION IMPACT FEES OR ASSESSMENTS:
The City of West Des Moines is currently developing plans for the construction
of a waste water treatment plant or expansion of Metropolitan waste water
treatment facilities to serve portions of the City and areas anticipated for
future expansion of the corporate City limits. To finance costs for
construction and expansion of waste water treatment, conveyance and other
associated infrastructure improvements, sanitary sewer connection impact fees
or assessments may be required by the City. Therefore, the owner, their heirs,
successors or assigns, agree to participate in any future City wide or service
area connection fee payment, district assessment or fee payments as legally
permitted to offset the City's cost for financing expansion of the City's waste
water conveyance and treatment facilities and agrees to waive all legal
formalities of whatever kind and character required by the laws of the State of
Iowa to be observed by municipalities in the construction of like improvements
where expenses of said improvements are to be assessed against a project,
district or area. All questions of jurisdiction, the amount of the assessment,
and all other legal requirements are waived in favor of the City of West Des
Moines. Nothing herein contained shall prohibit the owners, their heirs,
successors and assigns from receiving any credit for special sewer assessments
levied and heretofore paid prior to the enactment of this Ordinance on all or
any part of the property legally described herein. (Ord. 935, 11-26-1990)
011-10: DEFINITION:
The term "developer", for the purpose of this Ordinance, shall mean any person,
individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation, estate, trust, entity,
or agent of same acting or proposing to subdivide land or develop a parcel of
land for the construction of a building or buildings. (Ord. 935, 11-26-1990)
011-11: SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS:
The property may be subject to future areawide assessments, including, but not
limited to, the reconstruction, construction, widening, and/or improvements to
50th Street, Fuller Road, and the Fuller Road/I-80 interchange, as shall be
permitted and limited by the laws of the State of Iowa to be observed by
municipalities. (Ord. 935, 11-26-1990)
011-99: LEGISLATIVE HISTORY:
Ord. 935, 11-26-1990; Ord. 985, 12-23-1991.
PUD #12
SOUTHWOODS EAST
SECTION:
012-01: Legal Description
012-02: Sketch Plan
012-03: Conditions
012-04: Double-Frontage Lots Abutting South 50th Street Or 50th Street
012-05: Reservation Of Greenbelt Park Sites Parcel P
012-06: Relocation Of Delavan Drive And Overhead Power Lines
012-07: Building Restrictions, Easements And Covenants
012-08: All Areas To Be Platted
012-09: Storm Water Management
012-10: Corner Lots
012-99: Legislative History
012-01: LEGAL DESCRIPTION:
The legal description for the Southwoods East PUD is as follows:
The N1/2 NW1/4 NW1/4 Section 17 T78N R25W of the Fifth P.M., except the
following described parcel:
Beginning at the SE corner of the N1/2 NW1/4 NW1/4 Section 17 T78N R25W; thence
N00°06'09"E along the east line of said N1/2 NW1/4 NW1/4 for 60.00 feet; thence
S89°49'06"W, 581.29'; thence S60°00'00"W 122.68' to the south line of the N1/
2 NW1/4 NW1/4 of Section 17; thence N89°49'06"E along said south line for
687.43 feet to the point of beginning.
and
Lot 3, Official Plat of the S1/2 Section 8 T78N R25W of the Fifth P.M.
and
The west 18.92 acres of Lot 4, Official Plat of the S1/2 Section 8 T78N R25W of
the Fifth P.M.
All in and forming a part of the City of West Des Moines, Polk County, Iowa.
(Ord. 837, 10-10-1987)
012-02: SKETCH PLAN:
On file with the Community Development Department of the City and made a part
of this rezoning approval for concept description and delineation is the sketch
plan document for the Southwoods East Planned Unit Development. It is
recognized minor shifts or realignments of internal roadways and development
parcels, may be necessary and compatible with the need to acquire a workable
traffic pattern, grades and usable building sites, but the general plan layout,
including the relationship of uses to each other and the relationship of
building types and uses to the general plan framework, traffic layout, and
development requirements shall be used as the implementation guide. (Ord. 837,
10-10-1987)
012-03: CONDITIONS:
Whereas, Section 6, Ordinance 497 amended Ordinance 430 by creating Article XX
(a), PUD District, establishes certain regulations and guidelines pertaining to
accompanying information required on final site plan or final plat documents.
Now, therefore, the following conditions, restrictions, and regulations are
adopted as part of this approval, to wit: (Ord. 837, 10-10-1987)
   A.   General Conditions: The sketch plan incorporates a maximum of three
hundred twenty five (325) residential dwelling units and a maximum of six (6)
acres of land reserved for commercial development which shall be distributed by
use, building types and location according to the sketch plan as presented.
(Ord. 872, 3-20-1989)
In addition, the following general site plan criteria shall be integrated into
and made a part of the planned unit development and sketch plan document:
      1.   All subdivisions, streets, street rights-of-way and general
development shall adhere to the standards and design criteria set forth in the
West Des Moines Subdivision Ordinance pertaining thereto unless otherwise
stated within this Ordinance.
      2.   The development shall comply with Article XXII (Off-Street Parking
and Loading Areas), Article XXIII (Open Space Requirements), article XXV (site
plans) of the West Des Moines zoning ordinance and article XX(a) (PUD) sections
6 and 8. Site plan review by the planning and zoning commission and approval by
the city council shall be required for parcels B and C prior to issuance of
building permits. No final building or site plan review by the planning and
zoning commission and city council shall be required for individual single-
family detached lots.
      3.   In all areas adjoining drainageways or detention areas involving
potential flood hazards, no structure shall be erected which has a lowest
floor, including basements, less than one foot (1') above the determined level
of the 100-year return frequency rainfall flood event.
      4.   The petitioners seeking this rezoning, their successors and assigns,
if any, shall pay all construction and engineering costs for the interior
development of the planned unit development, as required by this ordinance, or
the subdivision ordinance of the city of West Des Moines, Iowa, for all
streets, public sidewalks, storm sewers, parking lots, sanitary sewers,
drainageway improvements, detention basins, city owned utilities, buffers and
other improvements within the PUD as may be required by the subdivision and
zoning ordinances; except the city's share of construction cost of E.P. True
Parkway which shall be the city's responsibility in excess of the developer's
cost as shall be determined by mutual agreement between the city and the
developer, or that cost which cannot be legally assessed to the developer.
   B.   Land Use Design Criteria: In addition to the general conditions as
stated in subsection A of this section, the following land use design criteria
shall apply to the development areas designated on the sketch plan. The sketch
plan document which is made a part of this rezoning action per section 012-02
of this ordinance, delineates three (3) parcels of the PUD as parcels A, B and
C, for application of specific development standards of residential and
commercial use and density regulations. The following development standards and
use regulations shall apply to each of the three (3) development parcels: (Ord.
837, 10-10-1987)
      1.   Parcel A: This parcel shall encompass a maximum of eighty five (85)
single-family detached homes which shall be located on individual lots with a
minimum average fifty five foot (55') and a minimum fifty foot (50') public
street frontage and a minimum of six thousand two hundred fifty (6,250) square
feet in lot area. No residential unit shall be set closer than twenty five feet
(25') from any internal public street right of way, sixty feet (60') from the
right of way of Fiftieth Street, and shall have a maximum thirty five foot
(35') rear yard and five foot (5') side yard setbacks. Driveway access to South
Fiftieth Street shall be prohibited. (Ord. 872, 3-20-1989)
      2.   Parcel B: This parcel shall encompass a maximum of two hundred forty
(240) dwelling units which shall be developed with residential buildings of a
size, design, height and dwelling unit type (i.e., number of dwelling units per
building, style and use of materials, number of stories, and garden style
apartments or condominiums versus single-family attached townhouse style
construction, etc.) as shall be determined with a master plan review by the
city for the entire parcel which shall be approved by the planning and zoning
commission and city council.
         a.   The parcel shall be developed as a single master plan project
with each building compatible in design and use of materials. Architecture and
use of materials for the construction of any building within parcel B shall be
acceptable to the city and accomplished in a manner compatible with adjoining
residential uses and neighborhood. A master plan for development of the entire
parcel shall be submitted and approved by the planning and zoning commission
and city council prior to site plan or plat approval for any portion of the
parcel.
         b.   No dwelling unit shall be located closer than fifty feet (50') to
E.P. True Parkway and Fiftieth Street, twenty five feet (25') from any interior
private roadway and right of way of any interior public street, twenty five
feet (25') from the east boundary of the parcel and sixty feet (60') from the
south boundary of the parcel. All accessory structures shall meet minimum
setback requirements as set forth by section 6, article VI of ordinance 430,
provided garages may be located within thirty feet (30') of E.P. True Parkway
and Fiftieth Street. Off street parking lots shall have a minimum fifteen foot
(15') setback from public street rights of way and sufficiently buffered, as
practical, from public street view, parcel A, and the property to the east of
the parcel with the use of landscaping and/or wall structures as may be
required by the city. (Ord. 837, 10-10-1987)
      3.   Parcel C: All general use regulations, performance standards and
provisions set forth in article XIII of ordinance 430 for the NC neighborhood
commercial district shall apply to any development proposal for the property
within parcel C as shown on the sketch plan except as shall be further provided
herein. This area shall involve a maximum of six (6.0) acres.
         a.   Multiple use of the site by more than one building shall be
permitted only if said buildings are consistent in architectural design and use
of materials and organized and sited in close physical proximity, utilizing a
centrally planned open space, landscape plan, and parking plan to serve and
maintain a unified master plan concept. All uses specifically permitted within
the NC neighborhood commercial district shall be allowed with the exception
that only one bank and one sit down style restaurant with lounge limited to a
maximum of three thousand (3,000) gross square feet of floor area shall be
permitted together with an outside seating area and patio area in conjunction
therewith. The sit down restaurant and lounge outside seating area shall be
effectively screened from adjacent properties with noise levels not to exceed
sixty five (65) CNEL beyond the property line in any direction. Said outside
seating and patio area shall be limited to a maximum three thousand five
hundred (3,500) square feet in area and include a single outside grill a
maximum sixty inches (60") in size for limited cooking purposes located within
a detached building (gazebo) not to exceed one thousand two hundred (1,200)
square feet in size. In addition, one or more quick serve (i.e., fast food)
restaurants shall be permitted and one or more coffeehouses shall be permitted
provided that all such quick serve restaurants and coffeehouses combined shall
collectively not exceed six thousand (6,000) square feet and, further provided
that no drive-through shall be permitted in connection with a quick serve
restaurant and one drive-through shall be permitted in connection with a
coffeehouse. One hardware store shall be permitted provided said hardware store
is located within the existing building identified as "Sub-Parcel 2" on exhibit
A on file in the city. Storage of all materials must be within an enclosure and
screened from view. All outdoor storage and display which is not otherwise in
an enclosure is prohibited except as may be associated with an approved
temporary permit. A maximum of two (2) drive-through uses shall be permitted
that are in association with a bank and with either a coffeehouse or dry
cleaner, provided such uses can be demonstrated to not negatively impact
traffic and can be designed to not negatively impact aesthetic view of the
area. In addition to there only being two (2) total drive- throughs allowed on
site, only one of any type of use identified as eligible for a drive-through
shall be allowed to have one; provided, however, the bank may have multiple
drive- through lanes in association with its use and the drive- through in
connection therewith.
Lot area, lot frontage and yard requirements shall comply with standards of the
NC district, provided the front yard depth shall be a minimum of fifty feet
(50') and the setback from parcel P shall be a minimum of twenty feet (20') and
sufficient measures shall be taken to provide buffering of negative aspects of
the rear of commercial buildings and storage areas from public view including
the Jordan Creek greenbelt, public streets and any adjoining sites.
         b.   Architecture and use of materials for the construction of any
building within parcel C shall be accomplished in a manner compatible with the
residential uses within the PUD and neighborhood. The architectural design
shall be acceptable to the city, residential in character, use of material
shall be wood and/or brick exterior veneer, and the roof shall be principally
of a gable, mansard or hip style design. Off street parking lots shall be
sufficiently set back a minimum of fifteen feet (15') from public street rights
of way and buffered from public street view, the Jordan Creek greenbelt and as
practical from adjoining sites with the use of landscaping, earth berming and/
or wall structures as may be required by the city.
         c.   A maximum of three (3) ground signs, which may be monument or
landscape signs, may be used, provided they are spaced a minimum of one hundred
fifty feet (150') apart and are located at one or more entrances to the
development as described below. The maximum height for the sign located at the
western entrance off E.P. True Parkway designated as entrance "B" on exhibit A
on file in the city shall be five feet (5') and the maximum sign panel on such
sign shall be 62.5 square feet (excluding architectural elements such as brick
columns or 100 gross square feet including such architectural element). The
maximum height for the signs located at the entrance on 50th Street designated
as entrance "A" on exhibit A on file in the city and at the eastern entrance
off E.P. True Parkway designated as entrance "C" on exhibit A on file in the
city shall be four feet (4') and the maximum sign panel for these signs shall
be fifty feet (50') (excluding architectural elements such as brick columns or
80 gross square feet including such architectural element). The sign at the
entrance designated as entrance "A" on 50th Street shall be set back a minimum
of sixteen feet (16') from the right of way line which existed when the complex
was developed. The sign at the western entrance on E.P. True Parkway designated
as entrance "B" shall be set back a minimum of twenty five feet (25') from the
right of way line which existed when the complex was developed. The sign at the
eastern entrance on E.P. True Parkway designated as entrance "C" shall be set
back a minimum of 8.5 feet from the right of way line which existed when the
complex was developed. All signs must obtain necessary sign permits and
approvals.
Noninternally illuminated signage, medallions, keystones, banners, pavement
markings, architectural features, etc., that display the development's logo,
initials, or name may be integrated into the development to further enhance the
character of the development. These identifiers and any structure or
architectural feature upon which they are placed will not count toward or as
signage.
         d.   A traffic study has been completed and approved by the city for
parcel C for the purpose of determining traffic impacts and required
improvements that would be necessary for the safe and orderly movement of
vehicles into and around the proposed development. The development or
redevelopment of each parcel within the PUD boundaries shall abide by and
accommodate the recommendations of the approved traffic study. The developer,
his successors or assigns shall be responsible for their pro rata share of
public road improvements deemed necessary to accommodate the intended
development, as well as the dedication of all necessary street right of way to
accommodate such improvement. Prior to, or in conjunction with the development
or redevelopment of any parcel, or portion of a parcel, the developer shall
have the traffic report reviewed by the city to ensure that the provisions and
assumptions of the original traffic report are still valid and applicable.
Per the traffic analysis completed by the city (Wellington Square traffic
study, 2007), parcel C has been allocated four hundred seventy five (475) P.M.
peak vehicle trips. Implementation of desired land uses, including specific
high traffic generating tenants, will be limited by the available number of
trips. Prior to, or in conjunction with the development of any parcel, or
portion of a parcel, the developer shall have the traffic report reviewed by
the city to ensure that the provisions and assumptions of the original traffic
report are still valid and applicable. The future developer will be required to
comply with the requirements outlined in the traffic impact study prepared for
this site. As development proposals are approved the number of vehicle trips
generated by the proposed development will be subtracted from the overall total
trips allocated to the development. Approval of this proposed PUD does not
constitute a guarantee that the proposed plan can be implemented. Any fitness
facility, daycare, drinking place, or video rental facility will require a
traffic compliancy letter before a tenant remodel permit may be approved. (Ord.
1857, 2-8-2010)
012-04: DOUBLE FRONTAGE LOTS ABUTTING SOUTH 50TH STREET OR 50TH STREET:
All double frontage lots along South 50th Street or 50th Street shall be
developed in accordance with section 6-6.04 subsection 5, paragraph B of the
West Des Moines subdivision ordinance. A complete buffer plan shall be
submitted to and approved by the city as part of the platting process for the
lots. Final responsibility for provision of the buffer shall rest with the
developer (subdivider) regardless of any pass through agreement. The city
building inspector shall not issue an occupancy permit for any of the affected
lots until the buffer as required within this section is properly installed per
approved plan specifications. (Ord. 837, 10-10-1987)
012-05: RESERVATION OF GREENBELT PARK SITES PARCEL P:
Parcel P as shown on the sketch plan is agreed to be reserved for acquisition
by the city for public and park use and platted for inclusion within the Jordan
Creek greenbelt upon development of adjoining properties within the PUD and
shall generally encompass the floodway (overlay) district of Jordan Creek.
Parcel P shall be acquired by the city upon development and platting of
adjoining properties, and conveyed by the developer through a warranty deed,
free and clear of any and all liens and encumbrances including all judgments,
attachments, mechanics and other liens.
The value of the land to be purchased by the city for park use shall be
established at the time of purchase of said property by the city and shall be
based upon the property's current fair market value as undeveloped. If
possible, the current fair market value shall be determined by mutual agreement
between the city council and developer. If an agreement on the current fair
market value cannot be mutually reached by the parties, such value shall be
determined by the parties appointing a real estate appraiser with
qualifications of an MAI with the cost of the appraisal being equally shared by
the city and the developer. Any part of parcel P which the developer shall
utilize for stormwater detention purposes as required by the city shall not be
included as part of the cost to the city for purchase of the park site. (Ord.
837, 10-10-1987)
012-06: RELOCATION OF DELAVAN DRIVE AND OVERHEAD POWER LINES:
The sketch plan for the Southwoods East PUD shows a relocation and realignment
of Delavan Drive. The proposed relocation of Delavan Drive will require an
associated relocation of overhead electric power lines and substantial
regrading of adjoining areas and the right of way of Delavan Drive. Prior to,
or in conjunction with development of the area adjoining Delavan Drive, the
developer shall make arrangements with the electric utility company and the
city of West Des Moines to provide for the relocation and realignment of
Delavan Drive and the overhead electric power lines.
Prior to finalization of any plat providing for the alignment of Delavan Drive,
plans for the future disposition, possible relocation and paving of Delavan
Drive east of parcel A shall be consummated with the owner of that property
east of parcel A to assure proper continuity of street patterns to the east.
(Ord. 837, 10-10-1987)
012-07: BUILDING RESTRICTIONS, EASEMENTS AND COVENANTS:
The developer shall with the approval of the city council adopt building
restrictions, easements and covenants pertaining to each area developed where
the developer and the city deem appropriate. (Ord. 837, 10-10-1987)
012-08: ALL AREAS TO BE PLATTED:
Prior to, or in conjunction with development of any portion of the PUD, that
area of the PUD shall be platted in accordance with the city's subdivision
ordinance, including all areas to be reserved for public and park use. (Ord.
837, 10-10-1987)
012-09: STORMWATER MANAGEMENT:
With the first development proposal, or prior thereto, there shall be submitted
to, and approved by the West Des Moines city engineer, a complete stormwater
management plan for all storm sewer and drainage systems to remain a portion of
the development. (Ord. 837, 10-10-1987)
012-10: CORNER LOTS:
Corner lots shall not be less than twenty feet (20') greater in lot frontage
than the minimum lot frontage required for each development parcel so as to
permit adequate building setbacks on both front and side streets. (Ord. 837,
10-10-1987)
012-99: LEGISLATIVE HISTORY:
Ord. 837, 10-10-1987; Ord. 872, 3-20-1989; Ord. 971, 10-28-1991; Ord. 1011, 7-
7-1992; Ord. 1040, 11-23-1992; Ord. 1053, 7-6-1993; Ord. 1759, 6-18-2007; Ord.
1857, 2-8-2010.
PUD #13
STONEBRIDGE
SECTION:
013-01: Legal Description
013-02: Sketch Plan
013-03: Conditions
013-04: Building Restrictions, Easements And Covenants
013-99: Legislative History
013-01: LEGAL DESCRIPTION:
The legal description for the Stonebridge PUD is as follows:
Beginning at a point 33.0 feet N89°55'45"E of the W1/4 corner of Section 8-78-
25, said point being on the east R.O.W. line of 50th Street and on the north
line of the SW1/4 of Section 8-78-25; thence N89°55'45"E, along said north
line, 3207.04 feet; thence S0°19'45"W, 423.5 feet; thence N89°55'45"E, 720.0
feet to a point on the west R.O.W. line of 39th Street; thence S0°19'45"W,
along said west R.O.W. line, 594.53 feet to a point on the south R.O.W. line of
Fisher Street; thence S88°54'08"W, along said south R.O.W. line, 275.15 feet to
a point on the east R.O.W. line of Walnut Street, said point also being the NW
corner of Lot 8, Block 4 of Ashawa, an O.P.; thence S0°19'45"W, along said east
R.O.W. line and the west line of Lots 8, 9, 10 of said Block 4, 198.0 feet to
the SW corner of said Lot 10; thence S88°54'08"W along the south line of Lot 5,
Block 3 of Ashawa extended east and said Lot 5, 198.0 feet to the SW corner of
said Lot 5; thence S0°19'45"W along the west line of Lots 4, 3 and 2 and Lot 2
of Block 3, of Ashawa and Lot 2 extended south, 251.13 feet to a point on the
south line of Depot Place; thence N81°32'05"W, along said south line of Depot
Place, 824.17 feet to a point on the north-south centerline of Section 8-78-25;
thence S0°16'05"W along said centerline 50.51 feet to a point on the north
R.O.W. line of the Chicago & Northwestern Railway Co.; thence N81°32'05"W along
said north R.O.W. line 2625.75 feet to a point on the east R.O.W. line of 50th
Street; thence N0°01'45"E along said east R.O.W. line 1013.95 feet to the point
of beginning.
All of the above described parcel being in the South 1/4 of Section 8, Township
78 North, Range 25 West of the 5th P.M., City of West Des Moines, Polk County,
Iowa, and containing 103.7040 acres more or less.
(Ord. 633, 3-5-1979)
013-02: SKETCH PLAN:
On file with the Community Development Department of the City and made a part
of this comprehensive plan amendment and rezoning approval, for concept
description and delineation is the sketch plan document prepared by Crose-
Gardner and Associates and dated November 9, 1978, with amendment thereto dated
February 19, 1979. Said amendment represents a change in street alignment only.
(Ord. 633, 3-5-1979)
013-03: CONDITIONS:
Whereas Section 6 of Ordinance 497, amending Ordinance 430 by creating Article
XXa, PUD District, establishes certain regulations and guidelines pertaining to
accompanying information required on a final site plan and final site plan
documents. Now therefore, the following conditions, restrictions, and
regulations are adopted as a part of this approval, to wit:
   A.   Plan Requirements: The plan shall incorporate a maximum of three
hundred fifty two (352) residential dwelling units intended for owner
occupancy, and which shall be generally distributed by design criteria as
follows:
      1.   As shown on the sketch plan, there shall be incorporated at least
one tier of single-family detached dwelling lots bordering the north boundary
of the plan, such building lots being a minimum of eighty feet (80') in
frontage, and ten thousand (10,000) square feet in area.
      2.   There shall be incorporated generally, a second horizontal tier of
single-family detached building lots which shall be directly south of the
aforementioned lots noted in subsection 1a of this Section. This second tier of
lots shall be a minimum of seventy five feet (75') in frontage, and eight
thousand five hundred (8,500) square feet in area.
      3.   All single-family detached building lots both north and south of
Stonebridge Road as shown on the plan, and other than as noted above, shall be
sixty feet (60') minimum frontage.
      4.   All bi-attached structures shown as part of the plan shall
incorporate an approximate one hundred sixteen (116) total dwelling units,
shall be located towards the far end of the project southerly of Stonebridge
Road, and shall be built upon lots with a minimum of seventy feet (70') in
width and eight thousand five hundred (8,500) square feet in area; provided,
that said lots after being built upon, may be further divided down the common
wall of the structure and common center line of the lot to provide a separate
ownership parcel attributable to each dwelling unit.
   B.   Setbacks: All structures shall maintain a minimum twenty five foot
(25') front yard setback, except those adjoining 50th Street, 39th Street, and
Stonebridge Road. Structures bordering 39th Street and Stonebridge Road shall
maintain a minimum thirty foot (30') front yard setback. All structures along
50th Street shall maintain a minimum of thirty five feet (35') in front yard
setback.
      1.   All single-family detached structures shall, with the exception of
corner lots, maintain a minimum side yard of seven feet (7') for any one side,
with a total of fifteen feet (15') for both sides.
      2.   To all corner lots shall be added an additional twenty feet (20'),
over and above those minimum lot frontages noted in Section 013-03, subsection
A1 of this Ordinance. No structure located on a corner lot shall be set closer
than twenty five feet (25') to a public right-of-way.
      3.   All bi-attached units shall maintain a minimum total side yard
setback of ten feet (10'), with not less than five feet (5') on any one side.
      4.   Rear yard setbacks shall be a minimum of thirty five feet (35') for
a single-family detached structure, and thirty feet (30') for bi-attached
structures.
   C.   Elements Included: The Western Hills Creek natural floodway/parkway
area shall incorporate the following elements:
      1.   The reserved floodway/parkway shall be a minimum of one hundred
forty feet (140') in width unless a greater area of dimension be required to
provide future trunk utilities, or be required for flood protection based upon
information supplied to the City as part of the consultant study now being
prepared on the creek.
      2.   The one hundred forty foot (140') width shall, to the extent
possible, be centered upon the existing creek channel.
      3.   The parkway shall be dedicated to the City at no cost concurrent
with the platting of the adjoining property. Prior to said dedication, however,
the owner/developer shall provide engineering plans to the City's
specifications and construct such improvements as shall be required to bring
the channel to a nonerodible slope and velocity. Nonerodible slope is defined
as a maximum slope of one-half percent (0.50%). Nonerodible velocity is defined
as five feet (5') to seven feet (7') per second. This may be achieved by use of
gabion drop structures, street crossing structures, or such other method of
good engineering practice as shall be approved by the City Engineer.
      4.   Prior to dedication, the developer shall remove all fallen trees,
debris, and other obstructions from the creek exclusive of landscaping to be
preserved. All areas of the creek including those disturbed by construction,
cleaning, or grading in conjunction with adjoining lots, shall be seeded by the
developer prior to dedication to the City.
   D.   Additional Regulations:
      1.   The Western Hills Creek crossing as part of Stonebridge Road shall
be designed and constructed by the developer at no cost to the City of West Des
Moines. Said structure as designed shall be capable of conveying without the
creation of more than one foot (1') of backwater, the discharge quantity of a
100-year return frequency storm.
      2.   An approximate one and sixty-five hundredths (1.65) acre rectangular
parcel in the northeast corner adjoining Western Hills School, shall be
dedicated without cost to the West Des Moines School Board if the Board shall
desire to accept the same. Prior to dedication, and concurrent with development
of the adjoining plat, the petitioner shall using standard West Des Moines
engineering design criteria construct a storm sewer capable of conveying
drainage through the property. And, prior to dedication, the developer shall
remove all debris exclusive of landscaping to be preserved, grade, and
hydroseed the parcel in a manner sufficient to assure initial growth and allow
maintenance with standard school mowing equipment.
      3.   All structures adjoining any drainage way shall be designed such
that all openings remain above the 100-year return frequency flood occurrence,
and at a level as shall be determined by State, Federal or local law.
      4.   Before development shall commence on any bi-attached structure, unit
floor plan design concepts shall be submitted to and approved by the Planning
and Zoning Commission and City Council. Said design concept shall also
incorporate exterior construction materials and elevations of unit exteriors.
      5.   West Des Moines subdivision engineering design standards shall apply
to all sections and areas of the development plan, including outlet storm
sewers to Jordan Creek. All work to be accomplished by the developer shall be
in accordance with plans and specifications submitted and approved by the City.
The developer shall pay all construction and engineering costs for all streets,
storm sewers, sanitary sewers, water, creek improvements, creek crossing
structures, City-owned utilities, and other improvements within the planned
unit development, with the same being in accordance with the specifications,
ordinances and adopted resolutions of the City of West Des Moines. It is
recognized that changes in the street layout as shown on the sketch plan may be
made at the time of platting by the City Council or the developer, if said
change is deemed to be the best interests of the City of West Des Moines. (Ord.
633, 3-5-1979)
013-04: BUILDING RESTRICTIONS, EASEMENTS AND COVENANTS:
The developer shall with the approval of the City Council adopt building
restrictions, easements and covenants pertaining to each area developed where
the developer and the City deem appropriate. (Ord. 633, 3-5-1979)
013-99: LEGISLATIVE HISTORY:
Ord. 633, 3-5-1979.
PUD #14
WISTFUL VISTA
SECTION:
014-01: Legal Description
014-02: Sketch Plan
014-03: General Conditions
014-04: Master Planning Required
014-05: Signage Regulations
014-06: Buffering
014-07: All Areas To Be Platted
014-08: Storm Water Management
014-09: Street Rights Of Way
014-10: Special Assessments
014-99: Legislative History
014-01: LEGAL DESCRIPTION:
The legal description for the Wistful Vista PUD is as follows:
A part of the NE 1/4 and the N 1/2 SE 1/4 Section 18 T78N R25W of the Fifth
P.M. lying east of Interstate 35, West Des Moines, Polk County, Iowa, more
particularly described as follows:
Commencing at the East 1/4 corner of Section 18 T78N R25W of the Fifth P.M.;
thence N89°31'19"W for 50.00 feet; thence S00°27'46"W parallel to and 50.00
feet from the east line of the SE 1/4 of said Section 18 for 439.70 feet to the
point-of- beginning; thence continuing S00°27'46"W along said line for 838.57
feet to the north right-of-way line of Mills Civic Parkway; thence S89°59'24"W
along said north line for 378.36 feet; thence N85°38'47"E along said north line
for 788.31 feet to the east right-of-way line of Interstate 35; thence
N01°08'11"W along said east right-of-way line for 2784.56 feet; thence
N89°59'16"E for 380.00 feet; thence N00°00'44"W for 69.94 feet; thence
N89°59'16"E for 1064.17 feet to a point that is 50.00 feet west of the east
line of the NE 1/4 NE 1/4 of Section 18; thence S00°30'56"W parallel to and
50.00 feet west of said east line of the NE 1/4 NE 1/4 for 310.70 feet; thence
S00°29'37"W along a line parallel to and 50.00 feet west of the east line of
the SE 1/4 NE 1/4 for 1273.62 feet; thence S63°03'19"W for 513.17 feet; thence
S26°56'55"E for 287.25 feet; thence S89°32'14"E for 323.30 feet to the point-
of- beginning. This parcel contains 89.26 acres.
AND
A part of the North 1/2 of the SE 1/4 of Section 18, T78N, R25W of the fifth
PM, lying East of Interstate Highway No. 35, in the City of West Des Moines,
Polk County, Iowa, platted as Outlot "B" of Wistful Vista Plat 5, in the
Records of the City of West Des Moines, and the Polk County Recorder's Office,
and which part is more particularly described as follows:
Commencing at the Southeast Corner of the Northeast 1/4 of the Southeast 1/4 of
Section 18, T78N, R25W, of the fifth P.M.; Thence S89°59'24"W, along the South
Line of the North 1/2 of the SE 1/4 of said Section 18, and the Mills Civic
Parkway (formerly Fuller Road) centerline, 874.53 feet; Thence N00°00'35"W,
75.00 feet, to a point on the northerly right-of- way line of said Mills Civic
Parkway, at the southwest corner of Lot 3 of said Wistful Vista Plat 5, which
is the point of Beginning of the parcel herein described; Thence S89°59'24"W,
along a line parallel with and 75.00 feet northerly of said Mills Civic Parkway
centerline, 227.80 feet; Thence N85°38'47"W, along the southerly line of said
Outlot "B", 37.37 feet; Thence N14°26'36"W, 984.51 feet, to a point on the
northeasterly line of said Outlot "B"; Thence S28°08'42"E, along said
northeasterly line, 1082.51 feet, to the Point of Beginning. Said tract of land
contains 2.905 acres, and is subject to easements and restrictions of record.
Legal description of parcel reserved for I-35 entrance ramp:
A part of the North 1/2 of the SE 1/4, of Section 18, T78N, R25W of the fifth
P.M., lying East of Interstate Highway No. 35, in the City of West Des Moines,
Polk County, Iowa, platted as Outlot "B" of Wistful Vista Plat 5, in the
Records of the City of West Des Moines, and the Polk County Recorder's Office,
and which part is more particularly described as follows:
Commencing at the Southeast Corner of the Northeast 1/4 of the Southeast 1/4 of
Section 18, T78N, R25W, of the fifth PM; Thence S89°59'24"W, along the South
Line of the North 1/2 of the SE 1/4 of said Section 18, and the Mills Civic
Parkway (formerly Fuller Road) centerline, 874.53 feet; Thence N00°00'35"W,
75.00 feet, to a point on the northerly right-of- way line of said Mills Civic
Parkway, at the southwest corner of Lot 3 of said Wistful Vista Plat 5; Thence
S89°59'24"W, along a line parallel with and 75.00 feet northerly of said Mills
Civic Parkway centerline, 227.80 feet; Thence N85°38'47"W, along the southerly
line of said Outlot "B", 37.37 feet, to the Point of Beginning of the parcel
herein described; Thence N85°38'47"W, along the southerly line, 275.37 feet, to
a point on the East right-of-way line of Interstate Highway No. 35; Thence
N01°08'11"W, along said East right-of-way line, 1040.00 feet, to the northerly
corner of said Outlot "B"; Thence S28°08'42"E, along said northeasterly line,
120.54 feet; Thence S14°26'36"E, 984.51 feet, to the Point of Beginning. Said
tract of land contains 3.594 acres, and is subject to easements and
restrictions of record.
The property had been previously rezoned from A-1 agricultural district R-1-
A single-family residential district and R-1 single-family residential district
to PUD planned unit development district by ordinance 926. Ordinance 1191
consolidated the provisions of ordinance 926 and the subsequent amendments,
ordinance 951 and ordinance 984, and amended the Wistful Vista PUD to change
the development standards for the portion of parcel C north of the overhead
power line and associated easement, from commercial uses to office uses as
allowed in parcel A. The amendment was consistent with the comprehensive plan
adopted at the time of the approval of ordinance 1191. The purpose of this
amendment is to change the land use designation of a portion of parcel A from
office to high-density residential. Since parcel B, which is just north of the
land that is to be changed to high- density residential is also high-density
residential, the new parcel will be referred to as parcel B-2 with the original
parcel B referred to as parcel B-1. In addition, the references to zoning
districts have been changed to reflect the new districts that were approved
with the new zoning ordinance in 1996. (Ord. 1529, 5-27-2003)
014-02: SKETCH PLAN:
On file with the community development department of the city and made a part
of this rezoning approval for concept description and delineation is the sketch
plan document for the Wistful Vista PUD planned unit development. It is
recognized that minor shifts or realignments of roadways may be necessary and
compatible with the need to acquire workable street patterns, grades and usable
building sites, but the general plan layout including the relationship of uses
to each other and the relationship of dwelling unit types to the general plan
framework, traffic layout and development requirements shall be used as the
implementation guide. Wherever conflict occurs between the written text in this
document and the notations on the sketch plan, the written text shall prevail.
The sketch plan is a graphic representation of the property included in the PUD
delineating the approximate location and configuration of the parcels for the
purpose of easier reference for the applicable regulations of this ordinance.
(Ord. 1278, 12-1-1997)
014-03: GENERAL CONDITIONS:
The sketch plan incorporates single-family residential, multi- family
residential, office, and commercial/retail land uses which shall be distributed
by area, types and location according to the sketch plan and this ordinance.
Whereas, title 9, of the West Des Moines city code, includes chapter 9, PUD
planned unit development district and establishes certain regulations and
guidelines pertaining to accompanying information required on plat and site
plan documents.
   A.   Conditions, Restrictions, And Regulations: Now, therefore, the
following conditions, restrictions, and regulations are adopted as part of this
approval and the following general site plan criteria shall be integrated into
and made a part of the development criteria for Wistful Vista PUD, to wit:
      1.   All subdivisions, public streets, public street rights of way and
general development shall adhere to the standards and design criteria set forth
in the West Des Moines subdivision ordinance and the Des Moines metropolitan
design standards as adopted by the city of West Des Moines pertaining thereto,
unless otherwise stated within this ordinance.
      2.   Any regulation, standard, provision or requirement that is not
specifically addressed within this document that is regulated elsewhere in the
city code of West Des Moines, the requirements of the city code are applicable
and shall be enforced.
      3.   In all areas within a 100-year frequency flood hazard zone, or
adjoining drainageways or detention areas involving potential flood hazards, no
building shall be erected which has a lowest floor, including basements, less
than one foot (1') above the determined level of the 100-year frequency flood
event or floodproofed to the same elevation in accordance with the West Des
Moines floodplain ordinance, and no building shall be erected within twenty
five feet (25') of any easement or property boundary of a major drainageway,
storm water detention basin or pond.
      4.   The developer, their successors and assigns, if any, shall pay all
planning, engineering, and construction costs for the interior development of
the planned unit development in accordance with the current city policies at
the time of development, as required by this ordinance, the subdivision
ordinance of the city of West Des Moines, and the Des Moines metropolitan
design standards as adopted by the city of West Des Moines, for all streets,
storm sewers, sanitary sewers, drainage improvements, detention basins, water
mains, buffers and other improvements within parcels A, B-1, B-2 C, D and E of
the Wistful Vista PUD as may be required.
   B.   Land Use Design Criteria: In addition to the general conditions as
stated in subsection A of this section, the following land use design criteria
shall apply to the development areas designated by parcel on the sketch plan.
The sketch plan document which is made a part of this rezoning action per
section 014-02 of this ordinance, delineates five (5) parcels of the PUD as
parcels A, B-1, B-2, C, and D for application of specific standards of land use
and development regulations, and one parcel, parcel E, to be reserved for
future interstate ramp right of way. The following development standards and
use regulations shall apply to each of the individual parcels as applicable:
      1.   Parcel A: Professional and semiprofessional office uses permitted
within the PCP professional commerce park district of the city of West Des
Moines, Iowa, shall be permitted within parcel A as shown on the sketch plan of
the Wistful Vista PUD. (Ord. 1278, 12-1-1997)
In addition, collector motor vehicle sales will be allowed as a permitted use
provided that: a) there is no outdoor storage or display of motor vehicles or
motor vehicle parts; b) there is no signage; c) business is conducted by
appointment only. "Collector" is defined as a motor vehicle that appreciates in
value over time and has one or more of the following characteristics: is
usually driven on a limited basis, is one of a limited number of existing
models, generally is at least fifteen (15) years old or is an antique (25 years
old or older). The community development director shall have the authority to
interpret and administer this ordinance. (Ord. 1655, 10-24-2005)
         a.   Development Standards: All open space requirements and height
regulations of the professional commerce park district (PCP) of the city of
West Des Moines, with the exception of the following minimum required building
setbacks: thirty feet (30') front yard, thirty five feet (35') rear yard and
ten feet (10') side yard, to any development within parcel A. Minimum lot width
requirement of two hundred feet (200') and minimum lot area requirement of two
(2) acres shall apply to any development in parcel A, provided minimum lot area
requirements shall not prohibit multiple use of a planned office park on a
minimum lot with the provisions properly set forth for control and maintenance
of those facilities, utilities and uses which must be installed and maintained
for joint use by the property owners of the common facilities. The placement of
multiple buildings on a minimum lot shall be developed as a single or unified
project with buildings consistent in architectural design and use of materials,
and organized utilizing a compatible planned open space, landscape plan, and
parking plan to serve and maintain a unified master plan concept.
Prior to development within any part of parcel A, a master plan shall be
prepared showing the location of street patterns in order to assure workable
street patterns, grades and usable building sites.
For those parts of parcel A which shall adjoin areas to the north to be zoned
and developed for single-family detached residential housing, a minimum sixty
foot (60') buffer setback, which may include a pond, shall be provided. No
building, accessory structure, drive or parking area shall be located or
encroach into the sixty foot (60') buffer setback.
Off street parking lots shall have a minimum fifteen foot (15') setback from
public street rights of way and minimum ten foot (10') setback from adjoining
properties if said parking lot is not part of a common parking lot jointly used
by adjoining properties. Parking lots shall be sufficiently screened, as
practical, from public street view and surrounding residential properties with
the use of landscaping, earth berming, and/or wall structures as may be
required by the city. (Ord. 1522, 4-28-2003)
         b.   Architecture: The architectural design of any building shall be
acceptable to the city, provided acceptance of the architectural design shall
not be unreasonably withheld, and all buildings within the parcel shall have as
a primary element of the exterior being fascia glass, face brick, concrete
panel, or stone panels, with all sides of any building built on the property
consistent in design and use of materials. No wood, masonite, visual asphaltic
exterior wall metal or plastic siding, nonarchitectural sheet metal, concrete
block or other similar materials shall constitute a portion of any building
exterior, except as trim material, unless the city council of the city of West
Des Moines, after review by the planning and zoning commission of West Des
Moines shall determine said materials when used as a primary element, enhances
the physical appearance, provides greater compatibility of the building design
with the adjoining neighborhood and continuity desired to unite all structures
within the property together into one unified master plan concept for a planned
office park on a minimum lot.
      2.   Parcels B-1 And B-2: All general use and dwelling unit density
regulations, performance standards and provisions set forth in title 9, chapter
5 of the city code, as amended, for RH residential high-density district shall
apply to any development within parcels B-1 and B-2 as shown on the sketch
plan, except as may be further provided herein and provided only residential
uses shall be permitted.
Design and use of materials for the construction of any building within parcels
B-1 and B-2 shall be acceptable to the city, provided acceptance shall not be
unreasonably withheld, and accomplished in a manner compatible with the
adjoining residential uses in the neighborhood. Architectural design for multi-
family buildings shall attempt to express a creative presentation of exterior
building materials, exterior details and texture, treatment of windows and
doors, and use of angles and multiplicity of planes within the wall and roof
design to lessen the plainness of appearance which can be characteristic of
large residential buildings.
RH zone district regulations for lot area, frontage, and yard requirements
shall apply, unless noted otherwise. All accessory structures shall meet
minimum setback requirements as set forth in title 9 of the city code. Off
street parking lots shall have a minimum fifteen foot (15') setback from
internal public street rights of way, minimum twenty foot (20') setback from
South 50th Street right of way, and minimum ten foot (10') setback from
adjoining properties if said parking lot is not part of a common parking lot
jointly used by adjoining properties. Parking lots shall be sufficiently
screened, as practical, from public street view and surrounding residential
properties with the use of landscaping, earth berming, and/or wall structures
as may be required by the city.
         a.   Parcel B-1: Parcel B-1 shall be a maximum of twenty (20) acres in
size and limited to two hundred ten (210) dwelling units at no greater than
eleven (11) dwelling units per acre, which shall be developed with residential
buildings of no greater than three (3) stories in height. No dwelling unit
shall be located closer than fifty feet (50') to South 50th Street.
         b.   Parcel B-2: Parcel B-2 shall be a maximum of fifteen (15) acres
in size and limited to two hundred thirty two (232) dwelling units and no
greater than sixteen (16) dwelling units per acre, which shall be developed
with residential buildings of no greater than three (3) stories in height. A
thirty foot (30') buffer park along Interstate 35 and parcel E, and a twenty
foot (20') setback from the overhead electric transmission line easement shall
be required. No structures (including accessory structures) shall be located
within the buffer park or the overhead electric transmission line easement.
(Ord. 1278, 12-1-1997)
      3.   Parcel C: All general use regulations, performance standards and
provisions set forth in title 9, chapter 6 of the city code for the SC support
commercial district shall apply to any development proposal for the property
within parcel C as shown on the sketch plan, except as shall be further
provided herein. This parcel shall encompass a maximum of twenty six (26)
acres. (Ord. 1529, 5-27-2003)
         a.   Permitted Uses: Allowed uses shall include all permitted and
permitted conditional uses allowed within the PCP professional commerce park
district and within the SC support commercial district and the within CMC
community commercial district as outlined in the commercial use matrix of title
9 of the city code, unless noted otherwise within this ordinance. Wherever
there is a conflict between the processing of a particular use in the
identified districts, the more stringent process shall be required. Within
parcel C, the following uses shall be prohibited, unless otherwise noted in
this ordinance:
Adult entertainment establishments (part of SIC 5999).
Auto and home supply stores (SIC 553).
Automobile repair, services, and parking (SIC 75), except car washes.
Automotive/boat/vehicle dealers (SIC 551, 552, 555, 556, 557, 559).
Recreational vehicle repair services, agricultural equipment repair services,
miscellaneous automotive repair services (part of SIC 7699).
Truckstops (SIC 5541).
These uses may be allowed as permitted conditional uses, subject to proper
location and design, which will be reviewed at the time of site plan
application:
One convenience market or service station which vends gasoline and one
automatic car wash (SIC 7542) will be allowed within the Wistful Vista PUD.
One eating place with drive-through (part of SIC 5812) will be allowed within
the Wistful Vista PUD. (Ord. 1548, 9-29-2003)
         b.   Development Standards: Lot area, lot frontage and yard
requirements shall comply with standards of the SC zone district unless
otherwise noted herein; provided, however, the minimum setback from any
internal public street right of way may be a minimum of fifty feet (50').
Multiple use of a lot by more than one building shall be designed to be
consistent in architectural design and use of materials, and organized
utilizing a compatible planned open space, landscape plan, and parking plan to
serve and maintain a unified master plan concept; multiple buildings separated
by parking areas or drives and lots less than two (2) acres in size may be
considered acceptable if approved by the planning and zoning commission and
city council as an acceptable master development plan for parcel C. (Ord. 1278,
12-1-1997)
Off street parking lots shall have a minimum fifteen foot (15') setback from
public street rights of way and a minimum ten foot (10') setback from adjoining
properties if said parking lot is not part of a common parking lot jointly used
by adjoining properties. Parking lots shall be sufficiently screened, as
practical, from public street view and surrounding residential properties with
the use of landscaping, earth berming, and/or wall structures as may be
required by the city. Adequate open space, landscape plantings, earth berming
and/or other landscape elements shall be designed and constructed at the
northwest corner of the intersection of existing Mills Civic Parkway and South
50th Street as agreed to by the city and developer to complement the open
space, landscape plantings, earth berming and/or other landscape elements which
shall also be required at the other three (3) corners of the intersection of
existing Mills Civic Parkway and South 50th Street to create an attractive and
aesthetically pleasing intersection and entryway from the future Interstate 35
interchange into the city of West Des Moines. (Ord. 1529, 5-27-2003)
Office buildings, hotels and motels may exceed the maximum height regulation of
thirty five feet (35') as set forth in the SC zone district. No building or
structure shall be located within the one hundred foot (100') wide overhead
electric transmission easement. (Ord. 1278, 12-1-1997)
In parcel C, a structure of seventy five thousand (75,000) square feet or
greater may be located no closer than thirteen feet (13') from the west PUD
boundary. All other structures must comply with the setback requirements set
out in this ordinance.
         c.   Architecture: The architectural design of any building shall be
acceptable to the city, provided acceptance of the architectural design shall
not be unreasonably withheld. Due to the fact that parcel C is located at one
of the main entrances of the city, it is appropriate to regulate the
architecture of the area to a higher degree. Building facades should be varied
and articulated to provide visual interest. All sides of the building open to
public view should be treated with similar levels of architectural style.
Building facades that are adjacent to pedestrian traffic shall have pedestrian
scale details. All buildings within the parcel shall have as a primary element
of the exterior being fascia glass, face brick, concrete panels, or stone
panels, with all sides of any building built on the property consistent in
design and use of materials. No wood, Masonite, visible asphaltic exterior wall
or roof material (including asphalt shingles), metal or plastic siding,
nonarchitectural sheet metal, concrete block, or other similar materials shall
constitute a portion of any building exterior, except as a trim material,
unless the city council of the city of West Des Moines, after review by the
planning and zoning commission of West Des Moines shall determine said material
when used as a primary element, enhances the physical appearance.
The architecture of canopies of drive-throughs, gasoline pumps, etc., shall be
consistent with the principal building, including the application of brick to
canopy support columns. Flush mounted lenses will be required for canopy
lighting. (Ord. 1548, 9-29-2003)
      4.   Parcel D: All general use and dwelling unit density regulations,
performance standards and provisions set forth in title 9, chapter 7 of the
city code, as amended, for the R-1 single-family residential district shall
apply to any development within parcel D as shown on the sketch plan, except as
may be further provided herein and provided only residential uses shall be
permitted.
This parcel shall encompass a maximum of seventy two (72) dwelling units and no
greater than five (5) dwelling units per acre, which shall be developed with
residential buildings of no greater than two (2) stories in height. Design and
use of materials for the construction of any building within parcel D shall be
acceptable to the city, provided acceptance shall not be unreasonably withheld,
and accomplished in a manner compatible with the adjoining residential uses in
the neighborhood.
RS-6 zone district regulations for lot area, frontage, and yard requirements
shall apply, except no dwelling unit shall be located closer than fifty feet
(50') to South 50th Street. Single-family detached residential dwelling units
shall be located no closer than thirty feet (30') to South 50th Street. All
accessory structures shall meet minimum setback requirements as set forth in
the city code for accessory structures. (Ord. 1278, 12-1-1997)
014-04: MASTER PLANNING REQUIRED:
Prior to development within any part of any parcel, a master plan shall be
prepared showing the location of new public streets within or adjoining the
parcel in order to assure workable street patterns, grades and usable building
sites. (Ord. 1278, 12-1-1997)
014-05: SIGNAGE REGULATIONS:
No pole sign, as defined by the West Des Moines city sign code, shall be
incorporated into any development within the Wistful Vista PUD. All signage
within the PUD shall comply with title 9, chapter 18, "Signs", of the city code
of the city of West Des Moines.
All signage constructed as wall signs on building fascia within the PUD shall
incorporate aesthetic features compatible with the overall character of the
development. All wall signs will be composed of solid individual letters
attached to the building fascia, or individual letters of anodized aluminum,
galvanized metal, illuminated self-contained with translucent plastic faces set
in anodized aluminum returns and trim; panel signs with letters incorporated or
painted upon a panel or wall area shall be prohibited. Advertising or
promotional temporary signage attached to exterior windows or walls including
exposed neon lights visible from the exterior of the building shall be
prohibited. (Ord. 1278, 12-1-1997)
014-06: BUFFERING:
Adequate treatment or buffering of negative aspects of buildings (loading
docks, garbage dumpsters and HVAC mechanical units) from any public street and
adjoining properties shall be required. Buildings shall not be located and
designed to expose loading docks or doors, loading areas or the rear of the
buildings to public streets.
All development within the Wistful Vista PUD shall comply with the buffering
provisions of the buffer ordinance of the city code. In situations where this
PUD specifies the provision of a buffer park easement, the building setbacks
shall be measured from the easement line. In situations where this PUD
specifies the provision of a buffer park, the buffer may be included in the
setback.
No outside storage of materials or displays of merchandise shall be permitted.
Outdoor displays and sales will be limited only to those which have been
approved through the temporary use permit or special event process. Outdoor
dining areas shall be prohibited unless approved as part of a site plan or
permitted conditional use permit application.
Buffer park areas are intended to screen and buffer negative elements of a site
through the use of berming and landscaping. Typically, if storm water detention
areas are proposed to be located within buffer park areas, the intent of the
buffer park is diminished because the berming and landscaping are limited by
the detention location. Therefore, dry detention areas shall only be allowed in
the buffer park if the berming in that immediate area still can be accommodated
and meet the intent of the buffer park and wet detention areas will be enhanced
with wetland plantings and edging treatments to create a focal point or
aesthetic enhancement. (Ord. 1548, 9-29-2003)
014-07: ALL AREAS TO BE PLATTED:
Prior to, or in conjunction with development or transfer of ownership of any
portion of the PUD, said area shall be platted in accordance with the city's
subdivision ordinance to delineate within a plat the parcel to be developed or
sold separately or any portion thereof. (Ord. 1278, 12-1-1997)
014-08: STORM WATER MANAGEMENT:
There shall be submitted to, and approved by the West Des Moines city engineer,
a complete storm water management plan for each parcel of the PUD to be
prepared by the developer prior to development within each of the individual
parcels of the PUD and for all storm sewer and drainage systems within the PUD.
(Ord. 1278, 12-1-1997)
014-09: STREET RIGHTS OF WAY:
Adequate right of way width shall be provided for reconstruction and widening
of adjoining streets to the south (existing Mills Civic Parkway) and east
(South 50th Street), with the total street right of way required to be one
hundred feet (100') in width for South 50th Street and one hundred twenty feet
(120') in width for Mills Civic Parkway, with one- half (1/2) to be provided by
the developer. (Ord. 1278, 12-1-1997; amd. Ord. 1529, 5-27-2003)
014-10: SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS:
   A.   Mills Civic Parkway And South 50th Street: With respect to any
assessments by the city of West Des Moines of special benefits conferred upon
parcel C of the property, or any portion thereof, as a result of the initial
paving and widening of that portion of Mills Civic Parkway adjacent to parcel
C, or the initial paving and widening of that portion of South 50th Street
adjacent to parcel C, the owner, on behalf of itself and its successors and
assigns (collectively by the "owner"), agrees that such assessments may be
spread against all of parcel C, as said parcel exists on the date of
assessment, by the city of West Des Moines on an area basis.
With respect to any assessments by the city of West Des Moines of special
benefits conferred upon parcels B and D of the property, or any portion
thereof, as a result of the initial paving and widening of that portion of
South 50th Street adjacent to parcels B-1 and D, the owner agrees that such
assessments may be spread against all of parcels B-1 and D, as said parcels
exist on the date of assessment, by the city of West Des Moines on an area
basis.
Each of the foregoing area assessment provisions is subject to the following
provision: Any assessment shall be reasonable and equitable in comparison to
the special benefits for such initial paving and widening assessed against the
property directly across the street from owner's parcel being assessed, and in
no event shall any payment by the owner exceed one-half (1/2) the cost of any
such initial paving and widening.
   B.   Mills Civic Parkway Interchange: Owner acknowledges that initial
construction of the interchange at Mills Civic Parkway and Interstate 35 may
require a contribution and/or an assessment of special benefits paid by owner
and owners of any benefited properties to accomplish the development of the
interchange. Owner agrees to cooperate in the future with the city and with
owners of any benefited property, which cooperation will not be unreasonably
withheld, toward working out a reasonable and equitable financing plan for the
construction of the Mills Civic Parkway interchange.
   C.   Applicability: This section shall apply to the owner and the parcels
described in this ordinance only if provisions similar to subsections A and B
of this section are made applicable to the property on the other three (3)
corners of the intersection of Mills Civic Parkway and South 50th Street
generally described in section 014-01 of this ordinance. (Ord. 1529, 5-27-2003)
014-99: LEGISLATIVE HISTORY:
Ord. 926, 8-6-1990; Ord. 951, 6-10-1991; Ord. 984, 12-23-1991; Ord. 1191, 7-15-
1996; Ord. 1278, 12-1-1997; Ord. 1522, 4-28-2003; Ord. 1529, 5-27-2003; Ord.
1548, 9-29-2003; Ord. 1653, 10-24-2005; Ord. 1655, 10-24-2005.
PUD #15
SOUTHWOODS WEST
SECTION:
015-01: Legal Description
015-02: Sketch Plan
015-03: Conditions
015-04: Building Restrictions, Easements And Covenants
015-05: 50th Street Paving
015-06: Noise Attenuation Along Interstate 35
015-07: Double-Frontage Lots Abutting 50th Street
015-08: Corner Lots
015-09: Buffers Required
015-99: Legislative History
015-01: LEGAL DESCRIPTION:
Amend the zoning map and comprehensive plan for the community by rezoning to a
PUD Planned Unit Development as described below, to wit:
Step One:
From U-1 Unclassified District to R-2 Multi-Family Residential District Garden
Apartments the north one hundred feet (100') measured on the West line of Lot 4
Southwoods Plat 1 containing approximately one and six one-hundredths (1.06)
acres and from A-1 Agricultural to R-1 Single-Family Residential District the
South 660.98 feet of Lot 4 Southwoods Plat 1, AND
Step Two:
From R-1 Single-Family Residential District, R-2 Multi-Family Residential
District, R-3 Multi-Family Residential District (Medium Density) and R-6 Multi-
Family Residential District (Medium Density) to PUD Planned Unit Development
Lot 4 Southwoods Plat 1, an official plat now included in and forming a part of
the City of West Des Moines, Polk County, Iowa.
(Ord. 671, 5-11-1981)
015-02: SKETCH PLAN:
On file with the Community Development Department of the City and made a part
of this comprehensive plan amendment and rezoning approval, for concept
description and delineation is the sketch plan document. It is recognized that
the minor shifts or realignments of roadways and units may be necessary and
compatible with the need to acquire workable street patterns, grades, and
usable building sites but the general plan layout, including the relationship
of unit types to each other and the relationship of unit types to the general
plan framework, traffic layout and development requirements shall be used as
the implementation guide. (Ord. 671, 5-11-1981)
015-03: CONDITIONS:
Whereas, Section 6 of Ordinance 497 amended Ordinance 430 by creating Article
XX(a), PUD District establishes certain regulations and guidelines pertaining
to accompanying information required on a final site plan and final site plan
documents. Now, therefore, the following conditions, restrictions, and
regulations are adopted as part of this approval, to wit:
   A.   General Conditions: The sketch plan incorporates a maximum of two
hundred ninety (290) residential dwelling units which shall be distributed by
types and location according to the plan as presented with a maximum average
density of four and two-tenths (4.2) units/acre allowed on the south twenty one
and one-tenth (21.1) acres.
In addition, the following general site plan criteria are integrated into and
made a part of the sketch plan document and its recommendation or approval:
      1.   All subdivisions, streets, street right-of-way and general
development shall adhere to the standards and design criteria set forth in the
West Des Moines Subdivision Ordinance pertaining thereto unless otherwise
stated within this Ordinance.
      2.   The development shall comply with Article XXV (Site Plans) of the
West Des Moines Zoning Ordinance, and Article XX(a) (PUD) Sections 6 and 8. No
final building plan shall be required for individual patio home lots although
the overall patio home section shall fall under this Section criteria.
      3.   With the first final development proposal, or prior thereto, there
shall be submitted to and approved by the City Engineer of West Des Moines, a
storm water management plan for the entire PUD. The drainage system plan shall
be such that the storm water management for the entire site as it relates to
the first development proposal shall be shown, in such detail as necessary to
satisfy the City. The plan shall be guided by, and adhere to the West Des
Moines Subdivision Ordinance and the Park Plaza Creek drainage study as same
pertains to storm water management, with the provision made for conveyance of
the 100-year return frequency rainfall (event), including the provision for on-
site temporary detention and storage equivalent to limiting the release of
storm water runoff from all areas tributary to Park Plaza Creek to eight-tenths
(0.8) cfs per acre. No use shall be permitted in a drainage easement other than
open space.
      4.   In all areas involving potential flood hazards, no residential
structure shall be erected which has a lowest floor, including basements, less
than one foot (1') above the determined level of the 100-year return frequency
rainfall event.
      5.   The petitioners seeking this rezoning, their successors and assigns,
if any, shall pay all construction and engineering costs for the interior
development of the planned unit development, as required by the Subdivision
Ordinance of the City of West Des Moines, Iowa, for all streets, storm sewers,
sanitary sewers, creek improvements, creek crossing structures, City-owned
utilities, buffers, and other improvements as may be required by the
Subdivision and Zoning Ordinances within the PUD. The term "within" shall be
construed to encompass the full width of 50th Street adjoining the southern
portion of Lot 4.
   B.   Land Use Design Criteria: In addition to the general criteria as stated
in subsection A above, the following land use design criteria shall apply to
the individual unit designations as set forth:
      1.   Patio Homes (Single-Family Attached/Detached):
         a.   All development shown as patio home in character, shall
incorporate a minimum lot frontage of forty five feet (45'), a minimum lot area
of five thousand six hundred (5,600) square feet, a minimum rear yard setback
of thirty feet (30') with all front yard setbacks on restricted residential
streets staggered with a minimum setback of twenty feet (20') and a minimum
average setback of twenty two feet (22'). Patio home lots which abut any other
classification of street shall have a minimum front yard setback of twenty five
feet (25') from the street right-of-way except when abutting 50th Street in
which case a minimum setback of thirty feet (30') will be required. (Ord. 671,
5-11-1981)
         b.   All development shown as patio lots (50 foot average frontage),
when platted, shall have an average minimum lot frontage of fifty feet (50')
for all lots, shall have an average minimum lot area of six thousand two
hundred fifty (6,250) square feet per lot and shall abide by all setbacks as
established in subsection B1a of this Section. (Ord. 754, 4-22-1985)
         c.   Units may be either detached or bi-attached in character. No
patio unit shall be set closer than two feet (2') to a property line, and the
minimum sum of both side yards for each lot shall be ten feet (10'). All
structures other than those attached by a common wall shall have a minimum
separation of ten feet (10').
         d.   Before development shall commence on any patio home segments of
the plan, a master plan and unit concept shall be submitted to, and approved by
the Planning and Zoning Commission and City Council pursuant to Article XXV
(Site Plans) of the West Des Moines Zoning Ordinance. The site plan information
shall contain the following: 1) exterior construction materials; 2) elevations
of exteriors of units; and 3) such other design elements as shall be
applicable. (Ord. 671, 5-11-1981)
      2.   Six-Plexes, Eight-Plexes And Ten-Plexes:
         a.   All lots set forth as six-plexes, eight-plexes or ten-plexes
shall in addition to requirements set forth in subsection A, General
Conditions, of this Section shall comply with open space and parking
requirements set forth in Articles XXII and XXIII of the West Des Moines Zoning
Ordinance.
         b.   No unit shall be located closer than thirty five feet (35') to
the right-of-way of Interstate 35. All units shall have a thirty foot (30')
minimum rear yard setback, a minimum side yard setback of ten feet (10'), and a
minimum twenty five foot (25') setback from public street right-of-way, except
if abutting E. P. True Parkway in which case a minimum thirty foot (30')
setback will be required.
         c.   All lots designated as six-plex, eight-plex or ten-plex shall be
developed as such with the density shown being maximum densities permitted, and
do not represent an assurance of the total number of units to be developed.
Actual densities shall be based upon the site plan approach pursuant to Article
XXV (Site Plans) of the West Des Moines Zoning Ordinance, which shall
incorporate all provisions of individual unit design, open space, parking,
drainage, landscaping, and such additional factors as shall lead to a sound
planning and development scheme which integrates a particular segment into an
overall neighborhood plan.
         d.   Each six-plex lot shall incorporate a minimum lot frontage of one
hundred twenty five feet (125') and a minimum area of fifteen thousand six
hundred twenty five (15,625) square feet. Each eight-plex lot shall incorporate
a minimum lot frontage of one hundred fifty feet (150') and a minimum area of
eighteen thousand seven hundred fifty (18,750) square feet. Each ten-plex lot
shall incorporate a minimum lot frontage of two hundred feet (200') and a
minimum area of twenty five thousand (25,000) square feet. (Ord. 754, 4-22-
1985)
      3.   Multi-Family Housing:
         a.   The development shown as multi-family housing shall in addition
to the requirements set forth in subsection A, General Conditions, of this
Section, shall comply with the open space and parking requirements as set forth
in Articles XXII and XXIII of the West Des Moines Zoning Ordinance.
         b.   No unit shall be located closer than thirty five feet (35') to
the right-of-way of Interstate 35. All units shall have a minimum thirty foot
(30') setback from any public street and a twenty five foot (25') setback from
any adjoining residential lots.
         c.   Densities as shown on the sketch plan are maximum densities
permitted, and do not represent any assurance of the total number of units to
be developed. Actual densities shall be based upon site plan approval pursuant
to Article XXV (Site Plans) of the West Des Moines Zoning Ordinance which shall
incorporate all provisions of individual unit design, open spaces, parking,
drainage, landscaping and such additional facts as shall lead to a sound
planning and development scheme. (Ord. 671, 5-11-1981)
015-04: BUILDING RESTRICTIONS, EASEMENTS AND COVENANTS:
The developer shall with the approval of the City Council adopt building
restrictions, easements and covenants pertaining to each area developed where
the developer and the City deem appropriate. (Ord. 671, 5-11-1981)
015-05: 50TH STREET PAVING:
Made a part of this rezoning request the petitioner agrees to pave 50th Street
from where 50th Street intersects Delavan Drive to the south boundary of the
Southwoods West PUD. Said paving shall be accomplished in accordance with the
City of West Des Moines Engineering Department specifications and prior to the
granting of any access to 50th Street from the PUD. (Ord. 671, 5-11-1981)
015-06: NOISE ATTENUATION ALONG INTERSTATE 35:
In order to promote a living environment free from the excessive noise produced
by vehicular traffic upon Interstate 35 the developer, with approval by the
City Planning and Zoning Commission and the City Council, shall incorporate
additional plantings and proper acoustical site design techniques to reduce the
negative impact of highway noise. As part of the final site development
proposal for that area of the PUD adjoining the Interstate 35 right-of-way and
where it is shown on the sketch plan that sound attenuation measures are to be
incorporated, sufficient landscape plantings, architectural or engineering
barriers shall be provided; predominate plantings if used shall be of evergreen
type, shrubs and trees so as to assure year round effectiveness; density and
height of plantings or barriers shall be such as to provide maximum
attenuation. The incorporation of sound attenuation measures shall be the
responsibility of the developer and made a part of plat improvements when
affected properties are subdivided. (Ord. 671, 5-11-1981)
015-07: DOUBLE-FRONTAGE LOTS ABUTTING 50TH STREET:
All double-frontage lots along 50th Street shall be developed in accordance
with Section 6-6.04, subsection 5, paragraph B of the West Des Moines
Subdivision Ordinance. A complete buffer plan shall be submitted to and
approved by the City as part of the platting process for the patio homes. Final
responsibility for provision of the buffer shall rest with the developer
(subdivider) regardless of any pass through agreement. The City building
inspector shall not issue an occupancy permit for any of the affected lots
until the buffer as required within this Section is properly installed per
final site plan specifications. (Ord. 671, 5-11-1981)
015-08: CORNER LOTS:
Corner lots shall be not less than twenty feet (20') greater in width than the
minimum required lot width for each development segment so as to permit
adequate building setbacks on both front and side streets. (Ord. 671, 5-11-
1981)
015-09: BUFFERS REQUIRED:
Any six-plex lot which abuts a patio home lot shall be separated by a buffer in
accordance with Article XXIV of the West Des Moines Zoning Ordinance. The
installation of the buffer shall be the responsibility of the builder or lot
owner of the four-plex lot. The City building inspector shall not issue an
occupancy permit for any of the affected four-plex lots until the buffer as
required within this Section is properly installed per final site plan
specifications. (Ord. 671, 5-11-1981; amd. Ord. 754, 4-22-1985)
015-99: LEGISLATIVE HISTORY:
Ord. 671, 5-11-1981; Ord. 754, 4-22-1985.
PUD #16
WESTBROOKE
SECTION:
016-01: Legal Description
016-02: Sketch Plan
016-03: Conditions
016-04: Building Restrictions, Easements And Covenants
016-05: All Areas To Be Platted
016-06: Storm Water Management
016-99: Legislative History
016-01: LEGAL DESCRIPTION:
The legal description for the Westbrooke PUD is as follows:
Lot 3 Southwoods Plat 1, an official Plat included in and forming a part of the
City of West Des Moines, Polk County, Iowa.
(Ord. 821, 5-11-1987)
016-02: SKETCH PLAN:
On file with the Community Development Department of the City and made a part
of this rezoning approval for concept description and delineation is the sketch
plan document for the Westbrooke Planned Unit Development. It is recognized
that minor shifts or realignments of parking lots, internal roadways and
building sites may be necessary and compatible with the need to acquire a
workable traffic pattern, grades and usable building sites, but the general
plan layout, including the relationship of uses to each other and the
relationship of building types and sizes of the general plan framework, traffic
layout, and development requirements shall be used as the implementation guide.
(Ord. 821, 5-11-1987; amd. Ord. 897, 1-8-1990)
016-03: CONDITIONS:
Whereas, Section 6, Ordinance 497 amended Ordinance 430 by creating Article XX
(a), PUD District, establishes certain regulations and guidelines pertaining to
accompanying information required on final site plan or final plat documents.
Now, therefore, the following conditions, restrictions, and regulations are
adopted as part of this approval, to wit:
   A.   General Conditions: The sketch plan incorporates maximum of one hundred
eighty (180) residential dwelling units and three (3) acres of land reserved
for commercial retail development which shall be distributed by use, building
types and location according to the sketch plan as presented:
      1.   Any required subdivision of the land and general development shall
adhere to the standards and design criteria set forth in the West Des Moines
Subdivision Ordinance pertaining thereto unless otherwise stated within this
Ordinance.
      2.   The development shall comply with Article XX(a) (PUD) Sections 6 and
8. Site plan review by the Planning and Zoning Commission and approval by the
City Council shall be required for each parcel prior to issuance of building
permits.
      3.   In all areas adjoining drainageways or detention areas involving
potential flood hazards, no structure shall be erected which has a lowest
floor, including basements, less than one foot (1') above the determined level
of the 100-year return frequency rainfall flood event.
      4.   The petitioners seeking this rezoning, their successors and assigns,
if any, shall pay all construction and engineering costs for the interior
development of the planned unit development, as required by this Ordinance, or
the Subdivision Ordinance of the City of West Des Moines, Iowa, for all
streets, storm sewers, parking lots, sanitary sewers, drainageway improvements,
detention basins, City-owned utilities, buffers and other improvements within
the PUD as may be required by the Subdivision and Zoning Ordinances.
   B.   Land Use Criteria: In addition to the general conditions as stated in
subsection A above, the following land use design criteria shall apply to the
development areas designated on the sketch plan. The sketch plan document which
is made a part of this rezoning action per Section 016-02 herein, delineates
two (2) parcels of the PUD as Parcels 1 and 2, for application of specific
development standards of residential and commercial use and density
regulations. The following development standards and use regulations shall
apply to each of the two (2) development parcels:
      1.   Parcel 1: All general use regulations, performance standards and
provisions set forth in Article XIV of Ordinance 430 for the C-1-A Business-
Commercial Plaza District shall apply to any development proposal for the
property within Parcel 1 as shown on the sketch plan except as shall be further
provided herein. This area shall involve a maximum of three (3.0) acres.
Multiple use of the site by more than one building shall be permitted only if
said buildings are consistent in architectural design and use of materials and
organized and sited in close physical proximity, utilizing a centrally planned
open space, landscape plan, and parking plan to serve and maintain a unified
master plan concept; multiple buildings separated by parking areas or drives
shall not be considered acceptable. All uses specifically permitted within the
C-1-A Business-Commercial Plaza District shall be allowed except bowling
alleys, landscape-garden plant stores, travel trailer parks, and full service
gasoline stations; however, retail convenience stores which provide retail
sales of gasoline and other fuels for automobile use shall be permitted. Lot
area, lot frontage and yard requirements shall comply with standards of the C-
1-A District, provided the front yard depth shall be a minimum of fifty feet
(50'), and the setback from Parcel 2 may be a minimum of twenty five feet (25')
if sufficient measures are taken for proper transition and buffering of
negative aspects of the rear of the commercial buildings from the residential
apartment use.
Architecture and use of materials for the construction of any building within
Parcel 1 shall be accomplished in a manner compatible with the residential uses
within the PUD and neighborhood. The architectural design shall be acceptable
to the City, residential in character, use of material shall be wood and/or
brick exterior veneer, and the roof shall be principally of a gable or hip
style design. Off-street parking lots shall be sufficiently set back from
public streets and buffered from public street view and as practical from
adjoining residential areas with the use of landscaping, earth berming and/or
wall structures as may be required by the City. (Ord. 821, 5-11-1987)
      2.   Parcel 2: This area shall encompass apartment style residential
buildings developed as condominiums or rental units and designed for a maximum
of thirty (30) dwelling units per building in accordance with the approved
sketch plan. The parcel is approximately sixteen (16) acres and shall not have
greater than one hundred eighty (180) dwelling units. No building shall be
greater than three (3) stories. No building shall be greater than two (2)
stories in height within one hundred feet (100') of the south boundary of
Parcel 2, within two hundred feet (200') of the west boundary of Parcel 2, and
within one hundred feet (100') from the right of way of E. P. True Parkway. The
maximum number of units and number of stories for each apartment building shall
be in accordance with the approved sketch plan for the PUD on file with the
Community Development Department and made a part of this rezoning proposal.
This parcel shall be developed as a single project with architectural design
acceptable to the City and each building compatible in design and use of
materials.
No apartment building shall be located closer than fifty feet (50') to any
public street, twenty five feet (25') from the boundary with Parcel 1, and
sixty feet (60') from the west and seventy feet (70') from the south boundaries
of Parcel 2, and apartment buildings with over sixteen (16) dwelling units per
building shall not be set back closer than one hundred feet (100') from the
west and south boundaries of Parcel 2. All accessory structures shall meet
minimum setback requirements as set forth by Section 6, Article VI of Ordinance
430, provided no accessory structure shall be located within fifty feet (50')
of any public right of way, sixty feet (60') from the west and south boundaries
of Parcel 2 and five feet (5') from the boundary with Parcel 1. No building
shall be located within ten feet (10') of the drainage easement along the west
boundary of Parcel 2. Off-street parking lots shall be sufficiently buffered
from public street view and as practical from adjoining residential areas to
the west and south with the use of landscaping, earth berming and/or wall
structures as may be required by the City. (Ord. 897, 1-8-1990)
016-04: BUILDING RESTRICTIONS, EASEMENTS AND COVENANTS:
The developer shall with the approval of the City Council adopt building
restrictions, easements and covenants pertaining to each area developed where
the developer and the City deem appropriate. (Ord. 821, 5-11-1987)
016-05: ALL AREAS TO BE PLATTED:
Prior to, or in conjunction with development of any portion of the PUD, the
entire PUD shall be replotted in accordance with the City's Subdivision
Ordinance to delineate the areas to be developed separately as Parcels 1 and 2
or any portion thereof. (Ord. 821, 5-11-1987)
016-06: STORM WATER MANAGEMENT:
With the first development proposal, or prior thereto, there shall be submitted
to, and approved by the West Des Moines City Engineer, a complete storm water
management plan for all storm sewer and drainage systems to remain a portion of
the development. (Ord. 821, 5-11-1987)
016-99: LEGISLATIVE HISTORY:
Ord. 821, 5-11-1987; Ord. 897, 1-18-1990.
PUD #17
THE KNOLLS
SECTION:
017-01: PUD Established
017-02: Regulations Prerequisite To Granting PUD
017-99: Legislative History
017-01: PUD ESTABLISHED:
The City Council of the City of West Des Moines hereby gives conditional
approval to the revised Iowa Realty Community Unit Plan Proposal, The Knolls,
generally located west of 50th Street, south of Ashworth Road, north of the
Chicago and Northwestern Railroad, and east of Interstate 35. Approval is
subject to the following conditions:
   A.   The written communication presented to the City by the Iowa Realty Co.,
Inc., dated December 5, 1974, and read into the minutes of the January 13, 1975
Council meeting is hereby acknowledged by the City and made an integral part of
the plan submitted by Iowa Realty Co., Inc., and the conditions and
requirements set forth in the said written communication shall be conditions
under which the proposed community unit plan is accepted unless otherwise
modified and amended by the City.
   B.   Conditioned upon acceptance given and granted by the City Council and/
or reviewed and accepted by any other governmental entity or body with regard
to:
      1.   All necessary trunk utilities and systems including, but not limited
to, sanitary sewer, storm sewer, and water within and surrounding the proposed
site and any extension for the same from their present existing locations to
the site including any looping needed or required in the water system.
      2.   All drainage plans and structures.
      3.   All street plans and improvements, rights-of-way needed or required,
dedications or easements, and method of funding or financing existing streets
of the City adjacent to or contiguous to the proposal.
      4.   Plans for public park property and the dedication thereof including
a timetable for the same.
      5.   Formulating any deed restrictions, easements (public and private),
buffers, dedications for public purposes, and street improvements as it relates
to each parcel.
   C.   All parcels other than those platted as single-family lots (proposed
Parcels 6, 7, and 9) are accepted as being developed as PUDs in accordance with
existing CUP or PUD guidelines. Accordingly, the following maximum unit numbers
are set forth for each parcel:
Parcel No. Maximum Units
Parcel No. Maximum Units
1          68
2          123
3          124
4          52
5          87
8          43
 
   D.   Parcels 6 and 7 are accepted to be developed by R-1-A standards of the
City of West Des Moines.
   E.   Parcel 9 is accepted as modified R-1 to meet all normal R-1 standards
of platting with the following changes as proposed by Iowa Realty:
      1.   Minimum frontage shall be seventy feet (70') with an additional
twenty feet (20') added to side yards on corner lots.
      2.   The minimum square footage of each lot shall be eight thousand five
hundred (8,500) square feet.
   F.   Iowa Realty by submittal of this CUP binds itself and its successors
and assigns to compliance with the CUP/PUD resolution passed by the City of
West Des Moines on April 2, 1973.
   G.   This approval constitutes conditional acceptance of sheet #2 as
presented by the Iowa Realty Co., Inc., with the changes in Parcel 4 from high
rise to single-family attached, and Parcel 2 from single-family attached to
medium density apartment type units. Both parcels shall be bound by the
aforesaid maximum number of units set forth in subsection C of this Resolution.
   H.   Sheets 1, 3, 4 and 5, as presented, are accepted only as supporting
documents intended to convey the intent of the developer in this proposal
subject to further consideration by the City. (Resolution dated 1-20-1975)
017-02: REGULATIONS PREREQUISITE TO GRANTING PUD:
The following regulations and guidelines shall be complied with before CUP or
PUD final site plan approval is granted:
   A.   Site Information: Sufficient site information shall be submitted in
order to evaluate the use characteristics of a final site plan; such evidence
shall be included in four (4) map documents of which twelve (12) copies each
shall be submitted:
      1.   A site study exhibit showing:
         a.   A vicinity map of sufficient scale to easily identify site
boundaries and location showing the acreage of the site.
         b.   A site boundary map showing dimensions and the existing zoning of
proposed CUP or PUD area and existing land use and ownership on contiguous
properties to the site as well as the site at a scale of one inch equals fifty
feet (1" = 50') or one inch equals one hundred feet (1" = 100').
         c.   Existing and proposed thoroughfares (dashed lines) as illustrated
by the comprehensive plan or as indicated by staff.
         d.   In table form the legal description of the property, applicant's
name, requested land use of zoning, and name of project.
      2.   A site services exhibit showing:
         a.   The site boundaries and abutting streets, easements, and rights-
of-way at a scale of one inch equals fifty feet (1" = 50') or one inch equals
one hundred feet (1" = 100').
         b.   The location and availability of existing and proposed utilities
including water lines, storm and sanitary sewer lines, gas lines, power lines
and outside lighting, fire hydrants, trash container locations, and drains and
culverts including easements and specifications thereof.
         c.   Walkways, driveways, streets, truck loading areas and all right-
of-way easements including right-of-way widths and paving widths.
         d.   Parking areas including delineation of spaces and enumeration of
spaces by cluster.
      3.   A site landscaping exhibit showing:
         a.   Existing and proposed topography at two foot (2') intervals.
         b.   The location of boundaries between public or commonly owned land
and privately owned property.
         c.   The location of manmade features including fences, signs, and
monuments and representative sketch elevations of these. If used as buffers,
height and materials should be specified. (Private road signs, if applicable,
should be located at entries to site.)
         d.   Existing natural land forms including streams and drainage
courses, rock outcroppings, and live trees and significant shrubbery.
         e.   Common or public recreation areas including buildings, tennis
courts, picnic areas, tot lots, etc.
         f.   Recreational pathways including identification of dimensions and
materials.
      4.   A site plan exhibit including:
         a.   The site boundaries and abutting streets, easements and rights-
of-way at one inch equals fifty feet (1" = 50') or one inch equals one hundred
feet (1" = 100').
         b.   Walkways, driveways, streets, and parking areas.
         c.   Boundaries between public or commonly-owned land and privately-
owned property of different use classifications.
         d.   The proposed location, height, and type of all buildings with
total gross floor area identified for commercial buildings.
         e.   A proposed phasing of land development, if any.
         f.   Appearance of exterior building elevations or facades as
representative types.
         g.   A table indicating gross acreage, total number of dwelling units,
and density by phase of development independent of nonresidential use areas;
for commercial use areas, gross floor area, estimated number of employees,
number of establishments per building, parking required by ordinance and
parking provided, and open space required by ordinance and open space provided.
This table should conform to the following format:
 Phase 1 Phase 2 Phase 3
                        Phase 1 Phase 2 Phase 3
Gross acreage                           
Dwelling units                          
Dwelling unit density                   
GFA commercial buildings                
Parking required                        
Parking                                 
Open space required                     
Open space                              
Employees estimated                     
 
All exhibits shall include a scale and a north point. Sketches may be submitted
on separate exhibits.
   B.   Evidence: Sufficient evidence shall be submitted to determine the
following:
      1.   The tract of land for a project may be owned, leased or controlled
either by a single person, or corporation or by a group of individuals or
corporations. The request for community unit plan development or planned unit
development zoning must be filed by the owner or jointly by owners of all
property included in the project. In case of multiple ownership, the approved
plan shall be binding on all owners.
      2.   Evidence that the developer is capable of successfully completing
the proposed project such as a financial commitment from a lending agency.
      3.   Evidence showing how the owner or owners present or future propose
to maintain any common ground included within the development.
      4.   If the proposed development includes a common land which will not be
dedicated to the City, and the proposed development will not be held in single
ownership, then proposed articles of incorporation and bylaws of the
homeowners' association fully defining the functions, responsibilities and
operating procedures of the association must be filed. The proposed articles
and bylaws shall include but not be limited to:
         a.   Automatically extending membership in the association to all
owners of dwelling units within the development;
         b.   Limiting the uses of common property to those permitted by the
final development plan;
         c.   Granting to each owner of a dwelling unit within the development
the right to use and enjoyment of the common property;
         d.   Placing the responsibility for operation and maintenance of the
common property in the association;
         e.   Giving every owner of the dwelling unit voting rights in the
association;
         f.   If the development will combine rental and for sale dwelling
units, stating the relationship between the renters and the homeowners'
association and the rights renters shall have to the use of the common land.
      5.   Performance bond or bonds approved by the City in an amount not less
than the estimated cost of the bonded improvements, which bond or bonds shall
ensure to the City that the dedicated public streets and utilities, including
sewers, located therein and other common development facilities in each stage
of the development shall be completed by the developer within the time
specified on the final development plan. In addition, the developer will
provide adequate maintenance bonds, as determined by the City, in the same
manner as required for subdivisions in the City.
      6.   Covenant or covenants to run with the land, in favor of the City and
all persons having a possessory interest in any portion of the development
premises, that the owner or owners of the land or their successors in interest
will maintain all interior streets, parking areas, sidewalks, parks and
plantings which have not been dedicated to the City of West Des Moines in
compliance with the present and future ordinances and regulations of the City
of West Des Moines and the final development plan as approved by the City
Council shall be recorded in the office of the Polk County Recorder or in any
other government division requiring the same.
      7.   Deeds or easements running in favor of the general public for any
areas proposed for public dedication or easement.
   C.   Factors For Consideration; Standards: The following criteria shall be
used to evaluate the community unit plan development and planned unit
development zoning proposals:
      1.   All dedicated streets, sanitary sewer and storm sewer facilities
must comply with the City ordinances and specifications.
      2.   That the streets to be provided, will assure a traffic circulation
pattern which minimizes through traffic, allow for adequate turning and parking
and provides ample space for the movement of public and private vehicles for
the servicing of the proposed land uses, and the loading and unloading of
furniture, without blocking traffic.
      3.   That there will be a minimum number of conflicts between pedestrian
and vehicular traffic.
      4.   That adequate street and pedestrian pathway lighting will be
provided.
      5.   If turning lanes or other forms of traffic controls are deemed
necessary by the City Council, the developer shall provide the necessary
improvements subject to the approval of their location and design by the City
of West Des Moines.
      6.   Before final approval of the development plan, the developer must
show that the sanitary sewer facilities are of the sufficient capacity to
accommodate the development and are accessible to the development.
Alternatively, the developer must show he can provide a temporary method of
sewage disposal which meets the approval of the City of West Des Moines. The
design of the interior sanitary sewer facilities of the development shall be
approved by the City Engineer of the City of West Des Moines.
      7.   That the design of open spaces and housing will assume both east
access and privacy and that continuity of open space and recreation areas will
be maintained.
      8.   That the final plans include the planting of adequate trees and
shrubs, where not already present.
      9.   That detailed landscaping and grading will be done to assure
adequate drainage.
      10.   No modification of existing stream channels, filling of lands with
a moderate to high susceptibility to flooding, grading or removal of vegetation
in the area with moderate to high susceptibility to erosion, or excavation for
and construction of site improvements shall begin until the developer has
received final site plan approval.
      11.   During the progress of the work by the developer after approval by
the City of the community unit plan development or the planned unit development
zoning, the developer shall protect the area within the CUP or PUD from
erosion.
      12.   That no structure will be more than two hundred feet (200') from a
street, parking area or other right-of-way on which a fire truck may be
operated; in such areas, turning radii shall be adequate to permit fire truck
access.
      13.   That in a single-family residential development adequate deed
restrictions are present, running in favor of any one or more of the following:
         a.   The City;
         b.   An automatic homeowners' association; or
         c.   Individual homeowners, for the proper maintenance, care and
preservation of the exterior design, all common structures, facilities,
utilities access and open spaces by the original and all subsequent owners of
property within the development.
      14.   That in a common land ownership development, the owner or ownership
has deeded the recreation space to the City for the City to maintain or has
covenanted with the City that it will be maintained, such covenant to be
binding on all future ownership.
      15.   That in all use areas, standards of parking and open space
requirements be used which best conform to class of use permitted by other
Articles of Ordinance 430 as described in Article XXI, Off-Street Parking and
Loading Areas, and Article XXII, Open Space Requirements.
      16.   That setbacks on all exterior boundaries of the CUP or PUD tract to
be developed shall conform to the regular requirements of the district or
districts adjoining the tract, or shall provide appropriate screening of the
tract from surrounding developments.
      17.   The City Council may require recommendations as to the desirable
revisions to be incorporated in the final site plan required herein and such
recommendations shall be considered a condition of approval of the plan.
      18.   The Council may make the approval of the community unit plan
development or planned unit development zoning contingent upon the completion
of construction and improvements within a reasonable period of time; provided,
however, that in the determination of such period, the City Council shall
consider the scope and magnitude of the development and any schedule of
construction and improvements submitted by the developer. Failure to complete
all construction and improvements within the said period of time shall be
deemed sufficient cause for the Council to reject further development of the
total CUP or PUD unless an extension is approved by the Council for due cause
shown.
      19.   The City Council may condition the approval of the final site plan
upon the developer commencing construction of the development within six (6)
months after Council has approved the final plan. Failure to meet this
requirement shall be deemed sufficient cause for the Council to reject the
developer's plan unless an extension is approved by the City Council for due
cause.
      20.   No building permit for any building or other structure within the
development shall be issued until the final development plan is approved by the
City Council and filed with the City Clerk.
   D.   Request For Changes: Any change in the development plan or required
homeowners' association bylaws or certain elements of the plan are unfeasible
or are in need of sufficient modification, after the Council has approved the
plan the developer shall present such changes by resubmitting the same in the
same manner as the original development plan except the Council may waive
public hearing requiring the same.
   E.   Other Requirements: The City Council, wherever it deems necessary to
adequately protect the public health, safety and general welfare of the
community and to ensure good land use planning may impose additional
requirements and considerations before approval of the final development plan.
(Resolution dated 4-2-1973)
017-99: LEGISLATIVE HISTORY:
Resolution dated 4-2-1973; Resolution dated 1-20-1975.
PUD #18
WEST PARK
SECTION:
018-01: Legal Description
018-02: Sketch Plan
018-03: Conditions
018-99: Legislative History
018-01: LEGAL DESCRIPTION:
The legal description for the West Park PUD is as follows:
Beginning at the Southwest Corner of Section 5, thence North 00°20'30" West 583
feet along the West line of Section 5; thence North 89°51'36" East 45.05 feet;
thence 54.98 feet along a curve to the right tangent to the previous course,
the central angle and radius being 45°00' and 70 feet respectively; thence
South 45°08'24" East 572.76 feet; thence 54.98 feet along a curve to the right,
tangent to the previous course, the central angle and radius being 45°00' and
70 feet respectively; thence South 00°08'24" East 108 feet to a point on the
South line of said Section 5; thence South 89°51'36" West 518 feet to the point
of beginning, less existing road rights-of-way of 33 feet on the South and
West, all now being in and forming a part of the City of West Des Moines, Polk
County, Iowa, containing approximately 3.85 acres, more or less.
(Ord. 681, 9-8-1981)
018-02: SKETCH PLAN:
On file with the Community Development Department of the City and made a part
of this comprehensive plan amendment and rezoning approval, for concept
description and delineation is the revised sketch plan for West Park Planned
Unit Development which incorporates that property as herein acted upon and
legally described in Section 1 of Ordinance 681. The revised sketch plan for
West Park PUD as accepted and approved by the City Council of West Des Moines,
Iowa on February 2, 1987 shall be binding not only upon the herein acted upon
rezoned property but all future development within the West Park PUD as of the
effective date of this Ordinance. It is recognized that the minor shifts or
realignments of roadways, lot lines and units may be necessary and compatible
with the need to acquire workable street patterns, grades, and usable building
sites, but the general plan layout, including the relationship of unit types to
each other and the relationship of unit types to the general plan framework,
traffic layout, and development requirements shall used as the implementation
guide. (Ord. 816, 2-16-1987)
018-03: CONDITIONS:
Whereas, Section 6 of Ordinance 497 amended Ordinance 430 by creating Article
XX(a). PUD (Planned Unit Development) District establishes certain regulations
and guidelines pertaining to accompanying information required on a final site
plan and final site plan documents. Now, therefore, the following conditions,
restrictions, and regulations are adopted as part of this approval, to wit:
   A.   General Conditions: The revised sketch plan incorporates a maximum of
one hundred forty (140) residential dwelling units which shall be distributed
by types and location according to the plan.
In addition, the following general site plan criteria are integrated into and
made a part of the revised sketch plan document:
      1.   All subdivisions, streets, street rights-of-way and general
development shall adhere to the standards and design criteria set forth in the
West Des Moines Subdivision Ordinance pertaining thereto unless otherwise
stated within this Ordinance.
      2.   The development shall comply with Article XXV (Site Plans) of the
West Des Moines Zoning Ordinance, and Article XX(a) (PUD), Sections 6 and 8.
      3.   With the Phase 2 development proposal of West Park PUD or prior
thereto, there shall be submitted to and approved by the City of West Des
Moines a storm water management plan for the entire PUD. The drainage system
plan shall be such that the storm water management for the entire site as it
relates to the Phase 2 development and subsequent phase proposals shall be
shown in such detail as necessary to satisfy the City. The plan shall be guided
by and adhere to the West Des Moines Subdivision Ordinance and the Western
Hills Creek Drainage Study as same pertains to storm water management with
provisions made for the conveyance of the 100-year return frequency rainfall
event, including provision of twelve (12) acre feet of temporary detention
storage. No use shall be permitted in a drainage easement other than open
space.
      4.   In all areas involving potential flood hazards no residential
structure shall be erected which has a lowest floor, including basements, less
than one foot (1') above the determined level of the 100-year return frequency
rainfall event.
      5.   The developer of West Park PUD, their successors and assigns, if
any, shall pay all construction and engineering costs for the interior
development of the planned unit development, as required by the Subdivision
Ordinance of the City of West Des Moines, Iowa, for all streets, storm sewers,
sanitary sewers, creek improvements, storm water detention basins, creek
crossing structures, City-owned utilities, buffers, and other improvements
within the PUD as may be required by this Ordinance and/or the Subdivision and
Zoning Ordinances.
   B.   Land Use Design Criteria: In addition to the General Criteria as stated
in subsection A above, the following land use design criteria shall apply:
      1.   The Phase 2 and subsequent phases of development within West Park
PUD shall comply with open space and parking requirements set forth in Article
XXII and XXIII of the West Des Moines Zoning Ordinance. (Ord. 681, 9-8-1981)
      2.   No unit shall be located closer than thirty five feet (35') to the
right-of-way of Ashworth Road, Woodland Avenue and 50th Street. No attached
townhouse style unit shall be closer than twenty feet (20') and no detached
single-family unit shall be closer than twenty five feet (25') to the right-of-
way of any internal residential streets. No units shall be located closer than
thirty feet (30') to the east boundary of the West Park PUD or twenty five feet
(25') for townhouses and thirty feet (30') for single-family detached homes
from any drainage easement boundary. All townhouse style units except those
attached by a common wall shall have a minimum separation of ten feet (10').
Lots platted for individual detached single-family units shall be a minimum of
nine thousand five hundred (9,500) square feet in area, minimum seventy five
foot (75') frontage and conform to R-1 Single-Family Residential Zone District
standards for side yard requirements. (Ord. 816, 2-16-1987)
      3.   The maximum density of one hundred forty (140) units for West Park
PUD is the maximum permitted and does not represent an assurance of the total
number of units to be developed. Actual densities shall be based upon the site
plan approach pursuant to Article XXV (Site Plans) of the West Des Moines
Zoning Ordinance which shall incorporate all provisions of individual unit
design, open space, parking, drainage, landscaping, and such additional factors
as shall lead to sound planning and development scheme which integrates a
particular segment into an overall neighborhood plan. (Ord. 681, 9-8-1981)
   C.   Home Owners Association, Building Restrictions, Covenants And
Easements: With the first development proposal for the rezoned property as
acted upon herein and legally described in Section 018-01 hereof, if developed
as a townhouse or condominium property ownership regime, proper action shall be
taken to incorporate said property into the West Park Ltd. Owners Protective
Association and all building restrictions, covenants and other associated
conditions attached to the West Park PUD should be made to also apply to said
property. Additionally, the developer shall with the approval of the City
Council adopt easements and necessary maintenance agreements so as to protect
public drainageways and utility lines where the developer and City deem
appropriate. (Ord. 816, 2-16-1987)
   D.   Sidewalk Installation And Protection: Made a part of this action, the
petitioner agrees to install sidewalks along Ashworth Road, Woodland Avenue and
50th Street in addition to all internal streets as required by the City. Where
public sidewalks adjoin areas of permanent ponding the developer shall be
responsible for the provision of fencing, railings, walls or other appropriate
measures as required by the City to protect the public. (Ord. 681, 9-8-1981)
   E.   Double-Frontaged Units: Wherein the revised sketch plan shows lots and
units with rears facing public streets, proper measures shall be taken to
sufficiently screen the rear of the buildings from public view. As part of the
first site development proposal for each phase wherein the rear of buildings
front public streets, a screen plan shall be submitted to and approved by the
City with final responsibility for provision of the same resting with the
developer regardless of any pass through agreement. It is preferred that said
screens be incorporated through utilization of sufficient landscape plantings
and bermings with predominate plantings of evergreen type shrubs and trees so
as to assure year-round effectiveness; density and height of plantings or
architectural barriers if used, shall be such as to provide sufficient
screening. (Ord. 816, 2-16-1987)
018-99: LEGISLATIVE HISTORY:
Ord. 681, 9-8-1981; Ord. 816, 2-16-1987.
PUD #19
WOODLAND PARK
SECTION:
019-01: Legal Description
019-99: Legislative History
019-01: LEGAL DESCRIPTION:
   A.   Lot 3, Colonial Village Addition to include those portions platted as
Woodland Park, Plats No. 1, 2, 3 and 4; and the Southwest 1/4 of the Southwest
1/4 of Section 5, Township 78, Range 25, West of the 5th P.M., except the
following two portions thereof:
(a) That portion lying north of Woodland Avenue extended;
(b) An approximate 4.66 acre parcel in the Southwest corner legally described
as follows:
Beginning at the Southwest corner of Section 5, thence N00°20'3" West 583 feet
along the West line of Section 5; thence North 89°51'36" East 45.05 feet;
thence 54.98 feet; thence 54.98 feet along a curve to the right tangent to the
previous course, the central angle and radius being 45°00' and 70 feet
respectfully; thence South 45°08'24" East 572.75 feet; thence 54.98 feet along
a curve to the right tangent to the previous course, the central angle and
radius being 45°00' and 70 feet respectfully; thence South 00°08'24" East 108
feet to a point on the South line of said Section 5; thence South 89°51'36"
West 518 feet to the point of beginning, subject to existing road rights-of-way
of thirty-three (33) feet on the South and West.
   B.   A tract of land located in the East 1/2 of Section 7, Township 78,
Range 25, in West Des Moines, Polk County, Iowa, and more particularly
described as follows:
Beginning at a point that is 33.00 feet south and 33.00 feet west of the NE
corner of said Section 7, thence S00°00'00" East (assumed for the purpose of
this description only) along the westerly right-of-way line of State Farm Road,
2589.48 feet to a point on the south line of the Northeast 1/4 of said Section
7, said point being 33.00 feet westerly of the East 1/4 corner of said Section
7; thence S00°08'00" West along said westerly right-of-way line, 1003.96 feet
to a point on the northerly right-of-way line of the Chicago and Northwestern
Transportation Company Railroad (formerly known as the Minneapolis and St.
Louis Railway); thence North 81°27'09" West along said northerly right-of-way
line of said railroad, 1439.80 feet to a point on the easterly right-of-way
line of Interstate Highway No. 35, said point being 240.00 feet normally
distant from the centerline of said Interstate No. 35; thence North 10°22'38"
West along said easterly right-of-way line, 776.32 feet to a point on the south
line of the Northeast 1/4 of Section 7, said point being 120.00 feet normally
distant from the centerline of said Interstate No. 35; thence North 00°15'57"
East along said easterly right-of-way line, 2577.59 feet to a point that is
201.50 feet easterly of the centerline of said Interstate No. 35 and 60.00 feet
southerly of the north line of the Northeast 1/4 of Section 7; thence North
89°34'57" East and parallel to said north line of said Northeast 1/4, 271.48
feet to a point; thence North 00°25'03" West, 27.00 feet to a point on the
southerly right-of-way line of Ashworth Road; thence North 89°34'57" East along
said southerly right-of-way line, 1282.45 feet to the point of beginning and
containing 123.00 acres more or less, and containing the Knolls, Plats #1 and
#2.
   (Ord. 593, 5-23-1977)
019-99: LEGISLATIVE HISTORY:
Ord. 593, 5-23-1977.
PUD #20
THE SHOPPES AT VALLEY WEST
SECTION:
020-01: Legal Description
020-02: Sketch Plan
020-03: Intent Of PUD
020-04: Required Plans
020-05: General Conditions, Restrictions, And Regulations
020-06: Land Use Design Criteria
020-07: Open Space And Landscaping
020-08: Architecture
020-09: Signage Regulation
020-10: Traffic Study And Vehicle Trip Generation
020-11: Savings Clause
020-12: Effective Date
020-99: Legislative History
020-01: LEGAL DESCRIPTION:
The legal description for The Shoppes at Valley West PUD is as follows:
   Legal Description
That part of the North 80 acres of the West 1/2 of the Northwest fractional 1/
4 of Section 4, Township 78 North, Range 25 West of the 5th Principal Meridian,
described as follows: Commencing at the West 1/4 corner of said Section 4;
thence North 902.8 feet along the West line of said Section 4; thence East 50
feet to the point of beginning; thence continuing East 1,063.72 feet; thence
along a curved line concave Northwesterly, having a radius of 250 feet and a
chord bearing North 61°18'45" East, an arc distance of 250.34 feet to the point
of intersection of said curved line and the East line of the West 1/2 of said
Northwest fractional 1/4 of said Section 4; thence South 00°16'30" East 574.79
feet along said East line of said West 1/2 to the South line of said North 80
acres of said West 1/2 of said Northwest fractional 1/4; thence North 89°29'15"
West 497.81 feet along said South line of said North 80 acres to the point of
intersection of said South line and the Northeasterly right-of-way line of I-
235; thence North 75°21'40" West 732.86 feet along said right-of-way line;
thence continuing along said right-of-way line North 33°47'33" West 125.86 feet
to the point of intersection of said Northeasterly right-of-way line and the
East right-of-way line of 35th Street, West Des Moines; thence North 165.15
feet along said East right-of-way line to the point of beginning, except the
East 48.5 feet thereof, and also except that portion condemned for street right
of way as recorded in Book 9954 Page 507, all being in and a part of the City
of West Des Moines, Polk County, Iowa. (Ord. 2528, 7-18-2022)
020-02: SKETCH PLAN:
Attached hereto and on file with the City is the Sketch Plan document for the
Shoppes at Valley West PUD marked Exhibit A and is made a part of this rezoning
approval. The Sketch Plan is a graphic representation of the property included
in the PUD with delineation of PUD parcels and main circulation. Wherever
conflict occurs between the written text in this document and the notations on
the Sketch Plan, the written text shall prevail. The sketch illustrates two
areas of development: Parcel A and B for specific application of uses and
regulations allowed as outlined herein. (Ord. 2528, 7-18-2022)
020-03: INTENT OF PUD:
The Shoppes at Valley West PUD intends to provide a framework for development
standards reflective of the realities and constraints of redevelopment of a
site with existing structures, the possibility of demolition of existing
structures, and the construction of new structures on the land parcels. (Ord.
2528, 7-18-2022)
020-04: REQUIRED PLANS:
The following plans shall be required as a part of the processing of any
development application for any property within the PUD:
   A.   Planned Unit Development: A Planned Unit Development (PUD) identifies
detailed development criteria for specific areas within The Shoppes at Valley
West PUD. The Planned Unit Development shall be reviewed by the Plan and Zoning
Commission and adopted by the City Council by Ordinance.
This document shall constitute the Planned Unit Development Ordinance for The
Shoppes at Valley West PUD. This document and any referenced documents or
exhibit (included or on file with the City Clerk) are intended to specify the
components, parameters, and requirements to be adhered to and implemented in
order to ensure the realization of the site redevelopment. At the discretion of
the Director of Development Services, changes to the layout of the development
that are deemed to be 'major' changes may require an amendment to the Sketch
Plan and Ordinance.
Where the Sketch Plan and PUD language conflict, the PUD language shall
prevail.
   B.   Development Applications: For site or structure modifications, the
appropriate Development Application as determined by the city shall be
submitted for review of the proposed modifications. Unless provided otherwise
herein, said modifications shall be reviewed for compliance with City Code
provisions in effect at the time of the application.
   C.   Subdivision of Property: Subdivision of the property shall meet the
codes and regulations of Title 9, Zoning, and Title 10, Subdivision. Outlots
may be created with their purpose identified but will be considered unbuildable
for habitable structures unless re-platted as a buildable lot(s) through the
city's subdivision process. (Ord. 2528, 7-18-2022)
020-05: GENERAL CONDITIONS, RESTRICTIONS, AND REGULATIONS:
Whereas, Title 9, Chapter 9, PUD Planned Unit Development District of the City
Code, establishes certain regulations and guidelines pertaining to accompanying
information required on plat and site plan documents. Now, therefore, the
following conditions, restrictions, and regulations are adopted as part of this
approval:
   A.   General Conditions: In addition to the PUD Sketch Plan Map, the
following general development criteria shall be integrated into and made a part
of this planned unit development.
      1.   General Conformance to Subdivision Ordinance: All subdivisions,
public and private streets, public or private street rights-of-way and general
development shall adhere to the standards and design criteria set forth in the
West Des Moines Subdivision Ordinance and/or established City policies
pertaining thereto in effect at the time of development, unless otherwise
stated within this chapter.
      2.   General Conformance to Zoning Ordinance: Unless otherwise specified
herein, the development of the PUD shall comply with the provisions of the West
Des Moines Zoning Ordinance.
      3.   Building and Fire Code Conformance: All construction, remodeling and
change of use shall conform to West Des Moines building codes and West Des
Moines Fire Codes and addendums.
      4.   Flood Hazard: In all areas within a one hundred (100)-year frequency
flood hazard zone, or adjoining drainage ways, and detention ponding areas
involving potential flood hazards, no building shall be erected which has a
lowest level floor, including basements, less than one foot (1') above the
determined level of the one hundred (100)-year frequency flood event. Buildings
shall not be permitted within twenty-five feet (25') of any drainage easement
or property boundary of a major drainage way, storm water detention basin or
pond unless said location is approved as part of the development entitlement by
the city council and said building is structurally designed accordingly.
      5.   Developer Responsibilities: The Developer, their successors and/or
assigns, if any, shall pay all planning, engineering, and construction costs
for the development of the planned unit development, as required by this
chapter and approved site plans. Developer shall be responsible for cost of all
new streets, new or reconstructed storm sewers, sanitary sewers, drainage way
improvements, detention basins, water mains, buffers and other improvements as
required of the development.
      6.   Right-of-way: The Developer shall dedicate appropriate rights-of-way
and/or public easements required within the PUD, unless otherwise approved by
the City Council.
      7.   Street Lighting: The Developer shall be responsible for all costs
associated with the installation of public streetlights within or adjacent to
any area proposed to be platted or included within a development. (Ord. 2528,
7-18-2022)
020-06: LAND USE DESIGN CRITERIA:
In addition to the general criteria as stated above, the following land use
regulations, development standards, and design criteria shall apply to the
development of the PUD Parcels as designated on the Sketch Plan
   A.   The following permitted (P) or permitted conditional (Pc) uses are
prohibited in all areas of the PUD:
      1.   SIC 15, 16, 17 Building Construction Contractor and operative
builders offices.
      2.   SIC 4522 Heliport/Helistop.
      3.   SIC 47 Transportation Services.
      4.   SIC 55 Automotive Dealers, service stations, and auto and home
supply stores.
      5.   SIC 75 Automotive Repair, Services, and Parking.
   B.   PUD Parcel A. This parcel is generally considered to be located in that
area east of the eastern driveway into the site and the east property line. The
parcel will be developed under the Regional Commercial (RC) zoning district
standards and regulations, except as modified herein.
      1.   Building setbacks: any new building constructed in this PUD Parcel
will follow the setbacks from the property line and ultimate right-of-way line
as follows:
         a.   East Property Line = a minimum of twenty-five (25) feet.
         b.   North Property Line = a minimum of one hundred (100) feet from
the ultimate right-of-way line if parking is proposed along the north property
line. If the building is situated such that it is adjacent to the ultimate
right-of-way, has a pedestrian friendly façade (entry doors, glass fronts,
plaza areas, patios, etc. and not the back of the building) and no intervening
parking between the ultimate right-of-way line and the building, the minimum
building setback will be equal to fifteen (15) feet.
         c.   South property line = a minimum of forty-five (45) feet and out
of the sewer easement that is located adjacent to the sanitary sewer line that
is adjacent to the south property line.
         d.   Interior property lines = zero feet. If there are not any
interior property lines, the separation between buildings, including accessory
structures, will be a minimum of twenty (20) feet.
      2.   Height Restrictions: Maximum height at the minimum building setback
line will be thirty-six (36) feet. An additional ten (10) feet in setback will
be required for each twelve (12) feet in additional height of the building.
      3.   Parking: Parking spaces will be required according to Title 9,
Zoning, Chapter 15, Off Street Parking and Loading, for each use in the East
PUD Parcel. Except that parking rates as follows may be acceptable with City
Council review and approval: Office and retail uses shall provide a minimum of
one (1) parking space per three hundred (300) square feet of gross floor area.
Restaurants (both sit down and drive-thru) and drinking establishments shall
provide a minimum of 1 parking space per one hundred and fifty (150) of gross
floor area. Parking spaces located in the East PUD Parcel may also accommodate
the uses in the Middle PUD parcel that reasonably will be using or needing
parking in the East PUD Parcel. Shared parking easements and cross access
agreements between lots within the East PUD Parcel will be established with the
application and review of any Major Modification or Site Plan in the East PUD
Parcel. With the approval of the City Council and the execution of an
appropriate cross-parking easement, required spaces for one parcel may be
located on a different parcel. If shared parking is utilized, the total parking
spaces provided within the PUD must meet the minimum number of parking stalls
for all uses in accordance with the city code or a specified above.
      4.   Parking Setback: The parking lot setback from the ultimate right-of-
way will be equal to fifteen (15) feet. For parking spaces existing as of the
date of this ordinance that do not meet this setback, the existing condition
will be the setback for these spaces. New parking areas or full depth
replacement of parking will meet the minimum fifteen (15)-foot setback from the
ultimate right-of-way.
      5.   Parking Lot Landscaping: any reconfiguration, full depth replacement
of pavement, or new parking spaces will be required to meet the parking lot
landscape requirements outlined in Title 9, Zoning, Chapter 19, Landscaping,
including the addition of three foot berms and year-round screening of the
parking spaces facing the public street or interstate or the installation of
hardscape (walls, large stones, etc.) or a mixture of both which meets the
intent of screening the views of the parking from the public view.
      6.   Storm Water Management facilities: as part of the application and
review of a Site Plan or Major Modification for a new or replacement building
to be located within PUD Parcel A, storm water management facilities generally
capturing the storm water running through the PUD Parcel A, as determined by a
storm water management plan, will be required to be constructed.
   C.   PUD Parcel B: This parcel is generally considered to be located west of
the eastern main driveway into the development. This PUD Parcel will be
developed under the Professional Commerce Park (PCP) zoning district standards
and regulations, except as modified herein. All use and bulk regulations for
the PCP district shall apply to development of this PUD Parcel. (Ord. 2528, 7-
18-2022)
020-07: OPEN SPACE AND LANDSCAPING:
Landscaping for open space, parking lots, and screening shall be governed by
Title 9, Zoning, Chapter 19, Landscaping. (Ord. 2528, 7-18-2022)
020-08: ARCHITECTURE:
The architectural design of any building within this development shall be
acceptable to the city. The architecture shall attempt to express a creative
presentation by careful attention to exterior building materials and details,
use of fenestration, and change in building mass within the plan and roof
design to lessen the plainness of appearance which can be characteristic of
commercial buildings. Building design, materials, and colors shall provide
continuity amongst buildings to unite all structures within the development
into one project concept. All sides to each building shall receive high quality
materials, finishes, and details (three hundred and sixty (360)-degree
architectural treatment). There are no "backs" to a building. Materials should
be durable, economically maintained and of a quality that will maintain their
appearance over a prolonged time.
The building(s) within this development shall accommodate or incorporate the
following in building design and materials:
   A.   Prototypical architecture shall be prohibited in the PUD, except for
materials and colors specific to the corporate brand can be incorporated as
accents and architectural elements.
   B.   Building articulation and materials which break up the building mass
into modules that respect a pedestrian scale shall be implemented. The overall
design should minimize long expanses of wall at a single height or in one
plane. Long blank walls shall be prohibited. Variation in materials, material
modules, expressed joints, textures, colors and detailing should be used to
break up the mass of the buildings. Changes in materials should be aligned with
changes in plan or roof form to emphasize changes in building mass. In respect
to the areas of the existing building where long expanses of wall exist and are
visible to the public:
      1.   The exterior design shall accommodate or incorporate changes in
building footprint and materials to visually minimize long expanses of wall for
the entire wall segment.
   C.   The building's design should meet context and site objectives such as
providing gateways, creating visual and physical linkages and framing or
terminating views.
   D.   Variation in building height, mass and roof forms shall be provided to
create interest while still maintaining an overall building continuity. Roofs
should not be designed as attention getting devices related to the
reinforcement of signage or as an identifiable corporate image.
   E.   Entrances into buildings should be easily identified through the use of
building design and detailing. Projected or recessed entryways, change in
rooflines, addition of awnings or changes in building material are examples
that can create this effect. Building(s) with multiple tenant spaces shall be
designed to articulate each tenant facade and entry as a separate entity and to
provide visual interest to the building exterior.
   F.   Materials should be high quality, durable, and maintain their
appearance over a prolonged time. Natural materials such as brick and stone
shall be used as the major elements of the facade. Architectural concrete,
composite materials or metal panel systems acceptable to the city may be
incorporated in the design. These materials should be used in limited areas to
offer architectural detail and texture. Metal panel systems should be detailed
with finished edges and have concealed fasteners. Architectural concrete shall
have an integrated color rather than surface applied paint/staining and should
generally have texture for interest. The use of EIFS or synthetic stucco shall
be used in moderation and primarily used as an accent or trim material and not
within six feet (6') of grade. The use of vinyl materials is prohibited. The
incorporation of new materials on an existing building shall complement
existing building materials to provide a unified design.
   G.   Trim and structural elements such as posts or columns shall be sized to
the scale of the building.
   H.   Canopy supports that are subject to impacts due to vehicle traffic
shall be constructed with hard surface durable material such as brick or stone
or architectural masonry consistent with the materials used for the primary
structure for a minimum of seven feet (7') above the surrounding paved surface.
Masonry on the support columns may not be required if the columns provide a
significant design element for the canopy and/or the overall building or it is
unique in its design due to a specific architecture style to warrant the
elimination of the masonry at the base of the columns. (Ord. 2528, 7-18-2022)
020-09: SIGNAGE REGULATION:
Signage will be regulated through the provisions and standards of Title 9,
Chapter 18 (Signs) for the designated Zoning District for each of the PUD
Parcels, except as provided as follows:
   A.   Interstate Signage:
      1.   One interstate sign shall be allowed within each PUD Parcel with a
maximum of two Interstate signs along the I-235 frontage.
      2.   Interstate signs will be constructed of materials consistent with
the primary materials in the development.
      3.   All other regulations of interstate signs will be governed by Title
9, Zoning, Chapter 18, Signs.
   B.   Monument Signage
      1.   Two monument signs will be allowed along the Westown Parkway
frontage for Parcel B. The existing sign on the east side of PUD Parcel B will
be allowed to be used by Parcel A, normally considered off-premise signage, but
due to the sign already in existence and it's past use of the sign, the use
will be allowed to continue. The setback for the signs will be measured from
the property line or ultimate right-of-way easement line. All other regulations
of monument signs will be governed by Title 9, Zoning, Chapter 18, Signs. (Ord.
2528, 7-18-2022)
020-10: TRAFFIC STUDY AND VEHICLE TRIP GENERATION:
The traffic study completed by the city of West Des Moines dated May 16, 2022,
for the West Bank Corporate Headquarters estimates that the PUD area will
collectively generate a total of two thousand four hundred ninety-nine (2,499)
average daily trips (ADT); 2:20 A.M. peak; and 3:31 P.M. peak vehicle trips.
The traffic allocation indicated above shall be an entitlement to the PUD. The
traffic to be generated by these parcels must be less than or equal to that
allocated to the PUD. Traffic generation due to subsequent redevelopment,
expansion or change of use for any parcel shall not exceed the maximum traffic
allocation stated for the development. Alternate or different square foot ratio
of uses to that currently anticipated may be allowed, following completion of
an amendment to the approved traffic study analyzing the proposed alternative
and appropriate city approval if the existing uses and the proposed change(s)
collectively do not exceed the trip allocation above. (Ord. 2528, 7-18-2022)
020-11: SAVINGS CLAUSE:
If any section, provision, sentence, clause, phrase or part of the Ordinance
shall be adjudged invalid or unconstitutional, such adjudication shall not
affect the validity of the Ordinance as a whole or any provision, section,
subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or part hereof not adjudged invalid or
unconstitutional. (Ord. 2528, 7-18-2022)
020-12: EFFECTIVE DATE:
This Ordinance shall be in full force and effect after its passage, approval
and publication as provided by law. (Ord. 2528, 7-18-2022)
020-99: LEGISLATIVE HISTORY:
Valley South/Watson Center: Ord. 625, 11-20-1978; Ord. 675, 6-8-1981; Ord. 697,
11-15-1982; Ord. 797, 8-4-1986; Ord. 839, 10-26-1987; Ord. 2115, 10-5-2015; The
Shoppes At Valley West: Ord. 2328, 10-29-2018; Ord. 2528, 7-18-2022.
PUD #21
WESTDALE PLAZA
SECTION:
021-01: Legal Description
021-02: Sketch Plan
021-03: General Conditions
021-99: Legislative History
021-01: LEGAL DESCRIPTION:
The legal description for the Westdale Plaza PUD is as follows:
Lots 1, 2, and 3 of Westdale Plaza Plat 1 and Lots 1 and 2 of Westdale Plaza
Plat 2, described as follows:
Parcel 1 (Lot 1, Westdale Plaza Plat 1). An irregular shaped tract of land
located in a portion of Lot 4, except the east 335.0 feet thereof, and Lot 5,
all in Westgate Plaza 1, an official plat, West Des Moines, Polk County, Iowa,
more accurately described as follows:
Commencing at the NE corner of said Lot 4; thence N90°00'W along the north line
of said Lot 4, 335.0 feet to the point of beginning; thence S0°00'W, parallel
with and 335.0 feet west of the east line of said Lot 4, 335.0 feet; thence
N90°00'W, 100.0 feet; thence N61°59'27"W, 226.18 feet; thence N0°00'E, 205.00
feet; thence N44°27'44"E, 146.91 feet to the northerly line of said Lot 5;
thence southeasterly along the northerly lines of said Lots 5 and 4 and along a
377.23 foot radius curve to the left, 250.00 feet to the point of beginning.
Said tract of land being subject to and together with any and all easements of
record. Said tract of land contains 2.593 acres, more or less.
Parcel 2 (Lots 2 and 3, Westdale Plaza Plat 1). An irregular shaped tract of
land that is located in a portion of Lot 4, except the east 335.0 feet thereof,
and Lot 5, all in Westgate Plaza 1, an official plat, West Des Moines, Polk
County, all of which is more accurately described as follows:
Commencing at the NE corner of sad Lot 4, thence N90°00'W, along the north line
of said Lot 4, 335.0 feet; thence S0°00'W, parallel with and 335.0 feet west of
the east line of said Lot 4, 355.0 feet, to the point of beginning; thence
continuing S0°00'W, parallel with and 335.0 feet west of the east line of said
Lot 4, 152.8 feet to the southerly line of said Lot 4; thence S73°02'31"W,
along the southerly lines of said Lots 4 and 5, 463.72 feet, thence
N88°57'11"W, along the southerly line of said Lot 5, 225.84 feet, to the SW
corner of said Lot 5; thence N0°14'11"E, along the west line of said Lot 5,
514.26 feet; thence S72°24'39"E, 348.54 feet; thence S61°59'27"E, 266.18 feet;
thence N90°00'E, 100.0 feet to the point of beginning, said tract of land being
subject to and together with any and all easements of record. Said tract of
land contains 5.418 acres, more or less.
Parcel 3 (Lots 1 and 2, Westdale Plaza Plat 2). An irregular shaped tract of
land that is located in a portion of Lot 5, Westgate Plaza 1, an official plat,
West Des Moines, Polk County, all of which is more accurately described as
follows:
Commencing at the NE corner of Lot 4 in said Westgate Plaza 1; thence N90°00'W,
along the north line of said Lot 4, 335.0 feet; thence northwesterly along the
northerly lines of said Lots 4 and 5 and along a 377.23 foot radius curve to
the right, 250.00 feet to the point of beginning; thence continuing
northwesterly along the northerly line of said Lot 5 and along a 377.23 foot
radius curve to the right, 46.88 feet; thence N44°54'30"W along the northerly
line of said Lot 5, 248.13 feet; thence northwesterly along the northerly line
of said Lot 5 and along a 301.56 foot radius curve to the left, 237.13 feet;
thence N89°57'47" along the north line of said Lot 5, 9.46 feet to the NW
corner of said Lot 5; thence S0°14'11"W along the west line of said Lot 5,
500.0 feet; thence S72°24'39"E, 348.54 feet; thence N0°00'E, 205.0 feet; thence
N44°27'44"E, 146.91 feet to the point of beginning. Said tract of land being
subject to and together with any and all easements of record. Said tract of
land contains 3.954 acres, more or less.
(Ord. 1356, 4-5-1999)
021-02: SKETCH PLAN:
On file with the Community Development Department of the City and made a part
of this rezoning approval, for concept description and delineation is the
sketch plan document for the Westdale PUD. It is recognized that minor shifts
or realignments of roadways may be necessary and compatible with the need to
acquire workable street patterns, grades and usable building sites, but the
general plan layout, including the relationship of uses to each other and the
relationship of dwelling unit types to the general plan framework, traffic
layout, and development requirements shall be used as the implementation guide.
Wherever conflict occurs between the written text in this document and the
notations on the sketch plan, the written text shall prevail. The sketch plan
is a graphic representation of the property included in the PUD delineating the
approximate location and configuration of the parcels for the purpose of easier
reference for the applicable regulations of this Ordinance. (Ord. 1356, 4-5-
1999)
021-03: GENERAL CONDITIONS:
Whereas, Title 9 of the West Des Moines City Code includes Chapter 9, Planned
Unit Development District (PUD) and establishes certain regulations and
guidelines pertaining to accompanying information required on a plat and site
plan documents.
   A.   Now, therefore, the following conditions, restrictions, and regulations
are adopted as part of this approval and the following general site plan
criteria shall be integrated into and made a part of the development criteria
for the Westdale PUD, to wit:
      1.   All subdivisions, public streets, public street rights-of-way and
general development shall adhere to the standards and design criteria set forth
in the West Des Moines Subdivision Ordinance and the Des Moines Metropolitan
Design Standards as adopted by the City of West Des Moines pertaining thereto,
unless otherwise stated within this Ordinance.
      2.   Any regulation, standard, provision or requirement that is not
specifically addressed within this document that is regulated elsewhere in the
City Code of West Des Moines, the requirements of the City Code are applicable
and shall be enforced.
      3.   In all areas within a 100-year frequency flood hazard zone, or
adjoining drainageways or detention areas involving potential flood hazards, no
building shall be erected which has a lowest floor, including basements, less
than one foot (1') above the determined level of the 100-year frequency flood
event or floodproofed to the same elevation in accordance with the West Des
Moines Floodplain Ordinance, and no building shall be erected within twenty
five feet (25') of any major drainage, storm water detention basin or pond.
      4.   The developer, their successors and assigns, if any, shall pay all
construction and engineering costs for the interior development of the Planned
Unit Development, in accordance with the current City policies at the time of
development, as required by this Ordinance, the Subdivision Ordinance of the
City of West Des Moines, and the Des Moines Metropolitan Design Standards as
adopted by the City of West Des Moines, for all streets, storm sewers, sanitary
sewers, drainage improvements, detention basins, water mains, buffers and other
improvements within the PUD as may be required.
   B.   Land Use Design Criteria: In addition to the general conditions as
stated in subsection A above, the following land use design criteria shall
apply to the development areas designated by parcel on the sketch plan. The
sketch plan document which is made a part of this rezoning action per Section
021-02 of this Ordinance, delineates three (3) parcels of the PUD as Parcels 1,
2 and 3 for application of specific standards of land use and development
regulations. (The parcels are legally described in Section 021-01 of this PUD.)
The following development standards and use regulations shall apply to each of
the individual parcels as applicable.
      1.   Parcel 1: All general use regulations, performance standards and
provisions set forth in Title 9, Zoning, Chapter 6 of the City Code for the RC
Regional Commercial District shall apply to any development proposal for all
property within Parcel 1 as shown on the sketch plan of Westdale PUD, except
the following uses shall be prohibited:
Fast food restaurants with drive-thrus (part of SIC 5812)
Automotive repair and services (SIC 75)
      2.   Parcel 2: All general use regulations, performance standards and
provisions set forth in Title 9, Zoning, Chapter 11 for PCP Professional
Commerce Park District shall apply to any development proposal for all property
within Parcel 2 as shown on the sketch plan of Westdale Plaza PUD.
      3.   Parcel 3: The following general use regulations, performance
standards, and provisions shall apply to all development proposals for that
property within Parcel 3 as shown on the sketch plan of Westdale Plaza PUD:
         a.   Any use allowed in the PCP district, and the following uses are
allowed as permitted uses:
Drinking places (SIC 5813)
Motion picture theaters, except drive-in (SIC 7832)
Barber shops (SIC 724)
Beauty shops (SIC 723)
Stationery stores (SIC 5943)
Furniture stores (SIC 5712)
Jewelry stores (SIC 5944)
Service (part of SIC 7389)
Photographic studio (SIC 722)
Camera and photographic supply stores (SIC 5946)
Specialty or gourmet food store (convenience or general food
retail prohibited) (SIC 54)
Fast food restaurants with drive-thrus or uses of similar
character are prohibited.
         b.   All buildings regardless of occupying use shall have as the
primary elements of the exterior fascia glass, and concrete or face brick. No
wood, masonite, aluminum siding, or other similar material shall constitute a
portion of any building except as a trim material of no greater than ten
percent (10%) of any wall area, unless the City Council, after having received
a recommendation from the Planning and Zoning Commission, shall determine that
said material when used as a primary element, enhances the overall appearance,
and provides the continuity necessary to unite all structures together into one
project concept within Parcel 3 and be compatible with the neighborhood.
No building shall be constructed unless the same shall have been reviewed by
the Planning and Zoning Commission and City Council for compliance with this
Ordinance. No building plans shall be submitted for review unless accompanying
said structural plans, shall be an ancillary document detailing the screening,
storage, and removal of trash from the building proposed.
         c.   In connection with any use proposed in Parcel 3, space for
parking and loading shall be provided in accordance with regulations within
Off-Street Parking and Loading, Title 9 of the City Code, except as further
regulated herein.
Wherever possible, parking areas, loading ramps, utility areas, etc., shall be
effectively screened from observation and visibility by normal traffic using
all public thoroughfares within five hundred feet (500') of such area's
immediate perimeter or boundary. Screening shall be accomplished through the
design incorporation of landscaping such as planting screens using
substantially mature trees and shrubs which have a year-round effectiveness;
topography such as the natural or manmade grade differences; structural
additions such as permanent walls or other equally permanent and effective
screening innovations. Any one or combination of screening methods may be used;
providing, however, the net result shall be complimentary to the central theme
of the overall aesthetic character as well as effectively accomplish the
concealment of the area in question.
         d.   The total ground area devoted to open space for natural landscape
and landscape beautification shall not be less than thirty percent (30%) of the
total land area within the immediate site under ownership and consideration
plus additional open space equal to ten percent (10%) of the total paved area
devoted to parking, loading and drives. Such open spaces shall be free of all
drives, parking areas, structures, buildings, etc., except for those walkways,
monuments, ornamental structures, etc., considered to be necessary but
essential to the central landscape theme.
         e.   No structure shall be located closer than fifty feet (50') from
the right-of-way of Westown Parkway or any boundary of Parcel 3. All parking or
loading areas shall have a minimum setback of twenty five feet (25') from
Westown Parkway.
         f.   It is not the intent of this Section to prohibit the multiple use
of Parcel 3 by more than one building, provided if more than one building is
proposed a master plan shall be submitted to the City and approved by the City
Council. The City reserves the right to require the recordation of restrictive
covenants on the parcel setting forth guidelines for the use of building
materials and site plan development to assure that building construction shall
be compatible with the neighborhood and adjoining PCP Professional Commerce
Park Zoning District.
   B.   One monument sign each for Parcels 1 and 2 and two (2) monument signs
for Parcel 3 as a maximum, and no greater than one sign per building site in
Parcel 3 shall be utilized to identify development within each parcel. No
individual tenants shall be identified on a sign unless the tenant occupies
thirty three percent (33%) or more of the leasable area of a building.
Installation and performance standards of monument signs shall comply with
those regulations set forth in the City's Sign Code pertaining to monument
signs in the PCP District. No pole signs shall be incorporated into the
development.
The sign used to identify Parcel 2 may be placed within the required setback
limits off Westown Parkway, provided, said sign is placed within twenty five
feet (25') of the common drive providing access to Parcel 2 and a perpetual
easement is recorded before issuance of a sign permit by the City. No sign
structure shall be closer than seventy five feet (75') to another separate sign
structure within the PUD.
   C.   All signage to be constructed as wall signs on building fascia shall
incorporate aesthetic features compatible with wall signage in the development
and neighborhood. Each sign shall be composed of individual letters, listing
the store or tenant name only (product or items sold specifically excluded). No
window or door space, either exterior or interior to any building shall be used
for any sign, advertising, or similar purpose except to display the name or
address of the establishment.
Wall signage shall be allowed in accordance with the PCP regulations of the
West Des Moines Sign Code.
   D.   The outside storage or display of equipment, materials, or retail goods
is prohibited.
   E.   Ingress and egress to Parcel 2 shall be by way of a common access drive
which shall be a hard surface roadway (as required and approved by the City)
and shall be constructed by the developer, its successors in interest or
assigns, upon development of Parcel 2. A permanent private access easement as
reviewed by the City for that portion of the common drive located in Parcel 3
shall be recorded upon development of either Parcel 2 or 3, whichever shall
first occur.
   F.   With the first development proposal, or prior thereto, there shall be
submitted to and approved by the City of West Des Moines, a storm water
management plan for the entire PUD. The drainage system plan shall be such that
the storm water management for the entire site as it relates to the first
development proposal shall be shown, in such detail as necessary to satisfy the
City. The plan shall be guided by, and adhere to the West Des Moines
Subdivision Ordinance and the Blue Creek drainage study as same pertains to
storm water management, with the provision made for conveyance of the 100-year
return frequency rainfall (even), including the provision for on-site temporary
detention and storage equivalent to limiting the release of storm water run-off
from all areas tributary to Blue Creek. No use shall be permitted in a drainage
easement other than open space.
   G.   No structure shall be located closer than fifty feet (50') from the
drainage easement boundary of Blue Creek.
   H.   The petitioners seeking this rezoning, their successors and assigns, if
any, shall pay all construction and engineering costs for the interior
development of the planned unit development, as required by the Subdivision
Ordinance of the City of West Des Moines, Iowa, for all nonpublic and public
improvements as may be required including but not limited to drives, storm
sewers, sanitary sewers, creek improvements, creek crossing structures, City-
owned utilities, and other improvements as may be required by the Subdivision
Ordinance, Zoning Ordinance and this regulation. (Ord. 1356, 4-5-1999)
021-99: LEGISLATIVE HISTORY:
Ord. 698, 11-15-1982; Ord. 747, 1-14-1985; Ord. 1356, 4-5-1999.
PUD #22
COUNTRY PARK
SECTION:
022-01: Legal Description
022-02: Sketch Plan
022-03: Conditions
022-99: Legislative History
022-01: LEGAL DESCRIPTION:
The legal description for the Country Park PUD is as follows:
A parcel of land located in the SE1/4 of Section 7, Township 78 North, Range 25
West of the 5th P.M., City of West Des Moines, Polk County, Iowa, more
particularly described as follows:
Beginning at a point on the west line of said SE1/4 that is 33.00 feet north of
the S1/4 corner of Section 7; thence N00°35'39"E, 222.00 feet along said west
line to a point; thence N47°48'38"E, 176.61 feet along the east line of Jordan
Park, an official plat, to a point; thence N13°21'57"E, 483.12 feet along the
east line of Jordan Park to a point; thence N13°19'31"W, 526.76 feet along the
east line of Jordan Park to a point; thence northeasterly along a curve to the
left having a radius of 586.67 feet; an arc length of 386.62 feet, and a chord
bearing of N59°15'32"E, to a point of reverse curvature; thence northeasterly
along a curve to the right having a radius of 586.00 feet, an arc length of
328.17 feet to a point on the west right-of-way (R.O.W.) line of Interstate
Highway #35; thence S01°06'01"E, 230.11 feet along said west R.O.W. line to a
point; thence S01°47'01"E, 503.04 feet along said west R.O.W. line to a point;
thence S03°21'05"E, 965.26 feet along said west R.O.W. line to a point; thence
S89°59'59"W, 796.10 feet to the point of beginning and containing 21.1 acres
more or less.
Rezone from A-1 Agricultural District to U-1, Unclassified District, to PUD
Planned Unit Development District, a parcel of land located in the SE1/4 of
Section 7, Township 78 North, Range 25 West of the 5th P.M., City of West Des
Moines, Polk County, Iowa, more particularly described as follows:
Beginning at the northeast corner of Jordan Park, an official plat; thence
southeasterly along a curve to the left having a radius of 22,968.30 feet, an
arc length of 615.40 feet, and a chord bearing of S80°09'30"E, along the south
right-of-way (R.O.W.) line of the Chicago Northwestern Railroad to a point of
tangency; thence S81°13'17"E, 91.89 feet along said south R.O.W. line to a
point on the west R.O.W. line of Interstate Highway #35; thence S01°06'01"E,
122.25 feet along said west R.O.W. line to a point; thence southwesterly along
a curve to the left having a radius of 586.00 feet, an arc length of 328.17
feet, and a chord bearing of S56°25'22"W, to a point of reverse curvature;
thence southwesterly along a curve to the right having a radius of 586.77 feet,
and an arc length of 386.62 feet to a point on the east line of Jordan Park, an
official plat; thence N13°19'31"W, 83.24 feet along the east line of Jordan
Park to a point; thence N84°32'28"W, 90.00 feet along the east line of Jordan
Park to a point on the west line of the SE1/4 of Section 7, and the east line
of Jordan Park; thence N00°25'39"E, 525.00 feet along the west line of said
SE1/4 and the east line of Jordan Park to the point of beginning and containing
6.3 acres more or less.
(Ord. 852, 6-20-1988)
022-02: SKETCH PLAN:
On file with the Community Development Department of the City and made a part
of this rezoning approval for concept description and delineation is the sketch
plan document for the Country Park Planned Unit Development (PUD) which
delineates Parcels A and B for residential development and Parcel P for
dedication to the City for inclusion within the Jordan Creek Greenbelt Park. It
is recognized that minor shifts or realignments of roadways may be necessary
and compatible with the need to acquire workable street patterns, grades and
usable building sites, but the general plan layout, including the relationship
of uses to each other and the relationship of dwelling unit types to the
general plan framework, traffic layout, and development requirements shall be
used as the implementation guide. (Ord. 852, 6-20-1988)
022-03: CONDITIONS:
Whereas, Section 6, Ordinance 497 amended Ordinance 430 by creating Article XX
(a), PUD District, establishes certain regulations and guidelines pertaining to
accompanying information required on site plan or plat documents. Now,
therefore, the following conditions, restrictions, and regulations are adopted
as part of this approval and shall be enforceable upon the owner and/or
developer of the Country Park Planned Unit Development, their heirs,
successors, and assigns, to-wit:
   A.   General Conditions: The sketch plan incorporates a maximum of three
hundred thirty eight (338) residential dwelling units and land reserved for
inclusion in the Jordan Creek Greenbelt Park.
In addition, the following site plan and plat criteria are integrated into and
made a part of this planned unit development and its approval:
      1.   Subdivision Ordinance Compliance: Any required subdivision of the
land and general development shall adhere to the standards and design criteria
set forth in the West Des Moines Subdivision Ordinance pertaining thereto
unless otherwise stated within this Ordinance.
      2.   Site Plan Review: The development shall comply with Article XX(a)
(PUD) Sections 6 and 8. Site plan review in accordance with Article XXV of the
Zoning Ordinance by the Plan and Zoning Commission and approval by the City
Council shall be required for Parcels A and B prior to issuance of building
permits.
      3.   Floodway Fringe Development: In all areas adjoining drainageways or
detention areas involving potential flood hazards, no structure shall be
erected which has a lowest floor, including basements, less than one foot (1')
above the level of the 100-year return frequency rainfall flood event.
      4.   Internal Improvements: The owner and/or developer of the Country
Park PUD, their heirs, successors and assigns, shall pay all construction and
engineering costs for the interior development of the planned unit development,
as required by this Ordinance, or the Subdivision Ordinance of the City of West
Des Moines, Iowa, for all streets, storm sewers, parking lots, sanitary sewers,
drainageway improvements, detention basins, utilities to be dedicated to the
City, buffers and other improvements within the PUD as may be required by the
Subdivision and Zoning Ordinance. Furthermore, the petitioners, their heirs,
successors and assigns, with the passage of this Ordinance, agree to pay the
entire cost of constructing a north/south collector street and associated
utilities between E. P. True Parkway and the existing Delavan Drive as shown on
the sketch plan, and agree to pay their proportionate share of any special
assessments for the construction of E. P. True Parkway as shown on the Sketch
Plan from the right-of-way of Interstate 35 to the west boundary of the PUD.
      5.   Construction Cost - E. P. True Parkway: The owner and/or developer,
their heirs, successors or assigns shall pay all costs for E. P. True Parkway,
including, but not limited to, grading, sanitary and storm sewers, water mains,
incidental construction and paving up to thirty one feet (31') width and six
inches (6") depth reinforced Portland cement concrete paving for that portion
of E. P. True Parkway located wholly within the boundaries of the planned unit
development as shown, on file with the Community Development Department. The
City may participate in the cost of paving in excess of those widths and depths
as cited within this paragraph.
      6.   Paving - Delavan Drive: The owner and/or developer, their heirs,
successors or assigns whose property is all or part of this planned unit
development and shall derive a benefit from the paving of Delavan Drive, agree
to pay their proportionate share of the cost for any special assessment for the
paving of Delavan Drive in accordance with any benefit received as determined
through any special assessment project proceedings for the paving of Delavan
Drive.
      7.   Implementation Subject To Extension Of Public Improvements: At the
time of approval of this rezoning, the subject property does not have direct
access to public water facilities and paved streets. Precedent to the
implementation of the PUD is the provision of public improvements. In
conjunction with or prior to development within any parcel of the PUD, public
water and sanitary sewer service shall be brought to the site and extended
through the area being developed to adjoining undeveloped properties to the
south in a manner acceptable to the City and properly designed with sizes and
materials compatible with the City's plans for area wide water and sanitary
sewer service.
Prior to development within the PUD, E. P. True Parkway shall be paved from the
east right-of-way of Interstate 35 to the west boundary of the planned unit
development, and prior to, or in conjunction with any development in Parcels A
and B, and prior to issuance of occupancy permits within Parcels A and B, the
major north/south collector street as shown on the sketch plan shall be paved
to serve the area being developed and extended through the area being developed
to areas to the south adjoining the developed site to provide paved street
access to the south as required by the City.
      8.   All Areas To Be Platted: Prior to development within any portion of
the PUD, the area to be developed shall first be platted in accordance with the
City's Subdivision Ordinance.
   B.   Land Use Design Criteria: In addition to the general criteria as stated
in subsection A above, the following land use design criteria shall apply to
the development areas designated on the sketch plan. The sketch plan document
which is made a part of this rezoning action per section 022-02 herein,
delineates three (3) parcels of the PUD as parcels A, B and P for application
of the specific development standards and use regulations. The following
development standards and use regulations shall apply to each of the three (3)
development parcels. (Ord. 852, 6-20-1988)
      1.   Parcel A: This area shall encompass apartment style residential
buildings developed as condominiums or rental units and designed for a maximum
of forty eight (48) dwelling units per building, or townhouse style attached
dwelling units for rental or owner-occupancy designed for no greater than eight
(8) dwelling units per building. This parcel shall not have greater than three
hundred thirty two (332) dwelling units and no buildings shall be greater than
three (3) stories in height. This parcel shall be developed in accordance with
a master plan for the entire parcel and with the architectural design of
buildings and use of building materials acceptable to the city. The parcel may
be subdivided into smaller sites for individual development projects provided
each building within a specific project site shall be compatible in design and
use of materials.
No residential building shall be located closer than thirty feet (30') to any
public street, twenty five feet (25') from any adjoining site boundary, and one
hundred feet (100') from the right-of-way of Interstate 35, provided no
apartment style residential building greater than two (2) stories shall be
located closer than fifty feet (50') to any public street. All accessory
structures including garages shall meet minimum setback requirements as set
forth by section 6, article VI, of the zoning ordinance 430, provided no
accessory structures shall be located within thirty feet (30') of any public
right-of- way, five feet (5') from any adjoining site boundary, and ten feet
(10') from the right-of-way of Interstate 35. All off-street parking lots shall
have a minimum fifteen foot (15') setback from public streets and buffered from
public view, as practical, including any adjoining residential areas and public
streets with the use of landscaping, earth berming and/or wall structures as
may be required by the city. Principal structures with nine (9) or fewer
dwelling units may be located within ten feet (10') of each other, subject to
any applicable building and fire codes. (Ord. 1422, 10-2-2000)
      2.   Parcel B: This parcel shall encompass bi-attached single- family
dwelling units designed for owner-occupancy. The area shall be developed and
site planned as a single project with the architectural design acceptable to
the city and each building compatible in design and use of materials. This area
shall involve a maximum of six (6) dwelling units.
No residential unit shall be set closer than thirty feet (30') to a public
street right-of-way, ten feet (10') to another residential building, thirty
five feet (35') to the west boundary of the parcel, and fifteen feet (15') to
the boundary of any designated floodway easement or the north boundary of the
parcel. All accessory structures shall meet minimum setback requirements as set
forth by section 6, article VI of ordinance 430. The location and number of
driveway approaches onto adjoining collector streets may be restricted as
required by the city.
      3.   Parcel P: The owner and/or developer shall reserve for dedication to
the city that ground designated as parcel P for inclusion within the Jordan
Creek greenbelt for active park and open space use without cost to the city of
West Des Moines. Said area shall be platted and dedicated to the city free of
any liens, encumbrances and assessments with the platting of E. P. True Parkway
adjoining the parcel's south boundary. Furthermore, for the dedication of
parcel P to be included within the Jordan Creek greenbelt, the city agrees to
waive the developer's share of the mandatory fee payment for acquisition and/or
development of park system of one hundred dollars ($100.00) per acre, required
by section 6-6.12 of the city subdivision ordinance adopted by ordinance 777.
   C.   Building Restrictions, Easements And Covenants: Where the city deems
appropriate, the owner and/or developer shall on each particular area, adopt
building restrictions, easements and/or covenants in a form approved by the
city.
   D.   Soil Test Requirements: If required, owner and/or the developer shall
be responsible for supplying to the city, information prepared by a qualified
soils engineering firm, indicating that existing soil conditions are adequate
in stability and strength for construction of public and private improvements.
If determined by the soils engineering firm that adequate soils conditions do
not exist, the owner and/or developer shall indicate what measures shall be
taken to achieve adequate soil strength and stability for both public and
private improvements.
   E.   Sanitary Sewer Connection Impact Fees Or Assessments: The city of West
Des Moines is currently developing plans for the construction of a wastewater
treatment plant or expansion of metropolitan waste water treatment facilities
to serve portions of the city and areas anticipated for future expansion of the
corporate city limits. To finance costs for construction and expansion of waste
water treatment, conveyance and other associated infrastructure improvements,
sanitary sewer connection impact fees or assessments may be required by the
city. Therefore, the owner, their heirs, successors or assigns, agree to
participate in any future citywide or service area connection fee payment,
district assessment or fee payments as legally permitted to offset the city's
cost for financing expansion of the city's waste water conveyance and treatment
facilities and agrees to waive all legal formalities of whatever kind and
character required by the laws of the state of Iowa to be observed by
municipalities in the construction of like improvements where expenses of said
improvements are to be assessed against a project, district or area. All
questions of jurisdiction, the amount of the assessment, and all other legal
requirements are waived in favor of the city of West Des Moines. Nothing herein
contained shall prohibit the owners, their heirs, successors and assigns from
receiving any credit for special sewer assessments levied and heretofore paid
prior to the enactment of this ordinance on all or any part of the property
legally described in section 022-01, including voluntary participation and
payment of six thousand dollars ($6,000.00) as part of a privately implemented
project in 1978 providing for the extension of a trunk sanitary sewer facility
across Interstate 35. (Ord. 852, 6-20-1988)
022-99: LEGISLATIVE HISTORY:
Ord. 852, 6-20-1988; Ord. 1422, 10-2-2000.
PUD #23
JORDAN PARK VISTA
SECTION:
023-01: Legal Description
023-02: Sketch Plan
023-03: Conditions
023-04: Architecture
023-05: Master Planning Required
023-06: Double-Frontage Lots
023-07: All Areas To Be Platted
023-08: Storm Water Management
023-09: Street Rights-Of-Way
023-10: E. P. True Parkway Paving
023-11: 60th Street Paving, North
023-12: 60th Street Paving, South
023-13: Special Assessments
023-99: Legislative History
023-01: LEGAL DESCRIPTION:
The legal description for the Jordan Park Vista PUD is as follows:
The North 37.12 acres of Lot 5 of the Official Plat of the South 1/2 of Section
7, Township 78 North, Range 25 West of the 5th P.M. (except the right-of-way of
the Des Moines Valley Railroad Company), now included in and forming a part of
the City of West Des Moines, Iowa, more particularly described as follows:
Beginning at the NW corner of Lot 5 of the Official Plat of the South 1/2 of
Section 7 Township 78, North, Range 25 West said point also being the West 1/
4 corner of said Section 7; thence N89°45'51"(seconds) East along the north
line of the SW1/4 of Section 7 for 52.14 feet to the south right-of-way line of
the Chicago and Northwestern Railroad; thence along said south right-of-way
line a 22,968.3 foot radius curve to the left with an initial tangent of
S72°28'01"E for a chord of 1399.24 feet and a chord bearing of S74°12'45"E for
the length of 1399.46 feet to the east line of Lot 5, the east line of Lot 5
also being the east line of the NW1/4 of the SW1/4 Section 7, T 78 N, R 25 W;
thence S00°30'20"W along said east line of Lot 5 for 935.39 feet to the south
line of the NW1/4 of the SW1/4; thence S89°52'36"W along the south line of the
NW1/4 of the SW1/4 for 1402.52 feet to the west line of Lot 5, the west line of
Lot 5 also being the west line of the SW1/4; thence N00°31'43"E along the west
line of the SW1/4 for 1318.91 feet to the point-of-beginning. This parcel
contains 36.29 acres.
(Ord. 970, 6-10-1991)
023-02: SKETCH PLAN:
On file with the Community Development Department of the City and made a part
of this rezoning approval for concept description and delineation is the sketch
plan document for the Jordan Park Vista PUD Planned Unit Development. It is
recognized, minor shifts or modifications to general plan layout may be
necessary and compatible with the need to acquire workable street patterns,
grades and usable building sites, but the general plan layout, including the
relationship of uses to each other and the relationship of land use to the
general plan framework, and development requirements shall be used as the
implementation guide. (Ord. 970, 6-10-1991)
023-03: CONDITIONS:
Whereas, Section 6 of Ordinance 497, amended Ordinance 430, by creating Article
XX(a), PUD Planned Unit Development District, establishes certain regulations
and guidelines pertaining to accompanying information required on plat and site
plan documents. Now, therefore, the following conditions, restrictions, and
regulations are adopted as part of this approval, to wit:
   A.   General Conditions: The sketch plan incorporates single-family
residential multi-family residential and public park greenbelt land uses which
shall be distributed by area, types and location according to the sketch plan
and this Ordinance.
In addition, the following general development criteria shall be integrated
into and made a part of this planned unit development and sketch plan approval.
      1.   All subdivisions, public streets, public street rights-of-way and
general development shall adhere to the standards and design criteria set forth
in the West Des Moines Subdivision Ordinance pertaining thereto, unless
otherwise stated within this Ordinance.
      2.   Unless otherwise specified herein, the development of the Jordan
Park Vista PUD shall comply with Article XXII (Off-Street Parking and Loading
Areas), Article XXIII (Open Space Requirements) and Article XXV (Site Plans) of
the West Des Moines Zoning Ordinance. For the purposes of the application of
Article XX(a), Planned Unit Development District, Section 6, Final Plan
Submittal, the submittal of final plan documents for any parcel or part of any
parcel of the Park Place Investment PUD within one year after approval and
publication of this Ordinance, shall be considered to satisfy the terms and
requirements of Section 6.
      3.   In all areas within a 100-year frequency flood hazard zone, or
adjoining drainageways, and detention ponding areas involving potential flood
hazards, no building shall be erected which has a lowest floor, including
basements, less than one foot (1') above the determined level of the 100-year
frequency flood event, and no building shall be erected within twenty five feet
(25') of any easement or property boundary of a major drainageway, storm water
detention basin or pond.
      4.   The developer, their successors and/or assigns, if any, shall pay
all planning, engineering, and construction costs for the interior development
of the planned unit development, as required by this Ordinance, or the
Subdivision Ordinance of the City of West Des Moines, Iowa, for all streets,
storm sewers, sanitary sewers, drainageway improvements, detention basins,
water mains, buffers and other improvements within the Jordan Park Vista PUD as
may be required by the Subdivision Ordinance, Zoning Ordinance or this
Ordinance.
   B.   Land Use Design Criteria: In addition to the general conditions as
stated in subsection A above, the following land use design criteria shall
apply to the development areas designated by parcel on the sketch plan. The
sketch plan document which is made a part of this rezoning action per Section
023-02 of this Ordinance, delineates three (3) parcels of the PUD as Parcels A,
B and C for application of specific standards of land use and development
regulations. The following development standards and use regulations shall
apply to each of the individual parcels as applicable.
      1.   Parcel A:. All general use regulations, performance standards and
provisions set forth in Article XII-A of Ordinance 430 for the R-5 Multi-Family
Residential District (Medium Density) of the City of West Des Moines, shall
apply to any development in Parcel A unless otherwise stated herein.
         a.   Area Requirements: Parcel A shall be a minimum of six (6) acres
in size and limited to single-family attached, single-family detached and
townhouse units not to exceed eight (8) units per building and a maximum of
eight (8) dwelling units per acre.
         b.   Development Standards: Access to Parcel A shall be limited to a
maximum of one access drive off of 60th Street and a maximum of two (2) access
drives to E.P. True Parkway.
      2.   Parcel B: All general use regulations, performance standards and
provisions set forth in Article XII-A of Ordinance 430 for the R-5 Multi-Family
Residential District (Medium Density) of the City of West Des Moines, shall
apply to any development in Parcel B unless otherwise stated herein.
         a.   Area Requirements: Parcel B shall be a maximum of three (3) acres
in size and limited to single-family attached, single-family detached and
townhouse units not to exceed eight (8) units per building and a maximum of
eight (8) dwelling units per acre.
         b.   Development Standards: Access to Parcel B shall be limited to a
minimum of one access drive off of 60th Street and a maximum of one access
drive to E.P. True Parkway.
      3.   Parcel C: Parcel C as shown on the sketch plan, Section 023-02 of
this Ordinance, is agreed to be reserved for acquisition by the City for public
and park use. Parcel C shall be a minimum ten (10) acres in area. The park land
shall be conveyed by warranty deed free and clear of any and all liens and
encumbrances including all judgements, attachments, mechanics and other liens.
The method of acquisition by the City for Parcel C shall be by mutual agreement
between the City and the developer. The agreement shall stipulate the waiving
of mandatory park fees in an amount equal to the value of Parcel C and as
acceptable to both parties involved.
      4.   Parcel D: All general use regulations, performance standards and
provisions set forth in Article VII of Ordinance 430 for the R-1 Single-Family
Residential District of the City of West Des Moines, shall apply to any
development in Parcel D.
         a.   Development Standards: No direct driveway access shall be
permitted from Parcel C to either 60th Street or E.P. True Parkway. A minimum
sixty foot (60') buffer park shall be required for all double-frontage lots
bordering 60th Street and/or E.P. True Parkway. The minimum thirty five foot
(35') rear yard setback or thirty foot (30') front yard setback shall each be
measured from the sixty foot (60') foot buffer park with no fences or
structures permitted within the buffer park easement. Prior to development
within any part of Parcel C a buffer plan shall be reviewed and approved by the
City which illustrates the use of berms and tree plantings to effectively
buffer the single-family residential uses along E.P. True Parkway and 60th
Street. (Ord. 970, 6-10-1991)
023-04: ARCHITECTURE:
The architecture of multiple-family buildings within Parcel A and B shall be
acceptable to the City and accomplished in a manner compatible with the
adjoining residential uses in the neighborhood. Architectural design for multi-
family buildings shall attempt to express a creative presentation of exterior
building materials, exterior details and texture, treatment of windows and
doors, and use of angles and multiplicity of planes within the wall and roof
design to lessen the plainness of appearance which can be characteristic of
large residential buildings. (Ord. 970, 6-10-1991)
023-05: MASTER PLANNING REQUIRED:
Prior to development within any part of any parcel a master plan shall be
prepared showing the location of new public streets within or adjoining the
parcel in order to assure workable street patterns, grades and usable building
sites. (Ord. 970, 6-10-1991)
023-06: DOUBLE-FRONTAGE LOTS:
All double-frontage lots shall be developed in accordance with Section 6-6.04
subsection 5, paragraph B of the West Des Moines Subdivision Ordinance. A
complete buffer plan shall be submitted to and approved by the City as part of
the platting process for the lots. Final responsibility for provision of the
buffer shall rest with the developer (subdivider) regardless of any pass
through agreement. The City building inspector shall not issue an occupancy
permit for any of the affected lots until the buffer as required within this
Section is properly installed per approved plan specifications. (Ord. 970, 6-
10-1991)
023-07: ALL AREAS TO BE PLATTED:
Prior to, or in conjunction with development or transfer of ownership of any
portion of the PUD, said area shall be platted in accordance with the City's
Subdivision Ordinance to delineate within a plat the parcel to be developed or
sold separately or any portion thereof. (Ord. 970, 6-10-1991)
023-08: STORM WATER MANAGEMENT:
There shall be submitted to, and approved by the West Des Moines City Engineer,
a complete storm water management plan for each parcel of the PUD to be
prepared by the developer prior to development within each of the individual
parcels of the PUD and for all storm sewer and drainage systems within the PUD.
(Ord. 970, 6-10-1991)
023-09: STREET RIGHTS-OF-WAY:
Adequate street right-of-way shall be provided for the construction,
reconstruction and widening of adjoining streets adjacent to, or within the
Jordan Park Vista PUD. Said right-of-way shall be dedicated to the City at the
time of platting. (Ord. 970, 6-10-1991)
023-10: E. P. TRUE PARKWAY PAVING:
The developer, Park Place Investments, shall sign a petition and waiver for all
costs associated with the construction of E. P. True Parkway through the
subject site up to and not to exceed the costs of paving thirty one feet (31')
of roadway section. (Ord. 970, 6-10-1991)
023-11: 60TH STREET PAVING, NORTH:
The developer, Park Place Investments, shall sign a petition and waiver for all
cost associated with the construction of one-half (1/2) roadway width of 60th
Street adjacent to the site from E. P. True Parkway north to the northern
boundary of the subject site, projected fifteen and one-half foot (15.5')
width. (Ord. 970, 6-10-1991)
023-12: 60TH STREET PAVING, SOUTH:
All cost associated with the construction of 60th Street adjacent to the site
from E. P. True Parkway south to the southern boundary of the subject site
shall be paid for by the developer up to and not to exceed the costs of paving
thirty one feet (31') of roadway section. A bond in the amount to cover said
cost shall be posted, or an acceptable alternative approved by the City, prior
to the recording of the final plat for the subject site. (Ord. 970, 6-10-1991)
023-13: SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS:
   A.   Sanitary Trunk Sewer: With respect to any assessments by the City of
West Des Moines of special benefits conferred upon Parcels A, B and D of the
property, or any portion thereof, as a result of the design and construction of
sanitary trunk sewer improvements within the area the owner, on behalf of
itself and its successors and assigns (collectively by the "owner"), agrees
that such assessments may be spread against all of said parcels, as said
parcels exist on the date of assessment, by the City of West Des Moines on an
area basis.
   B.   Storm Water Detention: With respect to any assessments by the City of
West Des Moines of special benefits conferred upon Parcels A, B and D of the
property, or any portion thereof, as a result of the design and construction of
potential area wide storm water detention improvements as determined by
engineering studies approved by the City of West Des Moines, the owner, on
behalf of itself and its successors and assigns (collectively by the "owner"),
agrees that such assessments may be spread against all of said Parcels, as said
parcels exist on the date of assessment, by the City of West Des Moines on an
area basis.
   C.   Water Service Improvements: With respect to any assessments by the City
of West Des Moines of special benefits conferred upon Parcels A, B and D of the
property, or any portion hereof, as a result of the design and construction of
potential area-wide water service improvements as determined by engineering
studies approved by the City of West Des Moines, the owner, on behalf of itself
and its successors and assigns (collectively by the "owner"), agrees that such
assessments may be spread against all of said parcels, as said parcels exist on
the date of assessment, by the City of West Des Moines on an area basis.
The foregoing area assessment provisions are subject to the following
provision: any assessment shall be reasonable and equitable in comparison to
the special benefits for such initial paving and widening assessed against the
property directly across the street from owner's parcel being assessed, and in
no event shall any payment by the owner exceed one-half (1/2) the cost of any
such initial paving and widening. (Ord. 970, 6-10-1991)
023-99: LEGISLATIVE HISTORY:
Ord. 970, 6-10-1991.
PUD #24
MEADOWVIEW
SECTION:
024-01: Legal Description
024-02: Sketch Plan
024-03: Conditions
024-04: Building Restrictions, Easements And Covenants
024-99: Legislative History
024-01: LEGAL DESCRIPTION:
The legal description for the Meadowview PUD is as follows:
Except the North 473 feet thereof, a parcel of land in the W1/2 of the E1/2 of
Section 7 T78N R25W of the Fifth PM more particularly described as follows:
Commencing at the N1/4 Corner of Section 7 T78N R25W of the Fifth PM; thence
S0°34'46"W along the west line of the NE1/4 for 60.00 feet; thence N89°57'59"E
for 33.00 feet to the point-of-beginning; thence N89°57'59"E for 627.49 feet to
the west right-of-way line of Interstate 35; thence S0°23'15"W along said west
right-of-way for 510.72 feet; thence S0°21'43"W along said right-of-way for
882.66 feet; thence S0°18'21"W along said right-of-way for 1099.61 feet; thence
S0°15'46"W along said Interstate right-of-way for 769.05 feet to the north
right-of-way line for the Chicago and Northwestern Railroad; thence N81°14'23"W
along said north right-of-way for 54.34 feet; thence along the 22868.3 foot
radius curved right-of-way to the right for 629.43 feet with a chord of 629.41
feet and a chord bearing of N80°09'12"W to the west line of the SE1/4 Section
7-78-25; thence N0°34'33" along said west line for 576.07 feet to the center of
Section; thence N0°34'46"E along the west line of the NE 1/4 Section 7-78-25
for 1320.72 feet; thence S89°25'14"E for 33.00 feet; thence N0°34'46"E for
1249.41 feet to the point of beginning;
AND
Lot 3 an O.P. of S1/2 of Section 7, Township 78 North, Range 25 West of the 5th
Principal Meridian, all in and forming a part of the City of West Des Moines,
Polk County, Iowa;
AND
A parcel of land in the W1/2 of Section 7 T78N R25W of the Fifth PM, in and
forming a part of West Des Moines, Polk County, Iowa, more particularly
described as follows:
Commencing at the W1/4 Corner of Section 7 T78N R25W of the Fifth PM; then
N0°32'59"E along the west line of the S1/2 of the NW fractional 1/4 of Section
7 for 110.88 feet; thence S89°27'01"E for 33.00 feet to the intersection of the
east right-of-way line of 60th Street and the north right-of-way line of the C
& NW Railroad, also being the point-of-beginning; thence N0°32'59"E along the
said east right-of-way for 1211.79 feet to the north line of the S1/2 of the NW
fractional 1/4 of Section 7; thence N89°48'15"E along said north line for
668.44 feet; thence N0°34'46"E for 594.06 feet; thence S89°58'37"E for 144.71
feet; thence N0°34'46"E for 188.41 feet; thence S89°58'37"E for 206.00 feet;
thence S0°34'46"W for 782.47 feet to the north line of the S1/2 of the NW
fractional 1/4; thence N89°48'15"E along said north line for 1014.30 feet to
the SW Corner of Ashworth Woods, an O.P. in and forming a part of West Des
Moines, Polk County, Iowa; thence N89°48'11"E along the south line of Ashworth
Woods for 395.00 feet to the SE Corner of said plat; thence N89°48'11"E for
264.51 feet to the east line of the NW fractional 1/4 of Section 7; thence
S0°34'46"W for 1320.72 feet to the center of Section 7; thence S89°45'51"W
along the south line of said NW1/4 of Section 7 for 1323.10 feet; thence
S0°38'54"W for 281.57 feet to the north line of the C & NW Railroad right-of-
way; thence northwestern along a 22868.3 foot radius curve right-of-way to the
right for a length of 1047.74 feet, a chord of 1047.65 feet and a chord bearing
of N74°38'49"W to the intersection of said north right-of-way line and the
south line of the NW fractional 1/4; thence continuing along the 22868.3 foot
radius curved right-of-way for a length of 371.14 feet, a chord of 371.14 feet
and a chord bearing N72°52'10"W to the point of beginning.
From R-1-A Single-Family Residential District to R-5 Multi-Family Residential
District (Medium Density) to PUD planned unit development.
The North 473 feet of a parcel of land in the W1/2 of the E1/2 of Section 7
T78N R25W of the Fifth PM more particularly described as follows:
Commencing at the N1/4 Corner of Section 7 T78N R25W of the Fifth PM; thence
S0°34'46"W along the west line of the NE1/4 for 60.00 feet; thence N89°57'59"E
for 33.00 feet to the point-of-beginning; thence N89°57'59"E for 627.49 feet to
the west right-of-way line of Interstate 35; thence S0°23'15"W along said west
right-of-way for 510.72 feet; thence S0°21'43"W along said right-of-way for
882.66 feet; thence S 0°18'21"W along said right-of-way for 1099.61 feet;
thence S 0°15'46"W along said Interstate right-of-way for 769.05 feet to the
north right-of-way line for the Chicago and Northwestern Railroad; thence
N81°14'23"W along said north right-of-way for 54.34 feet; thence along the
22868.3 foot radius curved right-of-way to the right for 629.43 feet with a
chord of 629.41 feet and a chord bearing of N80°09'12"W to the west line of the
SE1/4 Section 7-78-25; thence N0°34'33"E along said west line for 576.07 feet
to the center of Section; thence N0°34'46"E along the west line of the NE1/
4 Section 7-78-25 for 1320.72 feet; thence S89°25'14"E for 33.00 feet; thence
N0°34'46"E for 1249.41 feet to the point of beginning, except the following
portion thereof:
Beginning at the North Quarter Corner of Section 7, Township 78 North, Range 25
West of the 5th P.M., thence S00°34'33"W on the west line of the NE1/4 (the
south line of the E1/2 of said Section having an assumed bearing of N90°00'00"E
with all subsequent bearings referenced thereto) for 60.00 feet; thence
N89°58'27"E along the south right-of-way of Ashworth Road for 218.00 feet to
the point of beginning; thence continuing N89°58'27"E for 442.49 feet to the
intersection of the south right-of-way line of Ashworth Road and the west
right-of-way line of Interstate 35; thence S00°23'43"W along said west right-
of-way for 250.00 feet; thence S53°59'12"W along a radial for 211.30 feet to a
point on a 180 foot radius curve; thence northwesterly along the curve to the
left for 169.72 feet with a chord bearing of N63°00'50"W and a chord length of
163.50 feet; thence S89°58'27"W for 127.10 feet; thence N00°34'33"E for 300.00
feet to the point of beginning.
AND
Commencing at the N1/4 Corner of Section 7 T78N R25W of the Fifth P.M.; thence
S0°34'46"W for 1309.41 feet; thence S89°48'11"W for 626.51 feet to the
Southwest Corner of Ashworth Woods an O.P. in and forming a part of West Des
Moines, Polk County, Iowa; thence S89°48'15"E for 1014.20 feet; thence
N0°34'46"E for 782.47 feet to point, also being the point of beginning; thence
N0°34'46"E for 500.00 feet to the south right-of-way line for Ashworth Road;
thence N89°58'37"W for 180 feet along said right-of-way line, thence S0°34'46"W
290.00 feet; thence S12°46'45"W for 123.03 feet; thence S0°34'46"W for 90.74
feet; thence S89°58'37"E for 206.00 feet to the point of beginning.
(Ord. 656, 6-2-1980)
024-02: SKETCH PLAN:
On file with the Community Development Department of the City and made a part
of this comprehensive plan amendment and rezoning approval, for concept
description and delineation is the sketch plan document dated December 18, 1979
with amendment thereto dated June 2, 1980. Said amendment represents a change
in street alignment and a reduction in the total number of proposed housing
units. That plan presentation, including the location and nature of each unit
type shall form the basis of the approval. It is recognized that minor shifts
or realignments of roadways and units may be necessary and compatible with the
need to acquire workable street patterns, grades, and suitable drainage or
utility solutions, but the general plan layout including the relationship of
each unit type to the general plan framework, and traffic and open space
layout, shall be used as the implementation guide. (Ord. 656, 6-2-1980)
024-03: CONDITIONS:
Whereas Section 6 of Ordinance 497, amending Ordinance 430 by creating Article
XXa, PUD District, establishes certain regulations and guidelines pertaining to
accompanying information required on a final site plan and final site plan
documents. Now therefore, the following conditions, restrictions, and
regulations are adopted as a part of this approval, to wit:
   A.   General Conditions: The plan shall incorporate a maximum of six hundred
eighty (680) residential dwelling units intended for owner occupancy, and which
shall be distributed by types and location according to the final site plan as
presented. In addition the following general site plan criteria are integrated
into and made a part of the final site plan document and its recommendation for
approval:
      1.   Each subdivision, and all streets, street rights-of-way and general
development shall adhere to all standards and design criteria set forth in the
West Des Moines Subdivision Ordinance.
      2.   Each development parcel other than those designated as R-1 or R-1-
A variety single-family, patio homes or cluster homes (single-family) shall
comply with Article XXV (Site Plans) of the West Des Moines Zoning Ordinance,
and a final site plan shall be approved by the West Des Moines Planning and
Zoning Commission and City Council prior to the initiation of any construction.
      3.   With the first development proposal, or prior thereto, there shall
be submitted to, and approved by the West Des Moines City Engineer, a complete
storm water management plan for all open space drainage systems to remain a
portion of the development. The plan shall be guided by, and adhere to the West
Des Moines Subdivision Ordinance, with provision made for conveyance of the
100-year return frequency rainfall (event), including the provision for on-site
temporary detention with discharge equivalent to the existing 5-year return
frequency storm.
      4.   All ground shown as open space or park to be dedicated at no cost to
the City of West Des Moines, shall be so dedicated with the platting of
contiguous property. Should the City later adopt a mandatory dedication
ordinance, the Council may consider granting to the owners a credit for that
ground designated as park. Prior to dedication, however, and as a condition of
the rezoning approval, such ground prior to its dedication shall be stabilized
at a nonerodible slope and velocity for drainage purposes. Nonerodible slope is
defined as velocity not to exceed four feet (4') per second. Required slopes
and velocities may be achieved by use of gabion drop structures, street culvert
crossing structures, or such other methods of good engineering design practice
as shall be approved by the City Engineer.
      5.   Prior to dedication, the developer shall remove all fallen trees,
debris, and other obstructions from the drainageway, exclusive of landscaping
to be preserved. All areas of any open space way shall, prior to dedication be
seeded with a ground cover as determined by the City Engineer, and placed at a
grade capable of maintenance by standard rotary mowing equipment.
      6.   The developers of Meadowview shall be responsible, as part of the
development plan, for any necessary changes, modifications to, additions in
culvert size, easements and all other costs associated with the completion of
drainage and transportation structures or facilities under and over the Chicago
and Northwestern Railroad Tracks, and southerly to Jordan Creek.
      7.   In all areas adjoining open space drainageways, or in all areas
involving potential flood hazards, no residential structure shall be erected
which has a lowest floor less than one foot (1') above the determined level of
the 100-year return frequency rainfall event.
      8.   The petitioners seeking this rezoning, their successors, or assigns,
shall pay all construction and engineering costs for all interior development,
including all streets, storm sewers, sanitary sewers, creek improvements, creek
crossing structures, City-owned utilities, and other improvements within the
planned unit development.
   B.   Land Use Design Criteria: In addition to the general criteria as stated
in subsection A of this Section, the following land use design criteria shall
apply to the individual unit designations as set forth:
      1.   Single-Family Residential (R-1-A and R-1 Types):
         a.   All developments designated as R-1-A Single-Family Residential in
character shall conform to the minimum provision of Article VIII (Single-Family
Residential District) of the West Des Moines Zoning Ordinance #430.
         b.   All development designated as R-1 in character, shall conform to
the minimum provisions of Article VII (R-1 Single-Family Residential District)
of the West Des Moines Zoning Ordinance.
      2.   Patio Or Cluster Homes (Single-Family Attached/Detached):
         a.   All development shown as patio in character, shall incorporate a
minimum lot frontage of forty five feet (45'), a minimum of five thousand six
hundred (5,600) square feet, a rear yard setback of thirty feet (30'), and a
front setback of twenty feet (20'), except that in the case of attached or
detached garages, no garage shall be located any closer than twenty five feet
(25') to the front lot line.
         b.   All development shown as cluster housing, shall have a minimum
lot frontage of fifty feet (50'), and a minimum lot area of six thousand two
hundred fifty (6,250) square feet, and shall abide by all setbacks as
established in paragraph a (patio) of subsection B2a.
         c.   Units may be either detached or bi-attached in character. No
patio or cluster unit shall be set closer than two feet (2') to a property
line, and all structures other than those attached by a common wall shall have
a minimum separation of ten feet (10').
         d.   Before development shall commence on any patio or cluster
segments of the plan, a master plan and unit concept shall be submitted to, and
approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission and City Council pursuant to
subsection A2 of this Section for recommendation and approval. The site plan
information shall contain the following: 1) exterior construction materials; 2)
elevations of exteriors of units; and 3) such other design elements as shall be
applicable.
      3.   Townhouses And Quadraminiums:
         a.   All units set forth as townhomes or quads shall in addition to
requirements set forth in subsection A of this Section, shall comply with open
space and parking requirements set forth in Articles XXII and XXIII of the West
Des Moines Zoning Ordinance. In calculating open space, no ingress/egress drive
shall be considered to extend beyond thirty feet (30') of the parking stall
nearest the street, whichever shall first occur.
         b.   No unit shall be located closer than thirty five feet (35') to
any interstate or railroad right-of-way, nor any closer than thirty five feet
(35') to Sixtieth Street.
         c.   All quads shall have a minimum thirty foot (30') setback from any
public street, and a minimum twenty foot (20') setback from any private access
drive other than individual driveways intended to serve a particular unit.
         d.   All townhomes shall have a minimum thirty foot (30') of setback
from a periphery street surrounding the development, except as stated in
subsection B3b above, and shall maintain a minimum twenty five foot (25')
setback from any internal street(s) where parking is provided in front of the
unit.
         e.   Densities as shown on the final zoning plan, with respect to
townhomes and quads are maximum densities permitted, and do not represent an
assurance of the total number of units shown. Actual densities shall be based
upon the site plan approval pursuant to subsection A2 of this Section, which
shall incorporate all provisions of individual unit design, open space, soils,
parking, drainage, landscaping, and such additional factors as shall lead to a
sound planning and development scheme which integrates a particular segment
into an overall neighborhood plan.
   C.   Phasing: Made a part of this rezoning approval is a condition that the
development of the property in accord with the land use plan, be phased in two
(2) increments based upon the ability of the major arterial transportation
network serving the area to move traffic in a manner providing safety and
convenience to all users. The parameters of this phasing are as follows:
      1.   Phase One development shall not exceed five hundred twenty two (522)
units in accord with Exhibit C, on file with the Community Development
Department, showing the entire area of rezoning and the first development
phase.
      2.   The petitioners agree that Phase Two development shall not be
commenced until such time as the West Des Moines City Council shall initiate
reconstruction activities for the Ashworth Road Bridge over Interstate 35,
bringing the same from a two (2) lane facility to a four (4) lane facility, or
allow the State of Iowa, or Federal Highway Administration or some other entity
to initiate construction activities in lieu of the City of West Des Moines.
      3.   Phase Two development as proposed shall not be initiated by the
petitioners until such time as a secondary southern linkage to the property
(herein referred to as the Jordan Parkway linkage) shall be brought to a point
where its reality is assured, providing access to the property while the
Ashworth Road Bridge is under replacement. (Ord. 656, 6-2-1980)
024-04: BUILDING RESTRICTIONS, EASEMENTS AND COVENANTS:
The developer shall with the approval of the City Council adopt building
restrictions, easements and covenants pertaining to each area developed where
the developer and the City deem appropriate. (Ord. 656, 6-2-1980)
024-99: LEGISLATIVE HISTORY:
Ord. 656, 6-2-1980.
PUD #25
SUN PRAIRIE
SECTION:
025-01: Legal Description
025-02: Sketch Plan
025-03: Conditions
025-04: Building Restrictions, Easements And Covenants
025-05: Corner Lots
025-06: All Areas To Be Platted
025-07: Noise Attenuation Along Interstate Highway System
025-99: Legislative History
025-01: LEGAL DESCRIPTION:
The legal description for the Sun Prairie PUD is as follows:
A parcel of land in the SW1/4 of Section 6, Township 78 North, Range 25 west of
the 5th P.M., City of West Des Moines, Polk County, Iowa that is more
particularly described as follows:
Beginning at a point on the east line of said SW1/4, said point being the
northeast corner of Sun Prairie Plat 1, an Official Plat; thence N89°56'48"W,
1319.96 feet along the north line of Sun Prairie Plat 1 to a point on the west
line of the E1/2 of said SW1/4 to a point; thence N00°25'28"W, 310.01 feet
along the west line of the E1/2 of said SW1/4 to a point; thence S89°56'48"E,
1319.97 feet to a point on the east line of said SW1/4; thence S00°25'23"E,
310.01 feet along the east line of said SW1/4 to the point of beginning, and to
be platted as Sun Prairie Plat 2, and;
A parcel of land in the W1/2 of the SE1/4 of Section 6, Township 78 North,
Range 25 West, City of West Des Moines, Polk County, Iowa bordered on the east
by the R.O.W. of Interstate 35, bordered on the west by Dixie Acres #1 plat,
bordered on the south by the R.O.W. of Ashworth Road and bordered on the north
by a line parallel to the R.O.W. of Ashworth Road and 467' north of the north
R.O.W. boundary of Ashworth Road.
And, rezoning from A-1 Agricultural District to R-6 Multi-Family Residential
District to PUD Planned Unit Development:
A parcel of land constituting all of the E1/2 of the SW1/4 of Section 6,
Township 78 North, Range 25 West, City of West Des Moines, Polk County, Iowa,
lying south of the R.O.W. of Interstate 80, and north of that property first
described above to be platted as Sun Prairie Plat 2, and;
A parcel of land within the W1/2 of the SE1/4 of Section 6, Township 78 north,
Range 25 West, City of West Des Moines, Polk County, Iowa, lying south and west
of the R.O.W. of Interstate 35 and 467' north of the north R.O.W. boundary of
Ashworth Road.
(Ord. 761, 7-22-1985)
025-02: SKETCH PLAN:
On file with the Community Development Department of the City and made a part
of this comprehensive plan amendment and rezoning approval, for concept
description and delineation is the sketch plan document. It is recognized that
minor shifts or realignments of roadways may be necessary and compatible with
the need to acquire workable street patterns, grades and usable building sites,
but the general plan layout, including the relationship of uses to each other
and the relationship of dwelling unit types to the general plan framework,
traffic layout, and development requirements shall be used as the
implementation guide. (Ord. 761, 7-22-1985)
025-03: CONDITIONS:
Whereas, Section 6 of Ordinance 497 amended Ordinance 430 by creating Article
XX(a), PUD District establishes certain regulations and guidelines pertaining
to accompanying information required on a final site plan and final site plan
documents. Now, therefore, the following conditions, restrictions, and
regulations are adopted as part of this approval, to wit: (Ord. 761, 7-22-1985)
   A.   General Conditions: The sketch plan incorporates a maximum of five
hundred fifty three (553) residential dwelling units which shall be distributed
by types and location according to the sketch plan as presented. (Ord. 790, 5-
27-1986)
In addition, the following general site plan criteria shall be integrated into
and made a part of the planned unit development and sketch plan document:
      1.   All subdivisions, streets, street rights-of-way and general
development shall adhere to the standards and design criteria set forth in the
West Des Moines Subdivision Ordinance pertaining thereto unless otherwise
stated within this Ordinance.
      2.   The development shall comply with Article XXII (Off-Street Parking
and Loading Areas), Article XXIII (Open Space Requirements) and Article XXV
(Site Plans) of the West Des Moines Zoning Ordinance, and Article XX(a) (PUD)
Sections 6 and 8. No final building or site plan review by the Planning and
Zoning Commission and City Council shall be required for individual single-
family detached lots.
      3.   In all areas adjoining drainageways or detention areas involving
potential floor hazards, no residential structure shall be erected which has a
lowest floor, including basements, less than one foot (1') above the determined
level of the 100-year return frequency rainfall flood event and no residential
structure shall be erected within forty feet (40') of said 100-year frequency
flood elevation.
      4.   The petitioners seeking this rezoning, their successors and assigns,
if any, shall pay all construction and engineering costs for the interior
development of the planned unit development, as required by this Ordinance or
the Subdivision Ordinance of the City of West Des Moines, Iowa, for all
streets, storm sewers, sanitary sewers, drainageway improvements, detention
basins, City-owned utilities, buffers and other improvements within the PUD as
may be required by the Subdivision and Zoning Ordinances.
   B.   Land Use Design Criteria: In addition to the general criteria as stated
in subsection A above, the following land use design criteria shall apply to
the development areas designated on the sketch plan. The sketch plan document
which is made a part of this rezoning action per Section 025-02 herein,
delineates eight (8) parcels of the PUD as Parcels A, B, C, D, E, F, G and H
for application of specific development standards of residential use and
density regulations. The following development standards and use regulations
shall apply to each of the eight (8) development parcels:
      1.   Parcel A: All general use regulations, performance standards and
provisions set forth in Article VIII of Ordinance 430 for the R-1-A Single-
Family Residential District shall apply to any development proposal for all
property within Parcel A as shown on the sketch plan of the Sun Prairie PUD.
This area shall involve approximately thirteen and four-tenths (13.4) acres
with a maximum of forty (40) dwelling units permitted. (Ord. 761, 7-22-1985)
      2.   Parcel B: All general use regulations, performance standards and
provisions set forth in Article VII of Ordinance 430 for the R-1 Single-Family
Residential District shall apply to any development proposal for all property
within Parcel B as shown on the sketch plan of the Sun Prairie PUD. This area
shall involve approximately six and nine-tenths (6.9) acres with a maximum of
twenty five (25) dwelling units.
      3.   Parcel C: This area shall encompass garden apartment or townhouse
style residential buildings developed as condominiums or rental units with
apartments designed for four (4) to eighteen (18) dwelling units per building
and townhouse buildings which shall be permitted two (2) to eight (8) dwelling
units per building. The parcel is approximately nine (9) acres and shall not
have greater than sixty four (64) units of apartments or forty eight (48) units
of townhouses. No building shall be greater than two (2) stories in height and
the parcel shall be developed as a single project with each building compatible
in design and use of materials.
No unit shall be located closer than thirty five feet (35') to any public
street, twenty five feet (25') from the west boundary of the parcel, ten feet
(10') from the boundary of Parcel E and sixty feet (60') from the right-of-way
of the Interstate highway system. All accessory structures shall meet minimum
setback requirements as set forth by Section 6, Article VI of Ordinance 430.
Off-street parking lots shall be sufficiently buffered from public street view
and Parcel B with the use of landscaping and/or wall structures as may be
required by the City.
      4.   Parcel D: This area shall encompass townhouse type units designed
for occupant ownership on approximately two and three-tenths (2.3) acres with a
maximum of twelve (12) dwelling units permitted. The following minimum setbacks
shall be required for all townhouse units: thirty five feet (35') from Parcels
A and B, with the exception of attached one-story garages which may be twenty
five feet (25') from the boundaries with Parcel A and B; thirty feet (30') from
the right-of-way of the major collector street; twenty feet (20') from the
right-of-way of any internal public street; twenty five feet (25') from any
internal private street; and, buildings shall be separated by a minimum of ten
feet (10').
Site plan documents shall be submitted for review and approval by the Planning
and Zoning Commission and City Council and shall provide adequate landscaping
with predominance of evergreen trees to buffer the rear of units from adjoining
single-family residential parcels to the west and south. (Ord. 790, 5-27-1986)
      5.   Parcel E: This area shall encompass apartment style residential
buildings developed as condominiums or rental units and designed for twelve
(12) to twenty four (24) dwelling units per building. The parcel is
approximately eight and two-tenths (8.2) acres and shall not have greater than
one hundred twenty (120) units permitted. No building shall be greater than
three (3) stories and not greater than two (2) stories within fifty feet (50')
of the right-of-way of the major collector street.
No unit shall be located closer than thirty feet (30') to any public street,
twenty five feet (25') from the boundary with Parcel C, ten feet (10') from the
boundary with Parcel F and sixty feet (60') from the right-of-way of the
Interstate highway system. All accessory structures shall meet minimum setback
requirements as set forth by Section 6, Article VI of Ordinance 430. Off-street
parking lots shall be sufficiently buffered from public street view and Parcel
C with the use of landscaping and/or wall structures as may be required by the
City.
      6.   Parcel F: This area shall encompass the development of medium to
high-rise condominium residential buildings of five (5) stories or greater
designed for owner occupancy to be developed as a single project with each
residential building compatible in design and use of materials. This area shall
encompass approximately eight and one-half (8.5) acres with a maximum of two
hundred ten (210) dwelling units permitted. No residential structure shall be
closer than one hundred feet (100') from the right-of-way of the major
collector street and the boundary with Parcel G, sixty feet (60') from the
right-of-way of the Interstate highway system and fifty feet (50') from the
boundary with Parcel E. All accessory structures shall meet minimum setback
requirements as set forth by Section 6, Article VI of Ordinance 430. Off-street
parking lots shall be sufficiently buffered from public street view and Parcel
G with the use of landscaping and/or wall structures as may be required by the
City.
If said medium to high-rise development concept is determined not to be
feasible, with approval from the City Council after consideration of a
recommendation from the Planning and Zoning Commission an alternative
development concept may be implemented provided the development density is no
greater than fifty percent (50%) of the density permitted for the medium to
high-rise project and no residential structure shall be located closer than
fifty feet (50') to the major collector street, provided, no buildings greater
than two (2) stories in height shall be permitted within seventy five feet
(75') of the major collector street to protect the R-1-A development within
Parcel A to the west. All other setbacks shall meet all minimum setback
requirements set forth in the first paragraph above.
      7.   Parcel G: This area shall encompass attached single-family units of
no greater than four (4) dwelling units per residential building. This parcel
shall be developed as a single project with buildings compatible in design and
use of materials. This area shall involve approximately ten (10) acres with a
maximum of seventy two (72) dwelling units permitted.
No residential units shall be set closer than thirty five feet (35') to the
right-of-way of the major collector street, forty five feet (45') from Ashworth
Road, sixty feet (60') from the right-of-way of Interstate 35 and fifteen feet
(15') from the boundary with Parcel F. Front yard setbacks shall be a minimum
of twenty feet (20') from the right-of-way of any internal public streets and
twenty five feet (25') from any private access drive where parking is provided
in front of the unit other than individual driveways intended to serve a
particular unit. No residential building shall be set closer than fifteen feet
(15') to another residential building. All accessory structures shall meet
minimum setback requirements as set forth by Section 6, Article VI of Ordinance
430. Off-street parking lots (except for driveways) shall be sufficiently
buffered from public street view.
      8.   Parcel H: This parcel shall encompass bi-attached single-family
dwelling units designed for owner-occupancy. The area shall be developed as a
single project with each building compatible in design and use of materials.
This area shall involve approximately two and nine-tenths (2.9) acres with a
maximum of ten (10) dwelling units.
No residential unit shall be set closer than thirty feet (30') to the rights-
of-way of the major collector street and Woodland Avenue, forty five feet (45')
from the right-of-way of Ashworth Road and thirty five feet (35') from the west
boundary of Parcel H. No residential building shall be set closer than fifteen
feet (15') to another residential building. All accessory structures shall meet
minimum setback requirements as set forth by Section 6, Article VI of Ordinance
430.
   C.   Dedication Of Park Site: Parcel P as shown on the sketch plan is agreed
to be reserved for dedication to the City for public and park use with the
development of adjoining properties within the PUD and shall be a minimum of
three and one-half (3.5) acres or five percent (5%) of all the land area within
the PUD. If the City adopts a mandatory dedication ordinance for the provision
of parks and open space, this development shall be credited for that ground
designated for park use within Parcel P.
The developer shall be responsible for grading and seeding the park site to be
dedicated in a manner acceptable to the City to permit the use of the park for
active recreation purposes. The developer shall be required to extend sanitary
sewer, storm sewer, and water service to the site for adequate access to public
facilities. (Ord. 761, 7-22-1985)
025-04: BUILDING RESTRICTIONS, EASEMENTS AND COVENANTS:
The developer shall with the approval of the City Council adopt building
restrictions, easements and covenants pertaining to each area developed where
the developer and the City deem appropriate. (Ord. 761, 7-22-1985)
025-05: CORNER LOTS:
Corner lots shall not be less than twenty feet (20') greater in lot frontage
than the minimum lot frontage required for each development parcel so as to
permit adequate building setbacks on both front and side streets. (Ord. 761, 7-
22-1985)
025-06: ALL AREAS TO BE PLATTED:
Prior to development within any portion of the PUD, the area to be developed
shall first be platted in accordance with the City's Subdivision Ordinance.
(Ord. 761, 7-22-1985)
025-07: NOISE ATTENUATION ALONG INTERSTATE HIGHWAY SYSTEM:
In order to promote a living environment free from the excessive noise produced
by vehicular traffic upon Interstates 35 and 80, the developer, with approval
by the City Planning and Zoning Commission and City Council shall incorporate
additional plantings, earth berming and proper acoustical site design
techniques to reduce the negative impact of highway noise. As part of the final
site development proposal for that area of the PUD adjoining Interstate 35 and
80 rights-of-way, sufficient landscape plantings, and earth berming barriers
shall be provided; predominant plantings shall be of evergreen type, shrubs and
trees, so as to assure year-round effectiveness; density and height of
plantings or barriers shall be such as to provide attenuation. The
incorporation of sound attenuation measures shall be the responsibility of the
developer and made a part of site plan or plat improvements when affected
properties are developed. (Ord. 761, 7-22-1985)
025-99: LEGISLATIVE HISTORY:
Ord. 761, 7-22-1985; Ord. 790, 5-27-1986.
PUD #26
SUN PRAIRIE WEST
SECTION:
026-01: Legal Description
026-02: Sketch Plan
026-03: Conditions
026-04: Building Restrictions, Easements And Covenants
026-05: Corner Lots
026-06: All Areas To Be Platted
026-07: Noise Attenuation Along Interstate Highway System
026-08: Double-Frontage Lots Abutting 60th Street
026-09: Storm Water Management
026-99: Legislative History
026-01: LEGAL DESCRIPTION:
The legal description for the Sun Prairie West PUD is as follows:
NW frl. 1/4 of SW 1/4 of Sec. 6-78-25; the N 290' of the SW frl. 1/4 of SW1/
4 of Sec. 6-78-25; and that portion of the SW frl. 1/4 of NW1/4 of Sec. 6-78-25
lying S of Interstate 80 except public roads, all included in and forming a
part of the City of West Des Moines, Polk County, Iowa and containing 50 acres,
more or less.
(Ord. 786, 3-31-1986)
026-02: SKETCH PLAN:
On file with the Community Development Department of the City and made a part
of this rezoning approval for concept description and delineation is the sketch
plan document. It is recognized that minor shifts or realignments of roadways
may be necessary and compatible with the need to acquire workable street
patterns, grades and usable building sites, but the general plan layout,
including the relationship of uses to each other and the relationship of
dwelling unit types to the general plan framework, traffic layout, and
development requirements shall be used as the implementation guide. (Ord. 786,
3-31-1986)
026-03: CONDITIONS:
Whereas, Section 6 of Ordinance 497 amended Ordinance 430 by creating Article
XX(a), PUD District, establishes certain regulations and guidelines pertaining
to accompanying information required on a final site plan and final site plan
documents. Now, therefore, the following conditions, restrictions, and
regulations are adopted as part of this approval, to wit:
   A.   General Conditions: The sketch plan incorporates a maximum of three
hundred eighty eight (388) residential dwelling units which shall be
distributed by types and location according to the sketch plan as presented.
In addition, the following general site plan criteria shall be integrated into
and made a part of the planned unit development and sketch plan document:
      1.   All subdivisions, streets, street rights-of-way and general
development shall adhere to the standards and design criteria set forth in the
West Des Moines Subdivision Ordinance pertaining thereto unless otherwise
stated within this Ordinance.
      2.   The development shall comply with Article XXII (Off-Street Parking
and Loading Area 3), Article XXIII (Open Space Requirements) and Article XXV
(Site Plans) of the West Des Moines Zoning Ordinance, and Article XX(a) (PUD)
Sections 6 and 8. No final building or site plan review by the Planning and
Zoning Commission and City Council shall be required for individual single-
family detached lots.
      3.   In all areas adjoining drainageways or detention areas involving
potential flood hazards, no residential structure shall be erected which has a
lowest floor, including basements, less than one foot (1') above the determined
level of the 100-year return frequency rainfall flood event and no residential
structure shall be erected within forty feet (40') of said 100-year frequency
flood elevation.
      4.   The petitioners seeking this rezoning, their successors and assigns,
if any, shall pay all construction and engineering costs for the interior
development of the planned unit development, as required by this Ordinance, or
the Subdivision Ordinance of the City of West Des Moines, Iowa, for all
streets, storm sewers, sanitary sewers, drainageway improvements, detention
basins, City-owned utilities, buffers and other improvements within the PUD as
may be required by the Subdivision and Zoning Ordinances; except as provided
for in subsection C of this Section, Reservation of Park Site.
   B.   Land Use Design Criteria: In addition to the general criteria as stated
in subsection A above, the following land use design criteria shall apply to
the development areas designated on the sketch plan. The sketch plan document
which is made a part of this rezoning action per Section 026-02 herein,
delineates five (5) parcels of the PUD as Parcels A, B, C, D and E for
application of specific development standards of residential use and density
regulations. The following development standards and use regulations shall
apply to each of the five (5) development parcels: (Ord. 786, 3-31-1986)
      1.   Parcel A: This area shall encompass garden apartment or townhouse
style residential buildings developed as condominiums or rental units with
apartments designed for four (4) to eighteen (18) dwelling units per building
and townhouse buildings which shall be permitted two (2) to eight (8) dwelling
units per building. The parcel is approximately seven (7) acres and shall not
have greater than ten (10) units per acre for apartments and eight (8) units
per acre for townhouses with a maximum of sixty (60) units permitted. In
addition to the maximum permitted number of residential dwelling units, a day
nursery school or child care center shall be permitted with a maximum capacity
of one hundred fifty (150) children. No building shall be greater than two (2)
stories in height and the parcel shall be developed as a single project with
each building compatible in design and use of materials.
No unit shall be located closer than thirty five feet (35') to any public
street, twenty five feet (25') from the east boundary of the parcel, ten feet
(10') from the boundary of Parcel B and sixty feet (60') from the right-of-way
of the Interstate highway system. Any day nursery school or day care center
constructed within this parcel shall adhere to performance standards for day
nursery schools and child care centers set forth within the use regulations of
the R-2 Multi-Family Residential Zone District. All accessory structures shall
meet minimum setback requirements as set forth by Section 6, Article VI of
Ordinance 430. Off-street parking lots shall be sufficiently buffeted from
public street view, Parcel E and the property to the east of the parcel with
the use of landscaping and/or wall structures as may be required by the City.
(Ord. 871, 2-20-1989)
      2.   Parcel B: This area shall encompass apartment style residential
buildings developed as condominiums or rental units and designed for twelve
(12) to twenty four (24) dwelling units per building. The parcel is
approximately fifteen (15) acres and shall not be greater than sixteen (16)
units per acre and two hundred forty (240) units. No building shall be greater
than three (3) stories and not greater than two (2) stories within fifty feet
(50') of the right-of-way of 60th Street and Vista Drive. This parcel shall be
developed as a single project with each building compatible in design and use
of materials.
No unit shall be located closer than thirty five feet (35') to any public
street, ten feet (10') from the boundary with Parcel A and sixty feet (60')
from the right-of-way of the Interstate highway system. All accessory
structures shall meet minimum setback requirements as set forth by Section 6,
Article VI of Ordinance 430. Off-street parking lots shall be sufficiently
buffered from public street view and Parcel C and E with the use of landscaping
and/or wall structures as may be required by the City.
      3.   Parcel C: This parcel shall encompass bi-attached single-family
dwelling units designed for owner-occupancy. The area shall be developed as a
single project with each building compatible in design and use of materials.
This area shall involve a maximum of sixteen (16) dwelling units.
No residential unit shall be set closer than thirty feet (30') to the right-of-
way of Vista Drive, forty five feet (45') from the right-of-way of Sixtieth
Street, fifteen feet (15') from the east boundary of the parcel, thirty five
feet (35') from the south boundary of the parcel and no residential building
shall be set closer than fifteen feet (15') to another residential building.
All accessory structures shall meet minimum setback requirements as set forth
by Section 6, Article VI of Ordinance 430. No driveway access shall be
permitted to Sixtieth Street and the location and number of driveway approaches
onto Vista Drive may be restricted as required by the City.
      4.   Parcel D: This parcel shall encompass single-family detached homes
which shall be located on individual lots with a minimum fifty foot (50')
public street frontage and six thousand two hundred fifty (6,250) square feet
in lot area. No residential unit shall be set closer than twenty five feet
(25') from the internal looped street right-of-way, sixty feet (60') from the
right-of-way of Sixtieth Street, and shall have a minimum thirty five foot
(35') rear yard and five foot (5') side yard setbacks. Driveway access to Vista
Drive and/or Sixtieth Street shall not be permitted.
      5.   Parcel E: All general use regulations, performance standards and
provisions set forth in Article VII of Ordinance 430 for the R-1 Single-Family
Residential District shall apply to any development proposal for all property
within Parcel E as shown on the sketch plan, provided those dwelling units
fronting the looped street west of 58th Street shall be permitted a minimum
setback of twenty five feet (25') from the right-of-way of the internal looped
street and no dwelling shall be located closer than sixty feet (60') to the
right-of-way of Sixtieth Street. Driveway access to Vista Drive and/or Sixtieth
Street shall not be permitted.
   C.   Reservation Of Park Site: Parcel P as shown on the sketch plan is
agreed to be reserved for acquisition by the City for public and park use upon
development of adjoining properties within the PUD and shall be a minimum of
three (3) acres in area with a minimum of forty feet (40') of frontage access
to 58th Street as shall be required by the City. The park land shall be
conveyed by warranty deed, free and clear of any and all liens and encumbrances
including all judgments, attachments, mechanics and other liens.
The value of the land to be purchased by the City for park use shall be
established at the time of purchase of said property by the City and shall be
based upon the property's current fair market value as undeveloped, plus the
cost of providing paved street frontage, sanitary sewer and water service and
grading. If possible, the current fair market value shall be determined by
mutual agreement between the City Council and developer. If an agreement on the
current fair market value cannot be mutually reached by the parties, such value
shall be determined by the parties appointing a real estate appraiser with
qualifications of a M.A.I. with the cost of the appraisal being equally shared
by the City and the developer. Any part of Parcel P which the developer shall
utilize for storm water retention purposes as required by the City shall not be
included as part of the cost to the City for purchase of the park site. (Ord.
786, 3-31-1986)
026-04: BUILDING RESTRICTIONS, EASEMENTS AND COVENANTS:
The developer shall with the approval of the City Council adopt building
restrictions, easements and covenants pertaining to each area developed where
the developer and the City deem appropriate. (Ord. 786, 3-31-1986)
026-05: CORNER LOTS:
Corner lots shall not be less than twenty feet (20') greater in lot frontage
than the minimum lot frontage required for each development parcel so as to
permit adequate building setbacks on both front and side streets. (Ord. 786, 3-
31-1986)
026-06: ALL AREAS TO BE PLATTED:
Prior to development within any portion of the PUD, the area to be developed
shall first be platted in accordance with the City's Subdivision Ordinance.
(Ord. 786, 3-31-1986)
026-07: NOISE ATTENUATION ALONG INTERSTATE HIGHWAY SYSTEM:
In order to promote a living environment free from the excessive noise produced
by vehicular traffic upon Interstates 35 and 80, the developer, with approval
by the City Planning and Zoning Commission and City Council shall incorporate
additional plantings, earth berming and proper acoustical site design
techniques to reduce the negative impact of highway noise. As part of the final
site development proposal for that area of the PUD adjoining Interstate 80
rights-of-way, sufficient landscape plantings, and earth berming barriers shall
be provided; predominant plantings shall be of evergreen type, shrubs and
trees, so as to assure year-round effectiveness; density and height of
plantings or barriers shall be such as to provide attenuation. The
incorporation of sound attenuation measures shall be the responsibility of the
developer and made a part of site plan or plat improvements when affected
properties are developed. (Ord. 786, 3-31-1986)
026-08: DOUBLE-FRONTAGE LOTS ABUTTING 60TH STREET:
All double-frontage lots along 60th Street shall be developed in accordance
with Section 6-6.04, subsection 5, paragraph B of the West Des Moines
Subdivision Ordinance. A complete buffer plan shall be submitted to and
approved by the City as part of the platting process for the lots. Final
responsibility for provision of the buffer shall rest with the developer
(subdivider) regardless of any pass through agreement. The City building
inspector shall not issue an occupancy permit for any of the affected lots
until the buffer as required within this Section is properly installed per
final site plan specifications. (Ord. 786, 3-31-1986)
026-09: STORM WATER MANAGEMENT:
With the first development proposal, or prior thereto, there shall be submitted
to, and approved by the West Des Moines City Engineer, a complete storm water
management plan for all storm sewer and drainage systems to remain a portion of
the development. The plan shall be guided by, and adhere to the West Des Moines
Subdivision Ordinance, with provision made for conveyance of the 100-year
return frequency rainfall (event), including the provision for on-site
temporary detention with discharge equivalent to the existing 5-year return
frequency storm as required by the City. (Ord. 786, 3-31-1986)
026-99: LEGISLATIVE HISTORY:
Ord. 786, 3-31-1986; Ord. 871, 2-20-1989.
PUD #27
WEST LAKES
SECTION:
027-01: Legal Description
027-02: Sketch Plan
027-03: Conditions
027-04: Signage Regulation
027-05: Parking Setbacks
027-06: Building Restrictions, Easements And Covenants
027-07: All Areas To Be Platted
027-08: Pedestrian Access And Orientation
027-09: Master Planning Required
027-10: 74th Street And University Avenue Improvements
027-11: Intersection Paving
027-12: Traffic Signals
027-13: Vehicular Access
027-14: Dam Improvements
027-15: Storm Water Management
027-99: Legislative History
027-01: LEGAL DESCRIPTION:
The legal description for the West Lakes PUD is as follows:
Outlot 1, Continental Plaza Plat 1, and official plat, and Outlot "C" and a
parcel of land in Outlot "A" West Lakes Office Park Plat 1, and official plat,
and a parcel of land in Government Lot 2, 3, and 4 in Section 1, Township 78
North, Range 26 West of the 5th P.M., City of West Des Moines, Dallas County,
Iowa, that is more particularly described as follows:
Beginning at the northwest corner of Government Lot 4; thence N89°44'52"E,
1367.97 feet along the north line of Government Lots 4 and 3 to a point; thence
N89°36'20"E, 1127.44 feet along the north line of Government Lot 3 to the
northeast corner of said lot; thence N89°36'20"E, 190.94 feet along the north
line of Government Lot 2 to the northwest corner of West Lakes Office Park Plat
1, an official Plat; thence S00°29'56"E, 1320.00 feet along the west line of
said West Lakes Office Park Plat 1 to a point; thence S89°36'54"W, 442.20 feet
along said west line to a point; thence S37°17'46"W, 353.79 feet to a point on
said west line; thence S00°42'02"E, 582.80 feet along said west line to a point
on a curve; thence southeasterly along a curve to the left having a radius of
1400.00 feet and a chord bearing of S66°57'16"E an arc length of 511.21 feet to
a point on the east line of Outlot 1, Continental Plaza Plat 1; thence
S00°29'46"E, 507.60 feet along said east line to the southeast corner of said
Outlot; thence S89°12'58"W, 800.60 feet along the south line of said Outlot to
a point; thence N87°48'34"W, 587.27 feet along said south line to a point;
thence N73°57'56"W, 426.74 feet along said south line to the southwest corner
of said Outlot; thence N16°02'04"E, 278.74 feet along the west line of said
Outlot to a point; thence N07°42'54"W, 60.00 feet along said west line to the
northwest corner of said Outlot; thence S82°17'06"W, 148.40 feet along the
north line of Continental Plaza Plat 1 to a point; thence N00°00'00"E, 1119.20
feet along said north line to a point; thence N90°00'00"W, 644.32 feet along
said north line to a point on the west line of said Government Lot 4; thence
N00°00'00"E, 1319.75 feet along said west line to the point of beginning. All
containing a total 137.177 acres more or less.
(Ord. 1330, 10-5-1998)
027-02: SKETCH PLAN:
On file with the Community Development Department of the City and made a part
of this rezoning approval for concept description and delineation is the sketch
plan document for West Lakes PUD. It is recognized, minor shifts or
realignments of streets may be necessary and compatible with the need to
acquire workable street patterns, grades and usable building sites, but the
general plan layout, including the relationship of uses to each other and the
relationship of land use to the general plan framework, traffic layout, and
development requirements shall be used as the implementation guide. (Ord. 1330,
10-5-1998)
027-03: CONDITIONS:
Title 9 of the City Code of West Des Moines establishes certain regulations and
guidelines pertaining to accompanying information required on a submittal of a
final plat, final site plan, and permitted conditional use permits documents;
therefore, the following conditions, restrictions, and regulations are adopted
as part of this approval:
   A.   General Conditions: The sketch plan incorporates office and commercial/
retail land uses which shall be distributed by area, types and location
according to the sketch plan as presented.
In addition, the following general site plan criteria shall be integrated into
and made a part of the planned unit development and sketch plan document.
      1.   All subdivisions, public streets, public street rights-of-way and
general development shall adhere to the standards and design criteria set forth
in the West Des Moines Subdivision Ordinance and the Des Moines Metropolitan
Design Standards as adopted by the City of West Des Moines pertaining thereto,
unless otherwise stated within this Ordinance.
      2.   Any regulation, standard, provision or requirement set forth in the
City Code of West Des Moines not specifically addressed within this document
are applicable to this PUD and shall be enforced.
      3.   In all areas within a 100-year frequency flood hazard zone, or
adjoining drainageways or detention areas involving potential flood hazards, no
building shall be erected which has a lowest floor, including basements, less
than one foot (1') above the determined level of the 100-year frequency flood
event or floodproofed to the same elevation in accordance with the West Des
Moines Floodplain Ordinance, and no building shall be erected within twenty
five feet (25') of any major drainage, storm water detention basin or pond.
      4.   The developers, their successors and assigns, if any, shall pay all
construction and engineering costs for the interior development of the planned
unit development, in accordance with the current City policies at the time of
development, as required by this Ordinance, the Subdivision Ordinance of the
City of West Des Moines, and the Des Moines Metropolitan Design Standards as
adopted by the City of West Des Moines, for all streets, storm sewers, sanitary
sewers, drainage improvements, detention basins, water mains, buffers and other
improvements within the PUD as may be required.
   B.   Land Use Design Criteria: In addition to the general conditions as
stated in subsection A above, the following land use design criteria shall
apply to the development areas designated by parcel on the sketch plan. The
sketch plan document which is made a part of this rezoning action per Section
027-02 of this Ordinance, delineates ten (10) parcels of the PUD as Parcels A,
B, C, D, E, F, G, H, I and J for application of specific standards of land use
and the development regulations. The following development standards and use
regulations shall apply to each of the individual parcels as applicable.
      1.   Parcel A And Parcel B:
         a.   All general use regulations, performance standards and provisions
set forth in Title 9, Zoning, of the City Code of West Des Moines for the SC
Support Commercial District shall apply to any development proposal for the
property within Parcel A and Parcel B as shown on the sketch plan except as
shall be further provided herein. The southern five hundred feet (500') of the
aggregate of Parcels A and B shall comply with all performance standards and
provisions including but not limited to open space, landscaping, building
setbacks, and other bulk regulations for the PCP Professional Commerce Park
District. Parcel A and Parcel B shall encompass a maximum of twenty five (25)
acres.
         b.   Development Standards: Allowed uses within Parcels A and B shall
include all permitted uses and permitted conditional uses within the PCP
Professional Commerce Park District and all permitted uses and permitted
conditional uses within the SC Support Commercial District, except for the
following uses which shall not be permitted:
Automobile dealers and service stations (SIC 55) (*see
exception noted below)
Automotive repair, services, and parking (SIC 75) (**except
car washes, see below)
Retail nurseries and garden stores (SIC 526)
Convenience stores (SIC 541) (*see exception noted below)
Hotels, rooming houses, camps, and other lodging places (SIC 70)
Recreational vehicle and agricultural equipment repair Services (SIC 7699)
Misc. automotive repair services (SIC 7699)
Personal item care and storage services (SIC 7299)
Mixed, manufactured, or liquefied petroleum gas production and/or distribution
(SIC 4925)
Passenger and freight transportation services (SIC 472 and 473)
*One convenience store/gasoline service station (without repair) shall be
allowed as a permitted condition use within the northern six hundred feet
(600') of Parcel A only.
In addition, the following uses shall also be permitted within Parcels A and
B***:
Apparel and accessory stores (SIC 56)
Candy, nut, and confectionery stores (SIC 544)
Dairy products stores (SIC 545)
Book and stationery stores (SIC 5942 and 5943).
Camera and photographic supply stores (SIC 5946).
Catalog and mail order houses (SIC 5961).
Florists (SIC 5992).
Furniture, home furnishings, and equipment stores (SIC 57).
General merchandise stores (SIC 53).
Gift, novelty, and souvenir shops (SIC 5947).
Hardware stores without outside storage (SIC 525).
Hobby, toy, and game shops (SIC 5945).
Luggage and leather goods stores (SIC 5948).
Miscellaneous retail stores without outside sales or storage (SIC 5999).
News dealers and newsstands (SIC 5994).
Retail bakeries (SIC 546).
Sewing, needlework and piece goods stores (SIC 5949).
Sporting goods stores and bicycle shops (SIC 5941).
Tobacco stores and stands (SIC 5993).
Used merchandise stores (SIC 593) except used building materials.
*Except engine and motor equipment supply stores; farm equipment and supply
stores; and monument and tombstone stores which shall not be permitted.
*Except pet and pet supply shops; and swimming pools, hot tubs and sauna
equipment and supply stores which shall be permitted conditional uses (see
below).
Advertising services (SIC 731).
Building cleaning and maintenance services, not elsewhere classified (SIC
7349).
Consumer credit reporting (SIC 732).
Disinfecting and pest control services (SIC 7342).
Earth science services (SIC 8999).
Garment pressing, and agents for laundries and dry cleaners, without drive-
throughs (SIC 7212).
Home healthcare services (SIC 808).
Legal services (SIC 81).
Lock and key services (SIC 7699).
Mailing, reproduction, commercial art and photography (SIC 733).
Medical and dental laboratories (SIC 807).
Motion picture theaters, except drive-in (SIC 7832).
Offices and clinics of doctors, dentists, and other healthcare practitioners
(SIC 801, 802, 803 and 804).
Photo finish labs (SIC 7384).
Social services, not elsewhere classified (SIC 839).
Videotape rental (SIC 784).
Watch, clock, and jewelry repair (SIC 763).
In addition, the following uses shall be allowed as permitted conditional uses
within parcels A and B***:
Bowling centers (SIC 793).
Car washes** (SIC 7542).
Dance, studios, schools, and halls (SIC 791).
Garment pressing, and agents for laundries and dry cleaners, with drive-
throughs (SIC 7212).
Hot tubs and sauna equipment and supply stores (SIC 5999).
Nursing and personal care facilities (SIC 805).
Pet and pet supply shops and swimming pools (SIC 5999).
***Please note that any use which is allowed as a permitted use in the PCP
professional commerce park or SC support commercial zoning districts which is
listed within this PUD as a permitted conditional use shall be considered a
permitted conditional use. In addition, any use which is allowed as a permitted
conditional use in the PCP professional commerce park or SC support commercial
zoning districts which is listed within this PUD as a permitted use shall be
considered a permitted use.
The southern five hundred feet (500') of the aggregate of parcels A and B shall
prohibit any and all drive-through facilities with the exception of a pick up
area associated with a grocery store and a drive-through facility associated
with a bank.
Any and all outside display shall be restricted and allowed only by the
issuance of a temporary use permit issued by the city of West Des Moines. (Ord.
1330, 10-5-1998)
Multiple use of the site by more than one building shall be permitted only if
said buildings are consistent in architectural design and use of materials and
organized utilizing a compatible planned open space, landscape plan, and
parking plan to serve and maintain a unified master plan concept; multiple
buildings separated by parking areas or drives and lots less than two (2) acres
in size may be considered acceptable if approved by the planning and zoning
commission and city council as an acceptable master development plan for parcel
A and parcel B. Buildings containing PCP district uses and hotels, motels, and
associated conventions facilities may exceed thirty five feet (35') in height.
Yard requirements shall comply with standards of the SC support commercial
district; provided however, the front yard building setback from any street
right of way shall be a minimum of fifty feet (50') and the minimum parking lot
and/or drive setback shall be a minimum of thirty feet (30'). In the case where
a rear yard of a parcel or lot abuts a private drive, a minimum rear yard
building setback of twenty five feet (25'), measured from the back of curb, may
be allowed to apply to any development of parcel A. The minimum thirty foot
(30') setback along University Avenue and 74th Street shall be measured from
the anticipated full right of way as determined by the city during the platting
process and shall be utilized, designed, and improved as a landscaped buffer
area effectively screening all parking and drive areas from the public view and
presenting an attractive view or element to the area. (Ord. 1616, 11-22-2004)
A minimum fifty foot (50') wide landscaped buffer shall be established along
the entire Westown Parkway frontage and the south four hundred feet (400') of
frontage along 74th Street which shall incorporate a berm minimum six feet (6')
in height and extensive plantings for the purpose of providing year round
buffering and screening of potential retail uses and rear building areas from
adjacent roadways and providing the aesthetic enhancement of this principal
entrance area to the West Lakes office park.
Parcel A and parcel B shall be restricted to a maximum of six (6) total
building pads with a maximum of two (2) building pads permitted within the
southern five hundred feet (500') of the aggregate of parcels A and B.
         c.   Architecture: Architectural design and use of materials for the
construction of any building within the property shall be accomplished in a
manner compatible with PCP professional commerce park district building
materials. The architectural design of any building shall be acceptable to the
city and all buildings within the property shall have as a primary element of
the exterior being fascia glass or face brick with all sides of any building
built on the property consistent in design and use of materials. No wood,
masonite, visible asphaltic exterior wall or roof material, aluminum siding,
nonarchitectural sheet metal, concrete block, or other similar materials shall
constitute a portion of any building except as a trim material, unless the city
council of West Des Moines, after having received a recommendation from the
planning and zoning commission of West Des Moines shall determine said material
when used as a primary element, enhances the physical appearance, or provides
continuity desired to unite all structures within the property together into
one project concept.
         d.   Buffering: Adequate buffering of negative aspects of commercial
buildings (loading docks, garbage dumpsters and HVAC mechanical units) from any
public street and adjoining properties shall be required. Commercial retail
buildings shall not be located and designed to expose loading docks or doors,
loading areas or the rear of buildings to public streets. (Ord. 1330, 10-5-
1998)
      2.   Parcel C: All general use regulations, performance standards and
provisions set forth in title 9, "Zoning", of the city code for the PCP
professional commerce park district shall apply to any development proposal for
all property within lots 9 and 10 as shown on the sketch plan of the West Lakes
PUD; except as follows: A minimum lot area of two (2) acres, and minimum lot
frontage width of two hundred feet (200'), as measured at the front yard
setback shall be permitted. The side and rear yard building setbacks shall be
forty feet (40'). A single restaurant of PCP standards shall be permitted on
lot 10 with any and all drive-through facilities being prohibited. (Ord. 1451,
9-4-2001)
      3.   Parcel D: Parcel D shall be a maximum of ten (10) acres. The
following general use regulations, performance standards and provisions shall
apply to any development proposal for that property within parcel D as shown on
the sketch plan of the West Lakes PUD:
         a.   Allowed Uses: Allowed uses within parcel D shall include all
permitted uses and permitted conditional uses within the PCP professional
commerce park district.
In addition, the following uses shall also be permitted uses within parcel D:
Hotels/motels, associated convention facilities, and accessory uses of
restaurants, service bars, cocktail lounges and shops with access to accessory
uses limited to inside the principal building or through an internal courtyard.
A restaurant without a drive-through, and a bank which may include a drive-
through.
         b.   Development Standards: Development within the parcel shall have a
minimum open space of thirty five percent (35%) with landscaping in accordance
with standards set forth within the zoning ordinance of the city of West Des
Moines, Iowa. The parcel shall be developed based upon a single master plan or
site plan with buildings compatible in design and use of materials. Buildings
shall be set back a minimum of fifty feet (50') from any public street right of
way, public street easement or the parcel D boundary. Buildings shall be set
back at least a sum of fifty feet (50') from side yard property lines with a
minimum of ten feet (10') on any one side. Multiple buildings separated by
parking areas and lots less that two (2) acres may be considered acceptable if
approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission and City Council as an
acceptable master development plan for the property.
Any building over five (5) stories shall be set back from any parcel boundary
an additional ten feet (10') for each story of height greater than five (5)
stories. Development of the property shall be in a cohesive and uniform manner
creating a campus-like setting with all buildings and the overall site
developed as a single or unified development. Multiple use of the site by more
than one building shall be permitted if said buildings are consistent in
architectural design and use of materials and organized utilizing a compatible
planned open space, landscape plan, and parking plan to serve and maintain a
unified master plan concept.
Upon written consent of all property owners within Parcel D, all individual
interstate frontages may be combined in order to qualify for a freestanding
interstate sign per the West Des Moines Sign Ordinance, to be utilized by the
businesses within Parcel D. Such a sign shall be setback a minimum of twenty
feet (20') from the interstate right-of-way, and a minimum two hundred feet
(200') from the eastern and western boundaries of Parcel D.
         c.   Architecture: All heating, ventilation, and air conditioning
mechanical units and facilities shall be screened from public view. All walls
of any building within the property shall be compatible in design and use of
materials. Any storage or loading area and loading docks shall be sufficiently
buffered from adjoining properties, public streets and general public view.
Architectural design and use of materials for the construction of any building
within the property as described in the sketch plan shall be accomplished in a
manner compatible with PCP Professional Commerce Park Zone District building
standards. The architectural design of any building shall be acceptable to the
City and all buildings within the property shall have as a primary element of
the exterior being fascia glass or face brick. No wood, masonite, visible
asphaltic exterior wall or roof material, aluminum siding, nonarchitectural
sheet metal, concrete block, or other similar materials shall constitute a
portion of any building except as a trim material, unless the City Council of
West Des Moines, after having received a recommendation from the Planning and
Zoning Commission of West Des Moines shall determine said material when used as
a primary element, enhances the physical appearance, or provides continuity
desired to unite all structures within Parcel D together into one project
concept.
         d.   Buffering: Adequate buffering of negative aspects of commercial
buildings (loading docks, garbage dumpsters and HVAC mechanical units) from any
public street and adjoining properties shall be required. Commercial retail
buildings shall not be located and designed to expose loading docks or doors,
loading areas or the rear of buildings to public streets or adjoining
properties.
      4.   Parcel E: All general use regulations, performance standards and
provisions set forth in Title 9, Zoning, of the City Code of West Des Moines
for the PCP Professional Commerce Park District shall apply to any development
proposal for all property within Parcel E as shown on the sketch plan of the
West Lakes PUD.
      5.   Parcel F: All general use regulations, performance standards and
provisions set forth in Title 9, Zoning, of the City Code of West Des Moines
for the PCP Professional Commerce Park District shall apply to any development
proposal for all property within Parcel F as shown on the sketch plan of the
West Lakes PUD, except a minimum two hundred feet (200') of lot frontage width
as measured at the front yard setback, and a minimum lot area of two (2) acres
shall be permitted within Parcel F.
      6.   Parcels G: All general use regulations, performance standards and
provisions set forth in Title 9, Zoning, of the City Code of West Des Moines
for the PCP Professional Commerce Park District shall apply to any development
proposal for all property within Parcel G as shown on the sketch plan of the
West Lakes PUD except that a minimum thirty foot (30') landscape buffer park
shall be established along University Avenue from the future right-of-way as
determined during the platting process.
      7.   Parcel H: All general use regulations, performance standards and
provisions set forth in Title 9, Zoning, of the City Code of West Des Moines
for the PCP Professional Commerce Park District shall apply to any development
proposal for all property within Parcel H as shown on the sketch plan of the
West Lakes PUD except as provided herein. In addition to the uses permitted
within the PCP Professional Commerce Park District, a day care center, or a
bank with drive-thru shall each be permitted within Parcel H. Any drive-thru
and/or ATM machine(s) shall be restricted to the south side of the building
located within Parcel H. Only one building shall be permitted on Parcel H. A
minimum thirty foot (30') rear yard building setback shall be permitted within
Parcel H.
         a.   Architecture: All heating, ventilation, and air conditioning
mechanical units and facilities shall be screened from public view. All walls
of any building within the property shall be compatible in design and use of
materials. Any storage or loading area and loading docks shall be sufficiently
buffered from adjoining properties, public streets and general public view.
Architectural design and use of materials for the construction of any building
within the property as described within the sketch plan shall be accomplished
in a manner compatible with PCP Professional Commerce Park Zone District
building standards. The architectural design of any building shall be
acceptable to the City and all buildings within the property shall have as a
primary element of the exterior being fascia glass or face brick. The roof or
the building within Parcel H shall be pitched or gabled and appear residential
in nature. No wood, masonite, visible asphaltic exterior wall or roof material,
aluminum siding, nonarchitectural sheet metal, concrete block, or other similar
materials shall constitute a portion of any building except as a trim material,
unless the City Council of West Des Moines, after having received a
recommendation from the Planning and Zoning Commission of West Des Moines shall
determine said material when used as a primary element, enhances the physical
appearance, or provides continuity desired to unite all structures within
Parcel H together into one project concept.
         b.   Buffering: Adequate buffering of negative aspects of a commercial
building (loading docks, garbage dumpsters and HVAC mechanical units) from any
public street and adjoining properties shall be required. A minimum thirty foot
(30') buffer park shall be established along University Avenue adjacent to
Parcel H to be designed and constructed to effectively screen any and all
parking areas and drives from adjacent properties. No parking or drives shall
be permitted within the thirty foot (30') setback area.
      8.   Parcel I: All general use regulations, performance standards and
provisions set forth in Title 9, Zoning, of the City Code of West Des Moines
for the PCP Professional Commerce Park District shall apply to any development
proposal for all property within Parcel I as shown on the sketch plan of the
West Lakes PUD except as provided herein. In addition to the uses permitted
within the PCP Professional Commerce Park District, a day care center, and/or a
bank with drive-thru shall each be permitted within Parcel I. Any drive-thru
and/or ATM machine(s) shall be restricted to the south side of any building
located within Parcel I. Only a maximum of two (2) freestanding buildings shall
be permitted on Parcel I. A minimum thirty foot (30') rear yard building
setback shall be permitted within Parcel I.
         a.   Architecture: All heating, ventilation, and air-conditioning
mechanical units and facilities shall be screened from public view. All walls
of any building within the property shall be compatible in design and use of
materials. Any storage or loading area and loading docks shall be sufficiently
buffered from adjoining properties, public streets and general public view.
Architectural design and use of materials for the construction of any building
within the property as described within the sketch plan shall be accomplished
in a manner compatible with PCP Professional Commerce Park Zone District
building standards. The architectural design of any building shall be
acceptable to the City and all buildings within the property shall have as a
primary element of the exterior being fascia glass or face brick. The roof of
any building within Parcel I must be pitched or gabled and appear residential
in nature. No wood, masonite, visible asphaltic exterior wall or roof material,
aluminum siding, nonarchitectural sheet metal, concrete block, or other similar
materials shall constitute a portion of any building except as a trim material,
unless the City Council of West Des Moines, after having received a
recommendation from the Planning and Zoning Commission of West Des Moines shall
determine said material when used as a primary element, enhances the physical
appearance, or provides continuity desired to unite all structures within
Parcel I together into one project concept.
         b.   Buffering: Adequate buffering of negative aspects of a commercial
building (loading docks, garbage dumpsters and HVAC mechanical units) from any
public street and adjoining properties shall be required. A minimum thirty foot
(30') buffer park shall be established along University Avenue adjacent to
Parcel I to be designed and constructed to effectively screen any and all
parking areas and drives from adjacent properties. No parking or drives shall
be permitted within the thirty foot (30') setback area.
      9.   Parcel J, Lots 11, 12, And 13 Of West Lakes PUD: All general use
regulations, performance standards and provisions set forth in Title 9 of the
City Code for the PCP Professional Commerce Park District shall apply to any
development proposal for all property within Lots 11, 12, and 13, as shown on
the sketch plan of the West Lakes PUD, unless otherwise stated herein. A
minimum lot area of two (2) acres, and minimum lot frontage width of two
hundred feet (200'), as measured at the front yard setback shall be permitted
within Parcel J. Internal side yard building setbacks within this parcel shall
be no less than forty feet (40') from property lines. Front yard and rear yard
building setback requirements shall be maintained at fifty feet (50').
         a.   Permitted Uses In Parcel J: All uses allowed within the PCP
Professional Commerce Park District and:
Hotels/motels, associated convention facilities, and accessory uses of
restaurants, service bars, cocktail lounges and shops with access to accessory
uses limited to inside the principal building or through an internal courtyard,
not to exceed three hundred fifty (350) rooms,
A stand-alone restaurant, excluding drive-thrus, not to exceed ten thousand
(10,000) gross square feet. (Ord. 1330, 10-5-1998)
Within Lot 11 of West Lakes Office Park Plat 3, which can be generally
described as the eastern one-third (1/3) of Parcel J, allowed uses shall
include all uses allowed within the PCP Professional Commerce Park District,
and the following shall also be allowed as permitted uses:
Art and architectural supply stores, art galleries (part of SIC 5999)
Art studios (part of SIC 8999)
Barber/beauty shop (SIC 723 and SIC 724)
Book store (SIC 5942)
Dry cleaning (SIC 7212)
Florist shop (SIC 5992)
Stationery stores (SIC 5943)
Note: No drive-thru facilities allowed. (Ord. 1351, 2-22-1999)
         b.   Architecture: All heating, ventilation, and air conditioning
mechanical units and facilities shall be screened from public view. All walls
of any building within the property shall be compatible in design and use of
materials. Any storage or loading area and loading docks shall be sufficiently
buffered from adjoining properties, public streets and general public view.
Architectural design and use of materials for the construction of any building
within the property as described within the sketch plan shall be accomplished
in a manner compatible with PCP Professional Commerce Park Zone District
building standards. The architectural design of any building shall be
acceptable to the City and all buildings within the property shall have as a
primary element of the exterior being fascia glass or face brick. No wood,
masonite, visible asphaltic exterior wall or roof material, EFIS, stucco,
aluminum siding, nonarchitectural sheet metal, concrete block, or other similar
materials shall constitute a portion of any building except as a trim material,
unless the City Council of West Des Moines, after having received a
recommendation from the Planning and Zoning Commission of West Des Moines shall
determine said material when used as a primary element, enhances the physical
appearance or provides continuity desired to unite all structures within Parcel
J together into one project concept.
         c.   Buffering: Adequate buffering of negative aspects of commercial
buildings (loading docks, garbage dumpsters and HVAC mechanical units) from any
public street and adjoining properties shall be required. Commercial retail
buildings shall not be located and designed to expose loading docks or doors,
loading areas or the rear of buildings to public streets or adjoining
properties. These lots shall provide a two foot (2') to three foot (3') berm
designed by a registered landscape architect, architect or engineer, with
landscape materials located within the parking lot setback, adjacent to the
public thoroughfares, to screen the parking lots from public view.
         d.   Master Plan: A master plan for the nine and fifty-seven
hundredths (9.57) acres shall be submitted along with each site plan submittal
in this location. The master plan shall be developed as a single master plan
for the three (3) lots, schematically showing private and public street
alignments, location of land uses, building and parking lot locations, storm
water detention and management facilities, utilities, other accessory or
ancillary uses supportive of the principal permitted use, and other specifics
dealing with onsite circulation, building materials and architecture,
pedestrian access and pedestrian areas, signage, etc. The master plan for the
development for each parcel shall be submitted and approved by the Planning and
Zoning Commission and City Council prior to site plan or plat approval for any
portion of the parcel. The master plan may be amended from time to time in the
same manner as its original review and approval by the Planning and Zoning
Commission and the City Council. (Ord. 1330, 10-5-1998)
027-04: SIGNAGE REGULATION:
No pole sign, as defined by the West Des Moines City Sign Code, shall be
incorporated into any development within the West Lakes PUD. Ground sign
standards shall be used for the construction of freestanding signage as
provided for within the West Des Moines City Sign Code for the PCP Professional
Commerce Park District.
Parcel A and Parcel B shall be restricted to a maximum of four (4) freestanding
ground mounted signs, one each on University Avenue, 74th Street, Westown
Parkway and 71st Street, providing the signage on Westown Parkway shall be
restricted to office park entrance identification only and any and all wall
signage prohibited on the building facing Westown Parkway.
All signage constructed as wall signs on building fascia within the PUD shall
incorporate aesthetic features compatible with the overall character of the
development. All wall signs will be composed of solid individual letters
attached to the building fascia, or individual letters of anodized aluminum,
galvanized metal, illuminated self contained with translucent plastic faces set
in anodized aluminum returns and trim; panel signs with letters incorporated or
painted upon a panel or wall area shall be prohibited. Advertising or
promotional temporary signage attached to exterior windows or walls including
exposed neon lights visible from the exterior of the building shall be
prohibited. (Ord. 1330, 10-5-1998)
027-05: PARKING SETBACKS:
Off-street parking lots, loading areas and internal drives shall be
sufficiently set back from public streets a minimum of twenty feet (20') for
all parcels and buffered from public street view, as practical with the use of
landscaping, earth berming and/or wall structures as may be required by the
City. Parking lots and associated access drives shall be set back a minimum ten
feet (10') from an adjoining private property lot line, unless the parking
space or access drive is part of a common parking lot of joint usage between
adjoining lots. (Ord. 1330, 10-5-1998)
027-06: BUILDING RESTRICTIONS, EASEMENTS AND COVENANTS:
The developer shall with the approval of the City Council adopt building
restrictions, easements and covenants pertaining to each parcel developed where
the developer and the City deem appropriate. (Ord. 1330, 10-5-1998)
027-07: ALL AREAS TO BE PLATTED:
Prior to, or in conjunction with development or transfer of ownership of any
portion of the PUD, said area shall be platted in accordance with the City's
Subdivision Ordinance to delineate within a plat the parcel to be developed or
sold separately or any portion thereof. (Ord. 1330, 10-5-1998)
027-08: PEDESTRIAN ACCESS AND ORIENTATION:
Pedestrian access shall be provided from uses within the West Lakes PUD to the
commercial uses developed within Parcels A, B, D, H and I. The design and/or
location of the pedestrian walkways shall be determined at the platting stage
with a master pedestrian circulation plan being reviewed and approved as a
component of the first plat approval of the West Lakes PUD area. The intent of
this requirement is to discourage the use of motorized vehicles for employees
within the office park desiring to frequent the commercial uses within the
area. The pedestrian access should also be provided to developments to the
east. (Ord. 1330, 10-5-1998)
027-09: MASTER PLANNING REQUIRED:
Prior to development within any part of any parcel, a master plan shall be
prepared showing the location of new public streets within or adjoining the
parcel in order to assure workable street patterns, grades, and usable building
sites. The master plan should also address building locations, pedestrian
orientation and/or access, and other elements identified within this PUD. (Ord.
1330, 10-5-1998)
027-10: 74TH STREET AND UNIVERSITY AVENUE IMPROVEMENTS:
All cost associated with the widening and construction of 74th Street and
University Avenue adjacent to the site shall be paid for by the developer up to
and not to exceed the equivalent costs of paving one-half (1/2) of thirty one
feet (31') of roadway section. A bond in the amount to cover said cost shall be
posted, or an acceptable alternative approved by the City, prior to the
recording of the final plat for the subject site. (Ord. 1330, 10-5-1998)
027-11: INTERSECTION PAVING:
All cost associated with the construction of all new and existing intersections
adjacent to the site shall be paid for by the developer including paving to the
future ultimate widths with the returns along University Avenue and 74th Street
(end of returns shall be a minimum including temporary tapers). (Ord. 1330, 10-
5-1998)
027-12: TRAFFIC SIGNALS:
The owner on behalf of itself, its successors and assigns, agrees to commit to
cost associated with the provision of traffic signals as follows: one-fourth
(1/4) of the cost of signalization at the intersection of 74th Street and
University Avenue; one- half (1/2) of the cost of signalization at the
intersection of University Avenue and the extension of Country Club Drive; one-
fourth (1/4) of the cost of signalization at the intersection of Westown
Parkway and 74th Street; and one-half (1/2) of the cost of signalization at the
intersection of University Avenue and the extension of Lake Point Drive
including executing a petition and waiver for said cost. (Ord. 1330, 10-5-1998)
027-13: VEHICULAR ACCESS:
Vehicular access from University Avenue and 74th Street shall be restricted and
limited as follows:
   A.   A maximum of one access drive shall be permitted from parcel A and
parcel B to University Avenue and a maximum of three (3) access drives shall be
permitted from parcel A and parcel B to 74th Street and 71st Street restricted
to truck access only. Access shall be prohibited from parcel A and parcel B to
Westown Parkway.
   B.   A maximum of one access drive shall be permitted from parcel G to
University Avenue and shall be a joint access drive with the city pump station
located adjacent to lot 3, as illustrated on the PUD sketch plan on file in the
city.
   C.   A maximum of one access drive shall be permitted from parcel I to
University Avenue and shall be a joint access drive with property located
immediately east of parcel I.
No other access drives shall be permitted from University Avenue and/or 74th
Street other than those stated above. Specific access locations and design
details shall be submitted and approved by the city during the platting and/or
site plan review process. (Ord. 1330, 10-5-1998)
027-14: DAM IMPROVEMENTS:
The owner on behalf of itself, its successors and assigns, agrees to commit to
cost associated with the provision of dam improvements within West Lakes PUD.
(Ord. 1330, 10-5-1998)
027-15: STORM WATER MANAGEMENT:
There shall be submitted to, and approved by the West Des Moines city engineer,
a complete storm water management plan for all storm sewer and drainage systems
within the PUD, to be prepared by the developer prior to development within the
PUD. (Ord. 1330, 10-5-1998)
027-99: LEGISLATIVE HISTORY:
Lake Point: Ord. 910, 6-11-1990; West Lakes Office Park Plat 3: Ord. 1003, 4-
13-1992; Ord. 1076, 12-20-1993; Ord. 1196, 8-12-1996; Ord. 1220, 12-2-1996;
Ord. 1326, 9-21-1998; West Lakes: Ord. 1330, 10-5-1998; Ord. 1351, 2-22-1999;
Ord. 1451, 9-4-2001; Ord. 1616, 11-22-2004.
PUD #28
COUNTRY CLUB OFFICE PLAZA (CCOP)
SECTION:
028-01: Legal Description
028-02: Sketch Plan
028-03: Conditions
028-04: Master Planning Required
028-05: Signage Regulation
028-06: Buffering
028-07: Building Restrictions, Easements And Covenants
028-08: All Areas To Be Platted
028-09: Stormwater Management
028-10: Pedestrian And Bike Routes
028-11: Landscape Area And Buffer Park Easements
028-12: Traffic Improvements
028-13: Woodland Water Main Extension
028-14: Violations And Penalties
028-99: Legislative History
028-01: LEGAL DESCRIPTION:
The legal description for the Country Club Office Plaza PUD is as follows:
West Parcel (Parcel A-1 and A-2): A tract of land in the Southeast 1/4 of
Section 2, Township 78 North, Range 26 West of the 5th P.M., now in and forming
part of the City of West Des Moines, Dallas County, Iowa, more particularly
described as follows:
Commencing at the Southeast Corner of Section 2; thence N00°00'00"E along the
east line of said Section 2,312.19 feet to the point of beginning, said point
also being on the northerly railroad right of way line; thence N63°40'00"W
along said northerly right of way line, 2,057.38 feet; thence N63°48'36"W along
said northerly right of way line, 690.54 feet to a point on the southerly
right-of-way line of Interstate Highway number 80; thence N54°05'32"E along
said southerly line 762.54 feet; thence N55°03'47"E along southerly line,
416.58 feet; thence N61°48'52"E along said southerly line, 322.00 feet; thence
N70°54'40"E along said southerly line, 252.55 feet; thence N79°42'15"E along
said southerly line, 382.55 feet, thence S00°04'26"E, 654.46 feet; thence
N82°49'12"E, 609.44 feet to a point on the east line of said Section 2; thence
S00°00'00"E along said east line, 1627.96 feet to the point of beginning and
containing 65.209 acres (2,840,510 S.F.) of which 2.217 acres (96,560 S.F.) are
within existing road right of way more or less.
There is no Parcel ’B’.
East Parcel (Parcels C & D): A tract of land in Government Lots 5 and 6 Section
1, Township 78 North, Range 26 West of the 5th Principal Meridian, and in the
North Half of the Southwest Quarter of Section 1, Township 78 North, Range 26
West of the 5th Principal Meridian, Dallas County, Iowa, more particularly
described as follows:
Commencing in the West Quarter Corner of Section 1, T78N, R26W of the 5th P.M.,
Dallas County, Iowa; thence S00°00'00", 507.00 feet along the west line of said
Section 1, to the point of beginning. Thence N90°00'00"E 40.00 feet; thence
along the southerly right-of-way line of Interstate Highway No. 80, N04°02'55"E
431.10 feet; thence N00°58'50"E 162.48 feet; thence N48°18'04"E 500.43 feet;
thence N60°17'18"E 468.58 feet; thence N84°42'50"E 677.11 feet; thence
N89°05'29"E 899.68 feet; thence leaving said right of way line, S00°24'29"E
1,674.57 feet to the SE Corner of the NE1/4 of the SW1/4 of said Section 1;
thence S82°18'14"W 1,289.04 feet to the SE Corner of the NW1/4 of the SW1/4 of
said Section 1; thence S82°15'35"W 1,265.88 feet to the SW Corner of the NW1/
4 of the SW1/4 of said Section 1; thence N00°00'00", 816.15 feet along the west
line of said Section 1, to the point of beginning. Said tract of land contains
97.079 acres including 1.183 acres of County Road right of way.
East Parcel (Parcels E & F): Lots 2 & 3 of Christ's Church Subdivision, Section
1, Boone Twp 1-78-26, Dallas County, Iowa. Lot 2 includes 7.25 acres and Lot 3
includes 8.75 acres.
(Parcel G): Lot 4 of Christ's Church Subdivision in the City of West Des
Moines, Dallas County, Iowa, except the south 693.95 feet thereof (as measured
on the east line thereof).
(Ord. 2102, 7-13-2015)
028-02: SKETCH PLAN:
Exhibit A, on file in the city and made a part of this rezoning approval for
concept description and delineation, is the sketch plan document for the
Country Club Office Plaza planned unit development (PUD) dated June 2015. It is
recognized, minor shifts or modifications to a sketch plan layout may be
necessary and compatible with the need to acquire workable street patterns,
grades and usable building sites, but the sketch plan layout, including the
relationship of uses to each other and the relationship of land use to the
sketch plan framework, and development requirements shall be used as the
implementation guide. Wherever conflict occurs between the written text in this
document and the notations on the sketch plan, the written text shall prevail.
The sketch plan is a graphic representation of the property included in the PUD
delineating the approximate location and configuration of the parcels for the
purpose of easier reference for the applicable regulations of this ordinance.
(Ord. 2102, 7-13-2015)
028-03: CONDITIONS:
Whereas, title 9 of the city code establishes certain regulations and
guidelines pertaining to accompanying information required on a submittal of a
final plat, final site plan, and permitted conditional use permit documents;
now, therefore, the following conditions, restrictions, and regulations are
adopted as part of this approval, to wit:
   A.   General Conditions: The sketch plan incorporates office, commercial/
retail and light industrial land uses which shall be distributed by area, types
and location according to the sketch plan as presented.
In addition, the following general criteria shall be integrated into and made a
part of the planned unit development and sketch plan document:
      1.   All subdivisions, public streets, public street rights of way and
general development shall adhere to the standards and design criteria set forth
in the West Des Moines subdivision ordinance pertaining thereto unless
otherwise stated within this ordinance.
      2.   Any regulation, standard, provision or requirement that is not
specifically addressed within this document that is regulated elsewhere in the
city code of West Des Moines, the requirements of the city code are applicable
and shall be enforced.
      3.   In all areas within a 100-year frequency flood hazard zone, or
adjoining drainageways, detention ponding areas involving potential flood
hazards, no building shall be erected which has a lowest floor, including
basements, less than one foot (1') above the determined level of the 100-year
frequency flood event.
      4.   The developer, their successors and assigns, if any, shall pay all
construction and engineering costs for public improvements directly associated
with the development of the property covered by the PUD, as required by this
ordinance, or the subdivision ordinance of the city of West Des Moines, Iowa.
Such improvements shall include streets, storm sewers, sanitary sewers,
drainageway improvements, detention basins, water mains, buffers and other
improvements within the PUD as may be required by the subdivision ordinance,
zoning ordinance or this ordinance.
   B.   Land Use Design Criteria: In addition to the general conditions as
stated in subsection A of this section, the following land use design criteria
shall apply to the development areas designated by parcel on the sketch plan.
The sketch plan document which is made a part of this rezoning action per
section
028-02 of this ordinance, delineates eight (8) parcels of the PUD as parcels A-
1, A-2, C, D, E, F, G and H for application of specific standards of land use
and development regulations. (Note: There is no parcel B.) The following
development standards and use regulations shall apply to each of the individual
parcels as applicable: (Ord. 1601, 9-28-2004)
      1.   Parcel A: The sketch plan document which is made a part of this
rezoning action per section
028-02 of this ordinance, delineates two (2) areas, A-1 and A-2 for application
of specific standards of land use and development regulations, marked exhibit A
on file in the city. The following general use regulations, performance
standards and provisions shall apply to all development proposals for that
property within either parcel A-1 or A-2 as shown on the sketch plan of the
Country Club Office Plaza PUD.
      2.   Parcel A-1: This parcel shall encompass a maximum of nineteen (19)
acres. This parcel is generally located west of the intersection of Office
Plaza Drive and Jordan Creek Parkway, with fifteen (15) acres south and 3.75
acres north. All general use regulations, performance standards and provisions
set forth in title 9 of the city code for the support commercial (SC) district
shall apply to any development proposal for all property within parcel A-1 as
shown on exhibit A on file in the city, the sketch plan of Country Club Office
Plaza PUD; except as provided herein. (Ord. 1601, 9-28-2004; amd. Ord. 1865, 5-
17-2010)
         a.   Permitted Uses: Permitted uses within parcel A-1 shall include
the following:
For the parcel south of Office Plaza Drive (maximum 15 acres):
All permitted (P) uses and permitted conditional uses (Pc) allowed within the
professional commerce park (PCP) district, unless otherwise noted.
All permitted (P) uses and permitted conditional (Pc) uses allowed within the
support commercial (SC) district, except for auto dealers (SIC 551 and 552)
unless otherwise noted. No outside storage in A-1 is allowed.
Other uses permitted (P) in the A-1 area:
Apparel and accessory store (56).
Bookstore (5942).
Candy, nut, and confectionery stores (544).
Dairy store (5451).
Dance studios, schools, and halls (791).
Department store (531).
Florist (5992).
Furniture stores (5712).
Garment making, alteration, and repair (7219.01).
Gift, novelty and souvenir shops (5947).
Hardware store (525), no outside storage.
Hobby, toy and game shop (5945).
Household appliance stores (5722).
Jewelry stores (5944).
Luggage and leather goods (5948).
Meat and fish market (542).
Musical instrument stores (5736).
Paint, glass, and wallpaper store (523).
Radio, television, and consumer electronics stores (5731).
Record and prerecorded tape stores (5735).
Retail nurseries, lawn and garden supply stores (526), no outside storage.
Sporting goods stores and bicycle shops (5941).
Stationery stores (5943).
Used merchandise stores - antique shops (5932.02).
Other uses allowed in the A-1 area(s) by permitted conditional (Pc) use:
Coin operated laundries and dry cleaning (7215).
Motion picture theaters (7832).
For the A-1 parcel north of Office Plaza Drive (maximum 3.75 acres):
All permitted (P) uses and permitted conditional uses (Pc) allowed within the
professional commerce park (PCP) district.
All permitted (P) uses and permitted conditional uses (Pc) allowed within the
support commercial (SC) district, except for uses with outside storage, and
auto dealers (SIC 551 and 552).
         b.   Development Standards: Any development in parcel A-1 shall have a
minimum lot size of two (2) acres. Permitted uses are to be developed with
providing a unified master plan. The master plan shall include, but not limited
to, multiple buildings on a site organized utilizing a compatible planned open
space, landscape plan, and parking plan, traffic and pedestrian circulation to
serve and maintain the master plan concept. Multiple buildings separated by
parking areas or drives and lots less than two (2) acres in size may be
considered acceptable if approved by the planning and zoning commission and
city council as part of an acceptable master development plan for the A-1 area.
All uses shall have a minimum of fifty foot (50') building setbacks from all
exterior property lines abutting the PUD boundaries, and abutting public
streets. A building setback of less than thirty feet (30') to zero feet (0')
may be allowed between adjoining lots when said adjoining lots are located in
the same zoning district and provided all buildings involved are master planned
in order to ensure a unified development with unified architecture, building
color and materials, parking, and general site design. All other building
setbacks shall be a minimum of thirty feet (30').
Open space requirements of twenty percent (20%) shall apply to development
within parcel A-1. In addition, in any case, all parking areas shall include
landscape area, islands, screens, etc., equal to not less than ten percent
(10%) of the total paved area.
A landscaped area of not less than twenty feet (20') shall be provided along
all public street rights of way. A landscaped area of not less than ten feet
(10') shall be provided along all other lot lines, except that no landscaped
area is required between adjoining lots when said adjoining lots are located in
the same zoning district (PUD parcel). All twenty foot (20') landscaped areas
shall be planted with a minimum amount of two- thirds (2/3) of the planting
requirements of a thirty foot (30') landscape buffer park as per the city
zoning ordinance. All ten foot (10') landscaped areas shall be planted with a
minimum amount of one-third (1/3) of the planting requirements of a thirty foot
(30') landscape buffer park as per the city zoning ordinance.
A two (2) to three foot (3') berm shall be provided along the existing public
streets. Earth berming and landscaped plantings shall be required to provide a
landscaped open space area to enhance the proposed uses within this area from
adjacent property, roadways, and for occupants on site. Landscaped areas shall
be designed by a registered landscape architect, architect or engineer and
shall be reviewed and approved during the site planning process associated with
the development of parcel A-1. For that portion of parcel A-1 beginning
approximately two hundred feet (200') north of Office Plaza Drive, the height
of a building shall not exceed a height of sixty feet (60').
Parking lot setbacks for each lot shall be twenty feet (20') from any
established public street right of way and ten feet (10') from all other lot
lines. Parking lots located adjacent to any private street or drive shall have
a minimum ten foot (10') parking lot setback measured from the back of curb of
said private street or drive. No parking lot setback is required between
adjoining lots located within this PUD when said adjoining lots are located in
the same zoning district (PUD parcel) and have shared parking lots joined by at
least one or more access drives.
No building, accessory structure, drive or parking area shall be located or
encroach into any landscape buffer setback.
Buffers and screening of items, such as, but not limited to, rooftop mechanical
units and trash receptacles, shall meet the requirements as outlined in
ordinance 1073, and as modified, herein. Large rooftop mechanical units may be
screened by painting the units to match the exterior of the building, where
smaller rooftop mechanical units shall be screened by the use of parapet walls,
as reviewed and recommended by the plan and zoning commission and approved by
the city council. The proposed method for minimizing the visual impacts of
mechanical units/elements shall be reviewed and approved by the city during the
site plan review process.
         c.   Architecture: Architectural design and use of materials for the
construction of any building within the parcel shall be accomplished in a
manner compatible with professional commerce park zone (PCP) district building
standards. The architectural design of any building shall be acceptable to the
city and all buildings within the parcel shall have as a primary element of the
exterior being fascia glass, face brick, architectural steel or stone panels
with all sides of any building built on the parcel consistent in design and use
of materials. No wood, masonite, visible asphaltic exterior wall or roof
material, aluminum siding, nonarchitectural sheet metal, concrete block, EIFS,
stucco, or other similar materials shall constitute a portion of any building
except as a trim material, unless the city council of West Des Moines, after
having received a recommendation from the plan and zoning commission of West
Des Moines, shall determine said material when used as a primary element,
enhances the physical appearance, or provides continuity desired to unite all
structures within the parcel together into one project concept. (Ord. 1601, 9-
28-2004)
      3.   Parcel A-2: This parcel shall encompass a maximum of 40.5 acres.
This parcel generally sits between Interstate 80 and the Union Pacific
Railroad, west of Jordan Creek Parkway, excluding the ground identified in
parcel A-1. All general use regulations, performance standards and provisions
set forth in title 9 of the city code for the professional commerce park (PCP)
district shall apply to any development proposal for all property within parcel
A-2 as shown on the sketch plan of Country Club Office Plaza PUD; except as
provided herein. (Ord. 1601, 9-28-2004; amd. Ord. 1865, 5-17-2010)
         a.   Permitted Uses: Permitted uses within parcel A-2 shall include
the following:
All permitted (P) uses and permitted conditional uses (Pc) allowed within the
office and professional commerce park (PCP) districts.
Eating places (no drive-throughs).
Office warehousing uses for light distribution (except miniwarehousing) shall
be permitted wherein a minimum of twenty five percent (25%) of the floor area
shall be office use.
Printing and film processing.
         b.   Development Standards: Principal buildings constructed within
parcel A-2, together with accessory structures, shall be located on a lot
having an area of at least two (2) acres.
All uses shall have a minimum of a fifty foot (50') building setback from all
exterior property lines and abutting public streets, except for I-80 and the
railroad right of way shall have a thirty foot (30') building setback. A
building setback of less than thirty feet (30') to zero feet (0') may be
allowed between adjoining lots when said adjoining lots are located in the same
zoning district and provided all buildings involved are master planned in order
to ensure a unified development with unified architecture, building color and
materials, parking, and general site design. All other building setbacks shall
be a minimum of thirty feet (30').
A landscaped area of not less than ten feet (10') shall be provided along all
public street rights of way and along all other lot lines, except that no
landscaped area is required between adjoining lots when said adjoining lots are
located in the same zoning district (PUD parcel). All ten foot (10') landscaped
areas shall be planted with a minimum amount of one-third (1/3) of the planting
requirements of a thirty foot (30') landscape buffer park as per the city
zoning ordinance.
A two (2) to three foot (3') berm shall be provided along the existing public
streets. Earth berming and landscape plantings shall be required to provide a
landscaped open space area to enhance the proposed uses within this area from
adjacent property roadways and for occupants on site. Landscaped areas shall be
designed by a registered landscape architect, architect or engineer and shall
be reviewed and approved during the site planning process associated with the
development of parcel A-2.
Open space requirements of twenty percent (20%) shall apply to development
within parcel A-2. In addition, in any case, all parking areas shall include
landscape area, islands, screens, etc., equal to not less than ten percent
(10%) of the total paved area.
Parking lot setbacks for each lot shall be twenty feet (20') from any
established public street right of way and ten feet (10') from all other lot
lines. Parking lots located adjacent to any private street or drive shall have
a minimum ten foot (10') parking lot setback measured from the back of curb of
said private street or drive. No parking lot setback is required between
adjoining lots located within this PUD when said adjoining lots are located in
the same zoning district (PUD parcel) and have shared parking lots joined by at
least one or more access drives.
No building, accessory structure, drive or parking area shall be located or
encroached into the landscape buffer setback.
Buffers and screening of items, such as, but not limited to, rooftop mechanical
units and trash receptacles, shall meet the requirements as outlined in
ordinance 1073, and as modified, herein. Large rooftop mechanical units may be
screened by painting the units to match the exterior of the building, where
smaller rooftop mechanical units shall be screened by the use of parapet walls,
as reviewed and recommended by the plan and zoning commission and approved by
the city council. The proposed method for minimizing the visual impacts of
mechanical units/elements shall be reviewed and approved by the city during the
site plan review process.
         c.   Architecture: Architectural design and use of materials for the
construction of any building within the parcel shall be accomplished in a
manner compatible with PCP professional commerce park zone district building
standards. The architectural design of any building shall be acceptable to the
city and all buildings within the parcel shall have as a primary element of the
exterior being fascia glass, face brick, architectural steel or stone panels
with all sides of any building built on the parcel consistent in design and use
of materials. No wood, masonite, visible asphaltic exterior wall or roof
material, aluminum siding, nonarchitectural sheet metal, concrete block, EIFS,
stucco, or other similar materials shall constitute a portion of any building
except as a trim material, unless the city council of West Des Moines, after
having received a recommendation from the plan and zoning commission of West
Des Moines, shall determine said material when used as a primary element,
enhances the physical appearance, or provides continuity desired to unite all
structures within the parcel together into one project concept.
      4.   Parcel B: There is no parcel B. (Ord. 1601, 9-28-2004)
      5.   Parcel C: This parcel shall encompass a maximum of twenty one (21)
acres with a maximum depth from Jordan Creek Parkway of one thousand feet
(1,000') at the Interstate 80 intersection and a maximum depth of approximately
six hundred feet (600') at the south boundary of parcel C as shown on the
sketch plan for the Country Club Office Plaza PUD. All general use regulations,
performance standards and provisions set forth in title 9 of the city code for
the support commercial (SC) district shall apply to any development proposal
for all property within parcel C as shown on exhibit A on file in the city, the
sketch plan of Country Club Office Plaza PUD; except as provided herein. (Ord.
1601, 9-28-2004; amd. Ord. 1865, 5-17-2010)
         a.   Permitted Uses:
            (1)   Parcel C North: The following use regulations, performance
standards and provisions shall apply to any development proposal for the
property within parcel C that is located north of the established public street
right of way of Vista Drive, except as shall be further provided herein.
   Permitted uses shall include:
All permitted (P) uses and permitted conditional uses (Pc) allowed within the
professional commerce park (PCP) district.
All permitted (P) uses and permitted conditional uses (Pc) allowed within the
support commercial (SC) district except travel trailer parks, landscape-garden
plant stores and any use which has outside display areas for retail sales or
outside storage.
            (2)   Parcel C South: The following use regulations, performance
standards and provisions shall apply to any development proposal for the
property within parcel C that is located south of the established public street
right of way of Vista Drive, except as shall be further provided herein.
   Permitted uses shall include:
All permitted (P) uses and permitted conditional uses (Pc) allowed within the
professional commerce park (PCP) district and office (OF) district.
All permitted (P) uses and permitted conditional uses (Pc) allowed within the
support commercial (SC) district except travel trailer parks, landscape-garden
plant stores and any use which has outside display areas for retail sales or
outside storage.
Other uses permitted (P) in parcel C south of Vista Drive:
Apparel and accessory store (56).
Bookstore (5942).
Candy, nut, and confectionery stores (544).
Dairy store (5451).
Dance studios, schools, and halls (791).
Florist (5992).
Furniture stores (5712).
Garment making, alteration, and repair (7219.01).
Gift, novelty and souvenir shops (5947).
Hobby, toy and game shop (5945).
Household appliance stores (5722).
Jewelry stores (5944).
Luggage and leather goods (5948).
Meat and fish market (542).
Musical instrument stores (5736).
Radio, television, and consumer electronics stores (5731).
Record and prerecorded tape stores (5735).
Retail nurseries, lawn and garden supply stores (526), no outside storage.
Sporting goods stores and bicycle shops (5941).
Stationery stores (5943).
Used merchandise stores - antique shops (5932.02).
Other permitted conditional (Pc) uses in parcel C south of Vista Drive:
Coin operated laundries and dry cleaning (7215).
Motion picture theaters (7832).
         b.   Development Standards:
            (1)   Parcel C North: The following use regulations, performance
standards and provisions shall apply to any development proposal for the
property within parcel C that is located north of the established public street
right of way of Vista Drive, except as shall be further provided herein.
Minimum lot area, frontage, and yard requirements shall comply with the
following standards:
               (A) Lot area: A minimum of twenty one thousand seven hundred
eighty (21,780) square feet (1/2 acre);
               (B) Lot width: Fifty feet (50');
               (C) Front yard setback: Forty five feet (45'). All yards
abutting a public thoroughfare shall be considered front yards and shall comply
with the requirements for a front yard setback;
               (D) Side yard setback: None required; and
               (E) Rear yard setback: Twenty five feet (25').
            (2)   Parcel C South: The following use regulations, performance
standards and provisions shall apply to any development proposal for the
property within parcel C that is located south of the established public street
right of way of Vista Drive, except as shall be further provided herein.
Minimum lot area, frontage, and yard requirements shall comply with the
following standards:
                  (A) Lot area: A minimum of eighty seven thousand one hundred
twenty (87,120) square feet (2 acres). Lots less than two (2) acres in size may
be considered acceptable if approved by the plan and zoning commission and city
council as part of an acceptable master development plan for the property;
               (B) Lot width: Fifty feet (50');
               (C) Front yard setback: Fifty feet (50'). All yards abutting a
public thoroughfare shall be considered front yards and shall comply with the
requirements for a front yard setback;
               (D) Side yard setback: None required unless adjoining any
residential district in which case a minimum fifty foot (50') side yard setback
is required;
               (E) Rear yard setback: Fifty feet (50').
            (3)   All Property Within Parcel C: All property within parcel C
shall comply with the following:
Multiple use of the site by more than one building shall be consistent in
architectural design and use of materials and organized utilizing a compatible
planned open space, landscape plan, and parking plan to serve and maintain a
unified master plan concept.
A thirty foot (30') landscape area shall be required along Interstate 80 to
provide landscaped open space that presents a pleasing initial image of or
identity for the city of West Des Moines to interstate travelers. Landscaped
areas of not less than thirty feet (30') shall also be provided along Jordan
Creek Parkway, while twenty foot (20') wide areas shall be provided along all
other parcel perimeter boundaries. Landscape plantings, either with or without
berming, shall be utilized to provide a landscaped open space area that
enhances the proposed uses from adjacent property, roadways, and for occupants
on site. All landscape areas shall be planted, at a minimum, with the
appropriate proportionate quantity of a thirty foot (30') buffer park in
relation to the landscape area width (i.e., 20 foot wide landscape areas
require 2/3 of the planting requirements per the city zoning ordinance of a 30
foot landscape buffer park, 10 foot wide areas = minimum 1/3 of a 30 foot
requirement, etc.). Buffer planting requirements are in addition to open space
planting requirements. Landscaped areas shall be designed by a registered
landscape architect, architect or engineer and shall be reviewed and approved
during the site planning process associated with the development of this
parcel.
Parking lot setbacks shall be fifteen feet (15') from established public street
right of way and ten feet (10') from private streets and all other lot lines.
Parking lots located adjacent to any private street or drive shall have a
minimum ten foot (10') parking lot setback measured from the back of curb of
said private street or drive. No parking lot setback is required between
adjoining lots located within this PUD when said adjoining lots are located in
the same zoning district (PUD parcel) and have shared parking lots joined by at
least one or more access drives.
Open space equal to not less than twenty percent (20%) of the total lot area
shall be incorporated within each lot developed within parcel C.
Vegetation or other measures, with or without berming, shall be required to
provide opaque screening of all parking areas, dumpsters, ground mechanical
equipment, etc., from view from all streets (public or private) and adjoining
dissimilar land uses. Buffers and screening of items, such as, but not limited
to, rooftop mechanical units and trash receptacles, shall meet the requirements
as outlined in ordinance 1073, and as modified, herein. Large rooftop
mechanical units may be screened by painting the units to match the exterior of
the building, where smaller rooftop mechanical units shall be screened by the
use of parapet walls, as reviewed and recommended by the plan and zoning
commission and approved by the city council. The proposed method for minimizing
the visual impacts of mechanical units/elements shall be reviewed and approved
by the city during the site plan review process.
         c.   Architecture: Architectural design and use of materials for the
construction of any building within this parcel shall be accomplished in a
manner compatible with PCP professional commerce park zone district building
standards. Building height shall comply with the height regulations identified
within the support commercial (SC) district. The architectural design of any
building shall be reviewed and approved by the city. All buildings and all
sides of the buildings, within this parcel shall have primary elements of the
exterior composed of fascia glass, face brick, architectural steel or stone
panels. No wood, masonite, visible asphaltic exterior wall or roof material,
aluminum siding, nonarchitectural sheet metal, concrete block, EIFS, stucco, or
other similar materials shall constitute a portion of any building except as a
trim material, unless the city council of West Des Moines, after having
received a recommendation from the plan and zoning commission of West Des
Moines, determine said material when used as a primary element, enhances the
physical appearance, or provides continuity desired to unite all structures
within the parcel together into one project concept. (Ord. 1601, 9-28-2004)
      6.   Parcel D: This parcel shall encompass a maximum of seventy five (75)
acres. All general use regulations, performance standards and provisions set
forth in title 9 of the city code, for the professional commerce park (PCP)
district shall apply to any development proposal for all property within parcel
D as shown on exhibit A on file in the city, the sketch plan of the Country
Club Office Plaza PUD; except as further provided herein. For those parts of
parcel D which adjoin areas to the east and south to be zoned and developed for
single-family residential housing, a minimum thirty foot (30') landscaped
buffer shall be provided with earth berming, landscaping and wall structures as
necessary to screen, as practical, the professional commerce park uses,
accessory uses and associated parking areas and drives from adjoining
residential properties. No building, accessory structure, drive or parking area
shall be located or encroach into the thirty foot (30') landscape buffer. The
required building setbacks will be allowed to be reduced to forty feet (40') in
those instances where a property line abuts a common or shared detention area.
      7.   Parcel E: This parcel shall encompass a maximum of 8.0 acres. The
following general use regulations, performance standards and provisions shall
apply to all development proposals for that property within parcel E as shown
on the sketch plan of the Country Club Office Plaza PUD. All general use
regulations, performance standards and provisions set forth in title 9 of the
city code for the professional commerce park (PCP) district shall apply to any
development proposal for all property within parcel E as shown on exhibit A on
file in the city, the sketch plan of the Country Club Office Plaza PUD; except
as further provided herein. (Ord. 1601, 9-28-2004; amd. Ord. 1865, 5-17-2010)
         a.   Permitted Uses: Permitted uses within parcel E shall include the
following:
All permitted (P) uses and permitted conditional uses (Pc) allowed within the
professional commerce park (PCP) district, unless otherwise noted.
The following permitted (P) and permitted conditional (Pc) support commercial
(SC) uses shall be allowed:
Art and architectural supply stores (5999).
Barbershop (724).
Beauty shop (723).
Bookstores (5942).
Camera and photographic supply stores (5946).
Drugstores and proprietary stores (limited to 50 percent of the leasable area
of 1 building floor; no drive-through allowed) (591).
Educational aids and electronic training material stores (5999).
Florist (5992).
Garment pressing and agents for laundries and dry cleaning (7212).
Individual and family social services (832).
Job training and vocational rehabilitation services (833).
Optical goods store (5995).
Personal appearance services (7299-01).
Photographic studio, portrait (722).
Security system services (7382).
Stationery stores (5943).
Telephone and communication equipment stores (5999).
Tobacco stores and stand (5993).
Typewriter and business machine stores (5999).
No restaurant drive-throughs are allowed.
No outdoor storage is allowed.
         b.   Development Standards: Principal buildings constructed within
parcel E, together with accessory structures, shall be located on a lot having
an area of at least two (2) acres. Multiple use of the site by more than one
building shall be consistent in architectural design and use of materials and
organized utilizing a compatible planned open space, landscape plan, and
parking plan to serve and maintain a unified master plan concept. Lots less
than two (2) acres in size may be considered acceptable if part of an
acceptable master development plan for the property and approved by the plan
and zoning commission and city council.
All uses shall have a minimum of fifty foot (50') building setbacks from all
parcel boundaries. No building setback is required between adjoining lots when
said adjoining lots are located in the same zoning district or incorporate
similar land uses, provided all buildings involved are master planned in order
to ensure a unified development with unified architecture, building color and
materials, parking, and general site design.
A landscaped area of not less than thirty feet (30') shall be provided along
Jordan Creek Parkway and twenty feet (20') along all other public street rights
of way. Landscaped areas of not less than ten feet (10') shall be provided
along private streets and all other lot lines, except that no landscaped area
is required between adjoining lots when said adjoining lots are located in the
same zoning district (PUD parcel) or are adjacent to a similar land use.
Landscape plantings, either with or without berming, shall be utilized to
provide a landscaped open space area to enhance the proposed uses within this
area from adjacent property roadways and for occupants on site. All landscape
areas shall be planted at a minimum, with the appropriate proportionate
quantity of a thirty foot (30') buffer park in relation to the landscape area
width (i.e., 20 foot wide landscape areas require 2/3 of the planting
requirements of a 30 foot landscape buffer park per the city zoning ordinance,
10 foot wide areas = minimum 1/3 of a 30 foot requirement, etc.). Buffer
planting requirements are in addition to open space planting requirements.
Landscaped areas shall be designed by a registered landscape architect,
architect or engineer and shall be reviewed and approved during the site
planning process associated with the development of parcel E.
Open space equal to not less than twenty five percent (25%) of the total lot
area shall be incorporated within each lot developed within parcel E. In
addition, open space equal to not less than ten percent (10%) of the total
paved area shall be incorporated within each lot within parcel E.
Parking lot setbacks for each lot shall be twenty feet (20') from any
established public street right of way and ten feet (10') from all other lot
lines. Parking lots located adjacent to any private street or drive shall have
a minimum ten foot (10') parking lot setback measured from the back of curb of
said private street or drive. No parking lot setback is required between
adjoining lots located within this PUD when said adjoining lots are located in
the same zoning district (PUD parcel) and have shared parking lots joined by at
least one or more access drives.
No building, accessory structure, drive or parking area shall be located or
encroached into the landscape buffer/area setback.
Parking areas shall be designed to create aesthetically landscaped and screened
parking lots designed to function not only in the interest of accommodating
automobiles, but also in the interest of the pedestrian. All parking areas
shall include landscape area, islands, screens, etc., equal to not less than
ten percent (10%) of the total paved area. As an alternative to the required
ten percent (10%) within the parking, parking lots within parcel E may
implement the following:
            (1)   Landscape islands shall be spaced no greater than twelve (12)
parking stalls apart within a single row of parking. Islands shall be ten feet
(10') in width by thirty eight feet (38') in length for dual parking rows and
ten feet (10') in width by nineteen feet (19') in length for single rows.
            (2)   Landscaped islands shall be located at the terminus end of
all parking rows.
            (3)   Landscape pods shall be spaced no greater than six (6)
parking stalls apart from another landscape pod or island within a single row
of parking. Landscape pods shall measure a minimum of six feet (6') back of
curb to back of curb in each direction.
            (4)   A minimum of one tree should be installed in each landscape
pod and ten foot by nineteen foot (10' x 19') island; two (2) trees shall be
installed in each ten foot by thirty eight foot (10' x 38') island.
The above parking lot standards are in addition to any vegetation required as
part of open space and buffer park/landscape area requirements.
Vegetation or other measures, with or without berming, shall be implemented to
provide opaque screening of all parking areas, dumpsters, ground mechanical
equipment, etc., from view from all streets (public or private) and adjoining
dissimilar land uses. Buffers and screening of items, such as, but not limited
to, rooftop mechanical units and trash receptacles, shall meet the requirements
as outlined in ordinance 1073, and as modified, herein. Large rooftop
mechanical units may be screened by painting the units to match the exterior of
the building, where smaller rooftop mechanical units shall be screened by the
use of parapet walls, as reviewed and recommended by the plan and zoning
commission and approved by the city council. The proposed method for minimizing
the visual impacts of mechanical units/elements shall be reviewed and approved
by the city during the site plan review process.
         c.   Architecture: Architectural design and use of materials for the
construction of any building within this parcel shall be accomplished in a
manner compatible with professional commerce park (PCP) district building
standards. The architectural design of any building shall be reviewed and
approved by the city. All buildings and all sides of the buildings, within this
parcel shall have primary elements of the exterior composed of fascia glass,
face brick, architectural steel or stone panels. No wood, masonite, visible
asphaltic exterior wall or roof material, aluminum siding, nonarchitectural
sheet metal, concrete block, EIFS, stucco, or other similar materials shall
constitute a portion of any building except as a trim material, unless the city
council of West Des Moines, after having received a recommendation from the
plan and zoning commission of West Des Moines, determine said material when
used as a primary element, enhances the physical appearance, or provides
continuity desired to unite all structures within the parcel together into one
project concept. (Ord. 1601, 9-28-2004)
      8.   Parcel F: This parcel shall encompass a maximum of 8.07 acres. The
following general use regulations, performance standards and provisions shall
apply to all development proposals for that property within parcel F as shown
on the sketch plan of the Country Club Office Plaza PUD. All general use
regulations, performance standards and provisions set forth in title 9 of the
city code for the professional commerce park (PCP) district shall apply to any
development proposal for all property within parcel F as shown on exhibit A on
file in the city, the sketch plan of Country Club Office Plaza PUD; except as
provided herein. (Ord. 1601, 9-28-2004; amd. Ord. 1865, 5-17-2010)
         a.   Permitted Uses: All permitted (P) uses and permitted conditional
uses (Pc) allowed within the professional commerce park (PCP) district. No
drive-through is permitted in conjunction with any eating establishment.
         b.   Development Standards: Principal buildings constructed within
parcel F, together with accessory structures, shall be located on a lot having
an area of at least two (2) acres. Multiple use of the site by more than one
building shall be consistent in architectural design and use of materials and
organized utilizing a compatible planned open space, landscape plan, and
parking plan to serve and maintain a unified master plan concept. Lots less
than two (2) acres in size may be considered acceptable if part of an
acceptable master development plan for the property and approved by the plan
and zoning commission and city council.
All uses shall have a minimum of fifty foot (50') building setbacks from all
parcel boundaries. No building setback is required between adjoining lots when
said adjoining lots are located in the same zoning district (PUD parcel) or
incorporate similar land uses, provided all buildings involved are master
planned in order to ensure a unified development with unified architecture,
building color and materials, parking, and general site design. (Ord. 1601, 9-
28-2004)
A landscaped area of not less than thirty feet (30') shall be provided along
Jordan Creek Parkway, and the east property line. A landscaped area of not less
than twenty feet (20') shall be provided along all other street frontages,
while a landscape area ten feet (10') in width shall be established along the
railroad right of way and any remaining perimeter boundaries of parcel F.
Landscape plantings, either with or without berming, shall be utilized to
provide a landscape open space area to enhance the proposed uses within this
area from adjacent property roadways and for occupants on site. All landscape
areas shall be planted at a minimum, with the appropriate proportionate
quantity of a thirty foot (30') buffer park in relation to the landscape area
width (i.e., 20 foot wide landscape areas require 2/3 of the planting
requirements of a 30 foot landscape buffer park per the city zoning ordinance,
10 foot wide areas = minimum 1/3 of a 30 foot requirement, etc.). Buffer
planting requirements are in addition to open space planting requirements.
Landscaped areas shall be designed by a registered landscape architect,
architect or engineer and shall be reviewed and approved during the site
planning process associated with the development of this parcel.
Open space equal to not less than twenty five percent (25%) of the total lot
area shall be incorporated within each lot developed within parcel F. In
addition, open space equal to not less than ten percent (10%) of the total
paved area shall be incorporated within each lot within parcel F.
Parking lot setbacks for each lot shall be thirty feet (30') from Jordan Creek
Parkway and the east property line, twenty feet (20') from all other
established public street right of way and ten feet (10') from all private
streets and remaining lot lines. The setback for parking lots located adjacent
to any private street or drive shall be measured from the back of curb of said
private street or drive to back of curb of parking area. No parking lot setback
is required between adjoining lots located within this PUD when said adjoining
lots are located in the same zoning district (PUD parcel) and have shared
parking lots joined by at least one or more access drives. (Ord. 1645, 9-12-
2005)
No building, accessory structure, drive or parking area shall be located or
encroached into the landscape buffer/area setback.
Parking areas shall be designed to create aesthetically landscaped and screened
parking lots designed to function not only in the interest of accommodating
automobiles, but also in the interest of the pedestrian. All parking areas
shall include landscape area, islands, screens, etc., equal to not less than
ten percent (10%) of the total paved area. As an alternative to the required
ten percent (10%) within the parking, parking lots within parcel F may
implement the following:
            (1)   Landscape islands shall be spaced no greater than twelve (12)
parking stalls apart within a single row of parking. Islands shall be ten feet
(10') in width by thirty eight feet (38') in length for dual parking rows and
ten feet (10') in width by nineteen feet (19') in length for single rows.
            (2)   Landscaped islands shall be located at the terminus end of
all parking rows.
            (3)   Landscape pods shall be spaced no greater than six (6)
parking stalls apart from another landscape pod or island within a single row
of parking. Landscape pods shall measure a minimum of six feet (6') back of
curb to back of curb in each direction.
            (4)   A minimum of one tree should be installed in each landscape
pod and ten foot by nineteen foot (10' x 19') island; two (2) trees shall be
installed in each ten foot by thirty eight foot (10' x 38') island.
The above parking lot standards are in addition to any vegetation required as
part of open space and buffer park/landscape area requirements.
Vegetation or other measures, with or without berming, shall be implemented to
provide opaque screening of all parking areas, dumpsters, ground mechanical
equipment, etc., from view from all streets (public or private) and adjoining
dissimilar land uses. Buffers and screening of items, such as, but not limited
to, rooftop mechanical units and trash receptacles, shall meet the requirements
as outlined in ordinance 1073, and as modified, herein. Large rooftop
mechanical units may be screened by painting the units to match the exterior of
the building, where smaller rooftop mechanical units shall be screened by the
use of parapet walls, as reviewed and recommended by the plan and zoning
commission and approved by the city council. The proposed method for minimizing
the visual impacts of mechanical units/elements shall be reviewed and approved
by the city during the site plan review process.
         c.   Architecture: Architectural design and use of materials for the
construction of any building within this parcel shall be accomplished in a
manner compatible with professional commerce park (PCP) district building
standards. The architectural design of any building shall be reviewed and
approved by the city. All buildings and all sides of the buildings, within this
parcel shall have primary elements of the exterior composed of fascia glass,
face brick, architectural steel or stone panels. No wood, masonite, visible
asphaltic exterior wall or roof material, aluminum siding, nonarchitectural
sheet metal, concrete block, EIFS, stucco, or other similar materials shall
constitute a portion of any building except as a trim material, unless the city
council of West Des Moines, after having received a recommendation from the
plan and zoning commission of West Des Moines, determine said material when
used as a primary element, enhances the physical appearance, or provides
continuity desired to unite all structures within the parcel together into one
project concept. (Ord. 1601, 9-28-2004)
      9.   Parcel G: This parcel shall encompass a maximum of 7.2 acres. All
general use regulations, performance standards and provisions set forth in
title 9 of the city code for the residential high density (RH) district shall
apply to any development proposal for all property within parcel G as shown on
exhibit A on file in the city, the sketch plan of the Country Club Office Plaza
PUD; except as provided herein.
         a.   Development Standards: Principal buildings constructed within
parcel G, together with accessory structures, shall be located on a lot having
an area of at least two (2) acres. Multiple use of the site by more than one
building shall be consistent in architectural design and use of materials and
organized utilizing a compatible planned open space, landscape plan, and
parking plan to serve and maintain a unified master plan concept. Lots less
than two (2) acres in size may be considered acceptable if part of an
acceptable master development plan for the property and approved by the plan
and zoning commission and city council.
Building setbacks for primary and detached garage structures as required by
city code for the residential high density (RH) district shall be provided.
Setbacks shall be measured from the ultimate street right of way line for
boundaries adjacent to a public roadway and from the parcel perimeter for any
boundary not adjacent to a public roadway. The setback from the back of curb of
a private street to the main wall of a primary building shall be no less than
fifty feet (50'). Freestanding accessory structures such as trash enclosures,
generators, etc., shall be located no closer than fifteen feet (15') to a
perimeter boundary and shall not be located adjacent to any street regardless
public or private.
A landscaped area of not less than twenty feet (20') shall be provided along
Woodland Avenue, the east property line and all other public street frontages.
A ten foot (10') wide landscape area shall be established along private drives
and any remaining perimeter boundaries of parcel G. Landscape plantings, either
with or without berming, shall be utilized to provide a landscaped open space
area to enhance the proposed uses within this area from adjacent property
roadways and for occupants on site. All landscape areas shall be planted at a
minimum, with the appropriate proportionate quantity of a thirty foot (30')
buffer park in relation to the landscape area width (i.e., 20 foot wide
landscape areas require 2/3 of the planting requirements of a 30 foot landscape
buffer park per the city zoning ordinance, 10 foot wide areas = minimum 1/3 of
a 30 foot requirement, etc.). Buffer planting requirements are in addition to
open space planting requirements. Landscaped areas shall be designed by a
registered landscape architect, architect or engineer and shall be reviewed and
approved during the site planning process associated with the development of
this parcel.
Open space equal to not less than twenty five percent (25%) of the total lot
area shall be incorporated within each lot developed within parcel G.
Parking lot setbacks shall be twenty feet (20') from any established public
street right of way and the east property line and ten feet (10') from all
private streets and other lot lines. The setback for parking lots located
adjacent to any private street or drive shall be measured from the back of curb
of said private street or drive to back of curb of parking area. No parking lot
setback is required between adjoining lots located within this PUD when said
adjoining lots are located in the same zoning district (PUD parcel) and have
shared parking lots joined by at least one or more access drives.
No building, accessory structure, drive or parking area shall be located or
shall encroach into any required landscape buffer/area with the exception of
access drives which may cross perpendicularly through a buffer area.
Parking areas shall be designed to create aesthetically landscaped and screened
parking lots designed to function not only in the interest of accommodating
automobiles, but also in the interest of the pedestrian. All parking areas
shall include landscape areas, islands, screens, etc., equal to not less than
ten percent (10%) of the total paved area. As an alternative to the required
ten percent (10%) within the parking, parking lots within parcel G may
implement the following:
            (1)   Landscape islands shall be spaced no greater than eighteen
(18) parking stalls apart within a single row of parking. Islands shall be ten
feet (10') in width by thirty eight feet (38') in length for dual parking rows
and ten feet (10') in width by nineteen feet (19') in length for single rows.
            (2)   Landscaped islands shall be located at the terminus end of
all parking rows.
            (3)   Landscape pods shall be evenly spaced between landscape
islands, however, shall be spaced no greater than nine (9) parking stalls from
another landscape pod or island within a single row of parking. Landscape pods
shall measure a minimum of six feet (6') back of curb to back of curb in each
direction.
            (4)   A minimum of one tree should be installed in each landscape
pod and ten foot by nineteen foot (10' x 19') island; two (2) trees shall be
installed in each ten foot by thirty eight foot (10' x 38') island.
The above parking lot standards are in addition to any vegetation required as
part of open space and buffer park/landscape area requirements.
Vegetation or other measures, with or without berming, shall be implemented to
provide opaque screening of all parking areas, dumpsters, ground mechanical
equipment, etc., from view from all streets (public or private) and adjoining
dissimilar land uses. Buffers and screening of items, such as, but not limited
to, rooftop mechanical units and trash receptacles, shall meet the requirements
as outlined in ordinance 1073, and as modified, herein. Large rooftop
mechanical units may be screened by painting the units to match the exterior of
the building, where smaller rooftop mechanical units shall be screened by the
use of parapet walls, as reviewed and recommended by the plan and zoning
commission and approved by the city council. The proposed method for minimizing
the visual impacts of mechanical units/elements shall be reviewed and approved
by the city during the site plan review process.
         b.   Architecture: Building design and materials shall be reflective
of the design and materials utilized on other buildings within the CCOP
development. (Ord. 1975, 2-19-2013)
      10.   Parcel H: This parcel shall encompass a maximum of 7.0 acres. All
general use regulations, performance standards and provisions set forth in
title 9 of the city code for the professional commerce park (PCP) district
shall apply to any development proposal for all property within parcel H as
shown on exhibit A on file in the city, the sketch plan of the Country Club
Office Plaza PUD; except as provided herein. (Ord. 1601, 9-28-2004; amd. Ord.
1865, 5-17-2010)
         a.   Permitted Uses: All permitted (P) and permitted conditional (Pc)
uses allowed in the professional commerce park (PCP) district shall be
permitted except the following uses shall be prohibited:
Eating and drinking places (SIC 58).
Hotels and motels (SIC 701).
         b.   Development Standards: Principal buildings constructed within
parcel H, together with accessory structures, shall be located on a lot having
an area of at least two (2) acres. Multiple use of the site by more than one
building shall be consistent in architectural design and use of materials and
organized utilizing a compatible planned open space, landscape plan, and
parking plan to serve and maintain a unified master plan concept. Lots less
than two (2) acres in size may be considered acceptable if part of an
acceptable master development plan for the property and approved by the plan
and zoning commission and city council.
All uses shall have a minimum of fifty foot (50') building setbacks from all
parcel boundaries. No building setback is required between adjoining lots when
said adjoining lots are located in the same zoning district or incorporate
similar land uses, provided all buildings involved are master planned in order
to ensure a unified development with unified architecture, building color and
materials, parking, and general site design.
A landscaped area of not less than thirty feet (30') shall be provided along
the east property line. A landscaped area of not less than twenty feet (20') in
width shall be provided along Woodland Avenue and all other public street
frontages; while a ten foot (10') wide landscape area shall be established
along private drives and any remaining perimeter boundaries of parcel H.
Landscape plantings, either with or without berming, shall be utilized to
provide a landscaped open space area to enhance the proposed uses within this
area from adjacent property roadways and for occupants on site. All landscape
areas shall be planted at a minimum, with the appropriate proportionate
quantity of a thirty foot (30') buffer park in relation to the landscape area
width (i.e., 20 foot wide landscape areas require 2/3 of the planting
requirements of a 30 foot landscape buffer park per the city zoning ordinance,
10 foot wide areas = minimum 1/3 of a 30 foot requirement, etc.). Buffer
planting requirements are in addition to open space planting requirements.
Landscaped areas shall be designed by a registered landscape architect,
architect or engineer and shall be reviewed and approved during the site
planning process associated with the development of this parcel.
Open space equal to not less than twenty five percent (25%) of the total lot
area shall be incorporated within each lot developed within parcel H. (Ord.
1601, 9-28-2004)
Parking lot setbacks shall be thirty feet (30') from the east property line,
twenty feet (20') from any established public street right of way and ten feet
(10') from all private streets and other lot lines. The setback for parking
lots located adjacent to any private street or drive shall be measured from the
back of curb of said private street or drive to back of curb of parking area.
No parking lot setback is required between adjoining lots located within this
PUD when said adjoining lots are located in the same zoning district (PUD
parcel) and have shared parking lots joined by at least one or more access
drives. (Ord. 1645, 9-12-2005)
No building, accessory structure, drive or parking area shall be located or
shall encroach into any required landscape buffer/area.
Parking areas shall be designed to create aesthetically landscaped and screened
parking lots designed to function not only in the interest of accommodating
automobiles, but also in the interest of the pedestrian. All parking areas
shall include landscape area, islands, screens, etc., equal to not less than
ten percent (10%) of the total paved area. As an alternative to the required
ten percent (10%) within the parking, parking lots within parcel H may
implement the following:
            (1)   Landscape islands shall be spaced no greater than twelve (12)
parking stalls apart within a single row of parking. Islands shall be ten feet
(10') in width by thirty eight feet (38') in length for dual parking rows and
ten feet (10') in width by nineteen feet (19') in length for single rows.
            (2)   Landscaped islands shall be located at the terminus end of
all parking rows.
            (3)   Landscape pods shall be spaced no greater than six (6)
parking stalls apart from another landscape pod or island within a single row
of parking. Landscape pods shall measure a minimum of six feet (6') back of
curb to back of curb in each direction.
            (4)   A minimum of one tree should be installed in each landscape
pod and ten foot by nineteen foot (10' x 19') island; two (2) trees shall be
installed in each ten foot by thirty eight foot (10' x 38') island.
The above parking lot standards are in addition to any vegetation required as
part of open space and buffer park/landscape area requirements.
Vegetation or other measures, with or without berming, shall be implemented to
provide opaque screening of all parking areas, dumpsters, ground mechanical
equipment, etc., from view from all streets (public or private) and adjoining
dissimilar land uses. Buffers and screening of items, such as, but not limited
to, rooftop mechanical units and trash receptacles, shall meet the requirements
as outlined in ordinance 1073, and as modified, herein. Large rooftop
mechanical units may be screened by painting the units to match the exterior of
the building, where smaller rooftop mechanical units shall be screened by the
use of parapet walls, as reviewed and recommended by the plan and zoning
commission and approved by the city council. The proposed method for minimizing
the visual impacts of mechanical units/elements shall be reviewed and approved
by the city during the site plan review process.
         c.   Architecture: Architectural design and use of materials for the
construction of any building within this parcel shall be accomplished in a
manner compatible with PCP professional commerce park zone district building
standards. The architectural design of any building shall be reviewed and
approved by the city. All buildings and all sides of the buildings, within this
parcel shall have primary elements of the exterior composed of fascia glass,
face brick, architectural steel or stone panels. No wood, masonite, visible
asphaltic exterior wall or roof material, aluminum siding, nonarchitectural
sheet metal, concrete block, EIFS, stucco, or other similar materials shall
constitute a portion of any building except as a trim material, unless the city
council of West Des Moines, after having received a recommendation from the
plan and zoning commission of West Des Moines, determine said material when
used as a primary element, enhances the physical appearance, or provides
continuity desired to unite all structures within the parcel together into one
project concept. (Ord. 1601, 9-28-2004)
028-04: MASTER PLANNING REQUIRED:
Each parcel, A-1, A-2, C, D, E, F, G and H shall be developed in accordance to
the approved master plan, exhibit B on file in the city. This single master
plan for the entire planned unit development (PUD) schematically illustrates
private and public street alignments, identification of land uses, building
locations, parking lot locations and connections, stormwater detention and
management facilities, utilities, other accessory or ancillary uses supportive
of the principal permitted use, and other specifics dealing with on site
circulation, building materials and architecture, pedestrian access and
pedestrian areas, signage, etc. Development proposals which deviate from the
overall design and intent of the approved master plan (exhibit B on file in the
city) will require the submittal and approval of a revised master plan by both
the plan and zoning commission and city council prior to site plan approval of
the development proposal. (Ord. 1601, 9-28-2004; amd. Ord. 1975, 2-19-2013)
028-05: SIGNAGE REGULATION:
Prior to the installation of any sign, temporary or permanent within any parcel
included in the Country Club Office Plaza PUD, a sign permit application shall
be submitted to the city of West Des Moines for review and approval.
   A.   Wall Signs: Standards for wall signs as set forth within the West Des
Moines city sign code for the professional commerce park (PCP) district or the
support commercial (SC) district as established by the development standards
for the parcel shall be followed unless modified herein. All signage
constructed as wall signs on building fascia within the PUD shall incorporate
aesthetic features compatible with the overall character of the development.
All wall signs will be composed of solid individual letters attached to the
building fascia, or individual letters of anodized aluminum, galvanized metal,
or illuminated self-contained with translucent plastic faces set in anodized
aluminum returns and trim. Logos shall generally be constructed in the same
manner as individual letters including contouring to follow the shape of the
logo. In situations in which the logo cannot be contoured, a panel sign may be
allowed if the panel is sized and constructed in a manner that minimizes the
overall sign size and limits the portion illuminated to just the logo (opaque
background).
   B.   Ground Signs: The following standards shall apply to all freestanding
ground signs within the Country Club Office Park development: (Ord. 1865, 5-17-
2010)
      1.   Monument Or Landscape Signs: With the exception of parcel G as
identified on exhibit A and parcels 7 and 8 as identified on exhibit C both
exhibits on file in the city, sign standards for ground or landscape signs,
whichever is applicable shall be as set forth within the West Des Moines city
sign code for the support commercial (SC) district unless modified herein. Sign
standards for ground or landscape signs, whichever is applicable for parcel G
shall be as set forth within the West Des Moines city sign code for the
residential high density (RH) district unless modified herein. Parcels 7 and 8
may share one ground sign to identify tenants within only these two (2)
parcels. Said sign and structure shall not exceed fifteen feet (15') in height
and shall be set back a minimum of twenty feet (20') from the eastern property
line (Jordan Creek Parkway right of way). (Ord. 1975, 2-19-2013)
      2.   Entry Feature Signs: A total of four (4) entry feature landscape
signs shall be permitted provided that they do not promote or advertise a
specific user or users within any parcel of the Country Club Office Park PUD.
These landscape signs shall be located, one each on the northwest and southwest
corners of Office Plaza Drive and Jordan Creek Parkway (JCP) (exhibit A, parcel
A-1) and one each on the northeast and southeast corners of Vista Drive and JCP
(exhibit A, parcel C). The signs shall be set back a minimum of twenty feet
(20') from both streets' right of way.
      3.   Interstate/Freeway Signs: Interstate signs shall be defined as a
monument sign on a property abutting and within close proximity to an
interstate/freeway right of way which is oriented to the interstate/freeway and
which identifies an office, commercial or industrial complex or the principal
tenant(s) within a building within the complex. Attached as exhibit C on file
in the city is a diagram identifying the parcels as they relate to the
following standards regulating the placement of interstate/freeway signage:
         a.   All interstate/freeway signs erected after the approval date
hereof (March 2010), as well as all sign replacements shall abide by the
following:
            (1)   Signs shall be set back a minimum of twenty feet (20') from
the interstate right of way but shall be located within the first one hundred
feet (100') parallel and adjacent to the interstate frontage.
            (2)   Signs shall be set back a minimum of two hundred feet (200')
from the perimeter PUD boundary.
            (3)   A minimum three hundred foot (300') separation shall be
maintained between two (2) interstate signs.
            (4)   Maximum width of any face shall be twelve feet (12').
            (5)   Maximum height of sign and structure as measured to highest
element shall be thirty feet (30') except in those situations in which it can
be proven through an engineer's survey that the elevation at the base of the
intended sign as measured at the closest edge of pavement is lower than the
roadway surface of the interstate, the height of the sign may be increased in
order to achieve a maximum of thirty feet (30') of visible sign. In no case
shall the highest element of the sign, including the structure exceed sixty
feet (60') in height. The base portion of the sign used to provide elevation
shall be monolithic in nature; however, up to one-third (1/3) of the base area
may be open to decrease the visual mass and that surface area affected by wind
loads while maintaining structural integrity. In no situation, shall the base
of the sign appear as a "pole sign". Appropriate type and size of landscape
vegetation shall be incorporated adjacent to the base portion of any sign which
exceeds thirty feet (30') in height in order to mitigate and minimize the mass
of the sign.
            (6)   The total area of a sign shall be actual square footage of
one sign face. Double faced signs may be permitted with the maximum square
footage permitted each side. Multifaced signs shall not exceed two (2) times
the area of a single faced sign. The maximum copy area of a sign face shall not
exceed two hundred (200) square feet. The name of the complex or development
shall be indicated within the top one-fourth (1/4) of the sign copy area. The
maximum letter height for tenant identification copy on the sign shall be
eighteen inches (18").
            (7)   Any tenant in a building located within the Country Club
Office Plaza PUD in which R&R Realty Group, Ltd., or one of R&R's affiliated
companies (an affiliate shall be an entity which is controlled by, controlling,
or under common control with R&R Realty Group, Ltd.) has ownership interest may
be identified on an interstate sign, including tenants of buildings which do
not have interstate frontage. A single tenant may not be identified on more
than one interstate sign.
            (8)   With the exception of existing signs, the tenant copy area
shall be comprised of individually attached and illuminated letters or a panel
sign sized and treated (opaque vinyl or router face) to minimize the amount of
sign area that illuminates thus giving the appearance of individual letters or
elements.
            (9)   Replacement of a sign face within an existing sign shall
adhere to these provisions.
         b.   The following sign allowances per designated parcels as shown on
exhibit "C" shall apply unless one or more of the parcels are part of a
platting or replatting which alters the amount of frontage each parcel has
along the interstate. The need to amend this ordinance to address interstate
signage allocation due to platting or replatting shall be at the discretion of
the director of development services department.
            (1)   Parcel 1 shall be allowed a maximum of one interstate sign.
            (2)   Parcels 2, 3, and 4 collectively shall be allowed a maximum
of one interstate sign.
            (3)   Parcels 5 and 6 currently share an existing interstate sign;
no additional interstate signage shall be allowed for either of these parcels.
            (4)   Parcels 9 through 14 collectively currently share two (2)
interstate signs; no additional interstate signs shall be allowed for any of
these parcels. Said signs within these parcels shall maintain a one hundred
fifty foot (150') separation between the two (2) signs.
            (5)   Parcel 15 shall be allowed a maximum of one interstate sign.
            (6)   Parcels 16 and 17 collectively shall be allowed a maximum of
one interstate sign.
            (7)   Parcels 18 and 19 collectively shall be allowed a maximum of
one interstate sign.
   C.   Pole Signs: No pole sign as defined by the West Des Moines city sign
code shall be incorporated into any development parcel within the Country Club
Office Park PUD. (Ord. 1865, 5-17-2010)
028-06: BUFFERING:
Adequate screening or buffering of negative aspects of buildings (loading
docks, garbage dumpsters and HVAC mechanical units) from any street (public or
private) and adjoining properties shall be required. Buildings shall not be
located and designed in such a manner as to expose loading docks, service
doors, loading areas, or the rear of buildings to public streets. Trash
enclosures, generators, or other mechanical equipment shall be set back a
minimum setback distance equal to the parking lot setback of the associated
parcel boundary. No outside storage of products or materials, except for retail
sales purposes as allowed elsewhere in the PUD, shall be permitted. Buffering
requirements and provisions of title 9, ordinance 1073, buffers required, of
the city code shall be applied to development within the Country Club Office
Plaza planned unit development, except if other, specific requirements are set
forth elsewhere within this ordinance. (Ord. 1645, 9-12-2005; amd. Ord. 1865,
5-17-2010)
028-07: BUILDING RESTRICTIONS, EASEMENTS AND COVENANTS:
The developer shall with the approval of the city council adopt building
restrictions, easements and covenants pertaining to each parcel developed where
the developer and the city deem appropriate. (Ord. 1601, 9-28-2004)
028-08: ALL AREAS TO BE PLATTED:
Prior to, or in conjunction with development or transfer of ownership of any
portion of the PUD, said area shall be platted in accordance with the city's
subdivision ordinance to delineate within a plat the parcel to be developed or
sold separately or any portion thereof.
In conjunction with the platting of parcel E and/or parcel F or any portion
thereof, section 10-3-2 of the city code dealing with required improvements, is
amended with respect to parcel F to provide as follows:
   A.   Sewer: The city shall provide public sewer service to a public manhole
to serve parcel E and/or parcel F. The public manhole shall be located north of
Ashworth Road, south of parcel F, between 72nd Street and Jordan Creek Parkway
(f/k/a 74th Street), approved by the city in connection with applicable
preliminary platting and final platting procedures, with such manhole to be the
terminus of public sewer service. From that point on throughout the platted
portions of parcel E and parcel F, the developer shall be allowed to have a
private sewer line, and the relationship among developer and the owners, if
any, of lots in such subdivisions with respect to such private sewer line shall
be governed by private agreement. (Ord. 1645, 9-12-2005)
028-09: STORMWATER MANAGEMENT:
There shall be submitted to, and approved by the West Des Moines city engineer,
a complete stormwater management plan for each parcel of the PUD to be prepared
by the developer prior to development within each of the individual parcels of
the PUD and for all storm sewer and drainage systems within the PUD. (Ord.
1601, 9-28-2004)
028-10: PEDESTRIAN AND BIKE ROUTES:
Along the east side of Jordan Creek Parkway, parcels C, E, F, or other ground
incorporated into the PUD at a later date, as identified in exhibit A on file
in the city, shall provide adequate right of way width for a ten foot (10')
pedestrian and bike route in conjunction with the platting of the property, or
a submittal of a development entitlement proposal on an existing lot. (Ord.
1601, 9-28-2004)
028-11: LANDSCAPE AREA AND BUFFER PARK EASEMENTS:
All landscape areas and buffer park easements, as identified in the Country
Club Office Plaza PUD, shall be installed with the landscape materials as
required in ordinance 1073. (Ord. 1601, 9-28-2004; amd. Ord. 1865, 5-17-2010)
028-12: TRAFFIC IMPROVEMENTS:
   A.   Widen Jordan Creek Parkway to four (4) lanes, for the areas adjacent to
their properties, with raised median, from Ashworth Road to the south ramp of
I-80, plus dual left turn lanes at Vista Drive and left turn lanes at Office
Plaza Drive, Woodland Avenue, and Ashworth Road, at the time of platting or
site plan approval, whichever occurs first; (already completed)
   B.   Provide full access intersections only at Vista Drive, Office Plaza
Drive, Woodland Avenue, and Ashworth Road (72nd Street) based on the
comprehensive plan;
   C.   At the time the east side of Jordan Creek Parkway is platted or the
first site plan is submitted for parcel E, F, or G as noted in the rezoning
sketch, staff will recommend that Woodland Avenue will need to continue through
between 72nd and Jordan Creek Parkway as a minor collector, per the
comprehensive plan; (already completed)
   D.   Pay for their pro rata share of traffic signals at Ashworth Road and
Office Plaza Drive (already completed) and at Woodland Avenue, subject to the
contribution of the city for Woodland Avenue as set forth in the development
agreement executed by the parties in 2001. Installation shall occur at such
time as confirmed by warrants. Also pay their share of traffic signal
modifications at Vista Drive that are required and necessitated by the traffic
improvements stated in subsection A of this section. The modifications can be
installed up front, or bonded for installation as warrants are met;
   E.   The total left turn storage for the southbound left turn lane at
Woodland Avenue should be increased from one hundred seventy five feet (175')
to some distance less than the three hundred twenty five feet (325'), as listed
in the April 30, 1998, traffic study and to be determined by the public works
department; (already completed)
   F.   Applicant constructing a private drive to provide a connection that
shall function in the same manner as a public street between Woodland Avenue
and Office Plaza Drive. (Although the private drive will be constructed as set
forth below, the city will require that the drive meet city standards for curve
radii and other general engineering specifications.) The location of the
connection drive shall be on the eastern property line of parcel E and
generally aligned on or between lot 1, Christ's Church Subdivision and parcel D
and parcel G of the PUD. The connection drive shall be twenty six feet (26')
back to back (curb to curb) and shall be constructed to parking lot standards.
The applicant shall provide a permanent, perpetual and nonexclusive public
access easement to allow public access twenty four (24) hours a day, seven (7)
days a week. Parking shall be prohibited on the connection drive and parking
adjacent to the connection drive shall be configured to prohibit backing onto
the connection drive. Initial installation of the connection drive shall occur
at the time of issuance of a building permit for parcel E of the PUD, with the
connection drive to be constructed to access parcel E. Completion of the
connection drive from Woodland Avenue to Office Plaza Drive shall occur upon
the issuance of a building permit for either parcel G of the PUD or lot 1,
Christ's Church Subdivision. The applicant shall have responsibility for the
maintenance of and liability for the connection drive;
   G.   Applicant shall provide written access agreements for parcel G of the
PUD and lot 1, Christ's Church Subdivision to allow access to the connection
drive. Access for lot 1, Christ's Church Subdivision shall be pursuant to the
development agreement executed between the applicant and the owner of lot 1,
Christ's Church Subdivision, or in the alternative for lot 1, Christ's Church
Subdivision, the applicant shall execute a cross access agreement to provide
access within one hundred fifty feet (150') of the eastern property line of
parcel E to access lot 1, Christ's Church Subdivision. (Ord. 1601, 9-28-2004)
028-13: WOODLAND WATER MAIN EXTENSION:
If the parcels in the PUD lying to the south of Woodland Avenue are developed
differently than as shown on the current master plan, the applicant shall be
responsible for the extension of the water main, if necessary, from 72nd Street
to Jordan Creek Parkway at such time as determined by West Des Moines
waterworks. (Ord. 1601, 9-28-2004)
028-14: VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES:
Any person who violates the provisions of this ordinance upon conviction shall
be punished as set forth in sections 1-4-1 and 1-4-2 of the city code of the
city of West Des Moines, Iowa. (Ord. 1975, 2-19-2013)
028-99: LEGISLATIVE HISTORY:
Ord. 917, 7-23-1990; Ord. 1077, 1-31-1994; Ord. 1079, 1-31-1994; Ord. 1080, 1-
31-1994; Ord. 1198, 9-9-1996; Ord. 1227, 1-13-1997; Ord. 1288, 3-9-1998; Ord.
1295, 4-6-1998; Ord. 1325, 9-8-1998; Ord. 1445, 5-29-2001; Ord. 1601, 9-28-
2004; Ord. 1645, 9-12-2005; Ord. 1865, 5-17-2010; Ord. 1975, 2-19-2013; Ord.
2102, 7-13-2015.
PUD #29
REED'S CROSSING
Publisher's Note: This Chapter has been AMENDED by new legislation (Ord. 2632,
passed 10-7-2024). The text of the amendment will be incorporated below when
the ordinance is codified.
SECTION:
029-01: Legal Description
029-02: Sketch Plan
029-03: General Conditions
029-04: Architecture
029-05: Building Restrictions, Easements And Covenants
029-06: Soil Test Requirements
029-07: Implementation Subject To Extension Of Public Improvements
029-08: Traffic Study
029-09: Double Frontage Lots
029-10: Corner Lots
029-11: All Areas To Be Platted
029-12: Stormwater Management
029-13: Definition
029-14: Special Assessments
029-15: Traffic Signals
029-16: Buffers
029-17: Violations And Penalties
029-99: Legislative History
029-01: LEGAL DESCRIPTION:
The legal description for the Reed's Crossing PUD is as follows:
Except railroad and street right-of-ways the west half (1/2) of the northwest
quarter (1/4), the southeast quarter (1/4) of the northwest quarter (1/4), the
southwest quarter (1/4) of the northeast quarter (1/4), the northwest quarter
(1/4) of the southeast quarter (1/4) and the northeast quarter (1/4) of the
southwest quarter (1/4) of section twelve (12), township seventy-eight (78)
north, range twenty-six (26) west of the 5th P.M., city of West Des Moines,
Dallas County, Iowa.
Except
Parcel 'Y' being described as part of parcel "P" & "O" of the plat of survey
recorded in book 1998, page 5450 of the Dallas County recorder's office in the
northwest quarter of the southeast quarter (NW1/4 SE1/4) of section 12,
township 78 north, range 26 west of the 5th P.M., in Dallas County, Iowa, as
shown in plat of survey recorded in book 2006, page 16764, that is more
particularly described as follows:
Commencing at a point of reference at the southwest corner of the said
northwest quarter of the southeast quarter of section 12; thence north
83°19'11" east, 75.58 feet, to the point of beginning, said point being on the
east right-of-way line of 68th Street; thence north 00°22'38" east, 187.60
feet, along said right-of-way line, to a point of curvature; thence northerly,
along a curve to the left having a radius of 1,075.00 feet and a chord bearing
of north 03°05'14" west, an arc length of 130.01 feet, along said east right-
of-way line, to a point on the south right-of-way line of E.P. True Parkway;
thence north 28°41'36" east, 50.64 feet, along said right-of-way line, to a
point; thence north 65°01'19" east, 137.81 feet, along said south right-of- way
line, to a point of curvature; thence easterly, along a curve to the right
having a radius of 920.00 feet and a chord bearing north 74°33'41" east, an arc
length of 306.25 feet, along said south right-of-way line, to a point of
tangency; thence north 84°06'02" east, 151.75 feet, along said south right-of-
way line, to the northwest corner of lot 1, King's Pointe, an official plat;
thence S00°15'14" west, 447.03 feet, along the west line of said King's Pointe;
thence south 83°13'07" west, 590.50 feet, along the south line of said parcel
"O" and "P", to the point of beginning.
(Ord. 1923, 5-31-2011)
029-02: SKETCH PLAN:
On file with the community development department of the city and made a part
of this rezoning approval, for concept description and delineation is the
sketch plan document for the Reed's Crossing PUD. It is recognized that minor
shifts or realignments of roadways may be necessary and compatible with the
need to acquire workable street patterns, grades and usable building sites, but
the general plan layout, including the relationship of uses to each other and
the relationship of dwelling unit types to the general plan framework, traffic
layout, and development requirements shall be used as the implementation guide.
(Ord. 1364, 6-2-1999)
029-03: GENERAL CONDITIONS:
Whereas, title 9, chapter 9, "Planned Unit Development District" of the city
code, establishes certain regulations and guidelines pertaining to accompanying
information required on a plat and site plan documents.
   A.   General Criteria: Now, therefore, the following conditions,
restrictions, and regulations are adopted as part of this approval and the
following general site plan criteria shall be integrated into and made a part
of the development criteria for the Reed's Crossing PUD, to wit: (Ord. 1364, 6-
2-1999)
      1.   The PUD shall incorporate a maximum of one thousand two hundred ten
(1,210) residential dwelling units which shall be distributed by types and
location according to the sketch plan as presented. (Ord. 1926, 7-11-2011)
      2.   All subdivisions, public streets, public street rights of way and
general development shall adhere to the standards and design criteria set forth
in the West Des Moines subdivision ordinance and the Des Moines metropolitan
design standards as adopted by the city of West Des Moines pertaining thereto,
unless otherwise stated within this ordinance.
      3.   Any regulation, standard, provision or requirement that is not
specifically addressed within this document that is regulated elsewhere in the
city code of West Des Moines, the requirements of the city code shall still be
enforced.
      4.   In all areas within a 100-year frequency flood hazard zone, or
adjoining drainageways or detention areas involving potential flood hazards, no
building shall be erected which has a lowest floor, including basements, less
than one foot (1') above the determined level of the 100-year frequency flood
event or floodproofed to the same elevation in accordance with the West Des
Moines floodplain ordinance, and no building shall be erected within twenty
five feet (25') of any major drainage, stormwater detention basin or pond.
      5.   The developer, their successors and assigns, if any, shall pay all
construction and engineering costs for the interior development of the planned
unit development, in accordance with the current city policies at the time of
development as required by this ordinance, the subdivision ordinance of the
city of West Des Moines, and the Des Moines metropolitan design standards as
adopted by the city of West Des Moines, for all streets, storm sewers, sanitary
sewers, drainage improvements, detention basins, water mains, buffers and other
improvements within the PUD as may be required. (Ord. 1364, 6-2-1999)
   B.   Land Use Design Criteria: In addition to the general criteria as stated
in subsection A of this section, the following land use design criteria shall
apply to the development areas designated on the sketch plan. The sketch plan
document, which is made a part of this rezoning action per section
029-02 of this ordinance, delineates sixteen (16) parcels of the PUD as parcels
A, B, C, D, E, F, G, H, I, J, L, M, N, O, P, and Q for application of specific
development standards of residential use and density regulations, and public
and park use. Parcel H is reserved for a neighborhood park site and parcel P is
reserved for a greenbelt parcel. The following development standards and use
regulations shall apply to each of the following fourteen (14) development
parcels: (Ord. 1926, 7-11-2011)
      1.   Parcel A: Parcel A shall include approximately three and four-tenths
(3.4) acres and shall be developed as senior housing, for persons fifty five
(55) years and older, with a maximum of eighty four (84) dwelling units
permitted within parcel A. All general use regulations and provisions set forth
in title 9, "Zoning", of the city code for the RH residential high-density
district shall apply to any senior housing development proposal for all
property within parcel A as shown on the sketch plan of the Reed's Crossing
PUD, unless noted otherwise in this ordinance.
         a.   Any proposed development within parcel A other than senior
housing as described above shall comply with all general use regulations and
provisions set forth in title 9, "Zoning", of the city code for the RM
residential medium-density district, with a maximum of eight (8) dwelling units
per acre permitted.
         b.   A minimum thirty foot (30') buffer park shall be established
along Ashworth Road, the railroad right of way and private property immediately
east of parcel A to effectively buffer and screen parking areas and/or
associated uses from view. Buffer park screening shall be provided in
accordance with the West Des Moines buffer ordinance. No residential structure
shall be located closer than fifty feet (50') from the ultimate right of way of
Ashworth Road and private property east of parcel A with garages limited to a
minimum thirty foot (30') setback from the ultimate right of way of Ashworth
Road, the private property east of parcel A and the railroad right of way.
Senior housing shall not exceed three (3) stories or forty five feet (45') in
height, and any other development shall not exceed two (2) stories or thirty
feet (30') in height.
         c.   Funeral homes, accessory crematories, mausoleums, and cemeteries
may be permitted to have a maximum building height of fifty five feet (55') and
a twenty foot (20') rear yard setback from the railroad right of way. The
required thirty foot (30') buffer park along the railroad right of way and the
private property immediately east of parcel A may be waived for said uses
provided adequate landscaping and fencing is provided in lieu of said buffer
parks to adequately buffer and screen said uses.
      2.   Parcel B: All general use regulations and provisions set forth in
title 9, "Zoning", of the city code for the RH residential high-density
district shall apply to any development proposal for all property within parcel
B as shown on the sketch plan of the Reed's Crossing PUD, unless noted
otherwise in this ordinance. Parcel B shall incorporate approximately fifteen
(15) acres, with a maximum of two hundred forty (240) dwelling units permitted.
(Ord. 1364, 6-2-1999)
         a.   Parcel B will be required to provide on site stormwater detention
for the entire parcel. A minimum thirty foot (30') buffer park shall be
established along Ashworth Road, Jordan Creek Parkway, the railroad right of
way, and the east property line, unless otherwise herein modified. Any portion
of part of this parcel B that is used for churches, synagogues, and other
buildings used for religious worship, is not required to provide a thirty foot
(30') buffer park along the railroad right of way, as required herein. In
addition, a minimum thirty foot (30') buffer park shall be required between
parcel B and parcel I, and the burden of the provision of the buffer park shall
be upon whichever parcel develops first. Buffer park screening shall be
provided in accordance with the West Des Moines buffer ordinance. (Ord. 1696,
6-19-2006)
      3.   Parcels C, D, And E: All general use regulations and provisions set
forth in title 9, "Zoning", of the city code for the R-1 single-family
residential district shall apply to any development proposal for all property
within parcels C, D, and E as shown on the sketch plan of the Reed's Crossing
PUD, unless noted otherwise in this ordinance.
         a.   Parcel C shall incorporate approximately seventeen (17) acres
with a maximum of fifty four (54) dwelling units permitted.
         b.   Parcel D shall incorporate approximately thirty eight (38) acres
with a maximum of one hundred twenty (120) dwelling units permitted. A stubbed
street access shall be provided through parcel D to provide future public
street access to private properties located immediately north of parcel D and
located south of the railroad right of way. A centrally located thirty foot
(30') pedestrian access corridor extending south from parcel D into the
neighborhood park site parcel H shall be required by the city as the properties
are developed.
         c.   Parcel E shall incorporate approximately fourteen (14) acres with
a maximum forty eight (48) dwelling units permitted.
         d.   Minimum lot widths of seventy feet (70') shall apply to parcels
C, D, and E. No individual lot driveway access shall be permitted directly onto
Jordan Creek Parkway.
         e.   A minimum thirty foot (30') buffer park easement shall be
established along Jordan Creek Parkway in parcels C, D and E. Buffer park
screening shall be provided in accordance with the West Des Moines buffer
ordinance. (Ord. 1364, 6-2-1999)
      4.   Parcel F: All general use regulations and provisions set forth in
title 9, "Zoning", of the city code for the R-1 single-family residential
district shall apply to any development proposal for all property within parcel
F as shown on the sketch plan of the Reed's Crossing PUD, unless noted
otherwise in this ordinance. It is intended that parcel F be developed in
conjunction with the properties located north and east of the railroad right of
way at a future date and that said parcel F be granted access rights to
Ashworth Road and/or 60th Street as adjacent properties are developed.
         a.   Parcel F shall incorporate approximately eight (8) acres. A
minimum thirty foot (30') buffer park easement shall be established along the
railroad right of way in accordance with the provisions of the West Des Moines
buffer ordinance. A minimum side yard building setback of five feet (5') will
be allowed for the development of parcel F, however, no part of any structure
will be allowed to be any closer than five feet (5') to a property line,
including eaves and overhangs.
         b.   Parcel F will be required to provide on site storm water
detention for the entire parcel. In addition, parcel F will contain the
areawide storm water detention pond as specified in the Jordan Creek watershed
master plan for the watershed contained within the Reed's Crossing PUD. (Ord.
1651, 10-10-2005)
      5.   Parcel G: Parcel G shall incorporate approximately thirteen (13)
acres and is located within the village center subarea of the West Des Moines
comprehensive plan. All development within parcel G shall be subject to the
specific development standards identified in the comprehensive plan for this
subarea.
         a.   Parcel G shall be master planned with the village center
commercial parcel to the west, also known as parcel 3a, Village At Oakbrook
planned unit development. The architecture of development within parcel G shall
be consistent with the architectural theme of the village center subarea and
village center commercial parcels to the west and south.
         b.   Parcel G is intended to be a combination of commercial, office,
and multi-family residential. Multi-family residential uses shall only be
permitted above retail or office uses with approval of the city council through
the permitted conditional use permit process. No freestanding residential use
will be allowed in parcel G. The Reed's Crossing PUD shall be limited to a
maximum of two hundred fifty four (254) units south of Jordan Creek in parcels
G and N. Any residential dwelling in parcel G shall be shifted from parcel N.
In and of itself, parcel G has no residential density assigned to it.
         c.   Any use which is permitted or conditionally permitted in the CMC
community commercial district, NC neighborhood commercial district and SC
support commercial district shall be permitted within this parcel through the
appropriate review process identified in the zoning ordinance, except new and
used auto sales (SIC 551 and 552), automotive repair, service and parking (SIC
75), and gasoline stations (SIC 554) shall be prohibited. Automated car washes
(SIC 75) shall be allowed with the approval of a permitted conditional use
permit, provided that the overhead garage doors are designed to face away from
public streets and public view. Overhead garage door openings shall be screened
through design, berming and landscaping to effectively screen them from the
public right of way and greenbelt park. Wherever a use is listed in the Zoning
Ordinance as a permitted use in one of the allowed commercial districts and a
permitted conditional use in another, the Director of Community Development, or
their designee, shall be authorized to determine the most appropriate review
process. Drive-thrus, except grocery pick-up drive, banks, dry cleaners and
drug stores, with appropriate screening and buffering, shall be prohibited in
this parcel.
         d.   Development Standards: The following standards shall apply to all
development within Parcel G:
            (1)   As part of the development of any part of the parcel, a
detailed master plan shall be developed in conjunction with Parcel 3 of the
Village at Oakbrook PUD that will establish the overall character and layout of
the future development. The master plan for Parcel G is intended to be a
general guide for development and it is recognized that modifications will be
needed as the land is developed. Due to the anticipated development of the
Village Center as a project phased over a number of years, the goal of
flexibility with respect to future market demands is critical. It presents a
unique opportunity for the City to realize the objective of a mass and variety
of uses, linked by a pedestrian-based concept.
            (2)   The development of Parcel G shall integrate trails, pathways
and pedestrian plazas within and around the commercial area to link the
surrounding areas and encourage interaction between plaza users.
            (3)   Outdoor entertainment outdoor dining, and some seasonal or
temporary sidewalk shopping displays shall be allowed in the plaza areas with
the issuance of a temporary use permit by the City or as a permitted
conditional use approved by the City Council. Outdoor display and storage of
merchandise shall be prohibited except as permitted above.
            (4)   Bicycle parking and storage facilities shall be incorporated
into the design development of each site with a minimum of one bicycle parking
space per five hundred (500) square feet of gross leasable area for all
commercial uses, except hotels, motels and office uses.
            (5)   Convenience grocery stores shall only be permitted as an
integral part of a multi-tenant commercial building, no freestanding
convenience stores shall be permitted.
            (6)   The negative elements of the higher intensive uses, such as
loading docks, HVAC units, computer cooling equipment, parking areas and drive-
up windows shall be designed to be screened and buffered from view by the
general public through the use of architectural features or earth berming and
landscaping.
         e.   Parking:
            (1)   For any multi-family use that is located above a commercial
or office use, a minimum of one off-street car space will be solely dedicated
per residential unit and additional off-peak parking will be incorporated.
            (2)   For all commercial, retail, office, restaurant, one off-
street space per two hundred twenty five (225) square feet of gross floor shall
be provided.
            (3)   Any remaining parking needed at peak hours will be in shared
parking with a blanket easement.
            (4)   The location of parking will be on the street and in numerous
pockets behind and between buildings for any parking that is intended to be
jointly used between multiple users, the parking lot shall be located in an
area that is reasonably accessible to both users.
            (5)   On-street parking shall not be counted towards meeting the
parking requirements.
         f.   Building Height And Setbacks: Within Parcel G the building height
shall be a maximum of three (3) stories. Building setback shall be a minimum of
seventy feet (70') from the ultimate right-of-way of E. P. True Parkway.
Parking shall be required to be set back from major and minor arterial streets
a minimum of thirty feet (30') with earth berms, landscaping and decorative
lighting separating the Village Center from the major artery. Parking shall
have a minimum setback of fifteen feet (15') from all other public streets.
            (1)   Building setbacks shall be a minimum of sixty feet (60') from
the greenbelt (Parcel P), and no building setback shall be required from the
western boundary of Parcel G; however, the applicable building code and fire
code separation shall still apply. Parking shall maintain a minimum setback of
thirty feet (30') from the greenbelt parcel and no less than ten feet (10')
from the adjoining property west of Parcel G unless it is intended to be joint
parking with that property and appropriate cross access and parking easements
are established.
            (2)   No building setback shall be required from the public right-
of-way of all internal public streets, provided that there is a minimum twelve
foot (12') sidewalk maintained between the public street and any outdoor
commercial/retail/service use. Seasonal outdoor commercial/retail/service uses
may be permitted within the public right-of-way adjacent to the internal public
streets in this parcel, with a lease agreement approved by the City Council and
approval of a permitted conditional use permit. A hold harmless agreement as
prepared by the City, shall be required for any use permitted in the public
right-of-way. No side yard or rear yard setback shall be required between
similar land uses on adjacent properties.
         g.   Open Space/Buffer: A minimum thirty foot (30') buffer park shall
be required along E.P. True Parkway and the greenbelt park in accordance with
the Buffer Ordinance. The minimum required open space in this parcel shall be
twenty five percent (25%) of the project area. Pedestrian plazas and paved
outdoor spaces shall counted towards the open space requirements, provided they
are not dedicated as a patron use area for a specific business, i.e. outdoor
seating for a restaurant. Site furniture in the plazas for general use shall be
encouraged within this parcel. A pedestrian/bike trail shall be constructed
through this parcel that connects with the Jordan Creek Trail system and the
surrounding residential areas.
All parking areas shall include landscape areas, islands, screens, etc., equal
to not less than ten percent (10%) of the total paved area and associated
drives. Such landscaped area shall be in addition to the open space
requirements for the project area. Landscaped islands within the parking area
shall have ground cover of grass (i.e., sod), shrubs or other acceptable living
plant life, unless an alternate ground cover is specifically approved as part
of the site plan review by the City.
         h.   Architectural Character: All of the land uses in the Village
Center subarea will share a common architectural character so that visitors
will feel they are in a unified commercial and residential community and not
merely in a set of separate projects.
            (1)   The commercial developments in the Village Center subarea and
their relationship with multi-family residential uses will be organized so as
to promote pedestrian travel within various uses in the Village Center. That
promotion will include care with respect to how the uses relate to one another,
and the use of pedestrian walkways, plazas, and gathering spaces. It will also
incorporate connections to residential areas to the north of the Village
Center.
            (2)   The architectural design will incorporate exterior materials
and design elements that have withstood the test of time. The City Council of
West Des Moines, after having received a recommendation from the Plan and
Zoning Commission of West Des Moines, shall determine the appropriateness of an
architectural material when used as a primary element as to whether it enhances
the physical appearance, or provides continuity desired to unite all structures
within the property together into one project concept. Care shall be taken to
design structures of integrity, continuity and a sense of proportion. Emphasis
shall be placed on designing buildings that will have an equally attractive
appearance on all sides of the structure.
            (3)   Commercial buildings will incorporate some of the same
elements and the major exterior material should be stone, brick, or masonry.
Varied wall surfaces with recesses and shadow lines will be incorporated into
the design. Window projections coming up to the second or third story will be
incorporated to give relief to wall surfaces. While flat roofs may be necessary
in commercial buildings, pitched roof projections will be designed to share
compatibility with residential designs in close proximity.
         i.   Landscape: Landscaping will have an integral part in the Village
Center subarea's design and planning. The master plan shall identify where
street trees will be carried throughout the commercial center and around the
periphery. Entrances into the commercial area shall be well landscaped with
overstory and understory trees and accentuated with shrubs, ground covers and
flowers to convey the sense of arrival.
Plazas and open space areas will incorporate specific landscape plans
appropriate to their use and shall be reviewed as part of a site plan approval
process.
      6.   Parcel I: Parcel I shall incorporate approximately ten (10) acres,
with a maximum of sixty four (64) dwelling units permitted. Parcel I shall
encompass bi-attached townhouse units or single-family detached dwelling units.
If parcel I is developed as bi-attached units, all general use regulations and
provisions set forth in title 9, "Zoning", of the city code for the RM
residential medium-density district shall apply to any development proposal for
all property within parcel I as shown on the sketch plan of the Reed's Crossing
PUD, unless noted otherwise in this ordinance. If parcel I is developed as
single-family detached residential, then all general use regulations and
provisions set forth in title 9, "Zoning", of the city code for the R-1 single-
family residential district shall apply to any development proposal for all
property within parcel I as shown on the sketch plan of the Reed's Crossing
PUD, unless noted otherwise in this ordinance.
A minimum thirty foot (30') buffer park shall be established along Jordan Creek
Parkway and the east property line. In addition, a minimum thirty foot (30')
buffer park shall be established in parcel I along the south parcel line to
buffer the single-family residential uses in parcel C from the medium density
residential uses in parcel I. If parcel I is developed as single-family
detached residential in accordance with R-1 standards as permitted in
subsection B3 of this section, the minimum thirty foot (30') buffer park shall
not be required. In addition, a minimum thirty foot (30') buffer park shall be
required between parcel B and parcel I, and the burden of the provision of the
buffer park shall be upon whichever parcel develops first. Buffer park
screening shall be provided in accordance with the West Des Moines buffer
ordinance.
      7.   Parcels J And L: All general use regulations and provisions set
forth in title 9, "Zoning", of the city code for the RM residential medium-
density district shall apply to any development proposal for all property
within parcels J and L as shown on the sketch plan of the Reed's Crossing PUD,
unless noted otherwise in this ordinance. (Ord. 1364, 6-2-1999)
         a.   Parcel J shall incorporate approximately eighteen (18) acres with
a maximum of one hundred eighty (180) dwelling units. Parcel L shall
incorporate approximately fourteen (14) acres with a maximum of one hundred
eleven (111) dwelling units. (Ord. 1926, 7-11-2011)
         b.   (Rep. by Ord. 1651, 10-10-2005)
         c.   At such time that parcels Q or L are developed, a trail
connection shall be made from the greenbelt parcel P to the neighborhood park
parcel H. (Ord. 1926, 7-11-2011)
         d.   Front yard setbacks shall be a minimum of thirty feet (30') from
the right of way of internal public streets, thirty feet (30') from the right
of way of the minor collector street and a minimum setback of twenty five feet
(25') from any private access drive where parking is provided in front of the
unit other than individual driveways intended to serve a particular unit. No
attached residential building shall be set closer than twenty feet (20') to
another attached residential building. Building separation between two (2)
detached residential buildings shall be no closer than fourteen feet (14')
measured to the foundation. In no case shall a garage opening be located closer
than twenty five feet (25') from a shared access drive or roadway. No building
shall exceed two (2) stories or thirty feet (30') in height. (Ord. 1829, 5-18-
2009)
         e.   A minimum thirty foot (30') buffer park shall be established
along the railroad right of way and along the northwest side of parcel J to
effectively buffer the development on this parcel from the single-family
development of parcels D and M in accordance with the buffer ordinance. In
addition, a minimum thirty foot (30') buffer park shall be established along
the minor collector north of parcel L where it is adjacent to parcel E in
accordance with the buffer ordinance to effectively buffer this development
from the single-family development in parcel E. (Ord. 1364, 6-2-1999)
         f.   Single-family detached units are permitted. (Ord. 1829, 5-18-
2009)
      8.   Parcels M And Q: All general use regulations and provisions set
forth in title 9, "Zoning", of the city code for the R-1 single-family
residential district shall apply to any development proposal for all property
within parcel M and parcel Q as shown on the sketch plan of the Reed's Crossing
PUD, unless noted otherwise in this ordinance.
Parcel M shall incorporate approximately six (6) acres with a maximum of twenty
three (23) dwelling units permitted. Minimum lot widths of sixty feet (60')
shall apply to parcel M.
Parcel Q shall incorporate approximately nine (9) acres with a maximum of
twenty seven (27) dwelling units permitted. Minimum lot widths of sixty feet
(60') shall apply to parcel Q.
A minimum thirty foot (30') buffer park easement shall be established along the
railroad right of way in accordance with the West Des Moines buffer ordinance.
A minimum thirty foot (30') buffer park shall be established along the east
side of parcel Q where it abuts parcel J in accordance with the West Des Moines
landscape ordinance. Fences and other permitted structures may be located
within the buffer. No shrubs are required to be installed within this buffer.
(Ord. 1926, 7-11-2011)
      9.   Parcel N: All general use regulations and provisions set forth in
Title 9, Zoning of the West Des Moines City Code for the RH Residential High
Density District shall apply to any development proposal for all property
within Parcel N as shown on the sketch plan of the Reed's Crossing PUD, unless
noted otherwise in this Ordinance. Parcel N is located within the Village
Center subarea of the West Des Moines comprehensive plan, and all development
within Parcel N shall be subject to the specific development standards
identified in the comprehensive plan for this subarea. Parcel N shall
incorporate approximately twenty one (21) acres, with a maximum of two hundred
fifty four (254) dwelling units permitted. (Note: units may be shifted from
this parcel to Parcel G as noted in the subsection for Parcel G.)
Parcel N will be required to provide on site storm water detention for the
entire parcel. A minimum thirty foot (30') buffer park shall be established
along E. P. True Parkway to effectively buffer and screen parking areas and/or
associated uses from view. In addition, a minimum thirty foot (30') buffer park
shall be established along the south and east of Parcel N to effectively buffer
the development on this parcel from the single-family residential development
to the south and the medium density residential development to the east. Buffer
park screening shall be provided in accordance with the West Des Moines Buffer
Ordinance. No building, except garages, shall be located closer than sixty feet
(60') from the ultimate right-of-way of E. P. True Parkway with a minimum one
hundred foot (100') setback for all buildings exceeding two (2) stories or
thirty feet (30') in height from E. P. True Parkway. All garages and carports
shall maintain a minimum thirty foot (30') setback from E. P. True Parkway.
(Ord. 1364, 6-2-1999)
      10.   Parcel O: All general use regulations and provisions set forth in
Title 9, Zoning of the West Des Moines City Code for the RM Residential Medium
Density District shall apply to any development proposal for all property
within Parcel O as shown on the sketch plan of the Reed's Crossing PUD, unless
noted otherwise in this Ordinance.
         a.   The maximum permitted density shall be eight (8) dwelling units
per acre with a maximum of four (4) units per building. Parcel O shall
incorporate a maximum of seven (7) acres.
         b.   Within this parcel the required parking shall be two (2) off-
street spaces per unit and one space per three (3) units for visitor parking.
Tandem parking shall be allowed to meet the required parking requirements. In
addition, one space per one hundred (100) square feet of G.F.A. shall be
provided for any building or portion of a building designated for multi-purpose
recreational uses.
         c.   Within this parcel, permitted building heights will be a maximum
of two (2) stories, not including basements, or thirty six feet (36') above the
average grade of the building.
         d.   Building setbacks shall be a minimum thirty five feet (35') from
the ultimate right-of-way of 74th Street and from the perimeter of the
property, unless otherwise herein modified. Internal building setbacks shall be
a minimum twenty feet (20') from the right-of-way line or easement of the
internal street; however, garage openings shall be no closer than twenty five
feet (25') from said right-of-way line or easement. No unit shall be closer
than twenty feet (20') from another unit in a separate building. The building
setback from the southern line of this parcel shall be twenty five feet (25'),
and the building setback from the eastern line of this parcel shall be fifteen
feet (15'). The building setback from the public street from Cody Drive, south
to the southern boundary of this parcel shall be twenty five feet (25').
         e.   The minimum required open space in this parcel shall be equal to
at least twenty five percent (25%) of the gross area of the parcel. Parking
areas, except for driveway for individual dwelling units, shall be effectively
screened from general public view by incorporating the natural landscape and
topography with the introduction of permanent earth berming of no less than two
and one-half feet (21/2') above the top of curb of the adjacent public street.
In any case, all parking areas shall include landscape areas, islands, screens,
etc., equal to not less than ten percent (10%) of the total paved area. Such
landscaped area shall be in addition to the open space requirements for the
total parcel. Landscaped islands within the parking area shall have ground
cover of grass (i.e., sod), shrubs or other acceptable living plant life,
unless an alternate ground cover is specifically approved as part of the site
plan review by the City.
         f.   A minimum thirty foot (30') buffer park shall be established
along north and west boundaries of Parcel O to effectively buffer the
development on this parcel from the single-family development of Parcel E to
the north and 74th Street to the west. The buffer park shall be designed in
accordance with the West Des Moines Buffer Ordinance and shall be installed as
a part of the site plan development.
         g.   Parcel O shall be master planned with the medium density
residential parcel to the south, also known as Parcel 1, Village at Oakbrook
Planned Unit Development. The architecture of development within Parcel O shall
be consistent with the architectural theme of the Village Center subarea and
medium density residential parcel to the south.
         h.   Individual dwelling units within Parcel O shall not have direct
access to the minor collector along the north boundary of Parcel O, unless
otherwise approved by the City Council. An access to the minor collector north
of Parcel O needs to be provided for the property to the south, unless
otherwise approved by the City Council. (Ord. 1379, 7-26-1999)
   C.   Reservation Of Park Site: Parcel H as shown on the sketch plan,
attached and made a part hereof, is agreed to be reserved for acquisition by
the City for public and park use upon development of adjoining properties
within the PUD. Parcel H shall be a minimum of eight (8) acres in area and be
provided a minimum of sixty feet (60') of public street frontage for vehicular
access purposes. A centrally located thirty foot (30') pedestrian access
corridor extending from Parcel J into Parcel H shall be required by the City as
the properties are developed. A trail connection will be made from Parcel P to
Parcel H at such time that Parcels F or L are developed. The park land shall be
conveyed by warranty deed free and clear of any and all liens and encumbrances
including all judgments, attachments, mechanics and other liens.
The value of the land to be purchased by the City for park use shall be
established at the time of purchase of said property by the City and shall be
based upon the property's current fair market value as undeveloped, plus the
cost of providing paved street frontage, sanitary sewer and water service and
grading. If possible, the fair market value shall be determined by mutual
agreement between the City Council and developer. If an agreement on the fair
market value cannot be mutually reached by the parties, such value shall be
determined by the parties appointing a real estate appraiser with
qualifications of a M.A.I. with the cost of the appraisal being equally shared
by the City and developer. At such time that the minor collector south of
Parcel H is constructed, the West Des Moines Parks and Recreation Department
shall be responsible for the cost of paving one-half (1/2) of the width of the
minor collector (15.5 feet of the 31 foot width) for a maximum length of sixty
(60) linear feet. The terms of the payment shall be worked out at the time of
the development.
   D.   Dedication Of Greenbelt Park (Parcel P): The owner and/or developer
shall reserve for dedication to the City that ground designated as Parcel P as
shown on the sketch plan made a part hereof, for inclusion within the Jordan
Creek Greenbelt for active park and open space use without cost to the City of
West Des Moines. Said area shall be platted with the platting of Parcels L or J
adjoining the parcel's north boundary and dedicated to the City free of any
liens, encumbrances and assessments subsequent to the paving of E. P. True
Parkway or the minor collector through Parcels G, J, L or N. Furthermore, for
the dedication of Parcel P to be included within the Jordan Creek Greenbelt,
the City agrees to waive the developer's share of the mandatory fee payment for
acquisition and/or development of park system required by the City's
Subdivision Regulations. (Ord. 1364, 6-2-1999)
029-04: ARCHITECTURE:
Architecture for multi-family development (townhomes, condominiums, and
apartments) in Parcels A, B, I, J, L and O shall be acceptable to the City and
accomplished in a manner compatible with the adjoining residential uses in the
neighborhood. Architectural design for multi-family buildings shall attempt to
express a creative presentation of exterior building materials, exterior
details and texture, treatment of windows and doors, and use of angles and
multiplicity of planes within the wall and roof design to lessen the plainness
of appearance which can be characteristic of large residential buildings.
The architecture of the multi-family buildings in Parcel N shall be compatible
with the Village Center commercial buildings in Parcel G. Architectural design
will express a creative presentation of exterior materials, detailing, and
texture along with the use of angles and multiplicity of planes within the wall
and roof design to give an overall complexity of design exciting to the viewer.
Bay windows and relief in long walls will be encouraged to add a dynamic play
of light and shadow against the wall surfaces. Roof structures shall be
pitched, gabled, hipped, and multi-faceted. (Ord. 1364, 6-2-1999)
029-05: BUILDING RESTRICTIONS, EASEMENTS AND COVENANTS:
Where the City deems appropriate, the owner and/or developer shall on each
particular area, adopt building restrictions, easements and/or covenants in a
form approved by the City. (Ord. 1364, 6-2-1999)
029-06: SOIL TEST REQUIREMENTS:
If required, owner and/or the developer shall be responsible for supplying to
the city, information prepared by a qualified soils engineering firm,
indicating that existing soil conditions are adequate in stability and strength
for construction of public and private improvements. If determined by the soils
engineering firm that adequate soils conditions do not exist, the owner and/or
developer shall indicate what measures shall be taken to achieve adequate soil
strength and stability for both public and private improvements. (Ord. 1364, 6-
2-1999)
029-07: IMPLEMENTATION SUBJECT TO EXTENSION OF PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS:
   A.   Water And Sewer Service: In conjunction with or prior to development
within any parcel of the PUD, public water and sanitary sewer service shall be
brought to the site and extended through the area being developed to adjoining
undeveloped properties in a manner acceptable to the city and properly designed
with sizes and materials compatible with the city's plans for areawide water
and sanitary sewer service. (Ord. 1364, 6-2-1999)
   B.   Dedication Of E.P. True Right Of Way: A minimum one hundred twenty foot
(120') right of way width shall be dedicated to the city for that portion of
E.P. True Parkway located wholly within the boundaries of the PUD. Said
dedication shall be completed prior to or in conjunction with the development
of any portion of within parcels G, J, L, M, N, Q, and/or that portion of
parcel D east of parcel H and a line running from the northeast corner of
parcel H to the southwest corner of parcel M, labeled as the trigger line on
the sketch plan.
   C.   Paving Of E.P. True Parkway: The developer shall construct thirty one
feet (31') of paving of E.P. True Parkway through parcels G and N from the east
boundary line of the PUD to the south boundary line of the PUD, prior to or in
conjunction with any platting or entitlement approvals in parcels G, J, L, M,
N, Q, and/or that portion of parcel D east of parcel H and a line running from
the northeast corner of parcel H to the southwest corner of parcel M, labeled
as the trigger line on the sketch plan.
   D.   Thirty One Foot Public Street Connection (Minor Collector) South To
E.P. True Parkway And West To Jordan Creek Parkway: A minimum thirty one foot
(31') wide public street connection east from Jordan Creek Parkway between
parcels E, L and O, thence south across Jordan Creek between parcels J, Q, and
L to the point of intersection with E.P. True Parkway and/or the established
right of way alignment of E.P. True Parkway within parcel N shall be
established and constructed prior to or in conjunction with the development of
parcels G, J, L, M, N, Q, and/or that portion of parcel D east of parcel H and
a line running from the northeast corner of parcel H to the southwest corner of
parcel M, labeled as the trigger line on the sketch plan. This street is
designated as a minor collector in the West Des Moines comprehensive plan and
is referred as such within this PUD and labeled as such on the sketch plan.
(Ord. 1926, 7-11-2011)
029-08: TRAFFIC STUDY:
A traffic study was prepared for this PUD in September of 1996; however, in
that study parcels B and I were identified as a church, and calculated as such.
Prior to, or in conjunction with the development of parcel B or parcel I for
any use other than a church, the developer shall have the traffic report
reviewed by a traffic consultant to ensure that the provisions and assumptions
of the original traffic report are not negatively impacted or changed by the
proposed development. A written evaluation shall be submitted to the city that
shall identify what the impacts of the development of that parcel will have on
the existing street system and what improvements are necessary for the safe and
orderly movement of traffic in and around the area. The developer shall be
responsible for the full cost associated with the improvements necessary to
mitigate additional traffic generated as a result of the development. (Ord.
1364, 6-2-1999)
029-09: DOUBLE FRONTAGE LOTS:
All double frontage lots shall be developed in accordance with the West Des
Moines subdivision regulations. A complete buffer plan shall be submitted to
and approved by the city as part of the platting process for the lots. Final
responsibility for provision of the buffer shall rest with the developer
(subdivider) regardless of any pass through agreement. The city's chief
building official shall not issue an occupancy permit for any of the affected
lots until the buffer as required within this section is properly installed per
final site plan specifications. (Ord. 1364, 6-2-1999)
029-10: CORNER LOTS:
Corner lots shall not be less than twenty feet (20') greater in lot frontage
than the minimum lot frontage required for each development parcel so as to
permit adequate building setbacks on both frontage streets. (Ord. 1364, 6-2-
1999)
029-11: ALL AREAS TO BE PLATTED:
In conjunction with development of any portion of the PUD, said area shall be
platted in accordance with the city's subdivision regulations to delineate
within a plat the parcel to be developed or sold separately or any portion
thereof. (Ord. 1364, 6-2-1999)
029-12: STORMWATER MANAGEMENT:
There shall be submitted to, and approved by the West Des Moines public works,
a complete stormwater management plan for each separate parcel, except parcels
P and H, to be prepared by the developer prior to development within the
parcels. A stormwater management plan shall be submitted for all of parcels C,
D, and E prior to any development within any of said parcels to show the manner
in which stormwater shall be conveyed to Jordan Creek or other determined
stormwater drainage outlets from the area. (Ord. 1364, 6-2-1999)
029-13: DEFINITION:
The term "developer", for the purpose of this ordinance, shall mean any person,
individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation, estate, trust, entity,
or agent of same acting or proposing to subdivide land or develop a parcel of
land for the construction of a building or buildings. (Ord. 1364, 6-2-1999)
029-14: SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS:
The owners shall execute a petition and waiver, as prepared by the city, for
the future construction, reconstruction, widening, and/or improvements to
Ashworth Road, 60th Street and Jordan Creek Parkway. (Ord. 1364, 6-2-1999)
029-15: TRAFFIC SIGNALS:
The owner, on behalf of itself, its successors and assigns, agrees to commit to
cost associated with the provision of traffic signals as follows: all of the
cost of signalization at the intersection of E.P. True Parkway and the minor
collector; one-fourth (1/4) of the cost of signalization of the intersection of
Jordan Creek Parkway and Ashworth Road; one-half (1/2) of the cost of
signalization of the intersection of Jordan Creek Parkway and the minor
collector; and their proportional share of any other traffic signals that are
identified as a necessity in a traffic report for the safe movement of
vehicles. (Ord. 1364, 6-2-1999)
029-16: BUFFERS:
All development within the Reed's Crossing PUD shall comply with the buffering
provisions of the buffer ordinance, ordinance 1073, of the West Des Moines city
code. In situations where this PUD specifies the provision of a buffer park
easement, the building setbacks shall be measured from the easement line. In
situations where this PUD specifies the provision of a buffer park, the buffer
may be included within the setback. (Ord. 1364, 6-2-1999)
029-17: VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES:
Any person who violates the provisions of this ordinance upon conviction shall
be punished as set forth in section 1-4-1 of the city code of the city of West
Des Moines, Iowa. (Ord. 1926, 7-11-2011)
029-99: LEGISLATIVE HISTORY:
Jordan Valley: Ord. 961, 6-10-1991; Reed's Crossing: Ord. 1238, 3-24-1997; Ord.
1364, 6-2-1999; Ord. 1378, 7-26-1999; Ord. 1379, 7-26-1999; Ord. 1651, 10-10-
2005; Ord. 1682, 5-8-2006; Ord. 1696, 6-19-2006; Ord. 1829, 5-18-2009; Ord.
1923, 5-31-2011; Ord. 1926, 7-11-2011.
PUD #30
GLEN OAKS
SECTION:
030-01: Legal Description
030-02: Sketch Plan
030-03: Conditions
030-04: Total Unit Maximum
030-05: Signage Regulation
030-06: Buffering
030-07: Pedestrian Orientation
030-08: All Areas To Be Platted
030-09: Storm Water Management
030-10: Street Rights-Of-Way
030-11: Private Internal Streets
030-12: Special Assessments
030-13: Traffic Signals
030-14: Sanitary Sewer Service
030-15: Water Main Extensions
030-16: Paving Of North/South Connector
030-17: Double-Frontage Lots Abutting South 60th Street And Mills Civic Parkway
030-18: Right-Of-Way Easements
030-19: Fire Protection
030-20: Fuller Road Alignment
030-21: Interstate 35 Buffer Park
030-22: Development Agreement
030-99: Legislative History
030-01: LEGAL DESCRIPTION:
The legal description for the Glen Oaks PUD is as follows:
Lots 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 and 6 of Westview Proprietors Final Plat (W.P.F.P.), an
official plat, and lots 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15 and 16 of Westview Country
Estates Replat (W.C.E.R.), an official plat, and part of the SW 1/4 of the NW
1/4 of Section 19, Township 78 North, Range 25 west of the 5th P.M., and part
of the NW 1/4 of the SW 1/4 of said Section 19, and part of the E 1/2 of the SW
1/4 of said Section 19, and part of the W 1/2 of the SE 1/4 of said Section 19,
more particularly described as follows:
Commencing at the W 1/4 corner of said Section 19, which is the point of
beginning; thence S89°54'15"E, a distance of 513.47 feet; thence N 0°02'19"W, a
distance of 595.98 feet; thence S89°56'36"E, a distance of 244.80 feet; thence
N0°12'49"W, a distance of 719.20 feet to a point on the south line of lot 10 of
said W.C.E.R.; thence S89°57'21"W, a distance of 254.25 feet to the sw corner
of said lot 10, W.C.E.R.; thence N0°33'18"E, a distance of 874.93 feet to the
NW corner of said Lot 10; thence N28°47'38"E, a distance of 497.38 feet to the
NE corner of lot 3, W.C.E.R.; thence N28°19'06"E, a distance of 245.90 feet
along the westerly line of Lot 9, W.C.E.R.; thence N3°45'00"E, a distance of
201.67 Feet to the NW corner of said Lot 9; thence 90°00'00"E, a distance of
70.56 feet to the se corner of lot 5, W.C.E.R.; thence N0°00'07"E, a distance
of 876.29 feet to the NW corner of lot 8, W.C.E.R.; thence S89°57'27"E, a
distance of 1740.30 feet to the se corner of lot a of W.P.F.P.; thence
S85°52'40"E, a distance of 179.54 feet to the ne corner of lot 4, W.P.F.P.;
thence S85°51'06"E, a distance of 829.30 feet to the NE corner of Lot 1,
W.P.F.P; thence S1°08'13"E, a distance of 3849.98 feet to the SE corner of lot
3, W.P.F.P; thence S0°51'19"E, a distance of 1672.48 feet; thence S40°01'14"W,
a distance of 825.39 feet; thence S80°40'42"W, a distance of 487.59 feet;
thence N89°43'24"W, a distance of 378.86 feet; thence N89°17'54"W, a distance
of 452.08 feet; thence N69°11'09"W, a distance of 473.84 feet; thence
S24°35'00"E, a distance of 468.21 feet to a point on the south line of said
section 19; thence N89°49'57"W, a distance of 242.78 feet to the sw corner of
the E1/2 of the SW1/4 of said Section 19; thence N1°20'54"E, a distance of
504.19 feet; thence N1°31'25"E, a distance of 216.32 feet; thence N0°10'03"E, a
distance of 664.03 feet; thence N71°13'02"W, a distance of 29.70 feet; thence
N89°54'07"W, a distance of 1100.00 feet; thence N0°00'06"W, a distance of
444.00 feet; thence N89°54'10"W, a distance of 372.84 feet to a point on the
west line of said Section 19; thence N0°40'13"E, a distance of 800.00 feet to
the point of beginning, all being in and forming a part of the City of West Des
Moines, Polk County, Iowa, containing 432.113 acres, more or less; and
A tract of land situated in the NW fractional 1/4 of Section 19, Township 78
North, Range 25 West of the 5th P.M., more particularly described as follows:
Commencing at the W1/4 corner of said Section 19; thence N0°39'20"E, along the
West line of said Section 19, a distance of 595.69 feet; thence S89°56'35"E, a
distance of 506.06 feet to the point of beginning; thence N0°08'02"W, a
distance of 178.67 feet; thence S89°56'35"E, a distance of 243.80 feet; thence
S0°08'02"E, a distance of 178.67 feet; thence N89°56'35"W, a distance of 243.80
feet to the point of beginning, all being in and forming a part of the City of
West Des Moines, Polk County, Iowa, containing 1.000 acres, more or less.
AND
A tract of land located in the SW1/4 of the NW frl.1/4 of Section 19, Township
78 North, Range 25 West of the 5th p.m., in the City of West Des Moines, Polk
County, Iowa, described as follows:
Commencing at the W1/4 corner of said Section 19, a distance of 595.69 feet to
the point of beginning; thence N0°39'20"E, a distance of 303.67 feet; thence
S89°59'01"E, a distance of 418.00 feet; thence N0°36'33"E, a distance of 416.02
feet to the north line of the SW1/4 of the NW frl.1/4; thence S89°59'01"E, a
distance of 322.27 feet; thence S0°12'49"E, a distance of 719.16 feet; thence
N89°56'35"W, a distance of 749.86 feet to the point of beginning, containing
8.325 acres more or less except commencing at the West 1/4 of said Section 19;
thence N0°39'20"E, along the West line of said Section 19; a distance of 595.69
feet; thence S89°56'35"E, a distance of 506.06 feet to the point of beginning;
thence N0°08'02"W, a distance of 178.67 feet; thence S89°56'35"E, a distance of
243.80 feet; thence S0°08'02"E, a distance of 178.67 feet; thence N89°56'35"E,
a distance of 243.80 feet to the point of beginning.
AND
The North 415 feet of the West 418 feet of the SW 1/4 of the NW frl.1/4 of
Section 19, Township 78 North, Range 25 West of the 5th P.M., all now included
in and forming a part of the City of West Des Moines, Iowa.
AND
Outlot O Glen Oaks Plat 2, an official plat now included in and forming a part
of the City of West Des Moines,
EXCEPT
A PART OF OUTLOT "O", GLEN OAKS PLAT 2, AN OFFICIAL PLAT, NOW INCLUDED IN AND
FORMING A PART OF THE CITY OF WEST DES MOINES, POLK COUNTY IOWA, BEING MORE
PARTICULARLY DESCRIBED AS FOLLOWS. BEGINNING at the Northeast Corner of said
Outlot "O"; THENCE South 1°32'06" East, along the East line of said Outlot "O",
a distance of 1,129.17 feet; THENCE North 20°06'11" West, a distance of 56.63
feet; THENCE North 12°21'03" West, a distance of 100.00 feet; THENCE North
12°21'03" West, a distance of 100.00 feet; THENCE North 9°52'34" West, a
distance of 102.26 feet; THENCE North 13°04'23" West, a distance of 96.77 feet;
THENCE North 15°36'55" West, a distance of 96.13 feet; THENCE North 17°17'39"
West, a distance of 102.87 feet; THENCE North 18°22'13" West, a distance of
96.92 feet; THENCE North 20°23'54" West, a distance of 100.96 feet; THENCE
North 11°22'09" West, a distance of 101.09 feet; THENCE North 10°03'55" West, a
distance of 100.78 feet; THENCE North 27°34'20" West, a distance of 50.83 feet;
THENCE North 11°32'14" West, a distance of 83.90 feet, to the North line of
said Outlot "O"; THENCE South 86°14'59" East, along the said North line, a
distance of 272.05 feet to the POINT OF BEGINNING, containing 3.42 ACRES, more
or less
AND
A part of lot 4, Mills Landing, an official plat in the City of West Des
Moines, Polk County, Iowa and more particularly described as follows:
Beginning at the southeast corner of said lot 4; then north 89°38'55" west
along the south line of said lot 4, a distance of 21.17 feet to the west corner
of lot 16, Glen Oaks Plat 3, an official plat; thence north 13°03'42" east,
90.87 feet to the northwest corner of said lot 16; thence south 00°24'35" east
along the east line of said lot 4, a distance of 88.65 feet to the point of
beginning and containing 0.02 acres (938 square feet) (parcel 2022-1165).
EXCEPT
A tract of land located in the Southwest 1/4 of the Southwest 1/4 of Section
19, Township 78 North, Range 25 West of the 5th P.M. and the Northwest 1/4 of
the Northwest 1/4 of Section 30, Township 78 North, Range 25 West of the 5th
P.M., and Outlot “Y” in West Grand Business Park Plat 1, an official plat, now
included in and forming a part of the City of West Des Moines, Polk County,
Iowa is described as follows:
Beginning at the northwest corner of said Outlot “Y” thence South 59° 09'23"
east, a distance of 191.49 feet along the north line of said Outlot “Y”; thence
North 24° 00'04" east, a distance of 30.21 feet; thence south 59° 09'58" east,
a distance of 545.83 feet; thence south 31 ° 02'50" west, a distance of 47.19
feet; thence South 74° 37' 10" West, a distance of 38.51 feet; thence along a
curve to the left having a radius of 475.00 feet, a delta of 49°58'14", an arc
length of 414.27 feet, a chord which bears south 01°27'53" west having a chord
length of 401.27 feet; thence south 33°45'42" east a distance of 35.39 feet;
thence along a curve to the right having a radius of 550.00 feet, a delta of
19°17'45", an arc length of 185.23 feet, a chord which bears north 18°07'19"
west having a chord length of 184.35 feet; thence south 55°11'28" east, a
distance of 55.17 feet, to a point on the north right-of-way line of Grand
Avenue as presently established; thence along said north right of way along a
curve to the right along said right away having a radius of 940.00 feet, a
delta of 36°54'13" an arc length of 605.45 feet, a chord which bears south
84°27'03" east having a chord length of 595.03 feet; thence, continuing along
said north right-of-way, right north 66°05'20" west, a distance of 119.80 feet;
to the southeast corner of Outlot 2 in said west grand business park plat 1.
Thence north 0° 21 ‘25" east, a distance of 932.17 feet, to the point of
beginning, containing 11.83 square feet, more or less.
SOUTH AREA:
A tact of land located in the SW1/4 of the SW1/4 of Section 19, Township 78
North, Range 25 West of the 5th P.M., and the NW1/4 of the NW1/4 of Section 30,
Township 78 North, Range 25 West of the 5th P.M.
Beginning at the SW corner of the E1/2 of the SW1/4 of said Section 19; thence
S0°53'17"W, a distance of 182.38 feet; thence S0°18'40"W, a distance of 528.86
feet to a point on the North right-of-way line of the Chicago, Rock Island and
Pacific Railroad; thence S84°29'58"W, along said North right-of-way line of the
Railroad, a distance of 944.22 feet; thence N0°25'19"E, a distance of 1532.63
feet to a point on the centerline of Booneville Road (60th Street South);
thence S59°05'00"E, along the centerline of Booneville Road (60th Street South)
a distance of 1090.90 feet; thence S0°32'36"W, along the West line of the E1/
2 of the SW1/4 of said Section 19, a distance of 170.36 feet to the point of
beginning, containing 26.03 acres more or less, including 4.64 acres of road
right-of-way easement, all being in and forming a part of the City of West Des
Moines, Polk County, Iowa.
EXCEPT
A tract of land located in the Southwest 1/4 of the Southwest 1/4 of Section
19, Township 78 North, Range 25 West of the 5th P.M. and the Northwest 1/4 of
the Northwest 1/4 of Section 30, Township 78 North, Range 25 West of the 5th
P.M., and Outlot “Y” in West Grand Business Park Plat 1, an official plat, now
included in and forming a part of the City of West Des Moines, Polk County,
Iowa is described as follows:
Beginning at the northwest corner of said Outlot “Y” thence South 59°09'23"
East, a distance of 191.49 feet along the North line of said Outlot “Y”; thence
North 24°00'04" East, a distance of 30.21 feet; thence South 59°09'58" East, a
distance of 545.83 feet; thence South 31°02'50" West, a distance of 47.19 feet;
thence South 74°37'10" West, a distance of 38.51 feet; thence along a curve to
the left having a radius of 475.00 feet, a delta of 49°58'14", an arc length of
414.27 feet, a chord which bears South 01°27'53" West having a chord length of
401.27 feet; thence South 33°45'42".
East a distance of 35.39 feet; thence along a curve to the right having a
radius of 550.00 feet, a delta of 19°17'45", an arc length of 185.23 feet, a
chord which bears South 18°07'19" East having a chord length of 184.35 feet;
thence South 55°11'28" East, a distance of 55.17 feet, to a point on the north
right-of-way line of grand avenue as presently established; thence along said
north right of way along a curve to the right along said right away having a
radius of 940.00 feet, a delta of 36°54'13" an arc length of 605.45 feet, a
chord which bears North 84°27'03" West having a chord length of 595.03 feet;
thence, continuing along said north right of way, right North 66°05'20" West, a
distance of 119.80 feet; to the Southeast corner of Outlot “Z” in said West
Grand Business Park Plat 1. Thence North 0°21'25" East, a distance of 932.17
feet, to the point of beginning, containing 11.83 acres, more or less.
(Ord. 1007, 5-26-1992; amd. Ord. 1063, 10-11-1993; Ord. 2451, 11-16-2020; Ord.
2453, 11-16-2020; Ord. 2552, 12-19-2022; Ord. 2555, 1-17-2023)
030-02: SKETCH PLAN:
On file with the community development department of the city and made a part
of this rezoning approval for concept description and delineation is the sketch
plan document for the Glen Oaks planned unit development labeled "Revised
November 20, 2020". It is recognized minor shifts or modifications to general
plan layout may be necessary and compatible with the need to acquire workable
street patterns, grades and usable building sites, but the general plan layout,
including the relationship of uses to each other and the relationship of land
use to the general plan framework, and development requirements shall be used
as the implementation guide. (Ord. 1720, 12-18-2006; amd. Ord. 2451, 11-16-2020
; Ord. 2552, 12-19-2022 )
030-03: CONDITIONS:
Whereas, section 6 of ordinance 497, amended ordinance 430, by creating article
XX(a), PUD planned unit development district, establishes certain regulations
and guidelines pertaining to accompanying information required on plat and site
plan documents. Now, therefore, the following conditions, restrictions, and
regulations are adopted as part of this approval, to wit:
   A.   General Conditions: The sketch plan incorporates a golf course, single-
family residential, multi-family residential, and office/retail land uses which
shall be distributed by area, types and location according to the sketch plan
and this ordinance.
In addition, the following general development criteria shall be integrated
into and made a part of this planned unit development and sketch plan approval.
      1.   All subdivisions, public or private streets, public or private
street rights of way and general development shall adhere to the standards and
design criteria set forth in the West Des Moines subdivision ordinance and/or
established city policies pertaining thereto, unless otherwise stated within
this ordinance.
      2.   Unless otherwise specified herein, the development of the Glen Oaks
PUD shall comply with article XXII (off street parking and loading areas),
article XXIII (open space requirements), and article XXV (site plans) of the
West Des Moines zoning ordinance. For the purposes of the application of
article XX(a), planned unit development district, section 6, final plan
submittal, the submittal of final plan documents for any parcel, or part of any
parcel of the Glen Oaks PUD within one year after approval and publication of
this ordinance, shall be considered to satisfy the terms and requirements of
section 6.
      3.   In all areas within a 100-year frequency flood hazard zone, or
adjoining drainageways, and detention ponding areas involving potential flood
hazards, no building shall be erected which has a lowest floor, including
basements, less than one foot (1') above the determined level of the 100-year
frequency flood event, and no building shall be erected within twenty five feet
(25') of any easement or property boundary of a major drainageway, storm water
detention basin or pond.
      4.   The developer, their successors and/or assigns, if any, shall pay
all planning, engineering, and construction costs for the interior development
of the planned unit development, as required by this ordinance and the
subdivision ordinance of the city of West Des Moines, Iowa, for all streets,
storm sewers, sanitary sewers, drainageway improvements, detention basins,
water mains, buffers and other improvements within the parcels illustrated and
established within the Glen Oaks PUD as may be required by the subdivision
ordinance, zoning ordinance or this ordinance.
   B.   Land Use Design Criteria: In addition to the general conditions as
stated in subsection A of this section, the following land use design criteria
shall apply to the development areas designated by parcel on the sketch plan.
The sketch plan document which is made a part of this rezoning action per
section
030-02 of this ordinance, delineates eighteen (18) parcels of the PUD for
application of specific standards of land use and development regulations. The
following development standards and use regulations shall apply to each of the
individual parcels as applicable.
      1.   Parcels A, A-1, B, C, C-1, D, E, And H: All general use regulations
and provisions set forth in title 9, chapter 5 of the city code for the R-1-
A single-family residential district of the city of West Des Moines, shall
apply to any development in parcels A, A-1, B, C, C-1, D, E and H. Additional
restrictions and conditions may apply to specific parcels outlined in this
Section and are noted elsewhere herein.
      2.   Parcels E-1, F, G And E-2: All general use regulations, performance
standards and provisions set forth in Title 9, Chapter 5G for the R-5 Multi-
Family Residential District (Medium Density) of the City of West Des Moines,
shall apply to any development in Parcels E-1, F, G and E-2. Additional
restrictions and conditions may apply to specific parcels outlined in this
Section and are noted elsewhere herein. Any development of Parcel F and G shall
be limited to a maximum of four (4) dwelling units per building. (Ord. 1156,
10-9-1995)
      3.   Parcel I: All general use regulations, performance standards and
provisions set forth in Article XII-A of Ordinance 430 for the R-5 Residential
District (Medium Density) of the City of West Des Moines, shall apply to any
development in Parcel I.
         a.   Development Standards: A minimum sixty foot (60') buffer park
easement shall be required along the Mills Civic Parkway frontage of Parcel I
and along the western boundary of Parcel I with no structures, parking areas,
or internal drives permitted within said buffer park easement with a maximum of
two (2) access drives permitted from Mills Civic Parkway to Parcel I. The
building setback may be measured from the Mills Civic Parkway right-of-way with
any building exceeding two (2) stories in height requiring a minimum setback of
one hundred feet (100') from the Mills Civic Parkway right-of-way. Prior to
development within any part of Parcel I, a buffer plan shall be reviewed and
approved by the City which illustrates that use of berms and tree plantings to
effectively buffer the residential uses within Parcel I from Mills Civic
Parkway and projected uses north of Mills Civic Parkway.
      4.   Parcel J: All general use regulations, performance standards and
provisions set forth in Article XI of Ordinance 430 for the R-3 Multi-Family
Residential District (Medium Density) of the City of West Des Moines, shall
apply to any development in Parcel J with the exception of the height limit of
ten (10) stories and the additional setback requirements. Parcel J may be
developed with buildings not to exceed fifteen (15) stories or one hundred
ninety feet (190') in height with no additional setbacks required. Parcel J
shall be limited to a maximum twelve (12) acres in size. No office use(s) shall
be permitted within Parcel J.
         a.   Development Standards: No parking lot, internal drive, garage,
residential building or structure of any kind shall be located closer than
sixty feet (60') from the right-of-way of the future Mills Civic Parkway. All
structures over two (2) stories in height shall be setback a minimum one
hundred feet (100') from said rights-of-way. Prior to development within any
part of Parcel J, a buffer plan shall be reviewed and approved by the City
which illustrates that use of berms and tree plantings to effectively buffer
the residential uses within Parcel J from Mills Civic Parkway and projected
uses north of Mills Civic Parkway.
No structures other than entrance features and fences shall be allowed in that
portion of Parcel J located to the north and east of the internal street, known
as Glen Oaks Drive. This portion of ground may be included in the density
calculations for Parcel J but shall not be included as part of the open space
requirements for any development on Parcel J.
         b.   Architecture Requirements: The architecture of multiple-family
buildings within Parcel J shall be acceptable to the City and accomplished in a
manner compatible with the adjoining residential uses in the neighborhood.
Architectural design for multi-family buildings shall attempt to express a
creative presentation of exterior building materials, exterior details and
texture, treatment of windows and doors, and use of angles and multiplicity of
planes within the wall and roof design to lessen the plainness of appearance
which can be characteristic of large residential buildings. (Ord. 1063, 10-11-
1993)
      5.   Parcel L: All general use regulations, performance standards and
provisions set forth in City Code for the Support Commercial (SC) District
shall apply to any development proposal for the property within Parcel L as
shown on the PUD sketch plan, except as shall be further provided herein.
         a.   Permitted Uses: Permitted uses within Parcel L shall include: All
uses permitted within the Support Commercial (SC) District, except travel
trailer parks, landscape garden plant stores, any and all outside display areas
and all auto-related sales and service facilities shall each be prohibited.
         b.   Development Standards: Lot area, lot frontage and yard
requirements shall comply with standards of the SC District. Multiple use of a
lot shall comply with SC District standards with multiple buildings on a site
of minimum lot area being consistent in architectural design and use of
materials and organized utilizing a compatible planned open space, landscape
plan, and parking plan to serve and maintain a unified master plan concept.
Parking lots, internal drives, buildings and/or structures of any kind shall be
set back a minimum of sixty feet (60') from the future Grand Avenue right-of-
way. A minimum ten foot (10') parking lot and internal drive setback shall be
maintained from adjoining properties and internal streets and adjacent roadways
unless said parking lot is part of a common parking lot jointly used by
adjoining properties. Parking lots shall be sufficiently screened from public
street view and surrounding properties with the use of landscaping, earth
berming, and/or wall structures as may be required by the City. No direct
access shall be permitted to Grand Avenue from Parcel L.
         c.   Architecture: The architectural design of any building shall be
acceptable to the City, provided acceptance shall not be unreasonably withheld,
and all buildings within the parcel shall have as a primary element of the
exterior being fascia glass, face brick, stone, architectural metal or
composite panels acceptable to the City. All composite panel or metal cladding
must have concealed fasteners and fully finished edges. All sides of any
building built within Parcel L consistent in design and use of materials. No
wood, masonite, visible asphaltic exterior wall or roof material, aluminum
siding, non-architectural sheet metal, concrete block, or other similar
materials shall constitute a portion of any building exterior, except as a trim
material, unless the City Council of West Des Moines, after review by the Plan
and Zoning Commission of West Des Moines shall determine said material, when
used as a primary element, enhances the physical appearance.
   6.   Parcel M: All general use regulations, performance standards, and
provisions set forth in City Code, Title 9, Zoning, for the Residential Medium
Density (RM-8) zoning district shall apply to any development within Parcel M
as shown on the PUD sketch plan, except as shall be further provided herein.
      a.   Permitted Uses: The parcel shall only be developed with a maximum of
thirty-five (35) attached townhome dwellings. No other use otherwise allowed
within the Medium Density zoning district shall be allowed.
      b.   Development Standards:
         (1)   Building Setbacks:
            (a)   Minimum setback from I-35 Interstate right-of-way shall be 35
feet for a building up to four (4) stories. An additional 10 feet of setback
shall be provided for each story over four.
            (b)   Minimum setback from Mills Civic Parkway shall be 100 feet.
            (c)   Minimum Setback from the west property line shall be zero (0)
feet.
            (d)   Building setbacks within footprint lot shall follow City Code
unless noted below.
               i.   No minimum rear yard setback shall be required; however, no
part of the dwelling structure, including roof overhangs, or mechanical
equipment or window wells for a dwelling may extend outside of the footprint
lot boundary. A building shall not be setback more than ten (10) feet from the
footprint lot boundary as measured to the building foundation.
               ii.   The front boundary line of the footprint lot may be
located at the private access drive edge. The front plane of the building shall
be setback a minimum of seven (7) feet; however, to accommodate the exterior
parking of a vehicle between the vehicle access drive and the garage, the
opening to a garage shall be setback a minimum of twenty-five (25) feet from
the edge of the vehicle drive or pedestrian sidewalk if incorporated.
               iii.   The exterior wall of end units shall be setback a minimum
of seven (7) feet and maximum of ten (10) feet from the footprint lot boundary
as measured to the building foundation. A minimum of fourteen feet (14') shall
be provided between building elements of opposing end units, or protective
construction in accordance with building codes shall be utilized.
         (2)   Landscaping: Existing vegetation may be counted toward meeting
buffer or open space requirements, provided that the vegetation meets the type
of material required, the material is located within the respective buffer area
or open space, and that the material is documented on the site plan. Said
existing trees and shrubs may be credited towards provision of the buffer or
open space plantings when an ISA (International Society of Arboriculture)
certified arborist provides documentation confirming that the tree is high
quality, a desired variety, not on the City's prohibited tree list or of an Ash
variety and in a thriving condition. Any mature, quality trees to be retained
on the site shall be protected during construction.
         Existing vegetation shall be kept as much as possible. Removal of
trees outside of the footprint lots area and vehicle access drives within the
property owned by the developer of the townhomes will be permitted for
diseased, dead, damaged, or of a species not commonly recognized as being
desirable. For every two thousand (2,000) square feet of tree canopy removed,
as measured on an aerial photograph after July 1, 2018, at least one (1)
evergreen a minimum of six feet (6') tall or over-story species tree at least
two inches (2") in caliper, shall be planted within Parcel M to mitigate the
loss of canopy. Any existing trees kept with the intent to fulfill minimum
vegetation requirements that die during site development or up to within one
year after issuance of the last final occupancy permit, shall be replaced with
the minimum plant size required per the type of tree as stated in city code.
            (a)   Open Space: A minimum of twenty-five percent (25%) of Parcel
M shall be provided as open space, unencumbered by buildings or pavement.
Landscape vegetation shall be provided in accordance with city code.
            (b)   Buffers:
               i.   Along Mills Civic Parkway: A minimum 60-foot wide buffer
with landscaping shall be installed which complies with the landscape
requirements stated in City Code for a 60-foot buffer. A minimum 3' high
earthen berm shall be implemented in those areas in which existing vegetation
is not preserved.
               ii.   Along Interstate 35 On-Ramp: A minimum 30-foot wide buffer
with landscaping shall be installed which complies with the landscape
requirements of the City Code for a 30-foot buffer. A six foot (6') opaque
fence is required on the public side of this buffer.
               iii.   Along Glen Oaks Drive: The Glen Oaks Owners Association
controls the first approximately 35' immediately adjacent to the roadway.
Unless otherwise approved in writing by the Association, this area shall be
preserved as is except for that area necessary for the access drive to the
townhomes. Any vegetation disturbed because of the development of the townhomes
shall be replaced. The Glen Oaks Owners Association shall determine replacement
requirements. Documentation of the Owners Association allowance to disturb the
area and the replacement requirements shall be provided to the city prior to
approval of the townhome site plan with replacements noted on the associated
site plan and installation of replacements required prior to issuance of an
occupancy permit for any of the last 15 dwellings constructed.
               iv.   While the intended dwelling structures should provide
sound mitigation of the interstate and Mills Civic Parkway noise, in addition
to the minimum vegetation required of buffers, vegetation, preferably of an
evergreen variety shall be installed in the gaps between the dwelling structure
buildings. Said evergreens shall be a minimum height of six feet (6') if balled
& burlap or container, or a minimum height of four feet (4') if grown in a root
bag. Proof that the plants are root bag grown will be required.
               v.   If existing vegetation preserved is not sufficient to
mitigate views of mechanical or any other negative site element, additional
trees and shrubs shall be implemented to achieve mitigation of views.
            (c)   Architecture: The architecture of buildings within Parcel M
shall be acceptable to the City and accomplished in a manner compatible with
the adjoining residential uses in the neighborhood through the use of building
materials and colors, and design details. Architectural design for the
buildings shall attempt to express a creative presentation of exterior building
materials, exterior details and texture, treatment of windows and doors, and
use of angles and multiplicity of planes within the wall and roof design to
lessen the plainness of appearance which can be characteristic of large
residential buildings.
         Side or end walls of buildings visible from any roadway within the
Glen Oaks development, Mills Civic Parkway or I-35 ramp shall be enhanced
through changes in materials, colors, or pattern and textures or the placement
of additional landscape material, projected to grow to a height generally equal
to the height of the wall of the building.
   7.   Golf Course Parcel 1: A golf course club house and associated
facilities including a pool house, tennis club house, and maintenance building
shall be permitted within Golf Course Parcel 1 with a restaurant and retail use
within a pro shop allowed interior to said club house facility. A maximum of
six (6) accessory residential dwelling units may be permitted within Golf
Course Parcel 1 located within, or in close proximity, to the golf course club
house. Said residential units are to be utilized by club members and guests
only.
   8.   Golf Course Parcels 2 And 3: Only golf course elements shall be
permitted within Golf Course Parcel 2 with no buildings permitted. Golf Course
Parcel 3 shall permit a golf driving range and associated elements, a
maintenance facility and associated storage areas, and two (2) above ground
fuel tanks not to exceed five hundred (500) gallons each. (Ord. 1007, 5-26-
1992; amd. Ord. 1043, 1-4-1993; Ord. 1063, 10-11-1993; Ord. 1156, 10-9-1995;
Ord. 2451, 11-16-2020; Ord. 2453, 11-16-2020; Ord. 2555, 1-17-2023)
030-04: TOTAL UNIT MAXIMUM:
A maximum of four hundred thirty-four (434) residential units shall be
established for parcels located south of Mills Civic Parkway with the exception
of Parcel I, Parcel J and Parcel M. The maximum overall unit density for said
parcels, excluding Parcel I, Parcel J and Parcel M, shall not exceed the low
density residential designation of the comprehensive plan with a maximum
overall density being one dwelling unit per acre. The golf course parcels shall
be included within the overall density calculation. (Ord. 1156, 10-9-1995; amd.
Ord. 2453, 11-16- 2020; Ord. 2555, 1-17-2023)
030-05: SIGNAGE REGULATION:
No pole sign, as defined by the West Des Moines City Sign Code, shall be
incorporated into any development within the Glen Oaks PUD. Ground sign
standards shall be used for the construction of freestanding signage as set
forth within the West Des Moines City Sign Code for the PCP Professional
Commerce Park District. All remaining residential parcels shall have signage
regulated as outlined within the West Des Moines City Sign Code.
All signage constructed as wall signs on building fascia within the Glen Oaks
PUD shall incorporate aesthetic features compatible with the overall character
of the development. All wall signs will be composed of solid individual letters
attached to the building fascia, or individual letters of anodized aluminum,
galvanized metal, illuminated self-contained with translucent plastic faces set
in anodized aluminum returns and trim; panel signs with letters incorporated or
painted upon a panel or wall area shall be prohibited. Advertising or
promotional temporary signage attached to exterior windows or walls including
exposed neon lights visible from the exterior of the building shall be
prohibited. (Ord. 1007, 5-26-1992)
030-06: BUFFERING:
Adequate treatment or buffering of negative aspects of all buildings (loading
docks, garbage dumpsters and HVAC mechanical units) from any public street and
adjoining properties shall be required. Buildings shall not be located and
designed to expose loading docks or doors, loading areas or the rear of
buildings to public streets. No outside storage of products or materials,
except garbage and products for retail sales purposes, shall be permitted.
Buffering requirements and provisions of Article XXIV, Buffers Required, of the
City Zoning Ordinance shall be applied to development within the Glen Oaks PUD,
except if other specific requirements are set forth elsewhere within this
Ordinance. (Ord. 1007, 5-26-1992)
030-07: PEDESTRIAN ORIENTATION:
Pedestrian access shall be provided from all parcels within the Glen Oaks PUD
to permit and encourage pedestrian movement between parcels versus utilizing
motorized vehicles for access. (Ord. 1007, 5-26-1992)
030-08: ALL AREAS TO BE PLATTED:
Prior to, or in conjunction with development or transfer of ownership of any
portion of the PUD, said area shall be platted in accordance with the City's
Subdivision Ordinance to delineate within a plat the parcel to be developed or
sold separately or any portion thereof. (Ord. 1007, 5-26-1992)
030-09: STORM WATER MANAGEMENT:
There shall be submitted to, and approved by the West Des Moines City Engineer,
a complete storm water management plan for the entire parcel of the PUD to be
prepared by the developer prior to development within any of the individual
parcels of the PUD. (Ord. 1007, 5-26-1992)
030-10: STREET RIGHTS-OF-WAY:
   A.   Required: Adequate street right-of-way shall be provided for the
construction, reconstruction and widening of adjoining streets adjacent to, or
within the Glen Oaks PUD. Said right-of-way shall be dedicated to the City at
the time of platting.
   B.   Mills Civic Parkway Interchange: Owner acknowledges that initial
construction of the interchange at Mills Civic Parkway and Interstate 35 may
require a contribution and/or an assessment of special benefits paid by owner
and owners of any benefitted properties to accomplish the development of the
interchange. Owner agrees to cooperate in the future with the city and with
owners of any benefited property, which cooperation will not be unreasonably
withheld, toward working out a reasonable and equitable financing plan for the
construction of the Mills Civic Parkway interchange.
   C.   Applicability: This section 030-10 shall apply to the owner and the
parcels described in this ordinance only if provisions similar to subsection B
above are made applicable to other property proximate to the future
intersection of Mills Civic Parkway and Interstate 35 generally described on
exhibit C on file with the community development department. (Ord. 1007, 5-26-
1992; amd. Ord. 2453, 11- 16-2020)
030-11: PRIVATE INTERNAL STREETS:
The developer, their successors and assigns, if any, shall provide the city
with acceptable documentation providing that all properties within the PUD,
with the exception of parcels K, K-1, I and L, and all lots fronting on S. 60th
Street in parcel D, shall belong to the association which will be responsible
and liable for the ownership and maintenance (all costs associated with) of all
private streets. A minimum of fifty feet (50') of right of way and twenty five
feet (25') of paving measured from back of curb to back of curb shall apply to
all private streets within the Glen Oaks PUD. This agreement shall forever run
with and be filed against the title of all parcels within the PUD. (Ord. 1568,
1-20-2004)
030-12: SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS:
   A.   Fuller Road, Grand Avenue, South 60th Street And Booneville Road: With
respect to any assessments by the city of West Des Moines of special benefits
conferred upon any and all parcels of the Glen Oaks PUD, or any portion
thereof, as a result of the initial paving and widening of that portion of
Fuller Road, South 60th Street, Booneville Road and Grand Avenue adjacent to
said parcels, the owner, on behalf of itself and its successors and assigns
(collectively by the "owner"), agrees that such assessments may be spread
against all of said parcels, as said parcels exist on the date of assessment,
by the city of West Des Moines on an area basis, or other methodologies
utilized by the city.
The foregoing area assessment provisions are subject to the following
provision: Any assessment shall be reasonable and equitable in comparison to
the special benefits for such initial paving and widening assessed against
other properties receiving similar benefits pursuant to the current special
assessment practices of the city. (Ord. 1007, 5-26-1992)
030-13: TRAFFIC SIGNALS:
The developers, their successors and assigns, if any, shall pay for their pro
rata share of the cost associated with the installation of traffic signals
necessitated from the development of the Glen Oaks PUD including South 60th and
Mills Civic Parkway, South 60th and Grand and at any major intersections
impacted by this development. A bond in the amount to cover said cost shall be
posted, or an acceptable alternative approved by the city, prior to the
recording of a final plat for the subject site. The city shall encourage the
use of alternate funding sources for the installation of said traffic signals.
(Ord. 1007, 5-26-1992; Ord. 2453, 11- 16-2020)
030-14: SANITARY SEWER SERVICE:
The developer, their successors and assigns, if any, shall pay for sanitary
sewer service to the Glen Oaks PUD as determined by the city through standard
assessment procedures or as otherwise addressed within section
030-22 of this ordinance. (Ord. 1007, 5-26-1992)
030-15: WATER MAIN EXTENSIONS:
With respect to any assessments by the West Des Moines waterworks (waterworks)
of special benefits conferred upon any or all parcels of the Glen Oaks PUD, or
any portion thereof, as a result of the water main extensions in Mills Civic
Parkway, Grand Avenue, South 60th Street, and Booneville Road, which extensions
are in the vicinity of said Glen Oaks PUD and water service provided to any
parcel, the owner, on behalf of itself and its successors and assigns
(collectively by the "owner"), agrees that such assessments may be spread
against any or all of said parcels, as said parcels exist on the date of
assessment, by the West Des Moines waterworks under standard assessment
procedure or upon approval of an agreement in contract form covering said
costs.
The foregoing area assessment provisions are subject to the following
provision: Any assessment shall be reasonable and equitable in comparison to
the special benefits for such water service against other properties receiving
similar benefit. (Ord. 1007, 5-26-1992; Ord. 2453, 11-16-2020)
030-16: PAVING OF NORTH/SOUTH CONNECTOR:
Upon the submittal of the first phase plat, or prior to approval of any plat
within the Glen Oaks PUD, a north/south connector street on a permanent or
temporary easement extending from Mills Civic Parkway to Grand Avenue shall be
a component of said plat(s) and constructed prior to the issuance of any
certificates of occupancy of a use within the Glen Oaks PUD. (Ord. 1007, 5-26-
1992; Ord. 2453, 11-16-2020)
030-17: DOUBLE FRONTAGE LOTS ABUTTING SOUTH 60TH STREET AND MILLS CIVIC
PARKWAY:
All double frontage lots along South 60th Street and Mills Civic Parkway shall
be developed in accordance with section 6-6.04 subsection 5, paragraph B of the
West Des Moines subdivision ordinance. A complete buffer plan shall be
submitted to and approved by the city as part of the platting process for the
lots. Final responsibility for provision of the buffer shall rest with the
developer (subdivider) regardless of any pass through agreement. The city
building inspector shall not issue a certificate of occupancy for any of the
affected lots until the buffer as required within this section is properly
installed per approved plan specifications. (Ord. 1007, 5-26-1992; Ord. 2453,
11-16-2020)
030-18: RIGHT OF WAY EASEMENTS:
Appropriate right of way easements for accommodating public utilities shall be
established with the platting of any and all parcels within the Glen Oaks PUD.
Maintenance responsibilities and city ingress/egress rights, including pass
gate clearance, to said utilities shall be granted with any and all plats
submitted. (Ord. 1007, 5-26-1992)
030-19: FIRE PROTECTION:
Specific fire protection and access agreements shall be accomplished with the
platting of any and all parcels within the Glen Oaks PUD. (Ord. 1007, 5-26-
1992)
030-20: FULLER ROAD ALIGNMENT:
The owner, on behalf of itself, its successors and assigns agrees to commit to
the costs associated with the establishment of an acceptable future alignment
of Mills Civic Parkway, as approved by the city engineer of the city of West
Des Moines, prior to the platting and/or development of parcel I, parcel K-1,
parcel J and parcel K. Said cost shall be reasonable and equitable in
comparison to benefits derived by other properties receiving similar benefits.
(Ord. 1007, 5-26-1992; Ord. 2453, 11-16-2020)
030-21: INTERSTATE 35 BUFFER PARK:
A minimum one hundred foot (100') buffer park shall be established along the
eastern border of the Glen Oaks PUD adjacent to Interstate 35. Said buffer park
shall provide reasonable noise and visual screening/buffering of negative
aspects of Interstate 35 on land within the Glen Oaks PUD. Prior to development
within any part of any parcel within the Glen Oaks PUD, a buffer plan shall be
reviewed and approved by the city which illustrates that use of berms and tree
plantings to effectively buffer the residential uses within the Glen Oaks PUD
from Interstate 35. The minimum one hundred foot (100') buffer park may be
reduced in distance upon the demonstration of effective and adequate noise and
visual screening/buffering of Interstate 35 from residential uses as approved
on the required buffer plan. Internal streets may be permitted within the
buffer park upon review and approval by the city. (Ord. 1007, 5-26-1992)
030-22: DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENT:
It is hereby acknowledged that a development agreement, dated December 21,
1991, has been executed between the owner and the city regarding the provision
of city services and utilities to the Glen Oaks PUD property. Said agreement is
made a part of this ordinance and shall be binding upon the owner, their heirs,
successors, assigns, and transferees of the parties hereto. (Ord. 1007, 5-26-
1992)
030-99: LEGISLATIVE HISTORY:
Ord. 1007, 5-26-1992; Ord. 1043, 1-4-1993; Ord. 1047, 4-26-1993; Ord. 1063, 10-
11-1993; Ord. 1156, 10-9-1995; Ord. 1568, 1-20-2004; Ord. 1720, 12-18-2006;
Ord. 2451, 11-16-2020; Ord. 2453, 11-16-2020.
PUD #31
ASHWORTH CORRIDOR
SECTION:
031-01: Legal Description
031-02: Sketch Plan
031-03: Conditions
031-04: Master Planning Required
031-05: Signage Regulation
031-06: Buffering
031-07: Pedestrian Orientation
031-08: All Areas To Be Platted
031-09: Stormwater Management
031-10: Street Rights Of Way
031-11: Special Assessments
031-12: Building Restrictions, Easements And Covenants
031-13: Soil Test Requirements
031-14: Definition
031-15: Violations And Penalties
031-99: Legislative History
031-01: LEGAL DESCRIPTION:
Lot 1, Woodland Avenue Plat 1 and lots 1 through 11 Villas of Ashworth Glen,
Lots 1 through 14 Woodland Lake, and Outlot A Ashworth Glen Acquisition Plat
filed at Book 799 Page 960, all plats now in and forming a part of the City of
West Des Moines, Dallas County, Iowa.
(Ord. 2101, 7-13-2015)
031-02: SKETCH PLAN:
On file with the community development department of the city and made a part
of this rezoning approval for concept description and delineation is the sketch
plan document for the Ashworth Corridor PUD planned unit development. It is
recognized, minor shifts or modifications to general plan layout may be
necessary and compatible with the need to acquire workable street patterns,
grades and usable building sites, but the general plan layout, including the
relationship of uses to each other and the relationship of land use to the
general plan framework, and development requirements shall be used as the
implementation guide.
Nothing contained within this ordinance shall prohibit the development of the
individual parcels within the PUD independent of one another, so long as the
minimum city code requirements are met. (Ord. 1031, 10-12-1992)
031-03: CONDITIONS:
Whereas, section 6 of ordinance 497, amended ordinance 430, by creating article
XX(a), PUD planned unit development district, establishes certain regulations
and guidelines pertaining to accompanying information required on plat and site
plan documents. Now, therefore, the following conditions, restrictions, and
regulations are adopted as part of this approval, to wit:
   A.   General Conditions: The sketch plan incorporates multi-family
residential and church/school land uses which shall be distributed by area,
types and location according to the sketch plan and this ordinance.
In addition, the following general development criteria shall be integrated
into and made a part of this planned unit development and sketch plan approval.
      1.   All subdivisions, public streets, public street rights of way and
general development shall adhere to the standards and design criteria set forth
in the West Des Moines subdivision ordinance pertaining thereto, unless
otherwise stated within this ordinance.
      2.   Unless otherwise specified herein, the development of the Ashworth
Corridor PUD shall comply with article XXII (off street parking and loading
areas), article XXIII (open space requirements), and article XXV (site plans)
of the West Des Moines zoning ordinance. For the purposes of the application of
article XX(a), planned unit development district, section 6. Final plan
submittal, the submittal of final plan documents for any parcel, or part of any
parcel of the Ashworth Corridor PUD within one year after approval and
publication of this ordinance, shall be considered to satisfy the terms and
requirements of section 6.
      3.   In all areas within a 100-year frequency flood hazard zone, or
adjoining drainageways, and detention ponding areas involving potential flood
hazards, no building shall be erected which has a lowest floor, including
basements, less than one foot (1') above the determined level of the 100-year
frequency flood event, and no building shall be erected within twenty five feet
(25') of any easement or property boundary of a major drainageway, stormwater
detention basin or pond.
      4.   The developer, their successors and/or assigns, if any, shall pay
all planning, engineering, and construction costs for the interior development
of the planned unit development, as required by this ordinance, or the
subdivision ordinance of the city of West Des Moines, Iowa, for all streets,
storm sewers, sanitary sewers, drainageway improvements, detention basins,
water mains, buffers and other improvements within parcels 1, 2, 3, and 4 of
the Ashworth Corridor PUD as may be required by the subdivision ordinance,
zoning ordinance or this ordinance.
   B.   Land Use Design Criteria: In addition to the general conditions as
stated in subsection A of this section, the following land use design criteria
shall apply to the development areas designated by parcel on the sketch plan.
The sketch plan document which is made a part of this rezoning action per
section
031-02 of this ordinance, delineates four (4) parcels of the PUD as parcels 1,
2, 3, and 4 for application of specific standards of land use and development
regulations. The following development standards and use regulations shall
apply to each of the individual parcels as applicable. (Ord. 1031, 10-12-1992)
      1.   Parcel 1: All general use regulations and provisions set forth in
title 9, "Zoning", of the city code for residential high-density (RH-16) shall
apply to any development proposal for the property within parcel 1 as shown on
the sketch plan, except as shall be further provided herein. This parcel shall
encompass a maximum of seven and one-half (7.5) acres.
         a.   Permitted Uses: Permitted uses within parcel 1 shall include:
All uses permitted in the residential high-density zoning district and offices
as an ancillary use St. Francis Of Assisi Church or School. (Ord. 2101, 7-13-
2015)
         b.   Development Standards: A minimum thirty foot (30') buffer park
shall be established along the northern property line and the western property
line of this parcel to effectively buffer and screen the uses on this parcel
from adjacent properties. Screening shall be accomplished through the design
incorporation of landscaping such as planting screens of trees and shrubs which
have year round effectiveness and the use of natural and manmade grade
differences, specifically berming. Said landscape improvements shall be
approved and constructed prior to the occupancy of any use within parcel 1 of
the Ashworth Corridor PUD. Any and all buildings, including garages, shall
maintain a minimum thirty foot (30') setback from any public street right of
way.
A minimum fifteen foot (15') parking lot and internal drive setback shall be
maintained from adjoining properties if said parking lot is not part of a
common parking lot jointly used by adjoining properties. Parking lots shall be
sufficiently screened, as practical, from public street view and surrounding
properties with the use of landscaping, earth berming, and/or wall structures
as may be required by the city. (Ord. 1031, 10-12-1992; amd. Ord. 2101, 7-13-
2015)
         c.   Architecture: Architectural design for multi-family buildings
shall attempt to express a creative presentation of exterior building
materials, exterior details and texture, treatment of windows and doors, and
use of angles and multiplicity of planes within the wall and roof design to
lessen the plainness of appearance which can be characteristic of large
residential buildings. The use of brick shall be incorporated into the building
architecture on all sides of the structure, unless the city council of West Des
Moines, after review by the planning and zoning commission of West Des Moines
shall determine that the use of alternate building materials, enhances the
physical appearance and accomplishes a compatible structure with the
residential uses in the neighborhood. The roof design of any and all buildings
within parcel 1 shall be pitched or gabled and reflect a residential appearance
in nature.
         d.   Pedestrian Access: Particular emphasis shall be placed upon
providing pedestrian access, if possible, to the office and commercial areas
adjoining the property to encourage the tenants of the development to utilize
alternative modes of transportation. Consideration should also be included in
the site plan design addressing pedestrian access to the future park site to
the east of the Ashworth Corridor PUD.
      2.   Parcel 2: Parcel 2, as shown on the sketch plan on file with the
community development department, is proposed to be developed as a church,
primary school, community center and gym. Article XXVII, section 1-F, of
ordinance 430 sets forth the provisions allowing churches and associated uses
and schools within any district by the issuance of a special use permit. Any
other uses within parcel 2 shall comply with all general use regulations,
performance standards and provisions set forth in article XII-A of ordinance
430 for the R-5 multi- family residential district (medium density) district of
the city of West Des Moines, unless specified otherwise herein. parcel 2 shall
be limited to a maximum fifteen (15) acres in size.
         a.   Development Standards: No building or structure of any kind shall
be located closer than fifty feet (50') from the right of way of Ashworth Road
and thirty feet (30') from any internal public streets. All parking lots and
associated driveways shall be set back a minimum twenty feet (20') from
Ashworth Road and fifteen feet (15') from any internal public right of way. All
parking lots and/or associated driveways shall be effectively buffered and
screened from view from public streets and adjoining property, as practical.
Screening shall be accomplished through the design incorporation of landscaping
such as planting screens of trees and shrubs which have year round
effectiveness and the use of natural and manmade grade differences,
specifically berming.
Prior to any development within parcel 2, a master plan shall be prepared
showing the ultimate build-out of the site. The master plan shall show the
location of proposed buildings, parking lots and associated drives, pedestrian
circulation system for all development within parcel 2, in order to assure
workable traffic patterns, pedestrian circulation, grades and usable building
sites. Parcel 2 shall be limited to a maximum of two (2) ingress/egress drives
accessing directly onto Ashworth Road.
         b.   Architecture Requirements: The architecture of the development on
parcel 2 shall be acceptable to the city and accomplished in a manner
compatible with the adjoining residential uses in the neighborhood. All
buildings within parcel 2 shall be consistent in architectural design and use
of materials and organized utilizing a compatible planned open space, landscape
plan, and parking plan to serve and maintain a unified master plan concept.
(Ord. 1031, 10-12-1992)
      3.   Parcel 3: All general use regulations and provisions set forth in
title 9, "Zoning", of the city code for residential high-density (RH-16) shall
apply to any development proposal for the property within parcel 3 as shown on
the sketch plan, except as shall be further provided herein. This parcel shall
encompass a maximum of twelve (12) acres. (Ord. 2101, 7-13-2015)
         a.   Permitted Uses: (Rep. by Ord. 2101, 7-13-2015)
         b.   Development Standards: A minimum thirty foot (30') buffer park
shall be established along the northern property line and the eastern property
line of this parcel to effectively buffer and screen the uses on this parcel
from adjacent properties. Screening shall be accomplished through the design
incorporation of landscaping such as planting screens of trees and shrubs which
have year round effectiveness and the use of natural and manmade grade
differences, specifically berming. Said landscape improvements shall be
approved and constructed prior to the occupancy of any use within parcel 3 of
the Ashworth Corridor PUD. Any and all buildings, including garages, shall
maintain a minimum thirty foot (30') setback from any public street right of
way.
A minimum fifteen foot (15') parking lot and internal drive setback shall be
maintained from adjoining properties if said parking lot is not part of a
common parking lot jointly used by adjoining properties. Parking lots shall be
sufficiently screened, as practical, from public street view and surrounding
properties with the use of landscaping, earth berming, and/or wall structures
as may be required by the city. A minimum one hundred foot (100') setback for
all buildings exceeding two (2) stories or thirty feet (30') in height from the
private property immediately east of parcel 3. (Ord. 1031, 10-12-1992; amd.
Ord. 2101, 7-13-2015)
         c.   Identification And Preservation Of Existing Tree Cover: As a part
of the site plan development for parcel 3, all trees that are in excess of
twenty inches (20") in caliper, as measured twelve inches (12") above the
existing grade, shall be noted with the variety of tree and the size, on a
separate page of the site plan submittal. The trees to be saved and the trees
to be removed shall also be noted on this page of the site plan submittal.
Wherever practical, every effort should be made during the design and
construction of the project to protect and preserve the mature trees on the
site. No grading shall be permitted on parcel 3 until the site plan has been
approved by the city council and released by staff.
         d.   Architecture: Architectural design for multi-family buildings
shall attempt to express a creative presentation of exterior building
materials, exterior details and texture, treatment of windows and doors, and
use of angles and multiplicity of planes within the wall and roof design to
lessen the plainness of appearance which can be characteristic of large
residential buildings. The use of brick shall be incorporated into the building
architecture on all sides of the structure, unless the city council of West Des
Moines, after review by the planning and zoning commission of West Des Moines
shall determine that the use of alternate building materials, enhances the
physical appearance and accomplishes a compatible structure with the
residential uses in the neighborhood. The roof design of any and all buildings
within parcel 3 shall be pitched or gabled and reflect a residential appearance
in nature.
         e.   Pedestrian Access: Particular emphasis shall be placed upon
providing pedestrian access, if possible, to the office and commercial areas
adjoining the property to encourage the tenants of the development to utilize
alternative modes of transportation. Consideration should also be included for
pedestrian access to the future park site to the east of the Ashworth Corridor
PUD.
      4.   Parcel 4: All general use regulations, performance standards and
provisions set forth in article XII-A of ordinance 430 for the R-5 multi-family
residential district (medium-density) shall apply to any development proposal
for all property within parcel 4 as shown on the sketch plan of the Ashworth
Corridor PUD, unless specifically noted otherwise as a part of this ordinance.
This area shall include a maximum of eleven (11) acres and be restricted to
one-family detached, one-family attached, or townhouse development with no more
than four (4) dwelling units side by side in a row on any side of a building
and a maximum of eighty eight (88) dwelling units permitted within parcel 4.
Any single-family detached development within parcel 4 shall comply with the
minimum lot frontage and setback requirements set forth in article VII for R-
1 single-family residential district.
         a.   Development Standards: A minimum thirty foot (30') buffer park
shall be established along the private property immediately east of parcel 4 to
effectively buffer and screen parking areas and/or associated uses from view.
Screening shall be accomplished through the design incorporation of landscaping
such as planting screens of trees and shrubs which have year round
effectiveness and the use of natural and manmade grade differences,
specifically berming. No structure shall be located closer than fifty feet
(50') from the right of way of Ashworth Road and private property east of
parcel 4 with the exception of garages, which shall be limited to a minimum
thirty foot (30') setback from the private property east of parcel 4. No garage
units shall be allowed to be located between any residential dwelling units
fronting on Ashworth Road and the Ashworth Road right of way line. However,
attached garages shall be permitted provided that they meet the minimum fifty
foot (50') setback. No building shall exceed two (2) stories or thirty feet
(30') in height. Parking lots and associated drive shall be setback a minimum
twenty feet (20') from Ashworth Road. Whereas the city desires to maintain the
residential character of Ashworth Road, any multi-family residential dwelling
unit that fronts on Ashworth Road shall be oriented with the front door
appearance facing onto Ashworth Road to present the appearance of a large
estate dwelling. No structure shall be located closer than ten feet (10') from
the west boundary line of parcel 4.
A minimum fifteen foot (15') parking lot and internal drive setback shall be
maintained from adjoining properties if said parking lot is not part of a
common parking lot jointly used by adjoining properties. Parking lots shall be
sufficiently screened, as practical, from public street view and surrounding
properties with the use of landscaping, earth berming, and/or wall structures
as may be required by the City.
         b.   Identification And Preservation Of Existing Tree Cover: As a part
of the site plan development for Parcel 4, all trees that are in excess of
twenty inches (20") in caliper, as measured twelve inches (12") above the
existing grade, shall be noted with the variety of tree and the size, on a
separate page of the site plan submittal. The trees to be saved and the trees
to be removed shall also be noted on this page of the site plan submittal.
Wherever practical, every effort should be made during the design and
construction of the project to protect and preserve the mature trees on the
site. No grading shall be permitted on Parcel 4 until the site plan has been
approved by the City Council and released by staff.
         c.   Architecture: Architectural design for multi-family buildings
shall attempt to express a creative presentation of exterior building
materials, exterior details and texture, treatment of windows and doors, and
use of angles and multiplicity of planes within the wall and roof design to
lessen the plainness of appearance which can be characteristic of large
residential buildings. The use of brick shall be incorporated in to the
building architecture on all sides of the structure, unless the City Council of
West Des Moines, after review by the Planning and Zoning Commission of West Des
Moines shall determine that the use of alternate building materials, enhances
the physical appearance and accomplishes a compatible structure with the
residential uses in the neighborhood. The roof design of any and all buildings
within Parcel 4 shall be pitched or gabled and reflect a residential appearance
in nature.
         d.   Pedestrian Access: Particular emphasis shall be placed upon
providing pedestrian access, if possible, to the office and commercial areas
adjoining the property to encourage the tenants of the development to utilize
alternative modes of transportation. Consideration should also be included for
pedestrian access to the future park site to the east of the Ashworth Corridor
PUD. (Ord. 1031, 10-12-1992)
031-04: MASTER PLANNING REQUIRED:
Prior to development within any part of any parcel, a master plan shall be
prepared showing the location of new public streets within or adjoining the
parcel in order to assure workable street patterns, grades and usable building
sites. (Ord. 1031, 10-12-1992)
031-05: SIGNAGE REGULATION:
No pole sign, as defined by the West Des Moines City Sign Code, shall be
incorporated into any development within the Ashworth Corridor PUD. Ground sign
standards shall be used for the construction of freestanding signage as set
forth within the West Des Moines City Sign Code. Advertising or promotional
temporary signage attached to exterior windows or walls including exposed neon
lights visible from the exterior of the building shall be prohibited, except as
permitted with a temporary sign permit. (Ord. 1031, 10-12-1992)
031-06: BUFFERING:
Adequate treatment or buffering of negative aspects of all buildings (loading
docks, garbage dumpsters and HVAC mechanical units) from any public street and
adjoining properties shall be required. Buildings shall not be located and
designed to expose loading docks or doors, loading areas or the rear of
buildings to public streets. Buffering requirements and provisions of Article
XXIV, Buffers Required, of the City Zoning Ordinance shall be applied to
development within the Ashworth Corridor PUD, except if other specific
requirements are set forth elsewhere within this Ordinance. (Ord. 1031, 10-12-
1992)
031-07: PEDESTRIAN ORIENTATION:
Pedestrian access shall be provided from all parcels to permit and encourage
pedestrian movement between parcels and to employment and commercial centers in
the area versus utilizing motorized vehicles for access. (Ord. 1031, 10-12-
1992)
031-08: ALL AREAS TO BE PLATTED:
Prior to, or in conjunction with development of any portion of the PUD, said
area shall be platted in accordance with the City's Subdivision Ordinance to
delineate within a plat the parcel to be developed or sold separately or any
portion thereof. (Ord. 1031, 10-12-1992)
031-09: STORM WATER MANAGEMENT:
There shall be submitted to, and approved by the West Des Moines City Engineer,
a complete storm water management plan for each parcel of the PUD to be
prepared by the developer prior to development within each of the individual
parcels of the PUD and for all storm sewer and drainage systems within the PUD.
(Ord. 1031, 10-12-1992)
031-10: STREET RIGHTS OF WAY:
Adequate street right of way shall be provided for the construction,
reconstruction and widening of adjoining streets adjacent to, or within the
Ashworth Corridor PUD. Said right of way shall be dedicated to the city at the
time of platting. (Ord. 1031, 10-12-1992)
031-11: SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS:
The property may be subject to future area wide assessments, including, but not
limited to, the reconstruction, construction, widening, and/or improvements to
Ashworth Road and Jordan Creek Parkway, as shall be permitted and limited by
the laws of the state of Iowa to be observed by municipalities.
   A.   Water Service Improvements: With respect to any assessments by the city
of West Des Moines of special benefits conferred upon parcels 1, 2, 3 and 4 of
the property, or any portion hereof, as a result of the design and construction
of potential area wide water service improvements as determined by engineering
studies approved by the city of West Des Moines, the owner, on behalf of itself
and its successors and assigns (collectively by the "owner"), agrees that such
assessments may be spread against all of said parcels, as said parcels exist on
the date of assessment, by the city of West Des Moines on an area basis. (Ord.
1031, 10-12-1992)
031-12: BUILDING RESTRICTIONS, EASEMENTS AND COVENANTS:
Where the city deems appropriate, the owner and/or developer shall on each
particular area, adopt building restrictions, easements and/or covenants in a
form approved by the city. (Ord. 1031, 10-12-1992)
031-13: SOIL TEST REQUIREMENTS:
If required, owner and/or the developer shall be responsible for supplying to
the city, information prepared by a qualified soils engineering firm,
indicating that existing soil conditions are adequate in stability and strength
for construction of public and private improvements. If determined by the soils
engineering firm that adequate soils conditions do not exist, the owner and/or
developer shall indicate what measures shall be taken to achieve adequate soil
strength and stability for both public and private improvements. (Ord. 1031,
10-12-1992)
031-14: DEFINITION:
The term "developer", for the purpose of this ordinance, shall mean any person,
individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation, estate, trust, entity,
or agent of same acting or proposing to subdivide land or develop a parcel of
land for the construction of a building or buildings. (Ord. 1031, 10-12-1992)
031-15: VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES:
Any person who violates the provisions of this ordinance upon conviction shall
be punished as set forth in section 1-4-1 of the city code. (Ord. 2101, 7-13-
2015)
031-99: LEGISLATIVE HISTORY:
Ord. 1031, 10-12-1992; Ord. 2101, 7-13-2015.
PUD #32
RYUN FARM
SECTION:
032-01: Legal Description
032-02: Sketch Plan
032-03: Conditions
032-04: Master Planning Required
032-05: Paving Of Prairie View Drive
032-06: All Areas To Be Platted
032-07: Storm Water Management
032-08: Street Rights-Of-Way
032-09: Special Assessments
032-99: Legislative History
032-01: LEGAL DESCRIPTION:
The legal description for the Ryun Farm PUD is as follows:
A parcel of land in the NE1/4 Section 18, Township 78 North, Range 25 West of
the 5th P.M., City of West Des Moines, Polk County, Iowa, more particularly
described as follows:
Commencing as a point of reference at the N1/4 corner of said Section 18;
thence N88°52'05"E, 180.00 feet along said north line to the point of
beginning; thence continuing N88°52'05"E, 618.56 feet to a point on the west
right of way (R.O.W.) line of Interstate 35; thence S02°13'23"E, 2123.29 feet
along said west R.O.W. line to a point; thence S02°11'41"E, 318.90 feet along
said west R.O.W. line to a point; thence S27°59'46"W, 434.13 feet to a point;
thence N00°37'51"W, 240.58 feet to a point; thence S88°56'57"W, 659.92 feet to
the center of Sec. 18-78-25; thence N00°38'13"W, 818.28 feet to a point; thence
northeasterly along a curve to the left having a radius of 600.00 feet, an arc
length of 448.07 feet and a chord bearing of N21°23'38"E to a point; thence
N00°00'00"W, 1420.00 feet to the point of beginning and containing 44.25 acres
more or less.
(Ord. 1271, 10-6-1997)
032-02: SKETCH PLAN:
On file with the Community Development Department and made a part of this
rezoning approval for concept description and delineation is the sketch plan
document for the Ryun Farm PUD Planned Unit Development. It is recognized that
minor shifts or realignments of roadways may be necessary and compatible with
the need to acquire workable street patterns, grades and usable building sites,
but the general plan layout, including the relationship of uses to each other
and the relationship of dwelling unit types to the general plan framework,
traffic layout, and development requirements shall be used as the
implementation guide. Wherever conflict occurs between the written text in this
document and the notations on the sketch plan, the written text shall prevail.
The sketch plan is a graphic representation of the property included in the PUD
delineating the approximate location and configuration of the parcels for the
purpose of easier reference for the applicable regulations of this Ordinance.
(Ord. 1271, 10-6-1997)
032-03: CONDITIONS:
Whereas, Title 9 of the West Des Moines City Code includes Chapter 9, Planned
Unit Development District (PUD) and establishes certain regulations and
guidelines pertaining to accompanying information required on a plat and site
plan documents.
   A.   Now, therefore, the following conditions, restrictions, and regulations
are adopted as part of this approval and the following general site plan
criteria shall be integrated into and made a part of the development criteria
for the Ryun Farm PUD, to wit:
      1.   All subdivisions, public streets, public street rights-of-way and
general development shall adhere to the standards and design criteria set forth
in the West Des Moines Subdivision Ordinance and the Des Moines Metropolitan
Design Standards as adopted by the City of West Des Moines pertaining thereto,
unless otherwise stated within this Ordinance.
      2.   Any regulation, standard, provision or requirement that is not
specifically addressed within this document that is regulated elsewhere in the
City Code of West Des Moines, the requirements of the City Code are applicable
and shall be enforced.
      3.   In all areas within a 100-year frequency flood hazard zone, or
adjoining drainageways or detention areas involving potential flood hazards, no
building shall be erected which has a lowest floor, including basements, less
than one foot (1') above the determined level of the 100-year frequency flood
event or floodproofed to the same elevation in accordance with the West Des
Moines Floodplain Ordinance, and no building shall be erected within twenty
five feet (25') of a major drainage, storm water detention basin or pond.
      4.   The developer, their successors and assigns, if any, shall pay all
construction and engineering costs for the interior development of the planned
unit development, in accordance with the current City policies at the time of
development, as required by this Ordinance, the Subdivision Ordinance of the
City of West Des Moines, and the Des Moines Metropolitan Design Standards as
adopted by the City of West Des Moines, for all streets, storm sewers, sanitary
sewers, drainage improvements, detention basins, water mains, buffers and other
improvements within the PUD as may be required.
   B.   Land Use Design Criteria: In addition to the general conditions as
stated in subsection A above, the following land use design criteria shall
apply to the development areas designated by parcel on the sketch plan. The
sketch plan document which is made a part of this rezoning action per Section
032-02 of this Ordinance, delineates three (3) parcels within the PUD as
Parcels A, B and C for application of specific standards of land use and
development regulations.
The Ryun Farm PUD shall incorporate approximately forty five (45.00) acres with
an overall density that shall not exceed fifteen (15) dwelling units per acre
or a maximum of six hundred forty nine (649) dwelling units. The shifting of
densities within the PUD shall be permitted provided that the development of
any parcel in the PUD shall not exceed a density of eighteen (18.0) dwelling
units per acre. The following development standards and use regulations shall
apply to any development within the PUD as applicable.
      1.   Parcel A: All general use regulations, performance standards and
provisions set forth in Title 9, Chapter 5 of the City Code for the RM-12
Residential-Moderate Density District shall apply to any development proposal
for all property within Parcel A as shown on the sketch plan, unless noted
otherwise in this Ordinance.
         a.   Development Standards: A buffer park shall be required along
Prairie View Drive and Interstate 35 and no direct driveway access to
individual lots shall be permitted from Prairie View Drive. No fences or
structures shall be permitted within the buffer park. Prior to development
within any part of Parcel A, a buffer plan shall be reviewed and approved by
the City which illustrates that use of berms and tree plantings in accordance
with the provisions of the City Code, as amended by Ordinance 1073, to
effectively buffer the residential uses from the Interstate and Prairie View
Drive. Differing housing types shall be permitted within the parcel without
being required to provide a buffer park between the differing housing types;
however, the screening of the negative elements of one housing type from
another housing type shall be reviewed during the site plan development review
process and additional landscaping and berming may be required.
Any structures with more than two (2) dwelling units, shall maintain a minimum
building separation of thirty feet (30'). The building separation for single-
family detached and bi-attached single-family shall comply with the minimum
setback regulations as set forth in the RM District.
      2.   Parcels B And C: All general use regulations, performance standards
and provisions set forth in Title 9, Chapter 5 of the City Code for the RH-15
Residential-High Density District of the City of West Des Moines, shall apply
to any development in Parcel B and C, provided however, that no office uses
shall be permitted within this parcel.
         a.   Development Standards: A minimum thirty five foot (35') wide
landscaped buffer park shall be established along right-of-way of Prairie View
Drive and a minimum thirty foot (30') landscaped buffer park shall be
established along the right-of-way of Interstate 35 for the purpose of
screening and buffering the residential units within Parcel B from the negative
impact of these streets. A landscape buffer park shall also be required along
the southern boundary of Parcel C to provide buffering between this parcel and
other adjacent properties with future differing land uses; however there shall
be no buffer requirements between Parcel A and Parcel B of the PUD. No building
on Parcel B shall be located closer than thirty five feet (35') from Parcel A.
The landscaped buffer parks shall incorporate berming and vegetative plantings
to effectively screen and buffer said units from the adjacent street with no
buildings, internal drives, parking areas, fences, or structures of any type,
except permitted signage, shall be allowed within the buffer park. No fences or
structures shall be permitted within the buffer parks. Prior to development
within any part of Parcel B or C, a buffer plan shall be reviewed and approved
by the City which illustrates the use of berms and tree plantings in accordance
with the provisions of the City Code, as amended by Ordinance 1073.
No building taller than two (2) stories in height shall be located closer than
one hundred feet (100') to the public street right-of-way of Prairie View
Drive. The maximum height of any building within Parcel B and C shall be forty
five feet (45').
         b.   Architecture Requirements: The architecture of multiple-family
buildings within Parcel B and C shall be acceptable to the City and
accomplished in a manner compatible with the adjoining residential uses in the
neighborhood. Architectural design for multi-family buildings shall include
some brick features on all sides of the building and shall attempt to express a
creative presentation of exterior building materials, exterior details and
texture, treatment of windows and doors, and use of angles and multiplicity of
planes within the wall and roof design to lessen the plainness of appearance
which can be characteristic of large residential buildings. (Ord. 1271, 10-6-
1997)
032-04: MASTER PLANNING REQUIRED:
Prior to development within any part of any parcel, a master plan shall be
prepared showing the location of new public streets within or adjoining the
parcel in order to assure workable street patterns, grades and usable building
sites, throughout the PUD. (Ord. 1271, 10-6-1997)
032-05: PAVING OF PRAIRIE VIEW DRIVE:
Prior to, or in conjunction with development of any portion of the PUD, the
construction of Prairie View Drive, equivalent to thirty one feet (31') back-
to-back paving, shall be required from the northern boundary of the PUD to the
southern line of the proposed development or plat. (Ord. 1271, 10-6-1997)
032-06: ALL AREAS TO BE PLATTED:
Prior to, or in conjunction with development or transfer of ownership of any
portion of the PUD, said area shall be platted in accordance with the City's
Subdivision Ordinance to delineate within a plat, the parcel to be developed or
sold separately or any portion thereof. (Ord. 1271, 10-6-1997)
032-07: STORM WATER MANAGEMENT:
There shall be submitted to, and approved by the West Des Moines City Engineer,
a complete storm water management plan for each parcel of the PUD to be
prepared by the developer prior to development within each of the individual
parcels of the PUD and for all storm sewer and drainage systems within the PUD.
(Ord. 1271, 10-6-1997)
032-08: STREET RIGHTS-OF-WAY:
Adequate street right-of-way in accordance with the comprehensive plan shall be
provided for the construction, reconstruction and widening of adjoining streets
adjacent to, or within the Ryun Farm PUD. Said right-of-way shall be dedicated
to the City at the time of platting. (Ord. 1271, 10-6-1997)
032-09: SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS:
   A.   Prairie View Drive And Fuller Road/George M. Mills Civic Parkway: With
respect to any future assessments by the City of West Des Moines of special
benefits conferred upon Parcels A, B, and C of the property, or any portion
thereof, as a result of the initial paving and widening of that portion of
Prairie View Drive and Fuller Road/George M. Mills Civic Parkway that provides
access to said property, the owner, on behalf of itself and its successors and
assigns (collectively by the "owner"), agrees that such assessments may be
spread against all of said parcels, as said parcels exist on the date of
assessment, by the City of West Des Moines on an area basis.
   B.   Water Main Extension: With respect to any future assessments by the
City of West Des Moines of special benefits conferred upon Parcels A, B, and C
of the property, or any portion thereof, as a result of the construction and
installation of public water mains along Prairie View Drive to serve the area
and said property, the owner, on behalf of itself and its successors and
assigns (collectively by the "owner"), agrees that such assessments may be
spread against all of said parcels, as said parcels exist on the date of
assessment, by the City of West Des Moines on an area basis. (Ord. 1271, 10-6-
1997)
032-99: LEGISLATIVE HISTORY:
Ord. 1097, 8-15-1994; Ord. 1122, 2-27-1995; Ord. 1271, 10-6-1997.
PUD #33
WIRTZ PROPERTY
SECTION:
033-01: Legal Description
033-02: Sketch Plan
033-03: General Conditions
033-04: Master Planning Required
033-05: Double Frontage Lots Abutting South 50th Street And Mills Civic Parkway
033-06: Signage Regulation
033-07: Buffers
033-08: Pedestrian Orientation
033-09: All Areas To Be Platted
033-10: Stormwater Management
033-11: Special Assessments
033-12: Traffic Signals At South 50th Street And Civic Parkway
033-99: Legislative History
033-01: LEGAL DESCRIPTION:
The legal description for the Wirtz Property PUD is as follows:
Fieldstone Plat 3, Villas of Grey Hawk, Grey Hawk Plat 1, Wirtz Commercial Park
Plat No. 1 and Wirtz Commercial Park Plat No. 2, all Official Plats in the City
of West Des Moines, Polk County, Iowa.
(Ord. 1500, 12-9-2002)
033-02: SKETCH PLAN:
Attached hereto and made a part of this rezoning approval, for concept
description and delineation is the Sketch Plan Document for the Wirtz PUD
marked exhibit A. Wherever conflict occurs between the written text in this
document and the notations on the Sketch Plan, the written text shall prevail.
The Sketch Plan is a graphic representation of the property included in the PUD
delineating the approximate location and configuration of the parcels for the
purpose of easier reference for the applicable regulations of this ordinance.
(Ord. 2338, 1-7-2019)
033-03: GENERAL CONDITIONS:
Whereas, title 9 of the West Des Moines City Code includes chapter 9, Planned
Unit Development District (PUD) and establishes certain regulations and
guidelines pertaining to accompanying information required on plat and site
plan documents.
   A.   General Conditions: Now, therefore, the following conditions,
restrictions, and regulations are adopted as part of this approval and the
following general criteria shall be integrated into and made a part of the
development criteria for the Wirtz Property PUD, to wit:
      1.   All subdivisions, public streets, public street rights-of- way and
general development shall adhere to the standards and design criteria set forth
in the West Des Moines subdivision ordinance and the Des Moines metropolitan
design standards as adopted by the City of West Des Moines pertaining thereto,
unless otherwise stated within this ordinance.
      2.   Any regulation, standard, provision or requirement that is not
specifically addressed within this document that is regulated elsewhere in the
City Code of West Des Moines, the requirements of the City Code are applicable
and shall be enforced.
      3.   In all areas within a 100-year frequency flood hazard zone, or
adjoining drainageways, and detention areas involving potential flood hazards,
no building shall be erected which has a lowest floor, including basements,
less than one foot (1') above the determined level of the 100-year frequency
flood event or floodproofed to the same elevation in accordance with the West
Des Moines floodplain ordinance, and no building shall be erected within twenty
five feet (25') of any easement or property boundary of a major drainageway,
stormwater detention basin or pond.
      4.   The developer, their successors and/or assigns, if any, shall pay
all construction and engineering costs for the interior development of the
planned unit development, in accordance with the current City policies at the
time of development as required by this ordinance, or the subdivision ordinance
of the City of West Des Moines, and the Des Moines metropolitan design
standards as adopted by the City of West Des Moines, for all streets, storm
sewers, sanitary sewers, drainage improvements, detention basins, water mains,
buffers and other improvements within the PUD as may be required.
      5.   For those non-residential zoned PUD Parcels, lot sizes less than the
minimum city code required size shall be allowed within the PUD Parcel when the
parcel is preliminary platted demonstrating each parcel is of sufficient size
to accommodate all zoning regulations without requiring a waiver or variance.
   B.   Land Use Design Criteria: In addition to the general conditions as
stated in subsection A above, the following land use design criteria shall
apply to the development areas designated by parcel on the sketch plan. The
sketch plan document which is made a part of this rezoning action per section
033-02 of this ordinance, delineates seven (7) parcels of the PUD as Parcels A,
B, C, D, E-1, E-2 and F for application of specific standards of land use and
development regulations. The following development standards and use
regulations shall apply to each of the individual parcels as applicable.
      1.   Parcel A: All general use regulations, performance standards and
provisions set forth in title 9 for the RM Residential Medium Density District
of the City of West Des Moines shall apply to any development in Parcel A with
Parcel A limited to thirteen (13.0) acres in size.
         a.   Development Standards: This parcel shall encompass a maximum of
one hundred twenty (120) dwelling units and no greater than ten (10) dwelling
units per acre, which shall be developed with residential buildings of no
greater than two (2) stories in height. Design and use of materials for the
construction of any building within Parcel A shall be acceptable to the City,
provided acceptance shall not be unreasonably withheld, and accomplished in a
manner compatible with the adjoining residential uses in the neighborhood.
Architectural design for multi-family buildings shall attempt to express a
creative presentation of exterior building materials, exterior details and
texture, treatment of windows and doors, and use of angles and multiplicity of
planes within the wall and roof design to lessen the plainness of appearance
which can be characteristic of large residential buildings.
RM Residential Medium Density District regulations for lot area, frontage, and
yard requirements shall apply, unless otherwise specified herein. No dwelling
unit shall be located closer than fifty feet (50') to Parcel B or D. Front
setbacks shall be a minimum of thirty feet (30'). Building separation shall be
a minimum of twenty feet (20'). All accessory structures shall meet minimum
setback requirements as set forth in section 9-7-4 of the City Code. Off street
parking lots shall have a minimum fifteen foot (15') setback from internal
public street rights-of-way and minimum thirty foot (30') setback from all
other parcel boundaries including adjacent property to the south. Parking lots
shall be sufficiently screened, as practical, from public street view and
surrounding residential properties with the use of landscaping, earth berming,
and/or wall structures as may be required by the City.
The minimum thirty foot (30') setback/buffer shall include landscaping and
berming to effectively buffer residential uses from adjoining properties and
uses of varying density. Said buffer shall be reviewed and approved during the
site planning stage.
         b.   Architecture Requirements: The use of brick shall be incorporated
into the building architecture on all sides of the structure, unless the City
Council of West Des Moines, after review by the Planning and Zoning Commission
of West Des Moines shall determine that the use of alternate building materials
enhances the physical appearance and accomplishes a compatible structure with
the residential uses in the neighborhood. The roof design of any and all
buildings within Parcel B shall be pitched or gabled and reflect a residential
appearance in nature.
      2.   Parcel B: All general use regulations, performance standards and
provisions set forth in title 9 for the Professional Commerce Park (PCP)
District of the City of West Des Moines, shall apply to any development in
Parcel B with Parcel B being limited to a maximum 21.83 acres in size. Only
two-story office uses shall be allowed within three hundred feet (300') of any
residentially zoned property. No uses, such as hotels or restaurants that are
otherwise allowed in the PCP District, shall be allowed within these three
hundred feet (300').
         a.   Development Standards: Along the property line adjacent to I-35,
buildings five (5) stories (maximum of 60 feet) or lower shall be allowed a
thirty foot (30') setback from the property line, while buildings over five (5)
stories (maximum of 60 feet) shall be required to provide ten (10) additional
feet of setback for each twelve (12) additional feet of height. Parking lot
setbacks from the property line adjacent to I-35 shall be fifteen feet (15').
At the time of site plan or permitted conditional use permit review, the City
will review proposals regarding buffering along I-35 and will require buffering
through landscaping, berming, screenwalls, etc., in order to buffer negative
elements such as service areas, loading areas, parking lots, trash enclosures,
etc.
The thirty foot (30') buffer park along the east and south perimeter of Parcel
B shall be appropriately designed and constructed to include berming,
landscaping, and other design elements for effective screening of parking and
drive areas as well as providing an aesthetically pleasant view. If South 51st
Street is extended southward adjacent to residentially zoned or developed
property, the land between South 51st Street and the property lines of Grey
Hawk plat 1 shall become a buffer park with associated berms and landscaping
with no stormwater detention allowed within the buffer.
         b.   Architecture Requirements: The architecture of buildings within
Parcel B shall be acceptable to the City and accomplished in a manner
compatible with the adjoining residential uses in the neighborhood.
Architectural design for multi-family buildings shall attempt to express a
creative presentation of exterior building materials, exterior details and
texture, treatment of windows and doors, and use of angles and multiplicity of
planes within the wall and roof design to lessen the plainness of appearance
which can be characteristic of large residential buildings.
The use of brick shall be incorporated into the building architecture on all
sides of the structure, unless the City Council of West Des Moines, after
review by the Planning and Zoning Commission of West Des Moines, shall
determine that the use of alternate building materials, enhances the physical
appearance and accomplishes a compatible structure with the residential uses in
the neighborhood. The roof design of any and all buildings within Parcels C and
F shall be pitched or gabled and reflect a residential appearance in nature, or
be otherwise acceptable to the City Council or Board of Adjustment.
      3.   Parcels C And F: All general use regulations, performance standards
and provisions set forth in title 9 of the City Code for the SC Support
Commercial District shall apply to any development proposal for the property
within Parcels C and F as shown on the sketch plan, except as shall be further
provided herein.
         a.   Permitted Uses: Allowed uses shall include all permitted and
permitted conditional uses allowed within the PCP Professional Commerce Park
District and within the SC Support Commercial District and the CMC Community
Commercial District as outlined in the commercial use matrix of title 9, zoning
ordinance, unless noted otherwise within this ordinance. Wherever there is a
conflict between the processing of a particular use in the identified
districts, the more stringent process shall be required. Within Parcels C and
F, the following uses identified as allowed uses in the commercial use matrix
shall be prohibited, unless otherwise noted in this ordinance:
Automotive/boat/vehicle dealers (SIC 551, 552, 555, 556, 557, 559).
Truckstops (SIC 5541).
Auto and home supply stores (SIC 553).
Adult entertainment establishments (part of SIC 5999).
Automobile repair, services, and parking (SIC 75) except car washes.
Recreational vehicle repair services, agricultural equipment repair services,
miscellaneous automotive repair services (part of SIC 7699).
Retail nurseries and garden stores (SIC 526).
Uses with outside displays shall be prohibited except as a temporary use with
the issuance of a temporary use permit or as approved by the City Council as
part of a site plan or permitted conditional use permit.
A maximum of one freestanding fast food eating place with drive-through (SIC
5812) and a maximum of one fast food eating place with drive-through (SIC 5812)
as part of a building that houses another type of permitted use will be allowed
in the Wirtz Property PUD. Drive-throughs shall be screened from public streets
with berming and landscaping to the satisfaction of City Council.
One service station with minor repair (SIC 554) and one automatic car wash (SIC
7542) as an accessory use for a service station or convenience store will be
allowed within the Wirtz Property PUD; provided that the developer provides
sufficient screening through the use of earth berming and landscaping with year
round color to screen the negative aspects of the service islands and/or bays
from the views from public streets and adjoining properties to the satisfaction
of the City Council or Board of Adjustment and provided that the freestanding
car wash is located on the southern half of parcel F and will be processed as a
permitted use. Any overhead doors facing adjacent property or public streets
must be screened with landscaping and berming. Before a site plan for a
freestanding car wash may be approved by the city, a queuing study, completed
by a city approved traffic engineer, shall be submitted and approved by staff
to ensure that adequate stacking room shall be provided for the car wash such
that public streets are not affected by the use and safety is not compromised.
No outdoor storage of tires, batteries, or other automobile parts shall be
allowed. In no case shall the total number of uses that dispense and sell fuel
for motor vehicles exceed two (2).
         b.   Development Standards: Lot area, lot frontage and yard
requirements shall comply with standards of the SC support commercial district,
with the exception of permitting a minimum sixty foot (60') building setback
from South 50th Street and permitting one lot within parcel F to be less than
the minimum sixty thousand (60,000) square foot requirement. Multiple use of a
lot shall comply with SC support commercial district standards with multiple
buildings on a site of minimum lot area being consistent in architectural
design and use of materials and organized utilizing a compatible planned open
space, landscape plan, and parking plan to serve and maintain a unified master
plan concept; multiple buildings separated by parking areas shall not be
considered acceptable if not complying with the SC zoned district's minimum
sixty thousand (60,000) square foot lot area standards with the exception as
previously noted.
Parking lots, internal drives, buildings and/or structures of any kind shall be
set back a minimum of sixty feet (60') from the future Civic Parkway right of
way and a minimum sixty feet (60') for the first one hundred sixty feet (160')
south of the north property line along South 50th Street. Buildings and/or
structures of any kind shall be set back a minimum of sixty feet (60') from any
other roadways adjacent to parcels C and F. A minimum ten foot (10') parking
lot and internal drive setback shall be maintained from adjoining properties if
said parking lot is not part of a common parking lot jointly used by adjoining
properties. A thirty foot (30') building setback and fifteen foot (15') parking
setback shall be allowed on the western property line of parcel C, adjacent to
I-35. At the time of site plan or permitted conditional use permit review, the
city will review proposals regarding buffering along I-35 and will require
buffering through landscaping, berming, screen walls, etc., in order to buffer
negative elements such as service areas, loading areas, parking lots, trash
enclosures, etc. Parking lots shall be sufficiently screened, as practical,
from public street view and surrounding residential properties with the use of
landscaping, earth berming, and/or wall structures as may be required by the
city. Adequate open space, landscape plantings, earth berming and/or other
landscape elements shall be designed and constructed at the southeast corner of
the intersection of Mills Civic Parkway and South 50th Street as agreed to by
the city and developer to complement the open space, landscape plantings, earth
berming and/or other landscape elements which shall also be required at the
other three (3) corners of the intersection of existing Mills Civic Parkway and
South 50th Street to create an attractive and aesthetically pleasing
intersection and entryway from the future Interstate 35 interchange into the
city of West Des Moines. Said landscape improvements shall be approved and
constructed prior to the occupancy of any use within parcel C or F of the Wirtz
Property PUD.
         c.   Architecture: The architectural design of any building shall be
acceptable to the city, provided acceptance shall not be unreasonably withheld,
and all buildings within the parcel shall have as a primary element of the
exterior being fascia glass, face brick, or stone, with all sides of any
building built within parcels C and F consistent in design and use of
materials. No wood, Masonite, visible asphaltic exterior wall, aluminum siding,
nonarchitectural sheet metal, concrete block, or other similar materials shall
constitute a portion of any building exterior, except as a trim material,
unless the city council of West Des Moines, after review by the planning and
zoning commission of West Des Moines shall determine said material when used as
a primary element enhances the physical appearance. The roof design of any and
all buildings within parcels C and F shall be pitched or gabled and reflect a
residential appearance in nature, or be otherwise acceptable to the city
council or board of adjustment.
         d.   Traffic Report: All development within the Wirtz Property PUD
shall comply with the approved traffic report dated November 15, 2002, or as
subsequently amended. Unless otherwise waived, all development within parcel F
must meet the particular requirements as stated in the traffic report, which
include the following:
            (1)   Driveways to parcel F can be located no further north than
the existing Somerfield driveway along South 50th Street and the existing
McDonald's/Kum&Go driveway along South 51st Street.
            (2)   The centerline of the middle access to South 51st Street
shall be aligned with the centerline of the existing access to the west.
            (3)   Any driveway to parcel F from South 51st Street, south of the
existing private street located on the west side of South 51st Street (south of
McDonald's/Kum&Go), shall be located at the south property line of this parcel
to provide a "common" access to both this parcel and lot 1, Grey Hawk plat 1,
or in the case where a common access is not agreeable to the owner of said lot
1, Grey Hawk plat 1, any driveway to this parcel from South 51st Street, south
of the existing private street located on the west side of South 51st Street
(south of McDonald's/Kum&Go), shall be located a minimum distance of one
hundred fifty feet (150') (centerline to centerline) from the existing private
street located on the west side of South 51st Street (south of McDonald's/
Kum&Go).
      4.   Parcels D And E-1: All general use regulations, performance
standards and provisions set forth in title 9 of the city code for the R-
1 single-family residential district of the city of West Des Moines, shall
apply to any development in parcel D or E-1.
         a.   Development Standards: A minimum thirty foot (30') buffer park
easement shall be required for all lots bordering 50th Street with no driveway
access to individual lots permitted from South 50th Street. The minimum thirty
five foot (35') rear yard setback shall be measured from the thirty foot (30')
buffer park easement with no fences or structures permitted within the buffer
park easement. Prior to development within any part of parcels D and E-1, a
buffer plan shall be reviewed and approved by the city which illustrates that
use of berms and tree plantings to effectively buffer the single-family
residential uses along South 50th Street from South 50th Street and projected
uses west of South 50th Street.
      5.   Parcel E-2: All general use regulations, performance standards and
provisions set forth in title 9 of the city code for the PCP, professional
commerce park district of the city of West Des Moines, shall apply to any
development in parcel E-2, except as provided herein. Parcel E-2 shall
encompass a maximum of 4.76 acres.
         a.   Permitted Uses: Uses within parcel E-2 shall be limited to office
use only within three hundred feet (300') of residentially zoned property.
Other uses that are allowed in the PCP district (restaurants, hotels, physical
fitness facilities, etc.) shall be prohibited within these three hundred feet
(300').
         b.   Development Standards: A minimum thirty foot (30') buffer park
with associated berming and landscaping shall be required along South 50th
Street and along the southern boundary of parcel E-2. No buildings or paving
can be placed within these buffer areas. Buildings and/or structures of any
kind shall be set back a minimum of sixty feet (60') from South 50th Street and
from the southern boundary of parcel E-2. Other parking lot setbacks outside of
established buffers shall meet the PCP standard of twenty feet (20') from right
of way lines or remain five feet (5') from property lines, whichever is more
restrictive. Parking lots shall be sufficiently screened, as practical, from
public street view and surrounding residential properties with the use of
landscaping, earth berming, and/or retaining walls as may be required by the
city. A maximum height of two (2) stories shall be allowed for any building
within three hundred feet (300') of any residentially zoned property.
         c.   Architecture: The architecture of buildings within parcel E-
2 shall be acceptable to the city and accomplished in a manner compatible with
the adjoining residential uses in the neighborhood. The scale and massing of
buildings shall convey a residential appearance. Architectural design for
office buildings shall attempt to express a creative presentation of exterior
building materials, exterior details and texture, treatment of windows and
doors, and use of angles and multiplicity of planes within the wall and roof
design to lessen the plainness of appearance. All buildings within parcel E-
2 shall incorporate brick into the building architecture on all sides of the
structure and shall also have a roof design that is compatible with the
existing residential neighborhood, or be otherwise acceptable to the city
council or board of adjustment.
         d.   Traffic Report: All development within the Wirtz Property PUD
shall comply with the approved traffic report dated November 15, 2002, or as
subsequently amended. (Ord. 1500, 12-9-2002; amd. Ord. 1513, 3-3-2003; Ord.
1572, 3-1-2004; Ord. 2338, 1-7-2019; Ord. 2584, 10-16-2023)
033-04: MASTER PLANNING REQUIRED:
Prior to development within any part of any parcel, a master plan shall be
prepared showing the location of new public streets within or adjoining the
parcel in order to assure workable street patterns, grades and usable building
sites. (Ord. 1500, 12-9-2002)
033-05: DOUBLE FRONTAGE LOTS ABUTTING SOUTH 50TH STREET AND MILLS CIVIC
PARKWAY:
All double frontage lots along South 50th Street or the Civic Parkway shall be
developed in accordance with section 6-6.04 subsection 5, paragraph B of the
West Des Moines subdivision ordinance. A complete buffer plan shall be
submitted to and approved by the City as part of the platting process for the
lots. Final responsibility for provision of the buffer shall rest with the
developer (subdivider) regardless of any pass through agreement. The City
building inspector shall not issue an occupancy permit for any of the affected
lots until the buffer as required within this section is properly installed per
approved plan specifications. (Ord. 1500, 12-9-2002)
033-06: SIGNAGE REGULATION:
No pole sign, as defined by the West Des Moines City Sign Code, shall be
incorporated into any development within the Wirtz Property PUD. Ground sign
standards shall be used for the construction of freestanding signage as set
forth within the West Des Moines City Sign Code for the PCP Professional
Commerce Park District for Parcels C and F. All remaining residential parcels
shall have signage regulated as outlined within the West Des Moines City Sign
Code.
For property located within PUD Parcel C, specifically Lots 1 and 2 Wirtz
Commercial Park plat 5, one multi-tenant interstate sign will be allowed with
the execution of an easement on either property which benefits both properties.
If no easement is granted, then neither property meets the minimum interstate
frontage required to allow for an interstate sign.
For Lot 2 Wirtz Commercial Park plat 5, building signage allowance will be
calculated at a rate of one square foot of signage allowed for every one linear
foot of building wall on which the front door is located.
All signage constructed as wall signs on building fascia within Parcels C and F
shall incorporate aesthetic features compatible with the overall character of
the development. All wall signs will be composed of solid individual letters
attached to the building fascia, or individual letters of anodized aluminum,
galvanized metal, illuminated self- contained with translucent plastic faces
set in anodized aluminum returns and trim; panel signs with letters
incorporated or painted upon a panel or wall area shall be prohibited.
Advertising or promotional temporary signage attached to exterior windows or
walls including exposed neon lights visible from the exterior of the building
shall be prohibited. (Ord. 2338, 1-7-2019)
033-07: BUFFERS:
All development within the Wirtz Property PUD shall comply with the buffering
provisions of the buffer ordinance of the West Des Moines City Code. In
situations where this PUD specifies the provision of a buffer park easement,
the building setbacks shall be measured from the easement line. In situations
where this PUD specifies the provision of a buffer park, the buffer may be
included within the setback. (Ord. 1500, 12-9-2002)
033-08: PEDESTRIAN ORIENTATION:
Pedestrian access shall be provided between all parcels to permit and encourage
pedestrian movement between parcels versus utilizing motorized vehicles for
access. (Ord. 1500, 12-9-2002)
033-09: ALL AREAS TO BE PLATTED:
Prior to, or in conjunction with development or transfer of ownership of any
portion of the PUD, said area shall be platted in accordance with the City's
subdivision ordinance to delineate within a plat the parcel to be developed or
sold separately or any portion thereof. (Ord. 1500, 12-9-2002)
033-10: STORMWATER MANAGEMENT:
There shall be submitted to, and approved by the West Des Moines City Engineer,
a complete stormwater management plan for each parcel of the PUD to be prepared
by the developer prior to development within each of the individual parcels of
the PUD and for all storm sewer and drainage systems within the PUD. (Ord.
1500, 12-9-2002)
033-11: SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS:
13.1 Civic Parkway And South 50th Street: With respect to any assessments by
the City of West Des Moines of special benefits conferred upon any parcel of
the property, or any portion thereof, as a result of the initial paving and
widening of that portion of South 50th Street and Civic Parkway adjacent to
said parcels, the owner, on behalf of itself and its successors and assigns
(collectively by the "owner"), agrees that such assessments may be spread
against all of said parcels, as said parcels exist on the date of assessment by
the City of West Des Moines on an area basis.
The foregoing area assessment provisions are subject to the following
provision: Any assessment shall be reasonable and equitable in comparison to
the special benefits for such initial paving and widening assessed against the
property directly across the street from the owner's parcel being assessed, and
in no event shall any payment by the owner exceed one-half (1/2) the cost of
any such initial paving and widening. (Ord. 1500, 12-9-2002)
033-12: TRAFFIC SIGNALS AT SOUTH 50TH STREET AND CIVIC PARKWAY:
The developer, their successors and assigns, if any, shall pay twenty five
percent (25%) of all costs associated with the installation of traffic signals
at South 50th Street and Civic Parkway. A bond in the amount to cover said cost
shall be posted, or an acceptable alternative approved by the City, including
the signing and executing of a petition and waiver for said costs, prior to the
recording of a final plat for the subject site unless the City determines it is
not required at this time. (Ord. 1500, 12-9-2002)
033-99: LEGISLATIVE HISTORY:
Ord. 1086, 4-11-1994; Ord. 1313, 6-29-1998; Ord. 1485, 6-10-2002; Ord. 1500,
12-9-2002; Ord. 1513, 3-3-2003; Ord. 1572, 3-1-2004; Ord. 2338, 1-7-2019; Ord.
2584, 10-16-2023.
PUD #34
BOONE FARM
SECTION:
034-01: Legal Description
034-02: Sketch Plan
034-03: Conditions
034-04: Master Planning Required
034-05: Paving Of Old South 50th Street
034-06: All Areas To Be Platted
034-07: Storm Water Management
034-08: Street Rights-Of-Way
034-09: Special Assessments
034-10: Conservation Easement
034-99: Legislative History
034-01: LEGAL DESCRIPTION:
The legal description for the Boone Farm PUD is as follows:
The S1/2 of the SW1/4 of the NW1/4 and the S1/2 of the SE1/4 of the NW1/4 of
Section 20, Township 78 North, Range 25 West of the 5th P.M., West Des Moines,
Polk County, Iowa,
and
the W1/2 of the SW1/4 of said Section 20, except that part lying southerly of a
line 330 feet radially or normally distant northerly of and parallel to or
concentric with the presently established primary road, No. 90, exclusive of
highway and established road rights of way,
and
Outlot A, Quail Park Plat 2, an Official Plat in West Des Moines, Polk County,
Iowa.
(Ord. 1252, 6-16-1997)
034-02: SKETCH PLAN:
On file with the Community Development Department of the City and made a part
of this rezoning approval for concept description and delineation is the sketch
plan document for the Boone Farm PUD Planned Unit Development. It is
recognized, minor shifts or modifications to general plan layout may be
necessary and compatible with the need to acquire workable street patterns,
grades and usable building sites, but the general plan layout, including the
relationship of uses to each other and the relationship of land use to the
general plan framework, and development requirements shall be used as the
implementation guide. (Ord. 1252, 6-16-1997)
034-03: CONDITIONS:
Whereas, Title 9, Chapter 9, PUD Planned Unit Development District, of the City
Code, establishes certain regulations and guidelines pertaining to accompanying
information required on plat and site plan documents. Now, therefore, the
following conditions, restrictions, and regulations are adopted as part of this
approval, to wit:
   A.   General Conditions: The sketch plan incorporates single-family
residential and multi-family residential land uses which shall be distributed
by area, types and location according to the sketch plan and this Ordinance. In
addition, the following general development criteria shall be integrated into
and made a part of this planned unit development and sketch plan approval.
      1.   All subdivisions, public streets, public street rights-of-way and
general development shall adhere to the standards and design criteria set forth
in the West Des Moines Subdivision Ordinance pertaining thereto, unless
otherwise stated within this Ordinance.
      2.   Unless otherwise specified herein, the development of the Boone Farm
PUD shall comply with Chapter 15 (Off-Street Parking and Loading Areas),
Chapter 3 (General Zoning Provisions), and Chapter 1 (Zoning Administration and
Enforcement) of the West Des Moines City Code. For the purposes of the
application of Chapter 9, Planned Unit Development District, Section 9-9-6,
Final Plan Submittal, the submittal of final plan documents for any parcel, or
part of any parcel within one year after approval and publication of this
Ordinance, shall be considered to satisfy the terms and requirements of Section
9-9-6.
      3.   In all areas within a 100-year frequency flood hazard zone, or
adjoining drainage ways, and detention ponding areas involving potential flood
hazards, no building shall be erected which has a lowest floor, including
basements, less than one foot (1') above the determined level of the 100-year
frequency flood event, and no building shall be erected within twenty five feet
(25') of any easement or property boundary of a major drainage way, storm water
detention basin or pond.
      4.   The developer, their successors and/or assigns, if any, shall pay
all planning, engineering, and construction costs for the interior development
of the planned unit development, as required by this Ordinance, or the
Subdivision Ordinance of the City of West Des Moines, Iowa, for all streets,
storm sewers, sanitary sewers, drainageway improvements, detention basins,
water mains, buffers and other improvements within Parcels A, B, C, C-1, C-2,
E, F and G of the PUD as may be required by the Subdivision Ordinance, Zoning
Ordinance or this Ordinance.
   B.   Land Use Design Criteria: In addition to the general conditions as
stated in subsection A above, the following land use design criteria shall
apply to the development areas designated by parcel on the sketch plan. The
sketch plan document which is made a part of this rezoning action per Section
 034-02 of this Ordinance, delineates nine (9) parcels of the PUD as Parcels A,
B, C, C-1, C-2, D, E, F and G for application of specific standards of land use
and development regulations. The following development standards and use
regulations shall apply to each of the individual parcels as applicable.
      1.   Parcel A: All general use regulations, performance standards and
provisions set forth in Section 9-5-5A of the City Code for the RS Single-
Family Residential District shall apply to any development in Parcel A, except
that the minimum lot size shall not be less than forty thousand (40,000) square
feet.
      2.   Parcel B: All general use regulations, performance standards and
provisions set forth in the City Code for the RS Single-Family Residential
District of the City of West Des Moines, shall apply to any development in
Parcel B, except that the minimum lot size shall not be less than twenty
thousand (20,000) square feet and the minimum lot frontage shall not be less
than one hundred feet (100').
      3.   Parcel C: All general use regulations, performance standards and
provisions set forth in the City Code for the RS Single-Family Residential
District of the City of West Des Moines, shall apply to any development in
Parcel C, except that minimum lot size shall not be less than ten thousand
(10,000) square feet and the minimum lot frontage shall not be less than eighty
feet (80').
         a.   Buffering: A minimum thirty foot (30') buffer park shall be
required for all lots bordering 50th Street and no driveway access to
individual lots shall be permitted from South 50th Street. No fences or
structures shall be permitted within the buffer park. Prior to development
within any part of Parcel C, a buffer plan shall be reviewed and approved by
the City which illustrates that use of berms and tree plantings in accordance
with the provisions of the City Code, as amended by Ordinance 1073, to
effectively buffer the single-family residential uses along South 50th Street
from South 50th Street and projected uses west of South 50th Street.
      4.   Parcel C-1: Any uses within Parcel C-1 shall comply with all general
use regulations, performance standards and provisions set forth in the City
Code for the RS Single-Family Residential District, unless specified otherwise
herein. Parcel C-1 shall be limited to a minimum lot size of twenty thousand
(20,000) square feet. All double-frontage lots shall be required to have a side
yard setback of no less than twenty feet (20') measured from the thirty foot
(30') buffer park easement along South 50th Street. All other lots shall comply
with the standard setback requirements in accordance with the provisions of the
City Code.
         a.   Buffering: A minimum thirty foot (30') buffer park easement shall
be required along South 50th Street and no driveway access shall be permitted
directly onto South 50th Street from Parcel C-1. The minimum required yard
setback shall be measured from the thirty foot (30') buffer park easement with
no fences or structures permitted within the buffer park easement. Prior to
development within any part of Parcel C-1, a buffer plan shall be reviewed and
approved by the City which illustrates that use of berms and tree plantings in
accordance with the provisions of the City Code, as amended by Ordinance 1073,
to effectively buffer the residential uses from South 50th Street. A buffer
park easement shall be recorded at the County prior to the issuance of any
building permits on Parcel C-1.
      5.   Parcel C-2: Any uses within Parcel C-2 shall comply with all general
use regulations, performance standards and provisions set forth in the City
Code for the RS Single-Family Residential District, unless specified otherwise
herein. Parcel C-2 shall be limited to a minimum lot size of fifteen thousand
(15,000) square feet. All double-frontage lots shall be required to have a side
yard setback of no less than twenty feet (20') measured from the thirty foot
(30') buffer park easement along South 50th Street. All other lots shall comply
with the standard setback requirements in accordance with the provisions of the
city code.
         a.   Buffering: A minimum thirty foot (30') buffer park easement shall
be required along South 50th Street and no driveway access shall be permitted
directly onto South 50th Street from parcel C-2. The minimum required yard
setback shall be measured from the thirty foot (30') buffer park easement with
no fences or structures permitted within the buffer park easement. Prior to
development within any part of parcel C-2, a buffer plan shall be reviewed and
approved by the city which illustrates that use of berms and tree plantings in
accordance with the provisions of the city code, as amended by ordinance 1073,
to effectively buffer the residential uses from South 50th Street. A buffer
park easement shall be recorded at the county prior to the issuance of any
building permits on parcel C-2.
      6.   Parcel D: The area contained within parcel D has been dedicated as
right of way for South 50th Street.
      7.   Parcel E: All general use regulations, performance standards and
provisions set forth in the city code for the RS single- family residential
district of the city of West Des Moines shall apply to any development in
parcel E, except that the minimum lot size shall not be less than twenty
thousand (20,000) square feet and the minimum lot frontage shall not be less
than one hundred feet (100').
      8.   Parcel F: All general use regulations, performance standards and
provisions set forth in the city code for the RM medium density residential
district of the city of West Des Moines shall apply to the development of
parcel F with a maximum of two hundred five (205) dwelling units allowed with a
maximum density of eight (8) dwelling units per acre.
         a.   Development Standards: The southern twelve (12) acres may be
developed at a density of up to ten (10) dwelling units per acre with a
transfer of a corresponding number of units deducted from the northern thirteen
and sixty eight hundredths (13.68) acres. If this parcel is developed as
single-family residential then the RS-6 single-family residential standards
shall apply;
A minimum thirty foot (30') buffer park easement shall be required along South
50th Street and the minimum required yard setback shall be measured from the
thirty foot (30') buffer park easement with no fences or structures permitted
within the buffer park easement. Prior to development within any part of parcel
F, a buffer plan shall be reviewed and approved by the city which illustrates
that use of berms and tree plantings in accordance with the provisions of the
city code, as amended by ordinance 1073, to effectively buffer the residential
uses from South 50th Street. A buffer park easement shall be recorded at the
county prior to the recordation of any plat on parcel F.
No individual lot driveway access shall be permitted directly onto South 50th
Street. The layout of streets within parcel F shall be established with the
platting of the property prior to any development.
         b.   Architecture Requirements: The architecture of multiple-family
buildings within parcel F shall be acceptable to the city and accomplished in a
manner compatible with the adjoining residential uses in the neighborhood.
Architectural design for multi-family buildings shall attempt to express a
creative presentation of exterior building materials, exterior details and
texture, treatment of windows and doors, and use of angles and multiplicity of
planes within the wall and roof design to lessen the plainness of appearance
which can be characteristic of large residential buildings. (Ord. 1252, 6-16-
1997)
      9.   Parcel G: All general use regulations, performance standards and
provisions set forth in the city code for the office district shall apply to
any platted lot under two (2) acres. All general use regulations, performance
standards and provisions set forth in the city code for the professional
commerce park district and SIC 805 - nursing and personal care facilities as a
permitted use, shall apply to any platted lot over two (2) acres.
         a.   Prohibited Uses: The following uses shall be prohibited within
parcel G:   SIC 58 eating and drinking places and SIC 701 hotels and motels.
Any uses with drive-through facilities shall be designed to be screened from
the adjacent public street right of way and adjacent residential properties to
minimize the visual impact of the drive-up.
         b.   Height: Buildings within this development shall be no more than
two (2) stories or thirty feet (30') in height.
         c.   Traffic Circulation: The master plan shall include a circulation
element prepared by the developer prior to any development of parcel G showing
the general layout and location of existing and proposed public and private
streets within and adjoining parcel G in order to assure workable street
patterns, grades and usable building sites.
         d.   Buffer Park: A minimum sixty foot (60') buffer park shall be
established adjacent to the right of way of relocated South 50th Street.
Building setbacks shall be measured from right of way lines of South 50th
Street. No structures, other than ground signs shall be allowed within the
buffer park. Parking lots may be located immediately adjacent to the boundary
of the buffer park provided that there is adequate screening and buffering to
minimize the visual impact of the parking areas from the public street right of
way and surrounding properties.
         e.   Architecture: Architecture and use of materials for the
construction of any building within parcel G shall be accomplished in a manner
compatible with residential uses within the neighborhood. The architectural
design shall be acceptable to the city, use of materials shall be principally
brick exterior veneer with compatible coloring and size for the building on the
property and the roof shall be principally of a gable or hip style design. All
heating, ventilation, and air conditioning mechanical units shall be located on
the ground and shall be screened from all adjoining properties and roadways.
All sides of the building shall be compatible in design and use of materials.
         f.   Lighting Plan: At the time of site plan submittal a photometric
lighting plan shall be required that shows the proposed lighting and the
lighting level of the site. The lighting layout should be designed so as to not
negatively impact the surrounding residential properties.
         g.   Signage: No pole sign, as defined by the West Des Moines city
sign code, shall be incorporated into the development; ground sign standards
shall be used for construction of freestanding signage with a maximum of ten
feet (10') in height. All signage constructed as wall signs on the building
fascia shall incorporate individual internally lighted or individual solid
letters and logos, except as may be provided elsewhere herein, and shall be
restricted to no more than the name, address, crest or insignia, occupation or
profession of an occupant of the premises, name of the building, or trademark
of the occupant. Panel signs and exposed neon signage shall be prohibited for
use as wall signs and architectural elements.
         h.   Driveway Access: No individual lot driveway access shall be
permitted directly onto South 50th Street. The layout of streets within parcel
G shall be established with the platting of the property prior to any
development. (Ord. 1571, 2-17-2004)
034-04: MASTER PLANNING REQUIRED:
Prior to development within any part of any parcel, a master plan shall be
prepared showing the location of new public streets within or adjoining the
parcel in order to assure workable street patterns, grades and usable building
sites. In addition, the master plan shall demonstrate building locations,
parking areas, pedestrian elements, etc., which reflect continuity of design
versus piecemeal or incompatible design. Prior to the development of any
portion of parcel G, a traffic element shall be submitted showing how
circulation will provide access to the property to the west. (Ord. 1252, 6-16-
1997)
034-05: PAVING OF OLD SOUTH 50TH STREET:
Prior to, or in conjunction with development of any portion of parcel F and/or
parcel G, the construction of Old South 50th Street, equivalent to thirty one
feet (31') back to back paving, shall be reviewed at the time of platting.
Prior to the recordation of any final plats within parcel F or G, a performance
bond, in favor of the city, shall be required for the costs associated with the
paving of the portion of old South 50th Street adjacent to parcels F and G,
should the owner choose to not pave South 50th Street from the northern
property line of the PUD to the eastern boundary of the property at that time.
(Ord. 1252, 6-16-1997)
034-06: ALL AREAS TO BE PLATTED:
Prior to, or in conjunction with development or transfer of ownership of any
portion of the PUD, said area shall be platted in accordance with the city's
subdivision ordinance to delineate within a plat the parcel to be developed or
sold separately or any portion thereof. (Ord. 1252, 6-16-1997)
034-07: STORM WATER MANAGEMENT:
There shall be submitted to, and approved by the West Des Moines city engineer,
a complete storm water management plan for each parcel of the PUD to be
prepared by the developer prior to development within each of the individual
parcels of the PUD and for all storm sewer and drainage systems within the PUD.
(Ord. 1252, 6-16-1997)
034-08: STREET RIGHTS OF WAY:
Adequate street right of way shall be provided for the construction,
reconstruction and widening of adjoining streets adjacent to, or within the
Boone Farm PUD. Said right of way shall be dedicated to the city at the time of
platting. (Ord. 1252, 6-16-1997)
034-09: SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS:
   A.   Grand Avenue: With respect to any future assessments by the city of
West Des Moines of special benefits conferred upon parcels A, B, C, C-1, C-2,
E, F and G of the property, or any portion thereof, as a result of the initial
paving and widening of that portion of Grand Avenue that provides access to
said property, the owner, on behalf of itself and its successors and assigns
(collectively by the "owner"), agrees that such assessments may be spread
against all of said parcels, as said parcels exist on the date of assessment,
by the city of West Des Moines on an area basis.
   B.   Water Main Extension: With respect to any future assessments by the
city of West Des Moines of special benefits conferred upon parcels A, B, C, C-
1, C-2, E, F and G of the property, or any portion thereof, as a result of the
construction and installation of public water mains along South 50th Street and
Grand Avenue to serve the area and said property, the owner, on behalf of
itself and its successors and assigns (collectively by the "owner"), agrees
that such assessments may be spread against all of said parcels, as said
parcels exist on the date of assessment, by the city of West Des Moines on an
area basis.
The foregoing area assessment provisions are subject to the following
provision: Any assessment shall be reasonable and equitable in comparison to
the special benefits for such initial paving and widening assessed against the
property. (Ord. 1252, 6-16-1997)
034-10: CONSERVATION EASEMENT:
At the time that the property along the drainageway through the property is
platted, all trees that are in excess of twenty inches (20") in caliper, as
measured twelve inches (12") above the existing grade, shall be noted with the
variety of tree and the size, on a separate page of the plat submittal. The
trees to be saved and the trees to be removed shall also be noted on this page
of the site plan submittal. Wherever practical, every effort should be made
during the design and construction of the project to protect and preserve the
mature trees on the site. Conservation easements may need to be established in
order to protect and preserve the tree cover and vegetation within the
conservation easement in a manner which will affect the stability of the areas
of extreme slopes, affect the natural state or wooded nature of the area, and
not permit any construction, placement or erection of buildings or structures,
including satellite dishes and fences, within the conservation easement area,
except decks or patios may encroach into the easement area a maximum of twenty
feet (20'), if said decks or patios are so constructed and placed maintaining
slope stability and preservation of tree cover. A sanitary sewer line will be
allowed within the conservation easement; however, special consideration should
be given in the routing of the sewer line to minimize the damage to those trees
and their root systems within the conservation easement. (Ord. 1252, 6-16-1997)
034-99: LEGISLATIVE HISTORY:
Ord. 1085, 4-11-1994; Ord. 1252, 6-16-1997; Ord. 1520, 3-31-2003; Ord. 1571, 2-
17-2004.
PUD #35
98TH STREET
SECTION:
035-01: Legal Description
035-02: Sketch Plan
035-03: Conditions
035-04: Master Planning Required
035-05: All Areas To Be Platted
035-06: Stormwater Management
035-07: Infrastructure
035-08: Street Rights-Of-Way
035-09: Special Assessments
035-10: Signage Regulation
035-11: Definition
035-12: Violations And Penalties
035-99: Legislative History
035-01: LEGAL DESCRIPTION:
The legal description for the 98th Street PUD is as follows:
That part of Government Lot 3 lying north of the right-of-way of the Union
Pacific Railroad; and, that part of Government Lot 4 lying north of said
Railroad right-of-way and east of West Des Moines 98th Street; and, that part
of Government Lot 6 lying north of said railroad right-of-way, all in Section
3, Township 78 North, Range 26 West of the 5th P.M., Dallas County, Iowa.
(Ord. 1277, 11-17-1997)
035-02: SKETCH PLAN:
Attached hereto and made a part of this rezoning approval, for concept
description and delineation is the sketch plan document for the 98th Street PUD
marked exhibit A. Wherever conflict occurs between the written text in this
document and the notations on the sketch plan, the written text shall prevail.
The sketch plan is a graphic representation of the property included in the PUD
delineating the approximate location and configuration of the parcels for the
purpose of easier reference for the applicable regulations of this ordinance.
(Ord. 2286, 3-19-2018)
035-03: CONDITIONS:
Whereas, title 9, chapter 9, PUD Planned Unit Development District, of the City
Code, establishes certain regulations and guidelines pertaining to accompanying
information required on plat and site plan documents. Now, therefore, the
following conditions, restrictions, and regulations are adopted as part of this
approval, to wit:
   A.   General Conditions: The sketch plan incorporates community commercial
and manufactured housing (medium density) land uses which shall be distributed
by area, types and location according to the sketch plan and this ordinance. In
addition, the following general development criteria shall be integrated into
and made a part of this planned unit development and sketch plan approval:
      1.   All subdivisions, public streets, public street rights-of-way and
general development shall adhere to the standards and design criteria set forth
in the West Des Moines subdivision ordinance and the Des Moines metropolitan
design standards as adopted by the City of West Des Moines pertaining thereto,
unless otherwise stated within this ordinance.
      2.   Any regulation, standard, provision or requirement that is not
specifically addressed within this document that is regulated elsewhere in the
City Code of West Des Moines, the requirements of the City Code shall still be
enforced.
      3.   In all areas within a 100-year frequency flood hazard zone, or
adjoining drainageways or detention areas involving potential flood hazards, no
building shall be erected which has a lowest floor, including basements, less
than one foot (1') above the determined level of the 100-year frequency flood
event or floodproofed to the same elevation in accordance with the West Des
Moines floodplain ordinance, and no building shall be erected within twenty
five feet (25') of any major drainage, stormwater detention basin or pond.
      4.   The developer, their successors and assigns, if any, shall pay all
construction and engineering costs for the interior development of the planned
unit development, in accordance with the current City policies at the time of
development, as required by this ordinance, the subdivision ordinance of the
City of West Des Moines, and the Des Moines metropolitan design standards as
adopted by the City of West Des Moines, for all streets, storm sewers, sanitary
sewers, drainage improvements, detention basins, water mains, buffers and other
improvements within the PUD as may be required. (Ord. 1277, 11-17-1997)
   B.   Land Use Design Criteria: In addition to the general conditions as
stated in subsection A of this section, the following land use design criteria
shall apply to the development areas designated by parcel on the sketch plan.
The sketch plan identifies four (4) parcels of the PUD as Parcels A, B, C and D
for application of specific standards of land use and development regulations.
The following development standards and use regulations shall apply to each of
the individual parcels as applicable.
Each development site in the PUD is required to have two (2) access locations
for emergency services that are distanced apart according to the West Des
Moines Fire Code. The site plan for the original PUD Parcel C, now to be split
creating a new Parcel C and a new Parcel D, provided a roadway access location
in the southwest corner of what is now PUD Parcel D as a continuation of the
mobile home park development planned for PUD Parcel C. With the change in
zoning contained herein and the predictable change in development of new PUD
Parcel C, the planned access at the southeast corner shall either be extended
to Bishop Drive or 98th Street prior to or in conjunction with the development
of new PUD Parcel C. A cross access ingress/egress easement will be required to
enable the free access of vehicles between the two (2) PUD parcels. This access
shall be provided within one hundred eighty (180) days of the adoption of this
PUD, unless an alternative time frame is approved by the City Council. (Ord.
2286, 3-19-2018)
      1.   Parcel A And B: All general use regulations and provisions set forth
in title 9, Zoning, of the West Des Moines City Code for the CMC Community
Commercial District shall apply to any development proposal for all property
within Parcels A and B as shown on the sketch plan of the 98th Street PUD,
unless noted otherwise in this ordinance. (Ord. 1277, 11-17-1997)
         a.   Development Standards: Allowed uses shall include all permitted
and permitted conditional (Pc) uses within the CMC Community Commercial
District. All building heights and setbacks within Parcels A and B shall be in
accordance with the setback and bulk density regulations chapter of the West
Des Moines zoning ordinance, except for Parcel A where the front yard setback
along Bishop Drive shall be eighty seven feet (87'). All parking lot setbacks
within Parcels A and B shall be in accordance with the off street parking and
loading chapter of the West Des Moines zoning ordinance. The minimum required
open space in these parcels shall be twenty five percent (25%) of the project
area and all parking areas shall include landscaped areas, islands, screens,
etc., equal to not less than ten percent (10%) of the total paved area and
associated drives. Such parking lot landscaped area shall be in addition to the
open space requirements for the project area. Landscaped islands within the
parking area shall have ground cover of grass (i.e., sod), shrubs or other
acceptable living plant life, unless an alternate ground cover is specifically
approved as part of the site plan review by the City. No parking space shall be
greater than seventy five feet (75') from a landscaped open space with a
minimum area of two hundred fifty (250) square feet. The narrowest dimension of
a parking lot island shall not be less than five feet (5'). (Ord. 2077, 12-29-
2014)
Drive-throughs, except grocery pick up drive, banks, dry cleaners and
drugstores with appropriate screening and buffering, shall be prohibited in
these parcels. As a part of the review of a site plan or permitted conditional
use permit submitted for any allowed drive-through facilities, the property
owner/developer must demonstrate through design and screening that the proposed
drive-through facility will not negatively impact the surrounding properties or
create traffic congestion in the area. All allowed drive-through facilities
shall be designed to be screened from the public right-of-way through the use
of architectural features, earth berming and landscaping, to minimize the
visual impact of the drive-through.
Primary access should not be taken off local residential streets, but rather
off of the shared entrance drive between Parcels A and B or 94th and 98th
Streets. Direct access to University Avenue shall be limited to right in/right
out only, and shall be reviewed at the time of site plan and/or permitted
conditional use permit submittal.
         b.   Architecture: These parcels shall be developed with each building
compatible in design and use of materials so as to appear as a single unified
development. The architectural design of any building shall be acceptable to
the City and all buildings within the parcel shall have as a primary element of
the exterior being brick, with all sides of any building built within the
parcel consistent in design and use of materials. No wood, masonite, aluminum
siding, nonarchitectural sheet metal, concrete block, or other similar
materials shall constitute a portion of any building except as a trim material,
unless the City Council of West Des Moines, after having received a
recommendation from the Planning and Zoning Commission of West Des Moines shall
determine said material when used as a primary element, enhances the physical
appearance or provides continuity desired to unite all structures within the
parcel together into one project concept.
         c.   Buffering: Adequate buffering of negative aspects of commercial
buildings (loading docks, garbage dumpsters and HVAC mechanical units) from any
public street and adjoining properties shall be required. Commercial retail
buildings shall not be located and designed to expose loading docks or doors,
loading areas or the rear of the building to public streets unless adequately
screened from public view by berming and landscaping.
A twenty foot (20') wide buffer park shall be established along the southern
boundary of Parcels A and B to buffer the residential housing proposed to the
south of these parcels. Landscaping and berming of the buffer park shall be
provided in accordance with standards for a thirty foot (30') buffer park as
identified in the West Des Moines buffer ordinance. (Ord. 1277, 11-17-1997)
      2.   Parcel C: All general use regulations and provisions set forth in
title 9, Zoning of the West Des Moines City Code for Medium Density Residential
(RM-8) shall apply to any development proposal for the property and as provided
for in the following regulations.
         a.   Required Plans: In conjunction with development of any portion of
Parcel C, the following plans are required:
            (1)   Preliminary Plat And Final Plat: Parcel C shall be platted in
accordance with the City's subdivision ordinance. Parcels created via the plat-
of-survey process and platted outlots identified on a plat shall be unbuildable
until such time that the plat-of- survey parcel and/or outlot is re-platted
into a developable lot via the preliminary and final platting processes.
            (2)   Site Plan: Prior to the development of Parcel C, site plan
approval shall be obtained by the appropriate approval body through the
development process.
         b.   Parkland Dedication: Parkland dedication is required by City Code
for all residential plats and residential site plans. The calculated dedication
amount includes the use of a factor per dwelling unit to determine the amount
of park and greenway land. A Parkland Dedication Agreement, acceptable to the
Parks and Recreation Department, detailing the specifics related to the park
and greenway dedication requirements for the development of Parcel C will be
required prior to site plan approval.
         c.   Mailboxes: The developer shall be responsible for installation of
any required cluster box units (CBUs/mailboxes) as per the local U.S. Postal
Service. The CBUs shall be located no closer than one hundred feet (100') from
the curbs of 98th Street and Bishop Drive in order to minimize the probability
of vehicles queuing back onto adjacent public streets. No CBUs will be allowed
on 98th Street or Bishop Drive.
         d.   Street Lighting: The developer shall be responsible for all costs
associated with the installation of public street lights within or adjacent to
any area proposed to be platted or included within a development.
         e.   Sanitary Sewer: A master sanitary sewer analysis has been
conducted for this parcel. A specific sanitary sewer analysis with the platting
of the property or a residential site plan and any future change in approved
land use densities for the PUD will require an analysis of the downstream
sanitary sewer capacity to assure that adequate capacity is available for the
proposed change in approved land use densities.
         f.   Signage: Signage shall comply with all provisions and standards
of title 9, chapter 18 for the Residential Medium Density (RM) Zoning District.
Under the authority of the City's Fire Marshal, Development Directory Boards
may be required. Said boards shall be of a design as specified by the Fire
Marshal and shall be located per the Fire Marshal in a location on private
property outside of public street rights-of-way and utility easements.
         g.   Traffic Study: A traffic study was prepared for the amendment to
the PUD to allow Residential Medium Density in December 2017. Average weekday
trips for the PUD parcel are one hundred twenty (120) P.M. peak and one hundred
two (102) A.M. peak trips. Further traffic studies will be required for
development proposals to verify that the provisions in the December 2017 study
still are valid and determine if the study's recommendations need to be
changed.
         h.   Streets And Right-Of-Way: The developer will be responsible for
construction of public or private streets within the development. Public
streets will be constructed to West Des Moines design standards. Private
streets constructed within the development shall be constructed to public
street standards, with the exception that rolled curbs will be allowed on the
private street.
98th Street is classified as a major collector which requires one hundred feet
(100') of total right-of-way or fifty feet (50') from the center of the right-
of-way adjacent to the subject property. The developers will be obligated to
provide any additional right-of-way by fee title in conjunction with the
approval of any development or subdivision.
         i.   Stormwater Management Plan: A master stormwater management plan
was completed in December 2017. Stormwater management plans will be required
for platting or site plans for Parcel C. Upon implementation of stormwater
management facilities, a Stormwater Management Facility Maintenance Agreement
is required to be executed and as-built drawings are required to be submitted.
         j.   Sidewalks: The development of Parcel C will be required to
include construction of the public sidewalks along all public streets,
including 98th Street and Bishop Drive. Sidewalks along private streets are
encouraged to provide pedestrian connection to the public sidewalks bordering
the property.
         k.   Public Improvements: Any proposed public improvement will require
submittal of separate detailed construction plans to staff for review and
approval by the City Engineer prior to installation of any improvements. The
City charges an hourly fee for site inspection/observation during the
installation of all public improvements. In addition, 4-year maintenance bonds
will need to be provided for any installed public improvements. Easements, when
required, will be required for public improvements for access and maintenance.
Adequate easement widths will need to be provided in accordance with DSM Metro
Design Standards and WDM Addendums (minimum 30 feet or twice the depth,
whichever is greater).
         l.   Parking Requirements: Number of parking stalls to be provided
shall be compliant with City Code, title 9, chapter 15. For any residential
dwelling intended as owner occupied and/or for which a condominium regime is
established, a minimum of one of the required spaces for each unit shall be as
an enclosed parking space. This parking space shall be a minimum of 19' x 9'
and may be designed as a free standing garage, attached garage or multiple
garage spaces within an enclosure. A specific covered parking space shall be
designated for and legally tied to each dwelling unit. The covered space must
be for the exclusive use of the occupant of the dwelling unit and cannot be
rented or purchased by a 3rd party, even if the dwelling unit is rented.
         m.   Land Use Design Criteria: All general use regulations and
provisions set forth in title 9, Zoning of the West Des Moines City Code for
Medium Density Residential (RM-8) shall apply to any development proposal for
the property, unless noted otherwise in this ordinance.
            (1)   Building Setbacks: Setbacks for Parcel C shall be as follows:
   (A) Perimeter setback (to adjacent properties and public street right-of-
way): A minimum of thirty five feet (35') from the property line. Covered
porches, decks, patios, accessory structures, etc., shall not encroach into the
required perimeter setback.
   (B) Front yard setback (adjacent to private streets): A minimum of twenty
five feet (25') from the face of the garage to the curb of the private street
or sidewalk if such is provided, whichever is closer. Porches, decks or patios
are allowed to encroach up to eight feet (8') into the twenty five foot (25')
front yard setback.
   (C) Side yard setback (adjacent to private streets): Fifteen feet (15') to
curb of private streets, if no driveway is present; no porches, decks or patios
can encroach into the fifteen foot (15') side yard setback.
   (D) The required thirty five foot (35') perimeter building setback and the
required landscape buffers are allowed to overlap.
            (2)   Building Separation:
   (A) For two-story attached townhomes with four (4) units or less in a row,
there shall be a minimum building separation of fourteen feet (14') between
buildings or outdoor spaces (patios, decks, etc.), if such is provided.
   (B) For two-story attached townhomes with more than four (4) units per
building, including back-to- back structures or three-story or greater attached
townhomes with four (4) units or less, there shall be a minimum building
separation of twenty feet (20') between buildings or outdoor spaces (patios,
decks, etc.), if such is provided.
   (C) For three-story or greater attached townhomes with more than four (4)
units per building, there shall be a minimum building separation of thirty feet
(30') between buildings or outdoor spaces (patios, decks, etc.), if such is
provided.
         n.   Buffers: A thirty foot (30') buffer is required adjacent to 98th
Street for the development of Parcel C. A thirty foot (30') buffer is required
adjacent to the right-of-way for the railroad line running along the southern
boundary of Parcel C. If the density of PUD Parcel C is greater than fifty
percent (50%) of the density of PUD Parcel D, then a thirty foot (30') buffer
will be required between PUD Parcel C and D. If the development of PUD Parcel C
results in the rear facade of dwelling units to be facing Bishop Drive, then a
thirty foot (30') buffer is required along Bishop Drive. The landscape and
berming standards of title 9, chapter 19, Landscaping will be applied to all
buffers, except for the buffer along the property line adjacent to the
railroad, which shall be planted at one-half (1/2) the landscape requirements
of a thirty foot (30') buffer.
         o.   Architecture: The intent of the building design is to encourage a
sense of place. Building facades throughout the development shall be varied and
articulated to provide visual interest, human scale and to establish a unique
identity for the development and the dwellings within a cohesive design theme.
Building design should address the need for private space, promote interaction
and connection within the development, yet balance the functional and security
needs of the residents and visitors.
            (1)   In general, building design for multi-family buildings shall
provide a creative presentation utilizing variations in massing, building
materials, details and treatment of windows and doors. All facades of the
building shall be treated with the same level of architectural style and detail
(360 degree architecture), however, the level of detail can be reduced on the
facades not visible from a street (public or private) or visible to adjacent
property surrounding the development. The level of detail on a facade may also
be reduced if a landscape buffer or other method is installed to break up
building expanses and mitigate views from the street or adjacent property.
            (2)   Massing: Building form shall be articulated, dividing large
buildings into smaller elements organized on the dwelling units. Changes in
materials should be aligned with changes in plan or roof form to emphasize
these changes in building mass. Building design that is repetitive in form and
material use should be avoided.
            (3)   Materials: Materials, detail, and color choices shall be
selected to provide continuity, resulting in a cohesive building appearance and
to unite all structures within the development. Materials should be durable,
substantial and of a quality that will maintain their appearance over a
prolonged time. Unit masonry (brick or stone) shall be incorporated on all
sides of the building visible from public and private streets, predominantly on
the base (lowest) story of the building, organized with the other exterior
materials along with trim and details to provide visual interest for these
sides, emphasize variations in building mass, and reinforce the design theme.
Nonmasonry finishes can encompass the remaining area, combining a variety of
colors and textures along with trim and details to provide visual interest
within the development and reinforce the human scale.
   (A) Use of natural materials is encouraged, composite materials such as
fiber cement and wood composites are appropriate substitutions for non- masonry
cladding.
   (B) Vinyl or metal siding may be used only with appropriately scaled trim.
   (C) Non-traditional materials such as metal panels or concrete masonry units
and composite materials simulating the appearance of unit masonry may be
utilized after review by the Director of Development Services to determine that
the use of these alternate building materials enhances the physical appearance
and accomplishes a compatible design within the residential context of the
development.
   (D) Materials should change with the change in building plane and be
arranged to have the appearance of three-dimensional elements.
   (E) Variation in materials, material modules, expressed joints, textures,
colors and details should be used to break up the mass of the buildings.
   (F) Trim and structural elements such as posts or columns shall be sized to
the scale of the building.
            (4)   Rooflines: Roof overhangs shall be of sufficient size and
projection to be in proportion to the scale of the building.
            (5)   Entryways: Building entries serving the public should be
designed as a visual focal point and provide human scale to a typically large-
scale building. Secondary or unit entries for the building can be less
prominent in design, yet still provide a recognizable entry point and shelter
from the elements.
            (6)   Fenestration: Efforts should be made to place windows and
doors to promote the linkage of the interior and exterior of buildings and
provide natural light. Door and window openings shall be incorporated on all
sides of the building.
            (7)   Common Use And Accessory Building: The architectural details
of any common use buildings such as a clubhouse and detached accessory
structures such as garages shall incorporate the same building forms,
materials, treatments and the architectural style of the primary buildings.
Portions of accessory buildings visible from any street or adjacent property
shall incorporate same level of detail, including fenestration, as the primary
buildings.
            (8)   Garages: Garages facing any street should be set back from
the entry facade (measured from the wall containing the entry door or front
edge of the porch) or be designed to minimize their appearance. The following
building design options to mitigate the dominant appearance of the garage shall
be incorporated when the garage facade is in front of the entry facade:
   (A) Limiting the dwelling unit arrangement to no more than four (4) attached
units with the garage fronting on a single facade or detached garage size to no
more than seven (7) bays.
   (B) Providing side entry garages for the end units of a building.
   (C) Enhanced garage facade design such as the addition of engaged columns,
secondary roof forms or decorative garage doors. (Ord. 2286, 3-19-2018)
      3.   Parcel D: The following general use regulations, performance
standards and provisions shall apply to any development in Parcel D:
         a.   Definitions: For the purpose of this ordinance the following
definitions shall apply:
    FACTORY-BUILT HOME: Any structure, designed for residential use, which is
wholly or in substantial part, made, fabricated, formed or assembled in
manufacturing facilities for installation or assembly and installation, on a
building site. For the purpose of this ordinance factory-built homes include
mobile homes, manufactured homes and modular homes placed on a site for greater
than one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days.
   FACTORY-BUILT HOME PARK: A parcel or contiguous parcels of land divided into
two (2) or more factory-built home lots for rent or sale.
   MANUFACTURED HOME: Factory-built or manufactured homes that meet the
National Manufactured Home Construction and Safety Standards Act (42 USC
section 5401), commonly known as the HUD (U.S. Department of Housing and Urban
Development) Code.
   MOBILE HOME: Same as manufactured home, but subject to the National
Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Act of 1974.
         b.   Use Regulations: A building or premises within this parcel shall
be used only for single-family detached residential purposes only, except for
home occupations as permitted by the regulations of the West Des Moines City
Code and accessory uses as permitted in the R-1 Single-Family Residential
District unless otherwise stated in this ordinance. The permitted principal
uses for this parcel shall be as follows:
Factory-built homes, manufactured homes and mobile homes.
Single-family detached residential homes that meet the minimum requirements of
the R-1 Single-Family Residential District.
         c.   Age Restrictions: Any factory-built home, manufactured home or
mobile home facility developed in Parcel D shall conform with all Federal,
State and local laws and more particularly shall implement and enforce the
provisions dealing with senior residents as provided in the 1992 Fair Housing
Act as amended on December 28, 1995 requiring that at least one person who is
fifty five (55) years or older reside in at least eighty percent (80%) of the
occupied units.
         d.   Development Standards: The minimum development standards for this
parcel shall be as follows:
            (1)   All mobile or manufactured homes shall have a permanent
foundation system in compliance with the manufacturer's specifications, or
equipped with a skirting, or provided with a support pad which is recessed to
give the appearance of the home being located on-grade.
            (2)   All trailer hitches and wheels used to transport the home to
the site shall be removed within sixty (60) days after the structure has been
placed on site.
            (3)   All homes shall have roofs with a minimum pitch of 1:4 and a
minimum eave dimension of one foot (1').
            (4)   All siding shall be nonreflective and shall be installed from
the ground up.
         e.   Setback Requirements: The minimum required setbacks for any lot
within Parcel D are as follows:
            (1)   Minimum lot widths as measured at the front yard building
setback line shall be as follows:
   (A) Single-wide lots (for units with a width of 16 feet or less) - fifty
three feet (53');
   (B) Double-wide lots (for units with widths greater than 16 feet) - sixty
five feet (65').
            (2)   A minimum twenty foot (20') front yard setback shall be
measured from the back of curb on private streets, and from public street
rights-of-way.
            (3)   Minimum side yard setbacks shall be five feet (5').
            (4)   Minimum rear yard setbacks shall be ten feet (10').
            (5)   Minimum separation between any buildings or accessory
structures on different lots or trailer sites shall be ten feet (10'). (Ord.
1277, 11-17-1997; amd. Ord. 2286, 3-19-2018)
         f.   Buffers: A fifteen foot (15') buffer park shall also be required
for lots along the railroad right-of-way with planting requirements equal to
seventy five percent (75%) of the total planting requirements of the thirty
foot (30') buffer park requirements of the West Des Moines buffer ordinance. In
addition, a thirty foot (30') buffer park shall be established along the east
boundary line of Parcel D. Landscaping and berming of all buffer parks shall be
provided in accordance with the West Des Moines landscape ordinance.
The buffer park along the east boundary line of Parcel D shall be installed
prior to any development within phase 3, or at such time that the property
owner to the east installs the required buffer park along the west side of
Parcels 2, 3a, and 3b in the Maple Grove North PUD, whichever occurs first. In
either case, the developer shall coordinate with the property owner to the east
to provide the berming and landscaping concurrently, so as to appear as a
single buffer park.
No fences or structures shall be permitted within the buffer parks. Prior to
development within any part of Parcel D, a buffer plan shall be reviewed and
approved by the City which illustrates that use of berms and tree plantings in
accordance with the provisions of the West Des Moines buffer ordinance.
No buffer park shall be required along the east-west public street to the north
of Parcel D provided that the widest width of the factory-built home is
parallel or facing the direction of the public street.
         g.   Landscaping: Each lot or dwelling unit site shall have a minimum
of two (2) trees with a minimum caliper size of 2" - 21/2" planted in the open
space of the lot within sixty (60) days from the placement of the dwelling
unit, weather permitting.
         h.   Garages: Each dwelling unit or lot shall be required to have a
permanent garage provided for the sole use of the occupant of the dwelling and
a minimum of two (2) additional paved parking spaces will be provided for
residents and guests in the driveway approach to the garage or elsewhere on
site. Other outbuildings and structures, with the exception of decks, patios,
or attached porches, shall be prohibited.
         i.   Sidewalks: Sidewalks along the internal private streets within
Parcel D shall be deferred so long as no parking is allowed along the private
streets and the speed limit is posted at a maximum speed limit of ten (10)
miles per hour. Sidewalks shall be required on both sides of the public streets
to provide for pedestrian movement within and around the project in accordance
with West Des Moines specifications.
         j.   Storm Shelter And Warning Systems: Within the manufactured
housing development, provisions for a storm shelter and civil defense storm
warning system shall be required.
         k.   Driveway Access: No direct driveway access shall be allowed onto
Bishop Drive.
         l.   Private Internal Streets: The internal private streets shall be
required to be constructed with a minimum six inch (6") curb. (Ord. 1277, 11-
17-1997; amd. Ord. 1402, 4-3-2000; Ord. 2286, 3-19-2018)
035-04: MASTER PLANNING REQUIRED:
Prior to development within any part of any parcel, a master plan shall be
prepared showing the location of new public streets within or adjoining the
parcel in order to assure workable street patterns, grades and usable building
sites. In addition, the master plan shall demonstrate building locations,
parking areas, pedestrian elements, etc., which reflect continuity of design
versus piecemeal or incompatible design. Prior to the development of any
portion of the PUD, provision will have to be made to address the access needs
of the property to the east and the coordination with the property owner. (Ord.
1277, 11-17-1997)
035-05: ALL AREAS TO BE PLATTED:
Prior to, or in connection with development or transfer of ownership of any
portion of the PUD, said area shall be platted in accordance with the City's
subdivision ordinance to delineate within a plat, the parcel to be developed or
sold separately or any portion thereof. (Ord. 1277, 11-17-1997)
035-06: STORMWATER MANAGEMENT:
There shall be submitted to, and approved by the West Des Moines Public Works,
a complete stormwater management plan for the PUD to be prepared by the
developer prior to any development within the PUD and for all storm sewer,
drainage systems and detention areas within the PUD. (Ord. 1277, 11-17-1997)
035-07: INFRASTRUCTURE:
The developer of the property within the PUD is responsible for the public
improvements that are necessary to serve the property. Those improvements
include the paving of public streets, sanitary sewer extension, water main
extension, storm sewer improvements and traffic signals. In conjunction with or
prior to development within any parcel of the PUD, public water and sanitary
sewer service shall be brought to the site and extended through the area being
developed to adjoining undeveloped properties in a manner acceptable to the
City and properly designed with sizes and materials compatible with the City's
plans for area-wide water and sanitary sewer service.
The owner/developer shall be responsible for the paving of 96th Street with a
minimum thirty seven foot (37') back-to-back paving width at the time of
platting. In addition, the owner/developer shall be responsible for the paving
of 98th Street and the east/west collector street north of Parcel C with a
minimum thirty one foot (31') back-to-back paving width at the time of
platting.
Prior to, or in conjunction with the development of Parcel B, the owner/
developer shall be responsible for paving 94th Street with a minimum thirty one
foot (31') back-to-back paving width.
Prior to, or in conjunction with the development of either Parcel A or B, the
owner/developer shall be responsible for the widening of the south side of
University Avenue adjacent to this property, up to a maximum twenty one foot
(21') paving width (33 feet from center) of eight inch (8") reinforced concrete
with CD joints and medians. The construction of medians may be deferred until
such time that traffic dictates (as determined by the West Des Moines Public
Works Department) or that University Avenue is widened on the north side of the
street.
The City may require the owner to execute a petition and waiver, as prepared by
the City, or an acceptable alternative at the City's choice, for the above
mentioned street improvements at the time of platting, site plan, or other
development entitlement.
The owner, on behalf of itself it successors and assigns, agrees to commit to
cost associated with the provision of traffic signals as follows: one-quarter
(1/4) of the cost of signalization at the intersection of 98th Street and
University Avenue; and, either one-quarter (1/4) or one-half (1/2) of the cost
of signalization at the intersection of 94th Street and University Avenue
(depending on whether or not the City of Waukee or the developer to the north
will contribute). The City may require the owner to execute a petition and
waiver, as prepared by the City, or an acceptable alternative at the City's
choice, for the installation of the above mentioned traffic signals at the time
of platting, site plan, or other development entitlement. (Ord. 1277, 11-17-
1997)
035-08: STREET RIGHTS-OF-WAY:
The ultimate street right-of-way, as identified in the West Des Moines
Comprehensive Plan, shall be dedicated to the City for all public streets
adjacent to, or within the 98th Street PUD at the time of platting. (Ord. 1277,
11-17-1997)
035-09: SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS:
   A.   Stormwater Detention: With respect to any assessments by the City of
West Des Moines of special benefits conferred upon Parcels A, B and C of the
property, or any portion thereof, as a result of the design and construction of
potential area-wide stormwater detention improvements as determined by
engineering studies approved by the City of West Des Moines, the owner, on
behalf of itself and its successors and assigns (collectively by the "owner"),
agrees that such assessments may be spread against all of said parcels, as said
parcels exist on the date of assessment, by the City of West Des Moines on an
area basis.
   B.   Water Service Improvements: With respect to any assessments by the City
of West Des Moines of special benefits conferred upon Parcels A, B and C of the
property, or any portion hereof, as a result of the design and construction of
potential area wide water service improvements as determined by engineering
studies approved by the City of West Des Moines, the owner, on behalf of itself
and its successors and assigns (collectively by the "owner"), agrees that such
assessments may be spread against all of said parcels, as said parcels exist on
the date of assessment, by the City of West Des Moines on an area basis. (Ord.
1277, 11-17-1997)
035-10: SIGNAGE REGULATION:
No pole sign, as defined by the West Des Moines sign ordinance, shall be
incorporated into any development within the 98th Street PUD. Ground sign
standards shall be used for the construction of freestanding signage as set
forth within the West Des Moines sign ordinance. All wall signs will be
composed of solid individual letters attached to the building fascia, or
individual letters of anodized aluminum, galvanized metal, illuminated self-
contained with translucent plastic faces set in anodized aluminum returns and
trim; panel signs with letters incorporated or painted upon a panel or wall
area shall be prohibited. Permanent exposed neon signs shall be prohibited.
Advertising or promotional temporary signage attached to exterior windows or
walls visible from the exterior of the building shall be prohibited, except as
permitted with a temporary sign permit. (Ord. 1277, 11-17-1997)
035-11: DEFINITION:
The term "developer", for the purpose of this ordinance, shall mean any person,
individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation, estate, trust, entity,
or agent of same acting or proposing to subdivide land or develop a parcel of
land for the construction of a building or buildings. (Ord. 1277, 11-17-1997)
035-12: VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES:
Any person who violates the provisions of this ordinance upon conviction shall
be punished as set forth in section 1-4-1 of the City Code of the City of West
Des Moines, Iowa. (Ord. 2077, 12-29-2014)
035-99: LEGISLATIVE HISTORY:
Ord. 1095, 8-1-1994; Ord. 1253, 6-30-1997; Ord. 1277, 11-17-1997; Ord. 1402, 4-
3-2000; Ord. 2077, 12-29-2014; Ord. 2286, 3-19-2018.
PUD #36
WESTOWN CENTRE
SECTION:
036-01: Legal Description
036-02: Conditions
036-03: Signage Regulation
036-04: Parking Setbacks
036-05: Building Restrictions, Easements And Covenants
036-06: All Areas To Be Platted
036-07: Pedestrian Access And Orientation
036-08: Master Planning Required
036-09: Traffic Study Required
036-10: Intersection Paving
036-11: Traffic Signals
036-12: Vehicular Access
036-13: Storm Water Management
036-99: Legislative History
036-01: LEGAL DESCRIPTION:
The legal description for the Westown Centre PUD is as follows:
Lots 1, 3, 4, Westown Centre and Lot 2, Westown Centre, being an Official Plat,
now included in and forming a part of the City of West Des Moines, Polk County,
Iowa.
(Ord. 1098, 8-15-1994)
036-02: CONDITIONS:
Whereas, Title 9 of the West Des Moines City Code includes Chapter 9, PUD
Planned Unit Development District and establishes certain regulations and
guidelines for Westown Centre PUD pertaining to accompanying information
required on a plat and site plan documents. Now, therefore, the following
conditions, restrictions, and regulations are adopted as part of this approval,
to wit:
   A.   General Conditions: The sketch plan incorporates office and commercial/
retail land uses which shall be distributed by area, types and location
according to the sketch plan as presented. In addition, the following general
site plan criteria shall be integrated into and made a part of the planned unit
development and sketch plan document.
      1.   All subdivisions, public streets, public street rights-of-way and
general development shall adhere to the standards and design criteria set forth
in the West Des Moines Subdivision Ordinance pertaining thereto unless
otherwise stated within this Ordinance.
      2.   The development shall comply with Title 9 Chapter 15 (Off-Street
Parking and Loading Areas), Title 9 Chapter 3 Section 9 (Open Space
Requirements) and Title 9 Chapter 1 Section 1 Subsection 2 (Site Plans) of the
West Des Moines Zoning Ordinance, and Title 9 Chapter 9 (Planned Unit
Development District.
      3.   In all areas within a 100-year frequency flood hazard zone, or
adjoining drainageways or detention areas involving potential flood hazards, no
building shall be erected which has a lowest floor, including basements, less
than one foot (1') above the determined level of the 100-year frequency flood
event, and no building shall be erected within twenty five feet (25') of any
major drainageway, storm water detention basin or pond.
      4.   The developer, their successors and assigns, if any, shall pay all
construction and engineering costs for the interior development of the planned
unit development, as required by this Ordinance, or the Subdivision Ordinance
of the City of West Des Moines, Iowa, for all streets, storm sewers, sanitary
sewers, drainageway improvements, detention basins, water mains, buffers and
other improvements within the PUD as may be required by the Subdivision
Ordinance, Zoning Ordinance or this Ordinance.
   B.   Land Use Design Criteria: In addition to the general conditions as
stated in subsection A above, the following land use design criteria shall
apply to the legally described property herein:
      1.   All general use regulations, performance standards and provisions
set forth in Title 9, Zoning, Chapter 11 for the PCP Professional Plaza
District shall apply to any development proposal for the property except as
shall be further provided herein. The following development standards and use
regulations shall apply to property as applicable.
         a.   Development Standards: Permitted uses shall include all uses
allowed within the PCP Professional Commerce Park District and the following:
Art supplies, galleries and studios
Banks
Barber/beauty shop
Broadcasting (teleproductions)
Book store
Day care
Dry cleaning
Florist shop
Health club
Office supply and furniture
Packaging store
Printing
Restaurants
Note: No drive-thru facilities allowed with the exception of one for a bank use
only.
Multiple use of the site by more than one building shall comply with C-1-A Zone
District standards which require that multiple buildings on a site be
consistent in architectural design and use of materials and organized utilizing
a compatible planned open space, landscape plan, and parking plan to serve and
maintain a unified master plan concept; multiple buildings separated by parking
areas or drives and lots less than two (2) acres in size may be considered
acceptable if approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission and City Council
as an acceptable master development plan for the property legally described
herein (approval having been granted for one lot to be a minimum of one acre in
size). Buildings containing PCP District uses may exceed thirty five feet (35')
in height. Yard requirements shall comply with standards of the PCP District;
provided, however, the front yard building setback shall be measured from any
street right-of-way or right-of-way easement and shall be a minimum of fifty
feet (50'). The minimum parking lot and/or drive setback shall be a minimum of
twenty feet (20') and shall be measured from the anticipated full right-of-way
or right-of-way easement as determined by the City during the platting or site
planning process and shall be utilized, designed, and improved as a landscaped
buffer area effectively screening all parking and drive areas from public view
and presenting an attractive view or element to the area. Additional right-of-
way shall be reserved by establishing public street and utility easements at
the time of a final plat or site plan review and shall be allowed to be counted
to fulfill the open space requirements for the property.
         b.   Architecture: Architectural design and use of materials for the
construction of any building within the property shall be accomplished in a
manner compatible with PCP Professional Commerce Park Zone District building
materials. The architectural design of any building shall be acceptable to the
City and all buildings within the property shall have as a primary element of
the exterior being face brick with all sides of any building built on the
property consistent in design and use of materials. No wood, masonite, visible
asphaltic exterior wall or roof material, aluminum siding, nonarchitectural
sheet metal, concrete block, or other similar materials shall constitute a
portion of any building except as a trim material, unless the City Council of
West Des Moines, after having received a recommendation from the Planning and
Zoning Commission of West Des Moines shall determine said material when used as
a primary element, enhances the physical appearance, or provides continuity
desired to unite all structures within the property together into one project
concept.
         c.   Buffering: Adequate buffering of negative aspects of commercial
buildings (loading docks, garbage dumpsters and HVAC mechanical units) from any
public street and adjoining properties shall be required. Commercial retail
buildings shall not be located and designed to expose loading docks or doors,
loading areas or the rear of buildings to public streets. (Ord. 1098, 8-15-
1994)
036-03: SIGNAGE REGULATION:
No pole sign, as defined by the West Des Moines City Sign Code, shall be
incorporated into any development within the Westown Centre PUD. Ground sign
standards shall be used for the construction of freestanding signage as
provided for within the West Des Moines City Sign Code for the PCP Professional
Commerce Park District.
All signage constructed as wall signs on building fascia within the PUD shall
incorporate aesthetic features compatible with the overall character of the
development. All wall signs will be composed of solid individual letters
attached to the building fascia, or individual letters of anodized aluminum,
galvanized metal, illuminated self-contained with translucent plastic faces set
in anodized aluminum returns and trim; panel signs with letters incorporated or
painted upon a panel or wall area shall be prohibited. Advertising or
promotional temporary signage attached to exterior windows or walls including
exposed neon lights visible from the exterior of the building shall be
prohibited. (Ord. 1098, 8-15-1994)
036-04: PARKING SETBACKS:
Off-street parking lots, loading areas and internal drives shall be
sufficiently set back a minimum of twenty feet (20') from all property
boundaries and buffered from public street view, as practical, with the use of
landscaping, earth berming and/or wall structures as may be required by the
City. (Ord. 1098, 8-15-1994)
036-05: BUILDING RESTRICTIONS, EASEMENTS AND COVENANTS:
The developer shall with the approval of the City Council adopt building
restrictions, easements and covenants pertaining to the property where the
developer and the City deem appropriate. (Ord. 1098, 8-15-1994)
036-06: ALL AREAS TO BE PLATTED:
Prior to, or in conjunction with development or transfer of ownership of any
portion of the PUD, said area shall be platted in accordance with the City's
Subdivision Ordinance to delineate within a plat the parcel to be developed or
sold separately or any portion thereof. (Ord. 1098, 8-15-1994)
036-07: PEDESTRIAN ACCESS AND ORIENTATION:
Pedestrian access shall be provided from all adjacent properties to the
commercial uses developed within the Westown Centre PUD. The design and/or
location of the pedestrian walkways shall be determined at the site plan and/or
platting stage with a master pedestrian circulation plan being reviewed and
approved as a component of the first site plan and/or plat approval of the
Westown Centre PUD area. The intent of this area requirement is to discourage
the use of motorized vehicles for employees and tenants within the area
desiring to frequent the commercial uses within the area. The pedestrian access
should also be provided to developments to the east. (Ord. 1098, 8-15-1994)
036-08: MASTER PLANNING REQUIRED:
Prior to development within any part of the PUD, a master plan shall be
prepared showing the location of new public streets within or adjoining the
Parcel in order to assure workable street patterns, grades, and usable building
sites. The master plan should also address building locations, pedestrian
orientation and/or access, and other elements identified within this PUD. (Ord.
1098, 8-15-1994)
036-09: TRAFFIC STUDY REQUIRED:
Prior to development within any part of the PUD, a traffic study shall be
completed and approved by the City for the purpose of determining traffic
impacts and required improvements. (Ord. 1098, 8-15-1994)
036-10: INTERSECTION PAVING:
The equitable share assessed in accordance with the City's assessment policy of
the cost associated with the construction of any new and existing intersections
adjacent to the side shall be paid for by the owner, its successors and
assigns, including paving to the future ultimate widths with the returns along
Westown Parkway and 50th Street (end of returns shall at a minimum include
temporary tapers). (Ord. 1098, 8-15-1994)
036-11: TRAFFIC SIGNALS:
The owner, on behalf of itself, its successors and assigns, agrees to commit to
its equitable share of any cost associated with the provision of traffic
signals as deemed necessary and identified by the required traffic study, which
cost shall be assessed by the City in accordance with its standard assessment
practices. (Ord. 1098, 8-15-1994)
036-12: VEHICULAR ACCESS:
Vehicular access from Westown Parkway and 50th Street shall be restricted and
limited as deemed necessary and identified in the required traffic study. (Ord.
1098, 8-15-1994)
036-13: STORM WATER MANAGEMENT:
There shall be submitted to, and approved by the West Des Moines City Engineer,
a complete storm water management plan for the PUD to be prepared by the
developer prior to development within the PUD and for all storm sewer and
drainage systems within the PUD. (Ord. 1098, 8-15-1994)
036-99: LEGISLATIVE HISTORY:
Ord. 1098, 8-15-1994.
PUD #37
CORPORATE PLACE
SECTION:
037-01: Legal Description
037-02: Sketch Plan
037-03: Conditions
037-04: Architecture
037-05: Buffering
037-06: Master Planning Required
037-07: Signage Regulation
037-08: Building Restrictions, Easements And Covenants
037-09: Stormwater Management
037-10: Sanitary Sewer Trunk
037-11: Private Internal Streets
037-12: Traffic Study
037-99: Legislative History
037-01: LEGAL DESCRIPTION:
The legal description for the Corporate Place PUD is as follows:
A tract of land in the southwest quarter (SW 1/4) of the northeast fractional
quarter (NE frl. 1/4) of section 5, township 78 north, range 25 west of the 5th
principal meridian, city of West Des Moines, Polk County, Iowa, more
particularly described as follows:
Commencing as a point of reference at the center of said section 5; thence
N00°21'00"W (bearing assumed for the purpose of this description only) 271.52
feet (previously recorded as N00°21'W, 272.06 feet) along the west line of the
northeast quarter of said section 5 to a point on the northerly right-of-way
line of Interstate Highway No. 235; thence S89°41'00"E, 709.95 feet (previously
recorded as S89°41'E, 710.04 feet) along the northerly right-of-way line of
said Interstate Highway No. 235; thence N34°29'00"E, 139.93 feet (previously
recorded as N34°29'E, 140.00 feet); thence N55°31'00"W, 75.27 feet (previously
recorded as N55°31'W, 75.4 feet) to the point of beginning; thence continuing
N55°31'00"W, 124.38 feet (previously recorded as N55°31'W, 124.6 feet); thence
N34°29'00"E, 442.79 feet (previously recorded as N34°29'E, 442.6 feet); thence
S87°08'05"E, 446.25 feet (previously recorded as S87°08'05"E, 441.09 feet);
thence S00°16'06"W, 574.56 feet (previously recorded as S00°14'E, 574.78 feet);
thence N69°40'00"W, 256.98 feet (previously recorded as N69°40'W, 256.94 feet);
thence N00°19'00"E, 70.59 feet (previously recorded as N00°19'E, 70.81 feet);
thence N20°11'00"W, 79.14 feet (previously recorded as N20°11'W, 79.00 feet);
thence S69°19'00"W, 76.20 feet (previously recorded as S69°19'W, 76.3 feet);
thence N89°41'00"W, 141.89 feet (previously recorded as N89°41'W, 141.39 feet);
thence S67°04'00"W, 119.57 feet (previously recorded as S67°04'W, 119.66 feet)
to the point of beginning.
Containing 6.023 acres, together with all right, privileges or easements
appurtenant thereto, including but not limited to the right of ingress and
egress over adjacent property as set forth in a grant of easement dated April
17, 1974, filed May 22, 1974 and recorded in book 4449 at page 66 of the Polk
County records, and as set forth in that easement agreement filed August 14,
1979 in book 4941 at page 435 of the Polk County records.
(Ord. 1576, 3-29-2004)
037-02: SKETCH PLAN:
On file with the community development department of the city and made a part
of this rezoning approval for concept description and delineation is the sketch
plan document for the Corporate Place PUD. It is recognized, minor shifts or
modifications to general plan layout may be necessary and compatible with the
need to acquire workable street patterns, grades and usable building sites, but
the general plan layout, including the relationship of uses to each other and
the relationship of land use to the general plan framework, and development
requirements shall be used as the implementation guide. (Ord. 1078, 1-3-1994)
037-03: CONDITIONS:
Whereas, title 9, chapter 9 of the city code, PUD planned unit development
district, establishes certain regulations and guidelines pertaining to
accompanying information required on plat and site plan documents. Now,
therefore, the following conditions, restrictions, and regulations are adopted
as part of this approval, to wit: (Ord. 1078, 1-3-1994)
   A.   General Conditions: The sketch plan shows uses which shall be
distributed by area, types and location according to the sketch plan and this
ordinance. In addition, the following general development criteria shall be
integrated into and made a part of this planned unit development and sketch
plan approval. (Ord. 1917, 5-2-2011)
      1.   All subdivisions, public or private streets, public or private
street rights of way and general development shall adhere to the standards and
design criteria set forth in the West Des Moines subdivision ordinance and/or
established city policies pertaining thereto, unless otherwise stated within
this ordinance.
      2.   Unless otherwise specified herein, the development of the Corporate
Place PUD shall comply with title 9, chapter 15, "Off Street Parking And
Loading", section 9-3-9, "Open Space Requirements", and section 9-1-1-2, site
plans of the city code. For the purposes of the application of title 9, chapter
9, "Planned Unit Development District", section 9-9-6, final plan submittal,
the submittal of final plan documents for any parcel, or part of any parcel of
the Corporate Place PUD within one year after approval and publication of this
ordinance, shall be considered to satisfy the terms and requirements of section
9-9-6 of the city code. (Ord. 1078, 1-3-1994)
      3.   In all areas within a 100-year frequency flood hazard area zone, or
adjoining drainageways or detention areas involving potential flood hazards, no
building shall be erected which has a lowest floor, including basement, less
than two feet (2') above the determined level of the 100-year frequency flood
event or floodproofed to be the same elevation in accordance with the West Des
Moines flood ordinance, and no building shall be erected within twenty five
feet (25') of any major drainage, stormwater detention basin or pond, unless
the building and site can be adequately designed to protect structures from the
flooding, to the satisfaction of the city's public works department and
building division. (Ord. 1576, 3-29-2004)
      4.   The developer, their successors and/or assigns, if any, shall pay
all planning, engineering, and construction costs for the interior development
of the planned unit development, as required by this ordinance and the
subdivision ordinance of the city of West Des Moines, Iowa, for all streets,
storm sewers, sanitary sewers, drainageway improvements, detention basins,
water mains, buffers and other improvements within the parcels illustrated and
established within the PUD as may be required by the city code or this
ordinance.
      5.   All general use regulations and provisions set forth in chapter 11,
for the PCP professional commerce park district of title 9, "Zoning", of the
city code, shall apply to any development within the PUD unless stated
otherwise in this ordinance. Additional restrictions and conditions may apply
to specific parcels as outlined elsewhere herein.
      6.   Prior to, or in conjunction with development or transfer of
ownership of any portion of the PUD, all property within the PUD shall be
platted in accordance with the city's subdivision ordinance to delineate within
a plat the parcel to be developed or sold separately or any portion thereof.
The plat shall include a parcel of ground that is a minimum thirty feet (30')
wide that will provide the necessary joint ingress-egress requirements for all
parcels within the subject property and the isolated parcel of ground that
abuts the southern boundary line of the PUD in the southeast corner. Prior to,
or in conjunction with the recordation of the final plat, an ingress-egress
easement document shall be executed for the ingress-egress drive within the
Corporate Place PUD. (Ord. 1078, 1-3-1994)
      7.   The water main servicing the PUD property will need to be designed
and constructed to provide an adequate water supply for fire protection prior
to or in conjunction with the development of any portion of the property within
the PUD. (Ord. 1576, 3-29-2004)
      8.   Any and all buildings within the PUD shall have fully automatic fire
sprinkling systems. (Ord. 1078, 1-3-1994)
   B.   Land Use Design Criteria: In addition to the general conditions
requirement stated herein, the following land use criteria shall apply to the
development of property as reflected on the amended sketch plan. The amended
sketch plan shows the location of four (4) proposed buildings and associated
parking areas for application of specific standards of land use and development
regulations. The following development standards and use regulations shall
apply to the development of the entire or portions of the area contained within
the boundaries of the PUD, as applicable.
      1.   Development Standards: All general use regulations, performance
standards and provisions set forth in title 9, "Zoning", of the city code for
professional commerce park district (PCP) shall apply to any development
proposal within the PUD, except as modified herein. The following development
standards shall apply to any development proposal within the PUD as applicable:
         a.   Any building will be required to maintain a perimeter building
setback of twenty five feet (25') from the PUD boundary and a minimum
separation of twenty feet (20') between buildings comprised of one story or
thirty feet (30') between buildings over one story.
         b.   Any building will be required to comply with a minimum setback of
twenty five feet (25') from the existing thirty foot (30') joint ingress-egress
easement.
         c.   Any parking lot or associated drives will be required to maintain
a minimum ten foot (10') setback from the PUD boundary and the thirty foot
(30') joint ingress-egress easement, with the exception of the southern
boundary of the PUD, for which a minimum five foot (5') setback will be
required.
Parking lots or associated drives shall maintain a minimum setback of five feet
(5') from an internal lot line, in the event the property is platted into
separate lots that include the building and associated parking. Drive aisles
connecting parking lots shall maintain a ten foot (10') setback from the PUD
boundary.
Landscaping/berming shall be provided to screen drive aisles from public view
and adjoining properties and provide a visual separation between parking lots
on adjacent properties. Proposed landscaping will be included as part of the
site plan review.
         d.   A cumulative thirty five percent (35%) of the total area and an
additional ten percent (10%) of the total paved area of the PUD shall be
provided as open space. (Ord. 1576, 3-29-2004)
      2.   Performance Standards: The following standards shall be applicable
to any development within the PUD:
         a.   There shall be no more than four (4) lots, and one outlot.
         b.   Postage stamp lots with a minimum lot size less than two (2)
acres will be allowed with the establishment of a property owners' association
of which each lot has an ownership interest.
         c.   Multiple buildings on one lot shall be allowed as long as
building separations as provided in the development standards above or
separations as otherwise required of building and fire codes, whichever is
greater, are adhered to, and a master owners' association document is executed
which specifies maintenance and repair responsibilities.
         d.   Buildings shall not exceed a maximum building height of more than
four (4) stories or fifty feet (50') in height.
         e.   Off street parking for SIC 791: Dance studios and schools shall
be provided as follows:
            (1)   When for instruction purposes only: One parking stall per one
hundred (100) square feet of gfa shall be provided within the same parcel as
the school.
            (2)   When for instruction as well as dance recitals and
performances of the students: One parking stall per one hundred (100) square
feet of gfa plus one stall for every four (4) fixed seats shall be provided
within the same parcel as the school or in conjunction with adjacent lots under
a shared parking agreement.
      3.   Allowed Uses: Permitted uses within all parcels of the PUD shall
include:
         a.   All permitted (P) uses allowed within the professional commerce
park (PCP) zoning district except those otherwise adjusted or prohibited by
this ordinance;
         b.   All permitted conditional (Pc) uses allowed within the
professional commerce park (PCP) zoning district except those otherwise
adjusted or prohibited by this ordinance may be allowed with the approval of
the appropriate review body;
         c.   In addition, SIC 791: Dance studios and schools, except dance
halls shall be considered a permitted (P) use. This use shall be permitted for
instructional purposes only. Retail establishments of dance apparel and
supplies and cafe/restaurant uses which are ancillary to the primary use shall
be permitted (P). Said uses shall only operate in conjunction with the hours of
operation of the dance school;
         d.   Dance recitals or other public performances by the students shall
only occur within this site if the following are provided:
            (1)   Adequate parking is provided within the same property as the
dance school or an appropriate shared parking arrangement with adjoining parcel
(s) has been executed to accommodate and provide for adequate parking as
otherwise required within this ordinance;
            (2)   The day and time of performances and recitals are outside of
the day and time of normal operation hours for the businesses which have
allowed parking on their site through an executed shared parking agreement;
            (3)   The private access drive is in a suitable condition as
determined by the city's fire marshal to accommodate emergency response
vehicles; and
            (4)   The appropriate road maintenance agreement is in place to
adequately address maintenance and repair of the private ingress- egress road
which extends from 42nd Street into the site. (Ord. 1917, 5-2-2011)
037-04: ARCHITECTURE:
The architecture of the parcels within the PUD shall be consistent in character
and materials, so as to appear as a unified development. The architectural
design and use of materials for the construction of any building within the PUD
shall be accomplished in a manner compatible with PCP professional commerce
park zone district building standards. The architectural design of any building
shall be acceptable to the city and all buildings within the parcel shall have
as a primary element of the exterior being fascia glass, face brick, concrete
panels, architectural steel or stone panels, with all sides of any building
built on a parcel consistent in design and use of materials. No wood, masonite,
visible asphaltic exterior wall or roof material, aluminum siding,
nonarchitectural sheet metal, concrete block, decorative concrete block, or
other similar materials shall constitute a portion of any building except as a
trim material, unless the city council of West Des Moines, after having
received a recommendation from the planning and zoning commission of West Des
Moines, shall determine said material when used as a primary element, enhances
the physical appearance, or provides continuity desired to unite all structures
within the PUD together into one project concept. (Ord. 1078, 1-3-1994)
037-05: BUFFERING:
Adequate treatment or buffering of negative aspects of any building elements,
such as loading docks and garage doors, from any public street and adjoining
properties shall be required. Buildings shall not be located and designed to
expose loading docks or doors, loading areas or the rear of buildings to the
ingress-egress parcel or views from I-235. Garbage dumpsters, HVAC mechanical
units, satellite dishes, and any rooftop mechanical units shall be screened
from views from the adjoining properties and I-235 by an opaque screening or
parapet wall that is an extension of the building wall or constructed out of a
material consistent with the principal building materials of the building. The
screen should blend with the architecture and coloration of the building to
minimize the visual impact of the screening element. No outside storage of
products or materials shall be permitted. (Ord. 1078, 1-3-1994)
037-06: MASTER PLANNING REQUIRED:
The PUD shall be developed in accordance with a single master plan
schematically showing private street and drive alignments, building locations,
parking lot locations, stormwater detention and management facilities,
utilities and other accessory or ancillary uses supportive of the principal
permitted use. The master plan for the development shall be submitted and
approved by the city council after a recommendation by the planning and zoning
commission prior to or in conjunction with site plan or plat approval for any
portion of the PUD. The master plan may be amended from time to time in the
same manner as its original review and approval by the city council after a
recommendation by the planning and zoning commission. (Ord. 1917, 5-2-2011)
037-07: SIGNAGE REGULATION:
No pole sign, as defined by the West Des Moines city sign code, shall be
incorporated into any development within the Corporate Place PUD. Ground sign
standards shall be used for the construction of freestanding signage within
each parcel as set forth within the West Des Moines city sign code for the PCP
professional commerce park district. Setbacks for ground signage shall be
measured from the boundary of the ingress-egress parcel as if it were a public
street right of way. No ground signs shall be permitted in excess of fifteen
feet (15') in height.
All signage constructed as wall signs on building fascia within the PUD shall
incorporate aesthetic features compatible with the overall character of the
development. The frontage of the building adjacent to the joint ingress-egress
easement shall be utilized in calculating the maximum five percent (5%) of the
building face permitted for wall signage. In the event that any parcel should
have more than one building face fronting on the joint ingress-egress drive,
the developer/owner shall be allowed to designate one of the adjacent building
faces as the wall to be used to calculate the permitted wall signage. All wall
signs will be composed of solid individual letters attached to the building
fascia, or individual letters of anodized aluminum, galvanized metal,
illuminated self-contained with translucent plastic faces set in anodized
aluminum returns and trim; panel signs with letters incorporated or painted
upon a panel or wall area shall be prohibited. Advertising or promotional
temporary signage attached to exterior windows or walls including exposed neon
lights visible from the exterior of the building shall be prohibited. (Ord.
1078, 1-3-1994)
037-08: BUILDING RESTRICTIONS, EASEMENTS AND COVENANTS:
The developer shall, with the approval of the city council, adopt building
restrictions, easements and covenants pertaining to each parcel developed where
the developer and the city deem appropriate. (Ord. 1078, 1-3-1994)
037-09: STORMWATER MANAGEMENT:
Specific stormwater management plans will be required for the development of
each parcel, demonstrating compliance with the approved corporate place PUD
master stormwater management plan, on file with the city's public works
department. The developer will have said specific stormwater management plans
prepared by a professional engineer licensed in the state of Iowa, prior to the
submittal of any specific development proposals within the PUD. All specific
stormwater management plans shall comply with the city's current design
standards for stormwater management. The method of stormwater management and
the stormwater conveyance system shall be determined and approved prior to the
development of any portion of the property within the PUD. Such stormwater
management plans may provide for shared usage of detention areas for the
benefit of multiple lots and outlots within the PUD. (Ord. 1576, 3-29-2004)
037-10: SANITARY SEWER TRUNK:
It is anticipated that the city will need to extend an additional sanitary
sewer trunk line along the existing sanitary sewer that crosses the northern
portion of the property. It is also anticipated that an additional sanitary
sewer easement will be needed adjacent to the existing easement to accommodate
the new sewer line. The design of this sewer has not been developed at the time
of rezoning of the property; therefore, the developer at the time of
development of any portion of the PUD will be responsible for providing the
necessary easement for the future public sanitary sewer. The north line of the
future public sanitary sewer easement shall be twenty five feet (25') north and
parallel to the existing public sanitary sewer. The developer at the time of
development of any portion of the PUD will also be responsible for providing
five (5) additional feet to the south half of the existing public sanitary
sewer easement width which will be a total of fifteen feet (15') south of the
existing public sanitary sewer. (Ord. 1576, 3-29-2004)
037-11: PRIVATE INTERNAL STREETS:
   A.   Property Owners' Association: The subdivision of any area within the
PUD shall require the formation of a property owners' association. And, the
developer, their successors and assigns, if any, shall provide the city with
acceptable documentation providing that all properties within the PUD shall
belong to the property owners' association which will be responsible and liable
for the ownership and maintenance (all costs associated with) of all private
streets, private drives, parking areas, and common open space areas, including
any required landscaping of open space or parking areas within the PUD. For all
perpetuity, this agreement shall run with and be filed against the title of all
parcels within the PUD.
   B.   Access: On the sketch plan, it should be noted that the entire PUD does
not have any public street frontage. In order to comply with the intent of the
city code requirements for public street frontage for any proposed lots, at the
time of platting there shall be cross access easements, and cross parking
agreements established, if applicable, throughout the PUD which shall ensure
perpetual access to those properties without public street frontage. The
property owners' association shall be responsible for the long term maintenance
and reconstruction of internal drives utilized by the multiple lots. It shall
also be the responsibility of the property owners' association to maintain
access via the private streets and drives within the development to those
parcels without public street frontage and the city shall not have any
responsibility in providing for public street frontage access for any of the
parcels within the PUD. (Ord. 1576, 3-29-2004)
037-12: TRAFFIC STUDY:
In the event that the developer, their successors, or assigns propose any
development proposal for any lot within the PUD, different from that shown on
the revised sketch plan, the city engineer shall reserve the right to request a
traffic study prepared by a city approved traffic engineer to be submitted by
the developer. (Ord. 1576, 3-29-2004)
037-99: LEGISLATIVE HISTORY:
Ord. 1078, 1-3-1994; Ord. 1576, 3-29-2004; Ord. 1917, 5-2-2011.
PUD #38
WRENWOOD PLACE
SECTION:
038-01: Legal Description
038-02: Sketch Plan
038-03: General Conditions
038-04: Architecture
038-05: Master Planning Required
038-06: Double-Frontage Lots
038-07: All Areas To Be Platted
038-08: Storm Water Management
038-09: Street Rights-Of-Way
038-10: E. P. True Parkway Paving
038-11: 60th Street Paving - North
038-12: 60th Street Paving - South
038-13: Special Assessments
038-99: Legislative History
038-01: LEGAL DESCRIPTION:
The legal description for the Wrenwood Place PUD is as follows:
All that part of the SE1/4 of the NE1/4 of Section 12, Township 78 North, Range
26 West of the 5th P.M., West Des Moines, Dallas County, Iowa, lying south of
the southerly right-of-way line of the Chicago and Northwestern Railroad, and
the NE1/4 of the SE1/4 of Section 12, Township 76 North, Range 26 West of the
5th P.M., Dallas County, Iowa, except the south 165 feet of the east 233 feet
more accurately described as follows:
Beginning at E1/4 Corner of said Section 12; thence S00°31'45"W along the east
line of the NE1/4 of the SE1/4 of said Section 12 for 1153.82 feet; thence
S83°54'20"W for 232.82 feet; thence S00°31'08"W for 165.00 feet to a point on
the south line of the NE1/4 SE1/4 of said Section 12; thence S83°37'31"W along
said south line for 1056.71 feet to the southwest corner of said NE1/4 SE1/
4 Section 12; thence N00°39'47"E along the west line of said NE1/4 SE1/4 for
1318.38 feet to the northwest corner of said NE1/4 SE1/4 of said Section 12;
thence N00°58'10"E along the west line of the SE1/4 NE1/4 of said Section 12
for 603.46 feet to a point on the southerly right-of-way line of Chicago and
Northwestern Railroad; thence southeasterly along the said southerly right-of-
way line along a 22968.86 foot radius curve to the left with a chord bearing of
S70°42'05"E, a chord of 1344.30 feet and a length of 1344.30 feet to the east
line of the SE1/4 NE1/4 of said Section 12; thence S00°31'43"E along said east
line for 16.67 feet to the point-of-beginning. This parcel contains 46.90
acres.
(Ord. 1115, 12-5-1994)
038-02: SKETCH PLAN:
On file with the Community Development Department of the City and made a part
of this rezoning approval, for concept description and delineation is the
sketch plan document for the Wrenwood Place PUD. It is recognized that minor
shifts or realignments of roadways may be necessary and compatible with the
need to acquire workable street patterns, grades and usable building sites, but
the general plan layout, including the relationship of uses to each other and
the relationship of dwelling unit types to the general plan framework, traffic
layout, and development requirements shall be used as the implementation guide.
Wherever conflict occurs between the written text in this document and the
notations on the sketch plan, the written text shall prevail. The sketch plan
is a graphic representation of the property included in the PUD delineating the
approximate location and configuration of the parcels for the purpose of easier
reference for the applicable regulations of this Ordinance. (Ord. 1267, 9-22-
1997)
038-03: GENERAL CONDITIONS:
Whereas, Title 9 of the West Des Moines City Code includes Chapter 9, PUD
Planned Unit Development District and establishes certain regulations and
guidelines pertaining to accompanying information required on a plat and site
plan documents.
   A.   Now, therefore, the following conditions, restrictions, and regulations
are adopted as part of this approval and the following general site plan
criteria shall be integrated into and made a part of the development criteria
for the Wrenwood Place PUD, to wit:
      1.   All subdivisions, public streets, public street rights-of-way and
general development shall adhere to the standards and design criteria set forth
in the West Des Moines Subdivision Ordinance and the Des Moines Metropolitan
Design Standards as adopted by the City of West Des Moines pertaining thereto,
unless otherwise stated within this Ordinance.
      2.   Any regulation, standard, provision or requirement that is not
specifically addressed within this document that is regulated elsewhere in the
City Code of West Des Moines, the requirements of the City Code are applicable
and shall be enforced.
      3.   In all areas within a 100-year frequency flood hazard zone, or
adjoining drainageways or detention areas involving potential flood hazards, no
building shall be erected which has a lowest floor, including basements, less
than one foot (1') above the determined level of the 100-year frequency flood
event or floodproofed to the same elevation in accordance with the West Des
Moines Floodplain Ordinance, and no building shall be erected within twenty
five feet (25') of any major drainage, storm water detention basin or pond.
      4.   The developer, their successors and assigns, if any, shall pay all
construction and engineering costs for the interior development of the planned
unit development, in accordance with the current City policies at the time of
development, as required by this Ordinance, the Subdivision Ordinance of the
City of West Des Moines, and the Des Moines Metropolitan Design Standards as
adopted by the City of West Des Moines, for all streets, storm sewers, sanitary
sewers, drainage improvements, detention basins, water mains, buffers and other
improvements within the PUD as may be required.
   B.   Land Use Design Criteria: In addition to the general conditions as
stated in subsection A above, the following land use design criteria shall
apply to the development areas designated by parcel on the sketch plan. The
sketch plan document which is made a part of this rezoning action per Section
038-02 of this Ordinance, delineates two (2) parcels of the PUD as Parcels A
and B for application of specific standards of land use and development
regulations. The following development standards and use regulations shall
apply to each of the individual parcels as applicable.
      1.   Parcel A: All general use regulations, performance standards and
provisions set forth in Title 9, Chapter 6 of the City Code for the RH
Residential High Density District of the City of West Des Moines, shall apply
to any development in Parcel A unless otherwise stated herein. The development
of Parcel A shall be limited to residential uses, with hotels and motels being
prohibited.
Parcel A, excluding the approximately nine and thirty six-hundredths (9.36)
acres identified as the Jordan Creek Greenbelt Park and approximately one and
sixty five-hundredths (1.65) acres of roadway, shall be a maximum of seventeen
and one-half (17.5) acres in size and limited to single-family attached,
townhouse units and multi-family residential units not to exceed a maximum of
eighteen (18) dwelling units per acre. The maximum number of units per building
shall not exceed thirty six (36) units per building for apartments and eight
(8) side-by-side townhouse units or twelve (12) back-to-back townhouse units.
The maximum number of dwelling units on Parcel A shall not exceed three hundred
ten (310).
No building taller than two (2) stories in height shall be located closer than
one hundred feet (100') to the public street right-of-way of E. P. True Parkway
or 60th Street. The maximum height of any building within Parcel A shall be
forty five feet (45').
         a.   Development Standards: Access to Parcel A from E. P. True Parkway
and 60th Street shall be limited and shall be reviewed and approved by the City
as part of the platting and/or site planning review process. Pedestrian access
shall be provided from Parcel A to the Jordan Creek Bike Trail located north of
Parcel A by the use of an independent paved or blacktopped walkway/bike path
acceptable to the City's Parks Department. A minimum twenty foot (20') wide
pedestrian/bike trail easement shall be established along the southern boundary
of the greenbelt park and the northern boundary of developable portion of
Parcel A within the delineated flood encroachment line per the City's Parks and
Recreation Department requirement.
         b.   Landscaped Buffer: A minimum thirty five foot (35') wide
landscaped buffer shall be established along 60th Street and E. P. True Parkway
for the purpose of screening and buffering residential units within Parcel A
from these streets. The landscaped buffer shall incorporate berming and
vegetative plantings to effectively screen and buffer said units from the
adjacent street with no building, internal drives, parking areas, fences or
structures of any type, except permitted signage, allowed.
The greenbelt park within Parcel A as shown on the sketch plan, attached and
made a part hereof, is agreed to be reserved for acquisition by the City for
public and park use. The greenbelt park shall be a minimum of six (6) acres in
area. The park land shall be conveyed by warranty deed free and clear of any
and all liens and encumbrances including all judgements, attachments, mechanics
and other liens. Grading may occur within the greenbelt park as shown on the
sketch plan other than areas delineated within the future flood channel for
Q100 flows which shall be maintained in its natural state. Grading and
excavation proposals shall be approved by the City during the preliminary
platting process and shall include a reclamation plan addressing stockpiling
and reuse of topsoil, erosion control measures, reseeding, and storm water
management.
The method of acquisition by the City for the greenbelt park shall be by mutual
agreement between the City and the developer. The agreement shall stipulate the
waiving of mandatory park land dedication fees in an amount equal to the value
of the greenbelt and as acceptable to both parties involved.
         c.   Pedestrian Access: Pedestrian access shall be provided from and
through Parcel A to the Jordan Creek Bike Trail located in the northern portion
of Parcel A by the use of an independent paved or blacktopped walkway/bike path
acceptable to the City's Parks and Recreation Department.
         d.   Setback: Setbacks shall be twenty feet (20') along the northern
property line, provided that the design and location of the future bike/
pedestrian trail is approved by the Parks and Recreation Department prior to
the issuance of a building permit. If a bridge crossing is chosen, the
developer shall deposit sufficient funds in an escrow account for the
construction of the bridge over Jordan Creek prior to the issuance of a
building permit.
      2.   Parcel B: All general use regulations, performance standards and
provisions set forth in Title 9, Chapter 5 of the City Code for the RH
Residential High Density District of the City of West Des Moines, shall apply
to any development in Parcel B unless otherwise stated herein.
Parcel B shall be a maximum of nineteen (19) acres in size and limited to
single-family attached, single-family detached, and townhouse units not to
exceed eight (8) units per building and a maximum of eight (8) dwelling units
per acre.
         a.   Development Standards: Access to Parcel B from E. P. True Parkway
and 60th Street shall be limited and shall be reviewed and approved by the City
as part of the platting and/or site planning review process.
         b.   Landscaped Buffer: A minimum thirty five foot (35') wide
landscaped buffer shall be established along 60th Street and E. P. True Parkway
for the purpose of screening and buffering residential units within Parcel B
from these streets. The landscaped buffer shall incorporate berming and
vegetative plantings to effectively screen and buffer said units from the
adjacent street with no building, internal drives, parking areas, fences or
structures of any type, except permitted signage, allowed.
         c.   Pedestrian Access: Pedestrian access shall be provided from
Parcel B to the Jordan Creek Bike Trail located in the northern portion of
Parcel A by the use of an independent paved or blacktopped walkway/bike path
acceptable to the City's Parks and Recreation Department. (Ord. 1267, 9-22-
1997)
038-04: ARCHITECTURE:
The architecture of multiple-family buildings within Parcel A and B shall be
acceptable to the City and accomplished in a manner compatible with the
adjoining residential uses in the neighborhood. Architectural design for multi-
family buildings shall attempt to express a creative presentation of exterior
building materials, exterior details and texture, treatment of windows and
doors, and use of angles and multiplicity of planes within the wall and roof
design to lessen the plainness of appearance which can be characteristic of
large residential buildings. (Ord. 1267, 9-22-1997)
038-05: MASTER PLANNING REQUIRED:
Prior to development within any part of any parcel, a master plan shall be
prepared showing the location of new public streets within and/or adjoining the
parcel in order to assure workable street patterns, grades and usable building
sites. (Ord. 1267, 9-22-1997)
038-06: DOUBLE-FRONTAGE LOTS:
All double-frontage lots shall be developed in accordance with Section 6-6.04
subsection 5, paragraph B of the West Des Moines Subdivision Ordinance. A
complete buffer plan shall be submitted to and approved by the City as part of
the platting process for the lots. Final responsibility for provision of the
buffer shall rest with the developer (subdivider) regardless of any pass-
through agreement. The City building inspector shall not issue an occupancy
permit for any of the affected lots until the buffer as required within this
Section is properly installed per approved plan specifications. (Ord. 1267, 9-
22-1997)
038-07: ALL AREAS TO BE PLATTED:
Prior to, or in conjunction with development or transfer of ownership of any
portion of the PUD, said area shall be platted in accordance with the City's
Subdivision Ordinance to delineate within a plat the parcel to be developed or
sold separately or any portion thereof. (Ord. 1267, 9-22-1997)
038-08: STORM WATER MANAGEMENT:
There shall be submitted to, and approved by the West Des Moines City Engineer,
a complete storm water management plan for each parcel of the PUD to be
prepared by the developer prior to development within each of the individual
parcels of the PUD and for all storm sewer and drainage systems within the PUD.
(Ord. 1267, 9-22-1997)
038-09: STREET RIGHTS-OF-WAY:
Adequate street right-of-way shall be provided for the construction,
reconstruction and widening of adjoining streets adjacent to, or within the
Wrenwood Place PUD. Said right-of-way shall be dedicated to the City at the
time of platting. (Ord. 1267, 9-22-1997)
038-10: E. P. TRUE PARKWAY PAVING:
The developer, Park Place Investments, shall sign a petition and waiver for all
costs associated with the construction of E. P. True Parkway through the
subject site up to and not to exceed the costs of paving thirty one feet (31')
of roadway section. (Ord. 1267, 9-22-1997)
038-11: 60TH STREET PAVING - NORTH:
The developer, Park Place Investments, shall sign a petition and waiver for all
cost associated with the construction of one-half (1/2) roadway width of 60th
Street adjacent to the site from E. P. True Parkway north to the northern
boundary of the subject site, projected fifteen and one-half foot (15.5')
width. (Ord. 1267, 9-22-1997)
038-12: 60TH STREET PAVING - SOUTH:
All cost associated with the construction of 60th Street adjacent to the site
from E. P. True Parkway south to the southern boundary of the subject site
shall be paid for by the developer up to and not to exceed the costs of paving
thirty one feet (31') of roadway section. A bond in the amount to cover said
cost shall be posted, or an acceptable alternative approved by the City, prior
to the recording of the final plat for the subject site. (Ord. 1267, 9-22-1997)
038-13: SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS:
   A.   Sanitary Trunk Sewer: With respect to any assessments by the City of
West Des Moines of special benefits conferred upon Parcels A and B of the
property, or any portion thereof, as a result of the design and construction of
sanitary trunk sewer improvements within the area the owner, on behalf of
itself and its successors and assigns (collectively by the "owner"), agrees
that such assessments may be spread against all of said parcels, as said
parcels exist on the date of assessment, by the City of West Des Moines on an
area basis.
   B.   Storm Water Detention: With respect to any assessments by the City of
West Des Moines of special benefits conferred upon Parcels A and B of the
property, or any portion thereof, as a result of the design and construction of
potential area-wide storm water detention improvements as determined by
engineering studies approved by the City of West Des Moines, the owner, on
behalf of itself and its successors and assigns (collectively by the "owner"),
agrees that such assessments may be spread against an of said parcels, as said
parcels exist on the date of assessment, by the City of West Des Moines on an
area basis.
   C.   Water Service Improvements: With respect to any assessments by the City
of West Des Moines of special benefits conferred upon Parcels A and B of the
property, or any portion hereof, as a result of the design and construction of
potential area-wide water service improvements as determined by engineering
studies approved by the City of West Des Moines, the owner, on behalf of itself
and its successors and assigns (collectively by the "owner"), agrees that such
assessments may be spread against all of said parcels, as said parcels exist on
the date of assessment, by the City of West Des Moines on an area basis.
The foregoing area assessment provisions are subject to the following
provision: Any assessment shall be reasonable and equitable in comparison to
the special benefits for such initial paving and widening assessed against the
property directly across the street from owner's parcel being assessed, and in
no event shall any payment by the owner exceed one-half (1/2) the cost of any
such initial paving and widening. (Ord. 1267, 9-22-1997)
038-99: LEGISLATIVE HISTORY:
Ord. 1049, 5-24-1993; Ord. 1115, 12-5-1994; Ord. 1267, 9-22-1997.
PUD #39
WATER TOWER PLACE
SECTION:
039-01: Legal Description
039-02: Sketch Plan
039-03: Conditions
039-04: Signage Regulations
039-05: Building Restrictions, Easements And Covenants
039-06: All Areas To Be Platted
039-07: Pedestrian Access And Orientation
039-08: Master Planning Required
039-09: Traffic Study Required
039-10: 42nd Street And University Avenue Improvements
039-11: Intersection Paving
039-12: Traffic Signals
039-13: Vehicular Access
039-14: Stormwater Management
039-15: Street Rights Of Way
039-16: Future Site Modifications
039-17: Existing Improvements Within Ultimate Public Street Rights Of Way
039-99: Legislative History
039-01: LEGAL DESCRIPTION:
The legal description for the Water Tower Place PUD is as follows:
A parcel of land in section 5, township 78 north, range 25 west of the 5th
P.M., West Des Moines, Polk County, Iowa, that is more particularly described
as follows:
Commencing as a point of reference at the north 1/4 corner of said section 5;
thence S00°00'00"E, 40.00 feet along the west line of the NE 1/4 of said
section to a point; S89°03'01"E, 921.51 feet along the south right-of-way line
of University Avenue, to the point of beginning; thence S89°03'01"E, 308.55
feet along said right-of-way to a point; thence S00°00'51"E, 375.34 feet to a
point; thence N89°03'17"W, 309.02 feet to a point; thence N00°05'09"E, 375.35
feet to a point of beginning and containing 2.930 acres more or less.
(Ord. 1582, 6-7-2004)
039-02: SKETCH PLAN:
On file in the city is the sketch plan document for the Water Tower Place PUD
marked "exhibit B". It is recognized that minor shifts or realignments of
roadways may be necessary and compatible with the need to acquire workable
street patterns, grades and usable building sites, but the general plan layout,
including the relationship of uses to each other and the relationship of
dwelling unit types to the general plan framework, traffic layout, and
development requirements shall be used as the implementation guide. Wherever
conflict occurs between the written text in this document and the notations on
the sketch plan, the written text shall prevail. The sketch plan is a graphic
representation of the property included in the PUD delineating the approximate
location and configuration of the parcels for the purpose of easier reference
for the applicable regulations of this ordinance. (Ord. 1582, 6-7-2004)
039-03: CONDITIONS:
Whereas, title 9, chapter 9, "PUD Planned Unit Development District" of the
city code establishes certain regulations and guidelines pertaining to
accompanying information required on a plat and site plan documents. Now,
therefore, the following conditions, restrictions, and regulations are adopted
as part of this approval, to wit:
   A.   General Conditions: The sketch plan incorporates office and commercial/
retail land uses which shall be distributed by area, types and location
according to the sketch plan as presented. In addition, the following general
site plan criteria shall be integrated into and made a part of the Water Tower
Place PUD and sketch plan document.
      1.   All subdivisions, public streets, public street rights of way and
general development shall adhere to the standards and design criteria set forth
in the West Des Moines subdivision ordinance and the Des Moines metropolitan
design standards as adopted by the city of West Des Moines pertaining thereto
unless otherwise stated within this ordinance.
      2.   The development shall comply with title 9, chapter 15, "Off Street
Parking And Loading Areas", chapter 3, section 9, open space requirements, and
chapter 1, section 2, site plans of the West Des Moines city code, and title 9,
chapter 9, "Planned Unit Development District", sections 6 and 8.
      3.   In all areas within a 100-year frequency flood hazard zone, or
adjoining drainageways or detention areas involving potential flood hazards, no
building shall be erected which has a lowest floor, including basement, less
than one foot (1') above the determined level of the 100-year frequency flood
event, and no building shall be erected within twenty five feet (25') of any
major drainageway, stormwater detention basin or pond.
      4.   The developer, their successors and assigns, if any, shall pay all
construction and engineering costs for the interior development of the planned
unit development, as required by this ordinance, or the subdivision ordinance
of the city of West Des Moines, Iowa, for all streets, storm sewers, sanitary
sewers, drainageway improvements, detention basins, water mains, buffers and
other improvements within the PUD as may be required by the city code or this
ordinance. (Ord. 1180, 5-20-1996; amd. Ord. 1582, 6-7-2004)
   B.   Land Use Design Criteria: In addition to the general conditions as
stated in subsection A of this section, the following land use design criteria
shall apply to the legally described property herein:
All general use regulations, performance standards and provisions set forth in
title 9, chapter 11, "PCP Professional Commerce Park District", of the city
code shall apply to any development proposal for the property except as shall
be further provided herein. The following development standards and use
regulations shall apply to property as applicable: (Ord. 1446, 5-29-2001; amd.
Ord. 1582, 6-7-2004)
      1.   Development Standards: Allowed uses shall include all permitted and
permitted conditional uses (Pc) within the professional commerce park district
(PCP) and regional commercial district (RC), except gasoline service stations
(SIC 554), recreation vehicle repair centers (part of SIC 7699), restaurants
with drive-through facilities (part of SIC 5812), and any and all drive-through
facilities except banks and home improvement centers.
In addition, a home improvement center shall be allowed within this PUD with
the approval of a permitted conditional use permit. Home improvement centers
shall be considered to be combination of uses from the following SIC
classifications:   SIC 52 – building materials, hardware and garden supply
dealers, except 527 (mobile home dealers); SIC 53 – general merchandise stores;
and SIC 57 – furniture, home furnishings, and equipment stores.
         a.   Parcel A: Multiple buildings on a site be consistent in
architectural design and use of materials and organized utilizing a compatible
planned open space, landscape plan, and parking plan to serve and maintain a
unified master plan concept; multiple buildings separated by parking areas or
drives and lots less than two (2) acres in size may be considered acceptable if
approved by the plan and zoning commission and city council as an acceptable
master development plan for the property legally described herein. Buildings
containing PCP district uses and hotels, motels and associated conventions
facilities may exceed thirty five feet (35') in height. Yard requirements shall
comply with standards of the PCP district; provided, however, the front yard
building setback from University Avenue right of way shall be a minimum of one
hundred feet (100'), and the minimum building setback from 42nd Street shall be
five feet (5') from the ultimate street right of way line between the Water
Tower PUD's southern property line north to the centerline of the property's
internal drive that ultimately aligns with Corporate Drive (the first street to
the north). The remainder of the PUD building setback along 42nd Street shall
be one hundred feet (100'). The minimum building setback from 36th Street shall
be one hundred feet (100'). The rear yard building setback from the south
property line shall be thirty feet (30') when building separation as required
by applicable codes is provided between buildings within this development and
buildings on adjoining properties. The minimum parking lot and/or drive setback
shall be a minimum of twenty feet (20') from the ultimate street right of way
line along 36th Street; and ten feet (10') from the ultimate street right of
way line along 42nd Street; while no parking lot setback shall be required from
the ultimate street right of way line of University Avenue for that portion of
the development lying east of the primary University Avenue access. A minimum
eighty foot (80') setback shall be provided from the ultimate right of way line
of University Avenue for that portion lying west of the primary access. The
setback area shall be utilized, designed, and improved as a landscaped buffer
area effectively screening all parking and drive areas from public view and
presenting an attractive view or element to the area.
         b.   Parcel B: Multiple buildings on a site be consistent in
architectural design and use of materials and organized utilizing a compatible
planned open space, landscape plan, and parking plan to serve and maintain a
unified master plan concept; multiple buildings separated by parking areas or
drives and lots less than two (2) acres in size may be considered acceptable if
approved by the plan and zoning commission and city council as an acceptable
master development plan for the property legally described herein.
The front yard building setback from University Avenue shall be a minimum of
one hundred twenty four feet (124'), and shall be measured from the anticipated
full right of way as determined by the city during the review process.
The side yard building setback shall be a minimum of fifty feet (50') from the
main north-south driveway on the east side of parcel B, and zero feet (0') from
the west parcel boundary. The rear yard building setback shall be a minimum of
fifty feet (50') from the south parcel boundary.
No parking lot setback shall be required from the ultimate street right of way
line of University Avenue for that portion of the development lying east of the
primary University Avenue access. Parking lot setbacks from private driveways
shall be a minimum of seven feet (7').
Parking lot setbacks adjacent to public streets shall be utilized, designed,
and improved as a landscaped buffer area effectively screening all parking and
drive areas from public view and presenting an attractive view or element to
the area.
      2.   Outside Displays: Outside displays for retail sales shall only be
allowed with the issuance of a temporary use permit under the provisions of
title 9, temporary use permits, of the city code. Garden centers surrounded by
a permanent enclosure and attached to a home improvement center which are
approved as part of a permitted conditional use permit by the city council
shall not be considered an outdoor display area for retail sales herein.
However, merchandise or displays which are set up in the sidewalk or parking
lot in front of a home improvement center, attached garden center or grocery
store shall be considered an outdoor display, and are permitted only with the
approval of a temporary use permit. (Ord. 1924, 5-31-2011)
      3.   Outdoor Storage: Any outdoor storage shall be screened from public
view by the use of screen walls as approved by the city. Outdoor storage shall
not be permitted to extend above the height of the screen at any time. No long
term outdoor storage of shopping carts associated with any use within the PUD
shall be permitted. "Long term storage" shall be defined as any time period in
excess of three (3) hours. (Ord. 1446, 5-29-2001; amd. Ord. 1582, 6-7-2004)
      4.   Open Space Requirement: A minimum of twenty five percent (25%) of
the total site area (both parcels A and B) shall be dedicated to open space as
defined by the city code. No additional ten percent (10%) open space shall be
required for paved areas; however, efforts shall be made to accommodate all
other landscape provisions in title 9, chapter 19, "Landscaping", of the city
code relating to landscaping of off street parking areas. The water tower site
shall be included in the open space calculations pursuant to the landscaping
and open space easement recorded on May 27, 1996, in book 7641, page 852 in the
records of Polk County, Iowa.
      5.   Architecture: Architectural design and use of materials for the
construction of any building within the property shall be accomplished in a
manner compatible with PCP professional commerce park zone district building
materials. The architectural design of any building shall be acceptable to the
city and all buildings within the property shall have as a primary element of
the exterior being face brick with all sides of any building built on the
property consistent in design and use of materials. No wood, masonite, visible
asphaltic exterior wall or roof material, aluminum siding, nonarchitectural
sheet metal, concrete block, or other similar materials shall constitute a
portion of any building except as a trim material, unless the city council of
West Des Moines, after having received a recommendation from the planning and
zoning commission of West Des Moines shall determine said material when used as
a primary element, enhances the physical appearance, or provides continuity
desired to unite all structures within the property together into one project
concept. Due to the proximity of the building to the ultimate street right of
way, the western facade of any building adjacent to 42nd Street shall be
architecturally enhanced to provide visual interest and break up otherwise
blank facades.
      6.   Buffering: Adequate buffering of negative aspects of commercial
buildings (loading docks, garbage dumpsters and HVAC mechanical units) from any
public street and adjoining properties shall be required. Commercial retail
buildings shall not be located and designed to expose loading docks or doors,
loading areas or the rear of buildings to public streets.
Buffering of the multi-family development, located on the southwest corner of
University Avenue and 36th Street, shall be accomplished in accordance with the
provisions of the buffer ordinance, ordinance 1073. A buffer wall, located
along the east property line that divides this PUD from the multi-family
development, consisting of landscape materials and/or a fence incorporating
brick architectural elements, or a combination of both, shall only be
considered acceptable upon the submittal of a written agreement executed by the
owner of said property. (Ord. 1924, 5-31-2011)
039-04: SIGNAGE REGULATIONS:
No pole sign, as defined by the West Des Moines city sign code, shall be
incorporated into any development within the Water Tower Place PUD.
All proposed ground and exterior wall signage requires a sign permit issued by
the city of West Des Moines through normal sign review procedures. Unless
otherwise prescribed herein, signage shall abide by the standards and
regulations as set forth in title 9, chapter 18, "Signs", of the city code for
the regional commercial (RC) district.
   A.   Ground Signs:
      1.   Development Sign:
         a.   One development sign which identifies the name of the development
and a maximum of two (2) tenants within the development shall be allowed at the
corner of 42nd Street and University Avenue.
         b.   The name of the development shall be the predominant copy on the
sign with the tenant copy smaller and secondary to the development
identification copy. The tenant identification copy area shall not exceed fifty
percent (50%) of the total sign structure area. The tenant copy area shall be
comprised of individually attached and illuminated letters or a panel sign
sized and treated (opaque vinyl or router face) to minimize the amount of the
sign area that illuminates.
         c.   Development and tenant identification copy shall be located no
higher than nine feet (9'). No additional mounding or berming of soil shall be
allowed to elevate the sign except as required as part of a site plan for
screening purposes.
         d.   Existing sign may not be relocated closer to the University
Avenue street right of way and shall not be located within the ultimate street
right of way without approval by the city of West Des Moines. The sign shall be
set back a minimum of twenty feet (20') from the ultimate public street right
of way line of 42nd Street. New signs shall be located out of the vision
triangles for an intersection.
      2.   Tenant Monument Signs:
         a.   A maximum of one tenant monument sign per frontage per lot which
identifies businesses located within the development shall be allowed.
         b.   Existing signs may not be increased in size without the approval
of the city council. New tenant monument signs shall meet code requirements for
either a "landscape" or "monument" sign as defined in city code. The tenant
copy area shall be comprised of a router face panel to minimize the amount of
the sign area that illuminates and give the appearance of individual letters.
         c.   Existing signs may not be relocated closer to a street right of
way. New signs shall abide by code requirements for setbacks as determined by
the intended size and type of sign. No sign shall be located within the
ultimate street right of way and new signs shall be located out of the vision
triangles for an intersection.
         d.   Said signs shall be landscaped at the base of the sign. No
additional mounding or berming of soil shall be allowed to elevate the sign
except as required as part of a site plan for screening purposes.
      3.   Directional Signs:
         a.   Directional signs may be allowed interior to the development to
assist in directing patrons through the site. The intent of directional signage
is not to draw people off of the public street, so letter size and sign
location shall be designed to minimize visibility and readability from the
exterior of the property. Said signs shall be placed at vehicle decision points
to aid in directing patrons around the site.
         b.   Said signage may contain tenant identification.
         c.   Said sign structure shall be a maximum height of four feet (4')
and shall not exceed forty (40) square feet in size.
   B.   Wall Signage: All signage constructed as wall signs on building fascia
within the PUD shall incorporate aesthetic features compatible with the overall
character of the development. All wall signs will be composed of solid
individual letters attached to the building fascia, or individual letters of
anodized aluminum, galvanized metal, illuminated self-contained with
translucent plastic faces set in anodized aluminum returns and trim; panel
signs with letters incorporated or painted upon a panel or wall area shall be
prohibited. Advertising or promotional temporary signage attached to exterior
windows or walls including exposed neon lights visible from the exterior of the
building shall be prohibited. (Ord. 1924, 5-31-2011)
039-05: BUILDING RESTRICTIONS, EASEMENTS AND COVENANTS:
The developer shall, with the approval of the city council, adopt building
restrictions, easements and covenants pertaining to the property where the
developer and the city deem appropriate. (Ord. 1180, 5-20-1996; amd. Ord. 1582,
6-7-2004; Ord. 1924, 5-31-2011)
039-06: ALL AREAS TO BE PLATTED:
Prior to, or in conjunction with development or transfer of ownership of any
portion of the PUD, said area shall be platted in accordance with the city's
subdivision ordinance to delineate within a plat the parcel to be developed or
sold separately or any portion thereof. (Ord. 1180, 5-20-1996; amd. Ord. 1582,
6-7-2004; Ord. 1924, 5-31-2011)
039-07: PEDESTRIAN ACCESS AND ORIENTATION:
Pedestrian access shall be provided from all adjacent properties to the
commercial uses developed within the Water Tower Place PUD. The design and/or
location of the pedestrian walkways shall be determined at the platting stage
with a master pedestrian circulation plan being reviewed and approved as a
component of the platting approval of the Water Tower Place PUD area. The
intent of this requirement is to discourage the use of motorized vehicles for
employees and tenants within the area who desire to frequent the commercial
uses within the area. The pedestrian access should also be provided to
developments to the east. At the time a site plan is submitted for approval,
pedestrian and car conflict points are to be identified. Visual changes to the
built environment, such as, but not limited to, material changes with texture,
color, and appearance shall be identified on the site to identify such
conflicts to the users. The use of other traffic control measures may also be
required within the site for safety. (Ord. 1180, 5-20-1996; amd. Ord. 1582, 6-
7-2004; Ord. 1924, 5-31-2011)
039-08: MASTER PLANNING REQUIRED:
Prior to development within any part of the PUD, a master plan shall be
prepared showing the location of new public streets within or adjoining the
parcel in order to assure workable street patterns, grades, and usable building
sites. The master plan should also address building locations, pedestrian
orientation and/or access, and other elements identified within this PUD. (Ord.
1180, 5-20-1996; amd. Ord. 1582, 6-7-2004; Ord. 1924, 5-31-2011)
039-09: TRAFFIC STUDY REQUIRED:
Prior to development within any part of the PUD, a traffic study shall be
completed and approved by the city for the purpose of determining traffic
impacts and required improvements. The traffic study shall be amended at such
time that the amount or type of commercial uses, included in the original
study, are to be increased or changed that significantly diminish the validity
of the original report. (Ord. 1180, 5-20-1996; amd. Ord. 1582, 6-7-2004; Ord.
1924, 5-31-2011)
039-10: 42ND STREET AND UNIVERSITY AVENUE IMPROVEMENTS:
All cost associated with the widening and construction of 42nd Street and
University Avenue adjacent to the site shall be paid for by the developer up to
and not to exceed the equivalent costs of paving one-half (1/2) of thirty one
feet (31') of roadway section. (Ord. 1924, 5-31-2011)
039-11: INTERSECTION PAVING:
All cost associated with the construction of all new and existing intersections
adjacent to the site shall be paid for by the developer including paving to the
future ultimate widths with the returns along University Avenue and 42nd Street
(end of returns shall be a minimum including temporary tapers). (Ord. 1180, 5-
20-1996; amd. Ord. 1582, 6-7-2004; Ord. 1924, 5-31-2011)
039-12: TRAFFIC SIGNALS:
The owner, on behalf of itself, its successors and assigns, agrees to commit to
cost associated with the provision of traffic signals as deemed necessary and
identified by the required traffic study. (Ord. 1180, 5-20-1996; amd. Ord.
1582, 6-7-2004; Ord. 1924, 5-31-2011)
039-13: VEHICULAR ACCESS:
Vehicular access from University Avenue and 42nd Street shall be restricted and
limited as deemed necessary and identified in the required traffic study. (Ord.
1180, 5-20-1996; amd. Ord. 1582, 6-7-2004; Ord. 1924, 5-31-2011)
039-14: STORMWATER MANAGEMENT:
There shall be submitted to, and approved by the West Des Moines city engineer,
a complete stormwater management plan for the PUD to be prepared by the
developer prior to development within the PUD and for all storm sewer and
drainage systems within the PUD. (Ord. 1180, 5-20-1996; amd. Ord. 1582, 6-7-
2004; Ord. 1924, 5-31-2011)
039-15: STREET RIGHTS OF WAY:
The ultimate right of way required for University Avenue for this area has been
determined to be one hundred sixty five feet (165') of full width street right
of way (82.5 feet from each side of centerline). As a part of any expansion,
redevelopment, or other modification within this PUD with a site plan, plat, or
minor modification of any parcel or lot within this PUD that has University
Avenue frontage or at such time as requested by the city of West Des Moines as
a part of a University Avenue widening project, the developer of said parcel or
lot shall deed to the city of West Des Moines the additional right of way that
may be necessary to provide its full half of the ultimate required full right
of way for University Avenue. Said right of way shall be graded to conform to
typical city right of way cross section. (Ord. 1582, 6-7-2004; amd. Ord. 1924,
5-31-2011)
039-16: FUTURE SITE MODIFICATIONS:
It is understood that existing individual lease agreements require provision of
a certain number of parking stalls. At the writing of this ordinance amendment,
it is known that the overall Water Tower Place Development is deficient in the
amount of open space area provided and is not in full compliance with current
stormwater management requirements. Additionally, it is known that the site
contains an excess of parking stalls above that required by city code.
Therefore, as lease agreements expire, the applicant shall endeavor to
renegotiate the requirements of said agreements to reduce the number of parking
stalls required by tenant agreements and thus required within the overall
development. The unnecessary and excess parking areas shall be returned to
green space with the overall goal of achieving and maintaining the minimum open
space percentage required and providing for the site's minimum stormwater
detention needs. (Ord. 1924, 5-31-2011)
039-17: EXISTING IMPROVEMENTS WITHIN ULTIMATE PUBLIC STREET RIGHTS OF WAY:
It is known that some site improvements, including, but not limited to,
landscaping, signs, stormwater basins, irrigation equipment and other minor
appurtenances fall within the ultimate rights of way for adjoining public
streets. It is agreed that such improvements may remain until such time that
the public streets are to be widened and it is determined that the structures/
improvements are in the way. Removal of said structures/improvements shall be
by the developer of the shopping center and not the city and the city shall not
provide payment for these structures/improvements nor reimburse any cost to
remove said structures/improvements. Furthermore, should repair or replacement
of the utilities within the ultimate street rights of way cause damage to said
structures/improvements, it shall be the responsibility of the developer to
repair such damage to said structure/improvements at the developer's expense.
(Ord. 1924, 5-31-2011)
039-99: LEGISLATIVE HISTORY:
Ord. 1096, 8-15-1994; Ord. 1124, 3-27-1995; Ord. 1180, 5-20-1996; Ord. 1264, 8-
11-1997; Ord. 1446, 5-29-2001; Ord. 1582, 6-7-2004; Ord. 1924, 5-31-2011.
PUD #40
THREE FOUNTAINS COMMERCIAL
SECTION:
040-01: Legal Description
040-02: Sketch Plan
040-03: Conditions
040-04: Signage Regulation
040-05: Building Restrictions, Easements And Covenants
040-06: All Areas To Be Platted
040-07: Pedestrian Access And Orientation
040-08: Master Planning Required
040-09: Traffic Study Required
040-10: Corporate Drive Improvements
040-11: Intersection Paving
040-12: Traffic Signals
040-13: Vehicular Access
040-14: Stormwater Management
040-15: Lighting Requirements
040-16: Violations And Penalties
040-99: Legislative History
040-01: LEGAL DESCRIPTION:
The legal description for the Three Fountains Commercial PUD is as follows:
Lots 1, 2, and 3, Three Fountains Plat No. 2, an Official Plat, West Des
Moines, Polk County, Iowa. Said tract of land being subject to and together
with any and all easements of record. Said tract of land contains 12.206 acres
more or less.
And
Lot 1 K.V.I. Plat No. 1, an official plat now included in and forming a part of
the City of West Des Moines, Polk County, Iowa. Said tract of land contains
17.75 acres more or less.
(Ord. 1296, 4-6-1998)
040-02: SKETCH PLAN:
On file with the community development department of the city and made a part
of this rezoning approval for concept description and delineation is the sketch
plan document for the Three Fountains Commercial PUD. It is recognized, minor
shifts or modifications to a sketch plan layout may be necessary and compatible
with the need to acquire workable circulation patterns and usable building
sites, but the sketch plan layout, including the relationship of uses to each
other and the relationship of land use to the sketch plan framework, and
development requirements shall be used as an implementation guide. (Ord. 1296,
4-6-1998)
040-03: CONDITIONS:
Whereas, title 9 of the West Des Moines city code includes chapter 9, PUD
Planned Unit Development District and establishes certain regulations and
guidelines pertaining to accompanying information required on a plat and site
plan documents. Now, therefore, the following conditions, restrictions, and
regulations are adopted as part of this approval, to wit:
   A.   General Conditions: The sketch plan incorporates office and commercial/
retail land uses which shall be distributed by area, types and location
according to the sketch plan as presented. In addition, the following general
site plan criteria shall be integrated into and made a part of the Three
Fountains Commercial PUD and sketch plan document.
      1.   All subdivisions, public streets, public street rights of way and
general development shall adhere to the standards and design criteria set forth
in the West Des Moines subdivision ordinance and the Des Moines metropolitan
design standards as adopted by the city of West Des Moines pertaining thereto
unless otherwise stated within this ordinance.
      2.   The development shall comply with title 9 of the West Des Moines
city code.
      3.   In all areas within a 100-year frequency flood hazard zone, or
adjoining drainageways or detention areas involving potential flood hazards, no
building shall be erected which has a lowest floor, including basements, less
than one foot (1') above the determined level of the 100-year frequency flood
event, and no building shall be erected within twenty five feet (25') of any
major drainageway, stormwater detention basin or pond.
      4.   The developer, their successors and assigns, if any, shall pay all
construction and engineering costs for the interior development of the planned
unit development, as required by this ordinance, or the subdivision ordinance
of the city of West Des Moines, Iowa, for all streets, storm sewers, sanitary
sewers, drainageway improvements, detention basins, water mains, buffers and
other improvements within the PUD as may be required by the city code or this
ordinance.
   B.   Land Use Design Criteria: In addition to the general conditions as
stated in subsection A above, the following land use design criteria shall
apply to the legally described property herein.
All general use regulations, performance standards and provisions set forth in
title 9, Zoning, chapter 11 for the PCP professional commerce park district
shall apply to any development proposal for the property except as shall be
further provided herein. The following development standards and use
regulations shall apply to property as applicable.
      1.   Development Standards: The planned unit development area
incorporates two (2) parcels. Parcel A shall not exceed twelve point two
hundred six (12.206) acres and parcel B shall not exceed seventeen and three-
fourths (17.75) acres. Specific uses allowed on each parcel are identified
below:
      2.   Parcel A Uses:
         a.   Permitted uses shall include all uses allowed within the PCP
professional commerce park district and all uses permitted within the SC
support commercial district, except as noted elsewhere in this ordinance.
         b.   Other uses permitted (P) allowed in parcel A (by SIC number):
52 Paint wallpaper (523)
54 Dairy store (545)
54 Candy, nut, and confectionery stores (544)
56 Apparel and accessory store (56)
57 Furniture stores (5712)
   Household appliance stores (5722)
   Radio, television, & consumer electronics stores (5731)
   Computer and computer software stores (5734)
   Record and prerecorded tape stores (5735)
   Musical instrument stores (5736)
59 Used merchandise stores - antique shops (5932.02)
   Sporting goods stores and bicycle shops (5941)
   Bookstore (5942)
   Stationery stores (5943)
   Jewelry stores (5944)
   Hobby, toy & game shop (5946)
   Gift, novelty & souvenir shops (5947)
   Luggage & leather goods (5948)
   Notions (5949)
   Florist (5992)
   Miscellaneous retail stores (5999) except those noted in subsection B2c
   below
72 Garment making, alteration, and repair (7219.01)
76 Radio, TV sale, repair (7622)
78 Theaters (7832)
   Videotape rentals (784)
79 Dance studios, schools, and halls (791)
   Theatrical productions (792)
 
         c.   Uses not permitted:
Any use which has outside display areas for retail sales or outside storage
Bars and taverns, any uses that sell alcoholic beverages that do not have a
minimum of sixty percent (60%) of their annual sales attributed to food sales
Travel trailer parks
62 Hardware (525)
   Landscape garden (526) or landscape garden plant stores
54 Meat and fish markets (542)
55 Gasoline service stations, automobile dealers and service station (55)
58 Eating places with drive-throughs (5812)
59 Farm equipment and supply store (6999)
   Monument and tombstone stores (5999)
   Mail order display (5941) (5961)
75 Automotive repair, service, and parking (75)
76 Miscellaneous repair shops and related services (769)
 
         d.   Drive-through uses: Allowed uses which include a drive-through
component will be limited to a maximum of three (3) such uses in parcel A. The
length of the drive through queuing lane shall be such to accommodate the
minimum number of vehicles stated in the city code, except for establishments
with less than one thousand (1,000) square feet in gross floor area serving
only beverages via the drive through. For such establishments, a total of nine
(9) vehicle queuing spaces (four (4) of which are required to be designated for
the ordering station) shall be required. This reduction in the number of
vehicles to be accommodated within the queue lane shall only be permitted if an
associated traffic study indicates no anticipated impact to adjoining public
streets or a main vehicle drive aisle within the development.
      3.   Parcel B Uses:
         a.   Permitted uses shall include all uses allowed within the PCP
professional commerce park district.
         b.   Uses not permitted include any use which has outside display
areas for retail sales or outside storage.
Multiple buildings on a site shall be consistent in architectural design and
use of materials and organized utilizing a compatible planned open space,
landscape plan, and parking plan to serve and maintain a unified master plan
concept; multiple buildings separated by parking areas or drives and lots less
than two (2) acres in size may be considered acceptable if approved by the
planning and zoning commission and city council as an acceptable master
development plan for the property legally described herein.
Buildings containing PCP district uses and hotels, motels and associated
conventions facilities may exceed thirty five feet (35') in height. Yard
requirements shall comply with standards of the PCP district; provided,
however, the front yard building setback from any street right of way or right
of way easement shall be a minimum of fifty feet (50'). Any freestanding
buildings shall be located no closer than one hundred twenty feet (120') from
the ultimate right of way of University Avenue. The minimum parking lot and/or
drive setback shall be a minimum of thirty feet (30') along University and
Corporate Drive and shall be measured from the anticipated full right of way as
determined by the city during the platting or site plan process and shall be
utilized, designed, and improved as a landscaped buffer area effectively
screening all parking and drive areas from public view and presenting an
attractive view or element to the area.
      4.   Architecture: Architectural design and use of materials for the
construction of any building within the property shall be accomplished in a
manner compatible with PCP professional commerce park district building
materials. The architectural design and use of materials for the construction
of any building within the property shall be accomplished in a manner
consistent with PCP professional commerce park district building materials.
Color and material boards shall be presented with the site plan to ensure
compatibility with surrounding office buildings.
No wood, masonite, visible asphaltic exterior wall or roof material, aluminum
siding, nonarchitectural sheet metal, concrete block, or other similar
materials shall constitute a portion of any building except as a trim material,
unless the city council of West Des Moines, after having received a
recommendation from the planning and zoning commission of West Des Moines shall
determine said material when used as a primary element, enhances the physical
appearance, or provides continuity desired to unite all structures within the
property together into one project concept.
      5.   Buffering: Adequate buffering of negative aspects of commercial
buildings (loading docks, garbage dumpsters and HVAC mechanical units) from any
public street and adjoining properties shall be required. Commercial retail
buildings shall not be located and designed to expose loading docks or doors,
loading areas or the rear of buildings to public streets. (Ord. 1296, 4-6-1998)
      6.   Building Setback Requirements: A minimum separation distance of
forty feet (40') between primary buildings, regardless of the property line
location shall be reflected on all site plans submitted for consideration by
the planning and zoning commission and city council. Principal and accessory
buildings and structures shall be setback a minimum of fifty feet (50') from
the east property line and the ultimate right-of-way line of adjoining
roadways, except that accessory buildings or structures serving a principal
building or use within the site shall be setback a minimum of seventy-five feet
(75') from the University Avenue ultimate right-of-way line. (Ord. 1296, 4-6-
1998; amd. Ord. 2070, 12-1-2014; Ord. 2492, 10-4-2021; Ord. 2593, 12-18-2023)
040-04: SIGNAGE REGULATION:
No pole sign, as defined by the West Des Moines city sign code, shall be
incorporated into any development within the Three Fountains Commercial PUD.
Ground sign standards shall be used for the construction of freestanding
signage as provided for within the West Des Moines city sign code for the PCP
professional commerce park district; unless otherwise modified herein.
A total of three (3) ground monument signs shall be allowed on University
Avenue for the uses located in the Three Fountains Commercial PUD following the
following criteria: two (2) ground monument signs for K.V.I. plat no. 1 and one
ground monument sign for lots 1, 2, and 3, Three Fountains plat no. 2. A
minimum separation of three hundred feet (300') shall be observed between
ground monument signs, however, such sign may be placed at any location along
University Avenue within Three Fountains Commercial PUD as long as the minimum
separation is met. No monument signs shall be located along Corporate Drive.
Ground monument signs may display any tenant or lot owner located within the
Three Fountains Commercial PUD.
K.V.I. Plat No. 1: Signage shall follow the PCP professional commerce park
standards, as provided for within the West Des Moines city sign code.
Lots 1, 2, And 3, Three Fountains Plat No. 2: The existing monument sign on the
site shall not exceed sixty four (64) square feet in size or nine feet (9') in
height, and shall be set back from the ultimate right of way line a minimum of
twenty feet (20'). This existing nine foot (9') monument sign may be moved to a
new location on the site as long as the minimum twenty foot (20') setback and
three hundred foot (300') minimum separation requirements are met. The height
of the existing sign shall include any base of the sign and extend to the
midpoint of the cap sign. The measurement of the existing monument sign shall
not include side brick elements, provided that the brick material, i.e.,
columns, on each side of the sign, shall not extend beyond twelve inches (12")
from the monument sign. Lettering on all monument signs shall be cutout
lettering with copy backlight with translucent acrylic material or the
translucent acrylic letter is pushed through the opening. Any new ground
monument signs added to the site shall meet the West Des Moines city sign code
requirements for ground monument signs (or equivalent), including, but not
limited to, maximum number of signs, maximum sign size, maximum sign height,
minimum setback and minimum distance from other signs.
All signage constructed as wall signs on building fascia within the PUD shall
incorporate aesthetic features compatible with the overall character of the
development. All wall signs will be composed of solid individual letters
attached to the building fascia, or individual letters of anodized aluminum,
galvanized metal, illuminated self-contained with translucent plastic faces set
in anodized aluminum returns and trim; panel signs with letters incorporated or
painted upon a panel or wall area shall be prohibited. Temporary advertising or
promotional signage attached to exterior windows or walls shall be allowed only
with an approved temporary signage permit issued through the building
department under the provisions for temporary signage in the city code. Signs
with exposed neon lights, moving lights or flashing lights visible from the
exterior of the building shall be prohibited. (Ord. 1372, 6-28-1999)
Building (wall) signage shall be allowed according to the provisions of the
sign ordinance, title 9, Zoning, chapter 18, Signs, except that the longest
wall of a building less than one thousand (1,000) square feet may be used for
the wall signage allowance calculation. (Ord. 2070, 12-1-2014; amd. Ord. 2492,
10-4-2021)
040-05: BUILDING RESTRICTIONS, EASEMENTS AND COVENANTS:
The developer shall with the approval of the city council adopt building
restrictions, easements and covenants pertaining to the property where the
developer and the city deem appropriate. (Ord. 1296, 4-6-1998)
040-06: ALL AREAS TO BE PLATTED:
Prior to, or in conjunction with development or transfer of ownership of any
portion of the PUD, said area shall be platted in accordance with the city's
subdivision ordinance to delineate within a plat, the parcel to be developed or
sold separately or any portion thereof. (Ord. 1296, 4-6-1998)
040-07: PEDESTRIAN ACCESS AND ORIENTATION:
Pedestrian access shall be provided from all adjacent properties to the
commercial uses developed within the Three Fountains Commercial PUD. The design
and/or location of the pedestrian walkways shall be determined at the site plan
development or platting stage with a master pedestrian circulation plan being
reviewed and approved as a component of the first plat or with the first site
plan approval within the Three Fountains Commercial PUD. The intent of this
area requirement is to discourage the use of motorized vehicles for employees
and tenants within the surrounding office buildings desiring to frequent the
commercial uses within the area and encourage pedestrian traffic. The
pedestrian access should also be provided to developments on the surrounding
properties. (Ord. 1296, 4-6-1998)
040-08: MASTER PLANNING REQUIRED:
Prior to development within any part of the PUD, a master plan shall be
prepared showing the location of new public streets within or adjoining the
parcel in order to assure workable street patterns, grades, and usable building
sites. The master plan should also address building locations, pedestrian
orientation and/or access, and other elements identified within this PUD. (Ord.
1296, 4-6-1998)
040-09: TRAFFIC STUDY REQUIRED:
Prior to development within any part of the PUD, a traffic study shall be
completed and approved by the city for the purpose of determining traffic
impacts and required improvements. (Ord. 1296, 4-6-1998)
040-10: CORPORATE DRIVE IMPROVEMENTS:
All cost associated with the widening and construction of Corporate Drive to
provide a left turn pocket at 42nd Street shall be paid for by the developer as
agreed upon and based upon the finding of the traffic report and the city's
analysis of the future traffic needs. A bond in the amount to cover said cost
shall be posted, or an acceptable alternative approved by the city, prior to
the recording of the final plat for any portion of the PUD or issuance of a
building permit within the PUD. (Ord. 1296, 4-6-1998)
040-11: INTERSECTION PAVING:
All cost associated with the construction of all new and existing intersections
adjacent to the site shall be paid for by the developer including paving to the
future ultimate widths with the returns along University Avenue and Corporate
Drive (end of returns shall be a minimum including temporary tapers). (Ord.
1296, 4-6-1998)
040-12: TRAFFIC SIGNALS:
The owner on behalf of itself, its successors and assigns agrees to commit to
cost associated with the provision of traffic signals as deemed necessary and
identified by the required traffic study. (Ord. 1296, 4-6-1998)
040-13: VEHICULAR ACCESS:
Vehicular access from University Avenue and Corporate Drive shall be restricted
and limited as deemed necessary and identified in the required traffic study.
(Ord. 1296, 4-6-1998)
040-14: STORMWATER MANAGEMENT:
There shall be submitted to, and approved by the West Des Moines city engineer,
a complete stormwater management plan for the PUD to be prepared by the
developer prior to development within the PUD and for all storm sewer and
drainage systems within the PUD. (Ord. 1296, 4-6-1998)
040-15: LIGHTING REQUIREMENTS:
Prior to, or in conjunction with the submittal of a site plan for development
of any portion of the PUD, a photometric lighting plan with twenty foot (20')
grid centers shall be submitted to the city for review. The lighting plan shall
show the location, height and the type of lighting fixture proposed for use on
the site. The height of lighting structures within the first one hundred feet
(100') of property adjacent to the University Avenue right of way shall not
exceed twenty five feet (25') in height. The lighting of any development within
the PUD shall be designed to cast light downward onto the site and minimize the
glare and reflection onto the adjacent residential properties. The maximum
light levels at the boundary of the PUD shall not exceed one foot-candle and
the lighting within the parking lot shall not exceed a ratio of nine to one (9:
1). (Ord. 1296, 4-6-1998)
040-16: VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES:
Any person who violates the provisions of this ordinance upon conviction shall
be punished as set forth in section 1-4-1 of the city code of the city of West
Des Moines, Iowa. (Ord. 2070, 12-1-2014)
040-99: LEGISLATIVE HISTORY:
Ord. 1106, 11-7-1994; Ord. 1296, 4-6-1998; Ord. 1372, 6-28-1999; Ord. 2070, 12-
1-2014; Ord. 2492, 10-4-2021.
PUD #41
BLUE CREEK
SECTION:
041-01: Legal Description
041-02: Sketch Plan
041-03: Conditions
041-04: Architecture And Landscape
041-05: Buffering
041-06: Master Planning Required
041-07: Signage Regulation
041-08: Building Restrictions, Easements And Covenants
041-09: Storm Water Management
041-99: Legislative History
041-01: LEGAL DESCRIPTION:
The legal description for the Blue Creek PUD is as follows:
Lot 2, Blue Creek Plat 2, an Official Plat, now included in and forming a part
of the City of West Des Moines, Polk County, Iowa.
(Ord. 1175, 4-8-1996)
041-02: SKETCH PLAN:
On file with the Community Development Department of the City and made a part
of this rezoning approval for concept description and delineation is the sketch
plan document for the Blue Creek PUD. It is recognized, minor shifts or
modifications to general layout may be necessary and compatible with the need
to acquire workable street patterns, grades and usable building sites, but the
general plan layout, including the relationship of uses to each other and the
relationship of land use to the general framework, and development requirements
shall be used as the implementation guide. (Ord. 1175, 4-8-1996)
041-03: CONDITIONS:
Whereas, Title 9, Chapter 9 of the City Code of West Des Moines, PUD Planned
Unit Development District establishes certain regulations and guidelines
pertaining to accompanying information required on plat and site plan
documents. Now, therefore, the following conditions, restrictions, and
regulations are adopted as part of this approval, to wit:
   A.   General Conditions: The sketch plan shows office uses which shall be
distributed by area, types and location according to the sketch plan and this
Ordinance. In addition, the following general development criteria shall be
integrated into and made a part of this planned unit development and sketch
plan approval.
      1.   All subdivisions, public or private streets, public or private
street rights-of-way and general development shall adhere to the standards and
design criteria set forth in the West Des Moines Subdivision Ordinance and/or
established City policies pertaining thereto, unless otherwise stated within
this Ordinance.
      2.   Unless otherwise specified herein, the development of the Blue Creek
PUD shall comply with Title 9, Chapter 15, Off-Street Parking and Loading
Areas, Chapter 3, Section 9-3-9, Open Space Requirements, and Chapter 1,
Section 9-1-1-2, Site Plans of the West Des Moines City Code. For the purposes
of the application of Chapter 9, Planned Unit Development District, Section 9-
9-6, Final Plan Submittal, the submittal of final plan documents for any
parcel, or part of any parcel of the Blue Creek PUD within one year after
approval and publication of this Ordinance, shall be considered to satisfy the
terms and requirements of Section 9-9-6.
      3.   In all areas within a 100-year frequency flood hazard zone, or
adjoining drainageways, and detention ponding areas involving potential flood
hazards, no building shall be erected which has a lowest floor, including
basements, less than one foot (1') above the determined level of the 100-year
frequency flood event, or the maximum pond elevation.
      4.   The developer, their successors and/or assigns, if any, shall pay
all planning, engineering, and construction costs for the interior development
of the planned unit development, as required by this Ordinance and the
Subdivision Ordinance of the City of West Des Moines, Iowa, for all streets,
storm sewers, sanitary sewers, drainageway improvements, detention basins,
water mains, buffers and other improvements within the parcels illustrated and
established within the PUD as may be required by the City Code or this
Ordinance.
      5.   All general use regulations and provisions set forth in Chapter 11
for the PCP Professional Commerce Park District of Title 9, Zoning, of the City
Code of the City of West Des Moines, shall apply to any development within the
PUD unless otherwise stated in this Ordinance. Additional restrictions and
conditions may apply to specific parcels as outlined elsewhere herein.
      6.   Prior to, or in conjunction with development or transfer of
ownership of any portion of the PUD, all property within the PUD shall be
platted in accordance with the City's Subdivision Ordinance to delineate within
a plat the parcel to be developed or sold separately or any portion thereof.
The plat shall include a parcel of ground that is a minimum thirty feet (30')
wide that will provide the necessary joint ingress-egress requirements for all
parcels within the subject property. Prior to, or in conjunction with the
recordation of the final plat, an ingress-egress easement document shall be
executed for the ingress-egress drive within the Blue Creek PUD.
      7.   Prior to or in conjunction with the development of any portion of
the property within the PUD, the water main servicing the PUD property will
need to be designed and constructed to provide water in a looped system so as
to provide an adequate water supply for fire protection.
      8.   Any and all buildings within the PUD shall have fully automatic fire
sprinkling systems.
   B.   Land Use Design Criteria: In addition to the general conditions as
stated in subsection A above, the following land use design criteria shall
apply to the development areas designated by parcel on the sketch plan. The
sketch plan document which is made a part of this rezoning action per Section
041-02 of this Ordinance, delineates four (4) parcels of the PUD for
application of specific standards of land use and development regulations. The
following development standards and use regulations shall apply to each of the
individual parcels as applicable.
      1.   Development Standards: The following setbacks shall be applied on
all Parcels (Lots 1, 2, 3 and 4) excluding the ingress-egress parcel:
         a.   No building shall be located closer than fifty feet (50') from
the PUD boundary.
         b.   No building shall be located closer than twenty five feet (25')
from any interior lot line.
         c.   Parking lots and associated drives shall be located no closer
than five feet (5') from an internal lot line unless it is part of a shared
parking lot or joint drive with cross parking easements or ingress-egress
easements, and landscaping shall be required as a part of the site plan review
to provide a visual separation between parking lots on adjacent parcels.
         d.   There shall be no more that four (4) parcels, excluding the
ingress-egress drive parcel, in the PUD and each parcel shall be limited to a
maximum of one building.
         e.   The maximum building height shall be no more than four (4)
stories or fifty feet (50') in height.
      2.   Lot 4: All general use regulations, performance standards and
provisions set for the Title 9, Chapter 11, for the PCP Professional Commerce
Park District of the City of West Des Moines, shall apply to the development on
Lot 4, which shall include the use of banks, limiting drive-thrus to one lane
and no freestanding ATM automated teller machines. Access to this lot will be
limited to one ingress-egress from 28th Street. (Ord. 1175, 4-8-1996)
041-04: ARCHITECTURE AND LANDSCAPE:
The architectural design and use of materials for the construction of any
building within the PUD shall be accomplished in a manner compatible with PCP
Professional Commerce Park Zoning District standards. No wood, masonite,
visible asphaltic exterior wall or roof material, aluminum siding,
nonarchitectural sheet metal, concrete block, decorative concrete block, or
other similar materials shall constitute a portion of any building except as
trim material, unless the City Council of West Des Moines, after having
received a recommendation from the Planning and Zoning Commission of West Des
Moines, shall determine said material when used as a primary element, enhances
the physical appearance of the building and the PUD. The landscape of the
parcels within the PUD shall be consistent in character and materials,
including some use of wildflower meadow mix, so as to appear as a unified
development. (Ord. 1216, 11-4-1996)
041-05: BUFFERING:
Adequate treatment or buffering of negative aspects of any building elements,
such as loading docks and garage doors, from any public street and adjoining
properties shall be required. Buildings shall not be located and designed to
expose loading docks or doors, loading areas or the rear of buildings to the
ingress-egress parcel or views from I-235.
Garbage dumpsters, HVAC mechanical units, satellite dishes, and any roof top
mechanical units shall be screened from views from the adjoining properties and
I-235 by an opaque screening or parapet wall that is an extension of the
building wall or constructed out of a material consistent with the principal
building materials of the building. The screen should blend with the
architecture and coloration of the building to minimize the visual impact of
the screening element. No outside storage of products or materials shall be
permitted. (Ord. 1175, 4-8-1996)
041-06: MASTER PLANNING REQUIRED:
The PUD shall be developed in accordance with a single master plan
schematically showing private street and drive alignments, building locations,
parking lot locations, storm water detention and management facilities,
utilities and other accessory or ancillary uses supportive of the principal
permitted use. The master plan for the development shall be submitted and
approved by the City Council after a recommendation by the Planning and Zoning
Commission prior to site plan or plat approval for any portion of the PUD. The
master plan may be amended from time to time in the same manner as its original
review and approval by the City Council after a recommendation by the Planning
and Zoning Commission. (Ord. 1175, 4-8-1996)
041-07: SIGNAGE REGULATION:
No pole sign, as defined by the West Des Moines City Sign Code, shall be
incorporated into any development within the Blue Creek PUD. Ground sign
standards shall be used for the construction of freestanding signage within
each parcel as set forth within the West Des Moines City Sign Code for the PCP
Professional Commerce Park District. Setbacks for ground signage shall be
measured from the boundary of the ingress-egress parcel as if it were a public
street right-of-way. No ground signs shall be permitted in excess of ten feet
(10') in height for Lots 2 and 3; and fifteen feet (15') for Lots 1 and 4.
All signage constructed as wall signs on building fascia within the PUD shall
incorporate aesthetic features compatible with the overall character of the
development. The main entrance frontage of the building adjacent to the joint
ingress-egress easement shall be utilized in calculating the maximum five
percent (5%) of the building face permitted for wall signage. In the event that
any parcel should have more than one building face fronting on the joint
ingress-egress drive, the developer/owner shall be allowed to designate one of
the adjacent building faces as the wall to be used to calculate the permitted
wall signage. All wall signs will be composed of solid individual letters,
attached to the building fascia, or individual letters of anodized aluminum,
galvanized metal, illuminated self-contained with translucent plastic faces set
in anodized aluminum returns and trim; panel signs with letters incorporated or
painted upon a panel or wall area shall be prohibited. Advertising or
promotional temporary signage attached to exterior windows or walls including
exposed neon lights visible from the exterior of the building shall be
prohibited; except as approved by the City Council of West Des Moines, after
receiving a recommendation from the Planning and Zoning Commission of West Des
Moines, neon lights may be used as a limited architectural element for signage.
(Ord. 1175, 4-8-1996)
041-08: BUILDING RESTRICTIONS, EASEMENTS AND COVENANTS:
The developer shall, with the approval of the City Council, adopt building
restrictions, easements and covenants pertaining to each parcel developed where
the developer and the City deem appropriate. The developer, their successors
and assigns, if any, shall provide the City with acceptable documentation
providing that all properties within the PUD shall belong to the association
which will be responsible and liable for the ownership and maintenance (all
costs associated with) of all the pond, landscape, parking lot, walkways, and
general maintenance within the PUD. In addition, easements shall exist between
lot owners in order to allow for traffic to flow through the site, on-site
parking and drainage. (Ord. 1175, 4-8-1996)
041-09: STORM WATER MANAGEMENT:
There shall be submitted to, and approved by the West Des Moines City Engineer,
a complete storm water management plan for each parcel of the PUD to be
prepared by the developer prior to development within each of the individual
parcels of the PUD and for all storm sewer and drainage systems within the PUD.
(Ord. 1175, 4-8-1996)
041-99: LEGISLATIVE HISTORY:
Ord. 1116, 12-19-1994; Ord. 1175, 4-8-1996; Ord. 1216, 11-4-1996.
PUD #42
WESTIN HEIGHTS
SECTION:
042-01: Legal Description
042-02: Sketch Plan
042-03: Conditions
042-04: Master Planning Required
042-05: Signage Regulation
042-06: Pedestrian Orientation
042-07: Platting Requirements
042-08: Storm Water Management
042-09: Street Rights-Of-Way
042-10: Special Assessments
042-11: Building Restrictions, Easements And Covenants
042-12: Soil Test Requirements
042-13: Definition
042-99: Legislative History
042-01: LEGAL DESCRIPTION:
The legal description for the Westin Heights PUD is as follows:
Auditor's Lot 6, Auditor's Lot 7 and Auditor's Lot 8, of the Northeast Quarter
of the Northwest Quarter of Section 12, Township 78 North, Range 26 West, of
the 5th P.M., Dallas County, Iowa.
(Ord. 1121, 1-30-1995)
042-02: SKETCH PLAN:
On file with the Community Development Department of the City and made a part
of this rezoning approval for concept description and delineation is the sketch
plan document for the Westin Heights PUD Planned Unit Development. It is
recognized, minor shifts or modifications to general plan layout may be
necessary and compatible with the need to acquire workable street patterns,
grades and usable building sites, but the general plan layout, including the
relationship of uses to each other and the relationship of land use to the
general plan framework, and development requirements shall be used as the
implementation guide. (Ord. 1121, 1-30-1995)
042-03: CONDITIONS:
Whereas, Title 9 of the West Des Moines City Code includes Chapter 9, PUD
Planned Unit Development District and establishes certain regulations and
guidelines pertaining to accompanying information required on a plat and site
plan documents. Now, therefore, the following conditions, restrictions, and
regulations are adopted as part of this approval, to wit:
   A.   General Conditions: The sketch plan incorporates a mix of multi-family
residential (townhomes and condominiums) land uses which shall be distributed
by area, types and location according to the sketch plan as presented with a
maximum of one hundred forty four (144) dwelling units permitted within the
PUD.
In addition, the following general site plan criteria shall be integrated into
and made a part of the Westin Heights PUD and sketch plan document.
      1.   All subdivisions, public streets, public street rights-of-way and
general development shall adhere to the standards and design criteria set forth
in the West Des Moines Subdivision Ordinance and the Des Moines Metropolitan
Design Standards as adopted by the City of West Des Moines pertaining thereto
unless otherwise stated within this Ordinance.
      2.   The development shall comply with Chapter 15, Off-Street Parking and
Loading Areas, Chapter 3, Section 9, Open Space Requirements, and Chapter 1,
Section 2, Site Plans of the West Des Moines City Code, and Chapter 9, Planned
Unit Development District, Sections 6 and 8, Final Plan Submittal, the
submittal of final plan documents for any parcel, or part of any parcel of the
within one year after approval and publication of this Ordinance, shall be
considered to satisfy the terms and requirements of Section 9-9-6.
      3.   In all areas within a 100-year frequency flood hazard zone, or
adjoining drainageways or detention areas involving potential flood hazards, no
building shall be erected which has a lowest floor, including basements, less
than one foot (1') above the determined level of the 100-year frequency flood
event, and no building shall be erected within twenty five feet (25') of any
major drainageway, storm water detention basin or pond.
      4.   The developer, their successors and assigns, if any, shall pay all
construction and engineering costs for the interior development of the planned
unit development, as required by this Ordinance, the Subdivision Ordinance of
the City of West Des Moines, Iowa, or the Des Moines Metropolitan Design
Standards as adopted by the City of West Des Moines for all streets, storm
sewers, sanitary sewers, drainageway improvements, detention basins, water
mains, buffers and other improvements within the PUD.
   B.   Land Use Design Criteria: In addition to the general conditions as
stated in subsection A above, the following land use design criteria shall
apply to the development areas designated by parcel on the sketch plan. The
sketch plan document which is made a part of this rezoning action per Section
 042-02 of this Ordinance, delineates three (3) parcels of the PUD as Parcels
1, 2, and 3 for application of specific standards of land use and development
regulations. The following development standards and use regulations shall
apply to each of the individual parcels as applicable.
      1.   Parcel 1: All general use regulations, performance standards and
provisions set forth in Title 9, Chapter 5, of the City Code for the R-6 Multi-
Family Residential District of the City of West Des Moines, shall apply to any
development in Parcel 1. There shall be a maximum of thirty six (36) dwelling
units permitted on Parcel 1 as shown on the sketch plan.
         a.   Development Standards: Whereas, the City Council approved the
site plan for the Westin Heights Townhomes at their meeting on July 5, 1994 and
building permits have been issued for construction of the project based upon
the approved site plan, the development of Parcel 1 shall be in accordance with
the approved site plan for Westin Heights townhomes.
Should any portion of the project not be completed as shown on the approved
site plan or substantial changes are made from the approved site plan as
determined by the Director of Community Development, any further development
within Parcel 1 shall be subject to the development standards as stated below
for development with in Parcel 2.
      2.   Parcel 2: All general use regulations, performance standards and
provisions set forth in Title 9, Chapter 5, of the City Code for the R-6 Multi-
Family Residential District (medium density) of the City of West Des Moines,
shall apply to any development in Parcel 2 unless stated otherwise herein. This
Parcel shall incorporate a maximum of nine and one-half (9.5) acres and a
maximum of sixty (60) dwelling units.
         a.   Development Standards: Only single-family detached residential
structures with attached garages, single-family attached residential structures
with attached garages and townhomes shall be permitted within Parcel 2 with no
more than six (6) dwelling units side by side in a row on any side of a
building. Any single-family detached development within Parcel 2 shall comply
with the minimum lot frontage and setback requirements set forth in Title 9,
Chapter 5B for R-1 Single-Family Residential District. Any residential building
with more than one dwelling unit shall be located no closer than twenty feet
(20') from another building unless they comply with building and fire code
requirements and no closer than thirty five feet (35') from the boundary of the
PUD. No garage opening for vehicles shall be located closer than twenty five
feet (25') from any private internal drive from which direct access is from and
no garage shall be located closer than twenty feet (20') from an internal
drive. No building shall be located closer than twenty five feet (25') from the
public street right-of-way.
No building shall exceed two (2) stories or thirty five feet (35') in height.
Parking lots and associated drives shall be setback a minimum of twenty feet
(20') from public street rights-of-way. A minimum ten foot (10') parking lot
and internal drive setback shall be maintained from adjoining properties if
said parking lot is not part of a common parking lot jointly used by the
adjoining properties with established cross-parking easements. All parking lots
and associated drives shall be screened in accordance with the City Code
requirements.
A minimum thirty foot (30') buffer park as described in Ordinance 1073, Buffer
and Screening, shall be established along the railroad right-of-way immediately
to the south of Parcel 2 to effectively buffer and screen the residential uses
from the negative impact of the railroad and no residential building shall be
located closer than sixty feet (60') from the railroad right-of-way.
         b.   Architecture: Architectural design for multi-family buildings
shall attempt to express a creative presentation of exterior building
materials, exterior details and texture, treatment of windows and doors, and
use of angles and multiplicity of planes within the wall and roof design to
lessen the plainness of appearance which can be characteristic of large
residential buildings. The use of brick shall be incorporated into the building
architecture on all sides of the structure, unless the City Council of West Des
Moines, after review by the Planning and Zoning Commission of West Des Moines
shall determine that the use of alternate building materials, enhances the
physical appearance and accomplishes a compatible structure with the
residential uses in the neighborhood. The roof design of any and all buildings
within Parcel 2 shall be pitched or gabled and reflect a residential appearance
in nature.
      3.   Parcel 3: All general use regulations, performance standards and
provisions set forth in Title 9, Section 5H of the City Code for the R-6 Multi-
Family Residential District of the City of West Des Moines, shall apply to any
development in Parcel 3, unless stated otherwise herein. There shall be a
maximum of forty eight (48) dwelling units permitted on Parcel 3 as shown on
the attached sketch plan.
         a.   Development Standards: Only single-family detached residential
structures with attached garages, single-family attached residential structures
with attached garages, townhomes, condominiums and apartments shall be
permitted within Parcel 3. Any single-family detached development within Parcel
3 shall comply with the minimum lot frontage and setback requirements set forth
in Title 9, Chapter 5B for R-1 Single-Family Residential District.
No residential structure shall be located closer than forty five feet (45')
from the right-of-way of Ashworth Road and no other structure shall be located
closer than thirty five feet (35') from Ashworth Road with the exception of
permitted signage. Any residential building with more than one dwelling unit
shall not be located closer than twenty feet (20') from another structure
unless they comply with building and fire code requirements. No garage opening
for vehicles shall be located closer than twenty five feet (25') from any
private internal drive from which direct access is from and no garage shall be
located closer than twenty feet (20') from an internal drive. Any building
greater than two (2) stories or thirty five feet (35') in height shall be
located no closer than one hundred feet (100') from the right-of-way of
Ashworth Road and no closer than thirty five feet (35') from any other public
street right-of-way and the boundary of Parcel 3.
Parking lots and associated drives shall be setback a minimum of twenty feet
(20') from public street rights-of-way. A minimum ten foot (10') parking lot
and internal drive setback shall be maintained from adjoining parcels if said
parking lot is not part of a common parking lot. Parking areas shall be
screened in accordance with the City Code requirements.
         b.   Architecture: Architectural design for multi-family buildings
shall attempt to express a creative presentation of exterior building
materials, exterior details and texture, treatment of windows and doors, and
use of angles and multiplicity of planes within the wall and roof design to
lessen the plainness of appearance which can be characteristic of large
residential buildings. The use of brick shall be incorporated into the building
architecture on all sides of the structure, unless the City Council of West Des
Moines, after review by the Planning and Zoning Commission of West Des Moines
shall determine that the use of alternate building materials, enhances the
physical appearance and accomplishes a compatible structure with the
residential uses in the neighborhood. The roof design of any and all buildings
within Parcel 3 shall be pitched or gabled and reflect a residential appearance
in nature. (Ord. 1121, 1-30-1995)
042-04: MASTER PLANNING REQUIRED:
Prior to development within any part of any parcel, with the exception of the
previously approved site plan on Parcel 1 as approved by the City Council an
July 5, 1994, a master plan shall be prepared showing the location of new
public streets and private streets within or adjoining the PUD in order to
assure workable street patterns, grades and usable building sites. A minimum of
one public street shall provide a connection through the PUD and into the
property to the east. The master plan shall show a reasonable street layout for
the property within Westin Heights PUD and to the east of the PUD providing a
public street connection to the existing public streets extending westward from
60th Street. The master plan should also show a possible redevelopment proposal
for Parcel 3 that shows the relationship with the remainder of the PUD. (Ord.
1121, 1-30-1995)
042-05: SIGNAGE REGULATION:
No pole sign as defined by the West Des Moines City Sign Code shall be
incorporated into any development within the Westin Heights PUD. Ground sign
standards shall be used for the construction of freestanding signage as set
forth within the West Des Moines City Sign Code. Advertising or promotional
temporary signage attached to exterior windows or walls including exposed neon
lights visible from the exterior of the building shall be prohibited, except as
permitted with a temporary sign permit. (Ord. 1121, 1-30-1995)
042-06: PEDESTRIAN ORIENTATION:
Pedestrian access shall be provided from all parcels to permit and encourage
pedestrian movement between parcels and to employment and commercial centers in
the area versus utilizing motorized vehicles for access. Particular emphasis
shall be placed upon providing pedestrian access, if possible, to the office
and commercial land uses in the area to encourage the tenants of the
development to utilize alternative modes of transportation. Consideration
should also be included for pedestrian access to the future park site to the
east of the Westin Heights PUD. (Ord. 1121, 1-30-1995)
042-07: PLATTING REQUIREMENTS:
The splitting of any parcel within the PUD shall require the submittal of a
subdivision plat for the review and approval of the City of West Des Moines
prior to, or in conjunction with development of that portion of the PUD. Said
parcel shall be platted in accordance with the City's Subdivision Ordinance and
the Des Moines Metropolitan Standards as adopted by the City of West Des Moines
to delineate within a plat the parcel to be developed or sold separately or any
portion thereof. Should the platting of the property create joint usage of a
private street, drive, or common area, a homeowner's association document or
similar instrument, shall be submitted to the City for review. Said document
shall address joint ingress-egress and the ongoing maintenance and upkeep of
the shared drives and utilities. (Ord. 1121, 1-30-1995)
042-08: STORM WATER MANAGEMENT:
There shall be submitted to, and approved by the West Des Moines City Engineer,
a complete storm water management plan for each parcel of the PUD to be
prepared by the developer prior to development within each of the individual
parcels of the PUD and for all storm sewer and drainage systems within the PUD.
(Ord. 1121, 1-30-1995)
042-09: STREET RIGHTS-OF-WAY:
Adequate street right-of-way shall be provided for the construction,
reconstruction and widening of adjoining streets adjacent to, or within the
Westin Heights PUD. Said right-of-way shall be dedicated to the City at the
time of platting. (Ord. 1121, 1-30-1995)
042-10: SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS:
The property may be subject to future area-wide assessments, including, but not
limited to, the reconstruction, construction, widening, and/or improvements to
Ashworth Road and 74th Street, as shall be permitted and limited by the laws of
the State of Iowa to be observed by municipalities.
   A.   Ashworth Road And 74th Street: With respect to any future assessments
by the City of West Des Moines of special benefits conferred upon Parcel 1, 2
and 3 of the property, or any portion thereof, as a result of the repaving and
widening of that portion of Ashworth Road and 74th Street that provides access
to said property, the owner, on behalf of itself and its successors and assigns
(collectively by the "owner"), agrees that such assessments may be spread
against all of said parcels, as said parcels exist on the date of assessment,
by the City of West Des Moines on an area basis.
   B.   Water Service Improvements: With respect to any assessments by the City
of West Des Moines of special benefits conferred upon Parcels 1, 2, and 3 of
the property, or any portion hereof, as a result of the design and construction
of potential area wide water service improvements as determined by engineering
studies approved by the City of West Des Moines, the owner, on behalf of itself
and its successors and assigns (collectively by the "owner"), agrees that such
assessments may be spread against all of said parcels, as said parcels exist on
the date of assessment, by the City of West Des Moines on an area basis. (Ord.
1121, 1-30-1995)
042-11: BUILDING RESTRICTIONS, EASEMENTS AND COVENANTS:
Where the City deems appropriate, the owner and/or developer shall on each
particular area, adopt building restrictions, easements and/or covenants in a
form approved by the City. (Ord. 1121, 1-30-1995)
042-12: SOIL TEST REQUIREMENTS:
If required, owner and/or the developer shall be responsible for supplying to
the City, information prepared by a qualified soils engineering firm,
indicating that existing soil conditions are adequate in stability and strength
for construction of public and private improvements. If determined by the soils
engineering firm that adequate soils conditions do not exist, the owner and/or
developer shall indicate what measures shall be taken to achieve adequate soil
strength and stability for both public and private improvements. (Ord. 1121, 1-
30-1995)
042-13: DEFINITION:
The term "developer", for the purpose of this Ordinance, shall mean any person,
individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation, estate, trust, entity,
or agent of same acting or proposing to subdivide land or develop a parcel of
land for the construction of a building or buildings. (Ord. 1121, 1-30-1995)
042-99: LEGISLATIVE HISTORY:
Ord. 1121, 1-30-1995.
PUD #43
SOUTH WATER TOWER PLACE
SECTION:
043-01: Legal Description
043-02: Conditions
043-03: Signage Regulation
043-04: Master Planning Required
043-05: Building Restrictions, Easements And Covenants
043-06: All Areas To Be Platted
043-07: Traffic Study Required
043-08: Traffic Signals
043-09: Vehicular Access
043-10: Stormwater Management
043-11: Violations And Penalties
043-99: Legislative History
043-01: LEGAL DESCRIPTION:
The legal description for the South Water Towner Place PUD is as follows:
The North 655 feet of the South 700 feet of the West half of the East 32.18
acres of the Northwest quarter of the Northeast quarter of Section 5, Township
78 North, Range 25 West of the 5th P.M., West Des Moines, Polk County, Iowa.
Said tract of land being subject to and together with any and all easements of
record.
(Ord. 1147, 7-31-1995)
043-02: CONDITIONS:
Whereas, title 9 of the West Des Moines city code includes chapter 9, "Planned
Unit Development District", and establishes certain regulations and guidelines
pertaining to accompanying information required on a plat or site plan
documents for development of the South Water Tower Place PUD. Now, therefore,
the following conditions, restrictions, and regulations are adopted as part of
this approval, to wit:
   A.   General Conditions: The sketch plans, on file with the community
development department of the city and made a part of this document,
incorporates service commercial and office land uses which shall be distributed
by area and location according to the sketch plans.
In addition, the following general site plan criteria shall be integrated into
and made a part of the South Water Tower Place PUD and sketch plan document:
      1.   All subdivisions, public streets, public street rights of way and
general development shall adhere to the standards and design criteria set forth
in the West Des Moines subdivision ordinance and the Des Moines metropolitan
design standards as adopted by the city of West Des Moines pertaining thereto
unless otherwise stated within this ordinance.
      2.   The development shall comply with chapter 15, "Off Street Parking
And Loading", chapter 3, section 9, "Open Space Requirements", and chapter 1,
section 2, "Site Plans", of the West Des Moines city code, and chapter 9,
"Planned Unit Development District", sections 6 and 8.
      3.   In all areas within a 100-year frequency flood hazard zone, or
adjoining drainageways or detention areas involving potential flood hazards, no
building shall be erected which has a lowest floor, including basements, less
than one foot (1') above the determined level of the 100-year frequency flood
event, and no building shall be erected within twenty five feet (25') of any
major drainageway, stormwater detention basin or pond.
      4.   The developer, their successors and assigns, if any, shall pay all
construction and engineering costs for the interior development of the planned
unit development, as required by this ordinance, or the subdivision ordinance
of the city of West Des Moines, Iowa, for all streets, storm sewers, sanitary
sewers, drainageway improvements, detention basins, water mains, buffers and
other improvements within the PUD as may be required by the city code or this
ordinance.
   B.   Land Use Design Criteria: In addition to the general conditions as
stated in subsection A of this section, the following land use design criteria
shall apply to the legally described property herein:
All general use regulations, performance standards and provisions set forth in
title 9, "Zoning", chapter 11 for the PCP professional plaza district shall
apply to any development proposal for the property except as shall be further
provided herein. The following development standards and use regulations shall
apply to property as applicable:
      1.   Development Standards: Permitted uses shall include all uses allowed
within the PCP professional commerce park district and the following:
Banks
Daycare
Health club
Restaurants
Note: No drive-through facilities shall be allowed with the exception of one
for a bank use only.
Multiple use of the site by more than one building shall comply with C-l-A zone
district standards which require that multiple buildings on a site be
consistent in architectural design and use of materials and organized utilizing
a compatible planned open space, landscape plan, and parking plan to serve and
maintain a unified master plan concept; multiple buildings separated by parking
areas or drives and lots less than two (2) acres in size may be considered
acceptable if approved by the planning and zoning commission and city council
as an acceptable master development plan for the property legally described
herein. The development of the property shall be limited to a maximum of three
(3) freestanding buildings or parcels.
Buildings containing PCP district uses may exceed thirty five feet (35') in
height provided they comply with the height requirements of the PCP district,
however, any other uses shall not exceed thirty five feet (35') in height. The
front yard building setback shall be measured from any public street right of
way or public right of way easement and shall be a minimum of one hundred feet
(100'). No building shall be located closer than twenty five feet (25') to the
boundary of the PUD and no less than ten feet (10') from the internal property
lines.
The minimum parking lot and/or drive setback shall be a minimum of twenty feet
(20') and shall be measured from the anticipated full public street right of
way or public street right of way easement as determined by the city during the
platting or site planning process and shall be utilized, designed, and improved
as a landscaped buffer area effectively screening all parking and drive areas
from public view and presenting an attractive view or element to the area. No
parking area and associated drive shall be located closer than five feet (5')
from the boundary of the PUD with the exception of ingress-egress access drives
into the property. Additional right of way, as required by the comprehensive
plan, shall be reserved by the establishment of a public street and utility
easement at the time of a final plat or site plan review and shall be allowed
to be counted to fulfill the open space requirements for the property. The
developer of the property shall provide a minimum thirty five percent (35%) of
the total site to meet the open space requirements of the city code and all
parking area shall include landscape areas, islands, screens, etc., equal to
not less than ten percent (10%) of the total paved area in accordance with city
code requirements. Such landscaped area shall be in addition to the open space
requirement for the total site. (Ord. 1147, 7-31-1995)
      2.   Architecture: The architectural design of any building within this
development shall be acceptable to the city. Corporate or franchise
architecture is prohibited.
Building design within the development shall provide facades that are varied in
height and massing, articulated to provide visual interest through the use of
fenestration, materials and design elements, and establish a unique identity
that responds to the context of its surroundings. All sides to each building
shall receive high quality treatment (360 degree architecture). There are no
"backs" to a building. Entrances into buildings should be easily identified
through the use of building design and detailing. Materials should change with
the change in building plane and be organized to provide the appearance of
three- dimensional elements. Buildings shall provide visual cohesiveness
through the use of colors, materials, and design elements that are similar to
or complementary to adjacent buildings. Trim and structural elements such as
posts or columns shall be sized to the scale of the building.
Materials should be durable, economically maintained and of a quality that will
maintain their appearance over a prolonged time such as face brick, stone or
architectural concrete and metal panels. Natural materials such as wood or
composite materials such as fiber cement and other similar materials shall not
constitute any portion of any building, except as a trim material, unless it
can be demonstrated that the material can provide the same level of durability
and quality as noted above. Use of vinyl materials is prohibited. (Ord. 2088,
4-6-2015)
      3.   Buffering: Adequate buffering of negative aspects of any development
(loading docks, garbage dumpsters and HVAC mechanical units) from any public
street and adjoining properties shall be required. All buildings shall be
located and designed so as to not expose loading docks or doors, loading areas
or the rear of buildings to public streets. (Ord. 1147, 7-31-1995)
043-03: SIGNAGE REGULATION:
No pole sign as defined by the West Des Moines city sign code shall be
incorporated into any development within the South Water Tower Place PUD.
Ground sign standards shall be used for the construction of freestanding
signage as provided for within the West Des Moines city sign code for the PCP
professional commerce park district.
All signage constructed as wall signs on building fascia within the PUD shall
incorporate aesthetic features compatible with the overall character of the
development. All wall signs shall be composed of solid individual letters
attached to the building fascia, or individual letters of anodized aluminum,
galvanized metal, illuminated self-contained with translucent plastic faces set
in anodized aluminum returns and trim. Panel signs with letters incorporated or
painted upon a panel or wall area shall be prohibited. For the purpose of this
ordinance, panel signs shall be defined as a wall sign with a self-contained
frame covered with a translucent face which is internally illuminated and
extends away from the wall that it is attached to. These type of signs are
sometimes referred to as "cabinet signs" or "can signs". Signs with exposed
neon lights, moving lights or flashing lights attached to the exterior of the
building, monument sign or visible from the exterior of the building shall be
prohibited. Temporary advertising or promotional signage attached to exterior
windows or walls shall be allowed only with an approved temporary signage
permit issued through the building department under the provisions for
temporary signage in the city code. (Ord. 1147, 7-31-1995)
043-04: MASTER PLANNING REQUIRED:
Prior to development within any portion of the PUD, a master plan shall be
prepared showing the location of streets and shared drives within or adjoining
the parcel in order to ensure workable traffic circulation patterns, grades,
and usable building sites. At the time of the master plan review the necessary
ingress- egress easements will be identified to ensure applicable access
requirements will be addressed at the time of the platting or site plan review.
As a part of the master plan, the pedestrian access into and within the PUD
shall be designed to provide access from the adjacent properties to the
commercial uses developed within the South Water Tower Place PUD. The intent of
this requirement is to encourage pedestrian access into the development from
office uses in the area and to deemphasize the use of motorized vehicles for
employees and tenants within the surrounding areas desiring to frequent the
commercial uses within the PUD development. (Ord. 1147, 7-31-1995)
043-05: BUILDING RESTRICTIONS, EASEMENTS AND COVENANTS:
The developer shall with the approval of the city council adopt building
restrictions, easements and covenants pertaining to the property where the
developer and the city deem appropriate. (Ord. 1147, 7-31-1995)
043-06: ALL AREAS TO BE PLATTED:
Prior to, or in conjunction with development or transfer of ownership of any
portion of the PUD, said area shall be platted in accordance with the city's
subdivision ordinance to delineate within a plat the parcel, or any portion
thereof, to be developed or sold separately. (Ord. 1147, 7-31-1995)
043-07: TRAFFIC STUDY REQUIRED:
Prior to development within any part of the PUD, a traffic study shall be
completed and approved by the city for the purpose of determining traffic
impacts and required improvements that would be necessary for the safe and
orderly movement of vehicles into and around the proposed development. (Ord.
1147, 7-31-1995)
043-08: TRAFFIC SIGNALS:
The owner, on behalf of itself, its successors and assigns, agrees to pay its
share of any cost assessed by the city in accordance with its current standard
assessment practices for all cost in connection with traffic signals deemed
necessary and identified by the required traffic study. (Ord. 1147, 7-31-1995)
043-09: VEHICULAR ACCESS:
Vehicular access from Westown Parkway shall be restricted and limited to one
joint ingress-egress drive. The number of access drives to the north shall be
limited to two (2) and the developer of this property will be required to
obtain any necessary easements through adjoining properties for ingress and
egress from this property. Said easements shall be required prior to or in
conjunction with the first development in the PUD that proposes to use any
access through adjoining properties. (Ord. 1147, 7-31-1995)
043-10: STORMWATER MANAGEMENT:
There shall be submitted to, and approved by the West Des Moines city engineer,
a complete stormwater management plan for the PUD to be prepared by the
developer prior to development within the PUD and for all storm sewer and
drainage systems within the PUD. (Ord. 1147, 7-31-1995)
043-11: VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES:
Any person who violates the provisions of this ordinance upon conviction shall
be punished as set forth in section 1-4-1 of the city code of the city of West
Des Moines, Iowa. (Ord. 2088, 4-6-2015)
043-99: LEGISLATIVE HISTORY:
Ord. 1147, 7-31-1995; Ord. 2088, 4-6-2015.
PUD #44
42ND STREET
SECTION:
044-01: Legal Description
044-02: Sketch Plan
044-03: Conditions
044-04: Architecture
044-05: Signage Regulation
044-06: Master Planning Required
044-07: Building Restrictions, Easements And Covenants
044-08: All Areas To Be Platted
044-09: Traffic Study Required
044-10: Traffic Signals
044-11: Storm Water Management
044-99: Legislative History
044-01: LEGAL DESCRIPTION:
The legal description for the 42nd Street PUD is as follows:
Lots 1 and 6, Sandpiper Square, an official plat, now in and forming a part of
the City of West Des Moines, Polk County, Iowa.
(Ord. 1294, 4-6-1998)
044-02: SKETCH PLAN:
On file with the Community Development Department of the City and made a part
of this rezoning approval, for concept description and delineation is the
sketch plan document for the 42nd Street PUD. It is recognized that minor
shifts or realignments of roadways may be necessary and compatible with the
need to acquire workable street patterns, grades and usable building sites, but
the general plan layout, including the relationship of uses to each other and
the relationship of dwelling unit types to the general plan framework, traffic
layout, and development requirements shall be used as the implementation guide.
Wherever conflict occurs between the written text in this document and the
notations on the sketch plan, the written text shall prevail. The sketch plan
is a graphic representation of the property included in the PUD delineating the
approximate location and configuration of the parcels for the purpose of easier
reference for the applicable regulations of this Ordinance. (Ord. 1294, 4-6-
1998)
044-03: GENERAL CONDITIONS:
Whereas, Title 9 of the West Des Moines City Code includes Chapter 9, PUD
Planned Unit Development District and establishes certain regulations and
guidelines pertaining to accompanying information required on a plat and site
plan documents.
   A.   Now, therefore, the following conditions, restrictions, and regulations
are adopted as part of this approval and the following general site plan
criteria shall be integrated into and made a part of the development criteria
for the 42nd Street PUD, to wit:
      1.   All subdivisions, public streets, public street rights-of-way and
general development shall adhere to the standards and design criteria set forth
in the West Des Moines Subdivision Ordinance and the Des Moines Metropolitan
Design Standards as adopted by the City of West Des Moines pertaining thereto,
unless otherwise stated within this Ordinance.
      2.   Any regulation, standard, provision or requirement that is not
specifically addressed within this document that is regulated elsewhere in the
City Code of West Des Moines, the requirements of the City Code are applicable
and shall be enforced.
      3.   In all areas within a 100-year frequency flood hazard zone, or
adjoining drainageways or detention areas involving potential flood hazards, no
building shall be erected which has a lowest floor, including basements, less
than one foot (1') above the determined level of the 100-year frequency flood
event or floodproofed to the same elevation in accordance with the West Des
Moines Floodplain Ordinance, and no building shall be erected within twenty
five feet (25') of any major drainage, storm water detention basin or pond.
      4.   The developer, their successors and assigns, if any, shall pay all
construction and engineering costs for the interior development of the planned
unit development, in accordance with the current City policies at the time of
development as required by this Ordinance, the Subdivision Ordinance of the
City of West Des Moines, and the Des Moines Metropolitan Design Standards as
adopted by the City of West Des Moines, for all streets, storm sewers, sanitary
sewers, drainage improvements, detention basins, water mains, buffers and other
improvements within the PUD as may be required.
   B.   Land Use Design Criteria: In addition to the general conditions as
stated in subsection A above, the following land use design criteria shall
apply to the development areas designated on the sketch plan, which is made a
part of this rezoning action per subsection A of this Ordinance.
All general use regulations, performance standards and provisions set forth in
the Zoning Ordinance for PCP Professional Commerce Park District shall apply to
any development proposal for all property as shown on the sketch plan of the
PUD; except as provided herein.
      1.   Development Standards: Permitted uses shall include all uses allowed
within the PCP Professional Commerce Park District and the following:
Beauty shop (SIC 723)
Barber shop (SIC 724)
Personal appearance services (SIC 7299)
Photo studio (SIC 722)
In addition, the following uses will be allowed as permitted conditional uses:
Massage and steam bath services (SIC 7299)
Photo finishing lab (SIC 7384)
Note: No drive-thru facilities shall be allowed with the exception of one for a
bank use only and the drive-thru shall be designed to be screened from the
public view from the public street with berming, landscaping, and/or
architectural features.
Buildings shall not exceed sixty feet (60') in height. Access to the PUD shall
be restricted to internal access only from the private street along the eastern
boundary of the PUD. No direct access from Westown Parkway and 42nd Street
shall be permitted. If the property is divided into more than one ownership, an
ingress-egress easement shall be recorded at the time of subdivision to provide
access from the private street on the perimeter of the PUD to the entire
parcel.
The front yard building setback shall be measured from any public street right-
of-way or right-of-way easement and shall be a minimum of fifty feet (50'). No
building shall be located closer than fifteen feet (15') from the internal
property lines within the PUD.
Along 42nd Street and Westown Parkway, the minimum parking lot and/or drive
setback shall be a minimum of twenty feet (20') and shall be measured from the
anticipated full public street right-of-way or public street right-of-way
easement as determined by the City during the platting or site planning process
and shall be utilized, designed, and improved as a landscaped buffer area
effectively screening all parking and drive areas from public view and
presenting an attractive view or element to the area. Along the eastern and
southern boundaries of the PUD, no parking stall or drive, except for the
access drive(s) into the site from the private drive on the perimeter of the
PUD, shall be located less than ten feet (10') from the back of curb of the
private street or five feet (5') from the property line, whichever is more
restrictive. The area between the public street or the private drive on the
perimeter of the PUD, and the on site parking area and drives, shall be
utilized, designed, and improved as a landscaped buffer area effectively
screening all parking and drive areas from public view and presenting an
attractive view or element to the area from the public street and the private
street.
The site plan development of the property shall include a minimum of thirty
five percent (35%) of unencumbered open space and all parking areas shall
include landscape areas and islands, equal to not less than ten percent (10%)
of the total paved area of the site in accordance with City Code requirements.
Such landscaped area shall be in addition to the open space requirement for the
total site. All islands within the parking lot shall be planted with living
materials, i.e., shrubs, grass, or ground cover, or mulched with an organic
mulch.
      2.   Buffering: Adequate buffering of negative aspects of any development
loading docks, garbage dumpsters and HVAC mechanical units) from any public
street and adjoining properties shall be required. All buildings shall be
located and designed so as to not expose loading docks or doors, loading areas
or the rear of buildings to public streets. (Ord. 1294, 4-6-1998)
044-04: ARCHITECTURE:
The design of the buildings within the 42nd Street PUD shall be designed in
such a manner to present an overall architecturally unified development through
the use of similar materials, colors, architectural elements, etc.
Architectural design and use of materials for the construction of any building
within the PUD shall be accomplished in a manner compatible with PCP
Professional Commerce Park Zone District building materials. The architectural
design of any building shall be acceptable to the City and all buildings within
the property shall have as a primary element of the exterior being face brick
with all sides of any building built on the property consistent in design and
use of materials. No wood, masonite, visible asphaltic exterior wall or roof
material, aluminum siding, nonarchitectural sheet metal, concrete block, pre-
cast concrete panels, drivet, E.I.F.S., or other similar materials shall
constitute a portion of any building except as a trim material, unless the City
Council of West Des Moines, after having received a recommendation from the
Planning and Zoning Commission of West Des Moines shall determine said material
when used as a primary element, enhances the physical appearance. (Ord. 1294,
4-6-1998)
044-05: SIGNAGE REGULATION:
All signage shall be constructed in accordance with the West Des Moines City
Sign Code for the PCP Professional Commerce Park District.
All signage constructed as wall signs on building fascia within the PUD shall
incorporate aesthetic features compatible with the overall character of the
development. All wall signs shall be composed of solid individual letters
attached to the building fascia, or individual letters of anodized aluminum,
galvanized metal, illuminated self-contained with translucent plastic faces set
in anodized aluminum returns and trim. One ground or monument sign shall be
permitted each public street frontage. Accessory commercial uses, as allowed in
the PCP District, shall be limited to no exterior signage that would be
intended to draw the general public to the use.
Panel signs with letters incorporated or painted upon a panel or wall area
shall be prohibited. For the purpose of this Ordinance, panel signs shall be
defined as a wall sign with a self-contained frame covered with a translucent
face which is internally illuminated and extends away from the wall to which it
is attached. These types of signs are sometimes referred to as "cabinet signs"
or "can signs". Signs with exposed neon lights, moving lights or flashing
lights attached to the exterior of the building, monument sign or visible from
the exterior of the building shall be prohibited. Temporary advertising or
promotional signage attached to exterior windows or walls shall be allowed only
with an approved temporary signage permit issued through the Building
Department under the provisions for temporary signage in the City Code. (Ord.
1294, 4-6-1998)
044-06: MASTER PLANNING REQUIRED:
Prior to development within any portion of the PUD, a master plan shall be
prepared showing the location of streets and shared drives within or adjoining
the parcel in order to ensure workable traffic circulation patterns, grades,
and usable building sites. At the time of the master plan review the necessary
ingress-egress easements will be identified to insure that applicable access
requirements will be addressed at the time of the platting or site plan review.
As a part of the master plan, the pedestrian access into and within the PUD
shall be designed to provide access from the adjacent properties to the use(s)
developed within the 42nd Street PUD. The intent of this requirement is to
encourage pedestrian access into the development from office uses in the area
and to de-emphasize the use of motorized vehicles for employees and tenants
within the surrounding areas desiring to frequent the uses within the PUD
development. (Ord. 1294, 4-6-1998)
044-07: BUILDING RESTRICTIONS, EASEMENTS AND COVENANTS:
The developer shall, with the approval of the City Council, adopt building
restrictions, easements and covenants pertaining to the property where the
developer and the City deem appropriate. (Ord. 1294, 4-6-1998)
044-08: ALL AREAS TO BE PLATTED:
Prior to, or in conjunction with development or transfer of ownership of any
portion of the PUD, said area shall be platted in accordance with the City's
Subdivision Ordinance to delineate within a plat the parcel, or any portion
thereof, to be developed or sold separately. (Ord. 1294, 4-6-1998)
044-09: TRAFFIC STUDY REQUIRED:
Prior to development within any part of the PUD, a traffic study shall be
completed and approved by the City for the purpose of determining traffic
impacts and required improvements that would be necessary for the safe and
orderly movement of vehicles into and around the proposed development. (Ord.
1294, 4-6-1998)
044-10: TRAFFIC SIGNALS:
The owner, on behalf of itself, its successors and assigns, agrees to pay its
share of any cost assessed by the City in accordance with its current standard
assessment practices for all costs in connection with traffic signals deemed
necessary and identified by the required traffic study. (Ord. 1294, 4-6-1998)
044-11: STORM WATER MANAGEMENT:
There shall be submitted to, and approved by the West Des Moines City Engineer,
a complete storm water management plan for the PUD to be prepared by the
developer prior to development within the PUD and for all storm sewer and
drainage systems within the PUD. (Ord. 1294, 4-6-1998)
044-99: LEGISLATIVE HISTORY:
Ord. 1174, 4-8-1996; Ord. 1294, 4-6-1998.
PUD #45
50TH STREET
SECTION:
045-01: Legal Description
045-02: Conditions
045-03: Signage Regulation
045-04: Traffic Study Required
045-05: Intersection Paving
045-06: Traffic Signals
045-07: Storm Water Management
045-99: Legislative History
045-01: LEGAL DESCRIPTION:
The legal description for the 50th Street PUD is as follows:
A parcel of land in the North 1/2 of the Northeast fractional 1/4 of Section 6,
Township 78 North, Range 25 West of the 5th P.M., City of West Des Moines, Polk
County, Iowa, that is more particularly described as follows: Commencing at a
point on the West right-of-way (R.O.W.) line of 50th Street, said point being
33.0 feet West of the S.E. Corner of said North 1/2; thence N00°00'00"E, 90.00
feet along said West R.O.W. line to the point of beginning; thence N89°32'44"W,
7.00 feet to a point of curvature; thence Southwesterly along a curve to the
right having a radius of 30.00 feet, an arc length of 46.97 feet and a chord
bearing of S45°08'50"W, to a point of tangency; thence N89°40'39"W, 718.47 feet
along the North R.O.W. line of Westown Parkway to a point on the East R.O.W.
line of Interstate Highway #35; thence N17°08'31"W, 363.59 feet along said East
R.O.W. line to a point; thence N01°55'06"E, 646.45 feet along the East R.O.W.
line of Interstate Highway #35 to a point; thence S89°07'18"E, 841.14 feet to a
point on said West R.O.W. line of 50th Street, thence S00°00'00"W, 954.89 feet
along said right-of-way line to the point of beginning and containing 18.9
acres more or less.
(Ord. 1225, 1-13-1997)
045-02: CONDITIONS:
Whereas, Title 9 of the West Des Moines City Code includes Chapter 9, PUD
Planned Unit Development District and establishes certain regulations and
guidelines pertaining to accompanying information required on a plat and site
plan documents. Now, therefore, the following conditions, restrictions, and
regulations are adopted as part of this approval, to wit:
   A.   General Conditions: The following general site plan criteria shall be
integrated into and made a part of the 50th Street PUD:
      1.   All subdivisions, public streets, public street rights-of-way and
general development shall adhere to the standards and design criteria set forth
in the West Des Moines Subdivision Ordinance and the Des Moines Metropolitan
Design Standards as adopted by the City of West Des Moines pertaining thereto
unless otherwise stated within this Ordinance.
      2.   Any regulation, standard, provision or requirement that is not
specifically addressed within this document that is regulated elsewhere in the
City Code of West Des Moines, the requirements of the City Code shall still be
enforced.
      3.   In all areas within a 100-year frequency flood hazard zone, or
adjoining drainageways or detention areas involving potential flood hazards, no
building shall be erected which has a lowest floor, including basements, less
than one foot (1') above the determined level of the 100-year frequency flood
event, and no building shall be erected within twenty five feet (25') of any
major drainageway, storm water detention basin or pond.
      4.   The developer, their successors and assigns, if any, shall pay all
construction and engineering costs for the interior development of the planned
unit development, as required by this Ordinance, or the Subdivision Ordinance
of the City of West Des Moines, Iowa, for all streets, storm sewers, sanitary
sewers, drainageway improvements, detention basins, water mains, buffers and
other improvements within the PUD as may be required by the City Code or this
Ordinance.
   B.   Land Use Design Criteria: In addition to the general conditions as
stated in subsection A above, the following land use design criteria shall
apply to the legally described property herein:
      1.   All general use regulations, performance standards and provisions
set forth in Title 9, Zoning for the PCP Professional Commerce Park District
shall apply to any development proposal for the property except as modified
herein. The following development standards and use regulations shall apply to
the property as applicable.
      2.   Allowed Uses: Allowed uses shall include all permitted uses and
permitted conditional uses within the SC Support Commercial District and the
PCP Professional Commerce Park District, except for automobile repair services
(SIC 75) and automobile dealers and service stations (SIC 55), which shall not
be permitted.
In addition, the following uses shall be allowed within this PUD with the
approval of a permitted conditional use permit:
General merchandise stores (SIC 53)
Building materials, hardware, and garden supply stores (SIC
52, except 527)
Office supply and furniture stores (SIC 5712)
      3.   Drive-Thrus: No drive-thru facilities shall be permitted within this
PUD, with the exception of one for a bank use only.
      4.   Multiple Uses: Multiple use of the site by more than one building
shall be permitted provided that the buildings shall be consistent in
architectural design and use of materials and organized utilizing a compatible
planned open space, landscape plan, and parking plan to serve and maintain a
unified master plan concept. Multiple buildings separated by parking areas or
drives and lots less than two (2) acres in size may be considered acceptable if
approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission and City Council as part of an
acceptable master development plan for the property legally described herein.
      5.   Building Setbacks: The front yard building setback shall be measured
from any public street right-of-way or ultimate right-of-way easement per the
comprehensive plan. No building shall be located closer than one hundred feet
(100') from the ultimate right-of-way line of 50th Street and Westown Parkway.
All other building setbacks shall be a minimum of fifty feet (50') from the
property line.
      6.   Parking, Loading And Internal Drive Setbacks: Off-street parking
lots, loading areas and internal drives shall be sufficiently set back a
minimum of thirty feet (30') from property lines and ultimate right-of-way
lines. Parking, loading and internal drive setbacks shall be designed to be
effectively screened from public view with the use of landscaping, earth
berming and/or wall structures and presenting an attractive view or element to
the area. Landscape buffering shall be reviewed and approved as part of any
site plan submittal or entitlement request.
      7.   Open Space Required: On each lot there shall be provided an open
space equal to at least thirty five percent (35%) of the total lot area; said
space shall be unencumbered with any structure or off-street parking and shall
be landscaped and well maintained with grass, trees and shrubbery, except for
areas used as pedestrian walks and ingress-egress drives. In addition, all
parking areas shall include landscape areas, islands, screens, etc., equal to
not less than ten percent (10%) of the total paved area. Such landscaped area
shall be in addition to the open space requirements noted above for the total
lot area. Landscaped islands within the parking area shall have ground cover of
grass (i.e., sod), shrubs or other acceptable living plant life, unless an
alternate ground cover is specifically approved as part of the site plan review
by the City. Inorganic mulches in the landscape islands shall not be considered
acceptable.
      8.   Architecture: Architectural design and use of materials for the
construction of any building within the property shall be accomplished in a
manner compatible with PCP Professional Commerce Park Zone District building
materials. The architectural design of any building shall be acceptable to the
City and all buildings within the property shall have as a primary element of
the exterior being face brick with all sides of any building built on the
property consistent in design and use of materials. No wood, masonite, visible
asphaltic exterior wall or roof material, aluminum siding, nonarchitectural
sheet metal, concrete block, or other similar materials shall constitute a
portion of any building except as a trim material, unless the City Council of
West Des Moines, after having received a recommendation from the Planning and
Zoning Commission of West Des Moines shall determine said material when used as
a primary element, enhances the physical appearance.
      9.   Outside Displays: Outside displays for retail sales shall only be
allowed with the issuance of a temporary use permit under the provisions of
Title 9, Chapter 16, Temporary Use Permits, of the City Code.
      10.   Outdoor Storage: Any outdoor storage shall be screened from public
street view by the use of opaque screen walls. Outdoor storage shall not be
permitted to extend above the height of the screen at any time. No long-term
outdoor storage of shopping carts associated with any use within the PUD shall
be permitted. Long-term storage shall be defined as any time period in excess
of three (3) hours.
      11.   Buffering: Adequate buffering of negative aspects of commercial
buildings (loading docks, garbage dumpsters and HVAC mechanical units) from any
public street and adjoining properties shall be required. Commercial retail
buildings shall not be located and designed to expose loading docks or doors,
loading areas or the rear of buildings to public streets. All rooftop
mechanical units shall be screened from views from the adjacent public streets
with the use of architecturally designed screen walls, parapet walls,
penthouse, or other opaque material, and shall be identified as part of the
site plan submittal or entitlement request. (Ord. 1273, 10-20-1997)
045-03: SIGNAGE REGULATION:
Any signage within the PUD shall comply with the provisions of the West Des
Moines Sign Code unless noted otherwise herein. No pole sign as defined by the
West Des Moines City Sign Code shall be incorporated into any development
within the 50th Street PUD. Ground sign standards shall be used for the
construction of freestanding signage as provided for within the West Des Moines
City Sign Code for the PCP Professional Commerce Park District.
All signage constructed as wall signs on building fascia within the PUD shall
incorporate aesthetic features compatible with the overall character of the
development. All wall signs will be composed of solid individual letters
attached to the building fascia, or individual letters of anodized aluminum,
galvanized metal, illuminated self-contained with translucent plastic faces set
in anodized aluminum returns and trim; panel signs with letters incorporated or
painted upon a panel or wall area shall be prohibited. Temporary advertising or
promotional signage attached to exterior windows or walls shall be allowed only
with an approved temporary signage permit issued through the Building
Department under the provisions for temporary signage in the City Code. Signs
with exposed neon lights, moving lights or flashing lights visible from the
exterior of the building shall be prohibited. The maximum height of any
individual letter within a wall sign shall not exceed six feet (6') in height
except any use that occupies in excess of one hundred thousand (100,000) square
feet shall be allowed to have individual letters not to exceed eight feet (8')
in height. (Ord. 1273, 10-20-1997)
045-04: TRAFFIC STUDY REQUIRED:
Prior to development within any part of the PUD, a traffic study shall be
completed and approved by the City for the purpose of determining traffic
impacts and required improvements. (Ord. 1273, 10-20-1997)
045-05: INTERSECTION PAVING:
The equitable share assessed in accordance with the City's assessment policy of
the cost associated with the construction of any new and existing intersections
adjacent to the site shall be paid for by the owner, its successors and assigns
including paving to the future ultimate widths with the returns along Westown
Parkway and 50th Street (end of returns shall at a minimum include temporary
tapers). (Ord. 1273, 10-20-1997)
045-06: TRAFFIC SIGNALS:
The owner, on behalf of itself, its successors and assigns agrees to commit to
pay any cost associated with the upgrading of existing traffic signals for the
initial development of the property that is necessary for the safe movement of
vehicles entering and exiting the site. (Ord. 1273, 10-20-1997)
045-07: STORM WATER MANAGEMENT:
There shall be submitted to, and approved by the West Des Moines City Engineer,
a complete storm water management plan for the PUD to be prepared by the
developer prior to development within the PUD and for all storm sewer and
drainage systems within the PUD. (Ord. 1273, 10-20-1997)
045-99: LEGISLATIVE HISTORY:
Ord. 1225, 1-13-1997.
PUD #46
MAPLE GROVE NORTH
SECTION:
046-01: Legal Description
046-02: Sketch Plan
046-03: General Conditions
046-04: Building Restrictions, Easements And Covenants
046-05: All Areas To Be Platted
046-06: Stormwater Management
046-07: Traffic Reports
046-08: Vehicular Access
046-09: Infrastructure
046-10: Street Rights Of Way
046-11: Buffers
046-12: Signage Regulation
046-13: Definition
046-14: Violations And Penalties
046-99: Legislative History
046-01: LEGAL DESCRIPTION:
The legal description for the Maple Grove North PUD is as follows:
A parcel of land in Government Lots 2 and 7, Section 3, Township 78 North,
Range 26 West of the 5th P.M., City of West Des Moines, Dallas County, Iowa
that is more particularly described as follows:
Beginning at the Southwest Corner of said Lot 2, said point also being the
Northwest Corner of said Lot 7 and N00°05'24"E, 2646.24 feet from the center of
said Section 3; thence N00°05'24"E, 2064.31 feet along the West line of said
Lot 2 to a point on the North line of said Section 3; thence N89°54'29"E,
1073.15 feet along said North line to a point; thence N89°47'45"E, 178.26 feet
along said North line to a point; thence S00°02'57"W, 2827.10 feet to a point
on the North right-of-way line of the Minneapolis and St. Louis Railroad;
thence N63°16'12"W, 1402.30 feet along said North right-of-way line to a point
on the West line of said Lot 7; thence N00°05'24"E, 129.70 feet along the West
line of said Lot 7 to the point of beginning and containing 72.171 acres more
or less. (Ord. 1273, 10-20-1997)
046-02: SKETCH PLAN:
On file with the community development department of the city and made a part
of this rezoning approval, for concept description and delineation is the
sketch plan document for the Maple Grove North PUD. It is recognized that minor
shifts or realignments of roadways may be necessary and compatible with the
need to acquire workable street patterns, grades and usable building sites, but
the general plan layout, including the relationship of uses to each other and
the relationship of dwelling unit types to the general plan framework, traffic
layout, and development requirements shall be used as the implementation guide.
Wherever conflict occurs between the written text in this document and the
notations on the sketch plan, the written text shall prevail. The sketch plan
is a graphic representation of the property included in the PUD delineating the
approximate location and configuration of the parcels for the purpose of easier
reference for the applicable regulations of this ordinance. (Ord. 1273, 10-20-
1997)
046-03: GENERAL CONDITIONS:
Whereas, title 9 of the city code includes chapter 9, PUD planned unit
development district and establishes certain regulations and guidelines
pertaining to accompanying information required on a plat, site plan and
permitted conditional use documents.
   A.   Now, therefore, the following conditions, restrictions, and regulations
are adopted as part of this approval and the following general site plan
criteria shall be integrated into and made a part of the development criteria
for the Maple Grove North PUD, to wit:
      1.   All subdivisions, public streets, public street rights of way and
general development shall adhere to the standards and design criteria set forth
in the West Des Moines subdivision ordinance and the Des Moines metropolitan
design standards as adopted by the city of West Des Moines pertaining thereto,
unless otherwise stated within this ordinance.
      2.   Any regulation, standard, provision or requirement that is not
specifically addressed within this document that is regulated elsewhere in the
city code, the requirements of the city code shall still be enforced.
      3.   In all areas within a 100-year frequency flood hazard zone, or
adjoining drainageways or detention areas involving potential flood hazards, no
building shall be erected which has a lowest floor, including basements, less
than one foot (1') above the determined level of the 100-year frequency flood
event or floodproofed to the same elevation in accordance with the West Des
Moines Floodplain Ordinance, and no building shall be erected within twenty
five feet (25') of any major drainage, storm water detention basin or pond.
      4.   The developer, their successors and assigns, if any, shall pay all
construction and engineering costs for the interior development of the planned
unit development, in accordance with the current City policies at the time of
development, as required by this Ordinance, the Subdivision Ordinance of the
City of West Des Moines, and the Des Moines Metropolitan Design Standards as
adopted by the City of West Des Moines, for all streets, storm sewers, sanitary
sewers, drainage improvements, detention basins, water mains, buffers and other
improvements within the PUD as may be required.
   B.   Land Use Design Criteria: In addition to the general conditions
requirement stated within this document, the following land use design criteria
shall apply to the development areas designated by parcel on the sketch plan.
The sketch plan document referred to in Section
046-02 of this Ordinance delineates four (4) parcels of the PUD, each denoted
with a specific parcel number, for application of specific standards of land
use and development regulations. The following development standards and use
regulations shall apply to development within each of the individual parcels,
or portion of a parcel, as applicable.
      1.   Parcel 1: All general use regulations and provisions set forth in
Title 9, Zoning, of the West Des Moines City Code for the CMC Community
Commercial District shall apply to any development proposal for all property
within Parcel 1 as shown on the sketch plan of the Maple Grove North PUD,
unless noted otherwise in this Ordinance. Parcel 1 shall incorporate a maximum
of fifteen (15) acres.
         a.   Development Standards: Allowed uses shall include all permitted
and permitted conditional (Pc) uses within the CMC Community Commercial
District. All building heights and setbacks within Parcel 1 shall be in
accordance with the setback and bulk density regulations chapter of the West
Des Moines Zoning Ordinance. All parking lot setbacks within Parcel 1 shall be
in accordance with the off street parking and loading chapter of the West Des
Moines Zoning Ordinance. The minimum required open space in this parcel shall
be twenty five percent (25%) of the project area and all parking areas shall
include landscaped areas, islands, screens, etc., equal to not less than ten
percent (10%) of the total paved area and associated drives. Such parking lot
landscaped area shall be in addition to the open space requirements for the
project area. Landscaped islands within the parking area shall have ground
cover of grass (i.e., sod), shrubs or other acceptable living plant life,
unless an alternate ground cover is specifically approved as part of the site
plan review by the City. No parking space shall be greater than seventy five
feet (75') from a landscaped open space with a minimum area of two hundred
fifty (250) square feet. The narrowest dimension of a parking lot island shall
not be less than five feet (5').
Drive-throughs, except grocery pick up drive, banks, dry cleaners and drug
stores with appropriate screening and buffering, shall be prohibited in this
parcel. As a part of the review of a site plan or permitted conditional use
permit submitted for any allowed drive-through facilities, the property owner/
developer must demonstrate through design and screening that the proposed
drive-through facility will not negatively impact the surrounding properties or
create traffic congestion in the area. All allowed drive-through facilities
shall be designed to be screened from the public right of way through the use
of architectural features, earth berming and landscaping, to minimize the
visual impact of the drive-through.
         b.   Architecture: This parcel shall be developed with each building
compatible in design and use of materials so as to appear as a single unified
development. The architectural design of any building shall be acceptable to
the City and all buildings within the parcel shall have as a primary element of
the exterior being brick, with all sides of any building built within the
parcel consistent in design and use of materials. No wood, masonite, aluminum
siding, nonarchitectural sheet metal, concrete block, or other similar
materials shall constitute a portion of any building except as a trim material,
unless the City Council of West Des Moines, after having received a
recommendation from the Planning and Zoning Commission of West Des Moines shall
determine said material when used as a primary element, enhances the physical
appearance or provides continuity desired to unite all structures within the
parcel together into one project concept.
         c.   Pedestrian Access: Pedestrian access shall be provided from
Parcel 1 to the residential uses developed or to be developed within Parcels 2
and 3. The design and/or location of the pedestrian walkways shall be
determined at site plan development. The intent of this requirement is to
discourage the use of motorized vehicles for residents of the parcels 2 and 3
desiring to frequent the commercial uses within parcel 1 and to encourage
pedestrian accessibility. The maintenance of any pedestrian access proposed on
private property shall be the responsibility of the property owner. (Ord. 1273,
10-20-1997)
         d.   Buffering: Adequate buffering of negative aspects of commercial
buildings (loading docks, garbage dumpsters and HVAC mechanical units) from any
public street and adjoining properties shall be required. Commercial retail
buildings shall not be located and designed to expose loading docks or doors,
loading areas or the rear of the building to public streets unless adequately
screened from public view by berming and landscaping.
A thirty foot (30') buffer park shall be established along the south boundary
line of parcel 1 to screen the commercial uses from the adjoining residential
districts. Landscaping and berming of the buffer park shall be provided in
accordance with the West Des Moines buffer ordinance. (Ord. 1998, 8-19-2013)
      2.   Parcel 2: All general use regulations and provisions set forth in
title 9, "Zoning", of the city code for the RH residential high density
district shall apply to any development proposal for all property within parcel
2 as shown on the sketch plan of the Maple Grove North PUD, unless noted
otherwise in this ordinance. Parcel 2 shall include approximately eighteen and
seven-tenths (18.7) acres, with a maximum of three hundred thirty seven (337)
dwelling units permitted (18 dwelling units per acre).
         a.   Development Standards: Allowed uses shall include all permitted
and permitted conditional (Pc) uses within the RH residential high density
district. All building heights and setbacks within parcel 2 shall be in
accordance with the setback and bulk density regulations chapter of the West
Des Moines zoning ordinance. All parking lot setbacks within parcel 2 shall be
in accordance with the off street parking and loading chapter of the West Des
Moines zoning ordinance. The minimum required open space in this parcel shall
be twenty five percent (25%) of the project area and all parking areas shall
include landscaped areas, islands, screens, etc., equal to not less than ten
percent (10%) of the total paved area and associated drives. Such parking lot
landscaped area shall be in addition to the open space requirements for the
project area. Landscaped islands within the parking area shall have ground
cover of grass (i.e., sod), shrubs or other acceptable living plant life,
unless an alternate ground cover is specifically approved as part of the site
plan review by the city. No parking space shall be greater than seventy five
feet (75') from a landscaped open space with a minimum area of two hundred
fifty (250) square feet. The narrowest dimension of a parking lot island shall
not be less than five feet (5').
         b.   Architecture: Architecture for residential development in parcel
2 shall be acceptable to the city and accomplished in a manner compatible with
the adjoining residential uses in the neighborhood. Architectural design for
multi-family buildings shall attempt to express a creative presentation of
exterior building materials, exterior details and texture, treatment of windows
and doors, and use of angles and multiplicity of planes within the wall and
roof design to lessen the plainness of appearance which can be characteristic
of large residential buildings. The use of brick elements shall be incorporated
into the building architecture on all sides of the structure, unless the city
council, after recommendation by the planning and zoning commission, shall
determine that the use of alternate building materials enhances the physical
appearance.
         c.   Pedestrian Access: Pedestrian access shall be provided from
parcel 2 to the commercial uses developed within parcel 1 and the residential
uses developed within parcel 3. The design and/or location of the pedestrian
walkways shall be determined at site plan development. The intent of this
requirement is to discourage the use of motorized vehicles for residents of the
parcels 2 and 3 desiring to frequent the commercial uses within parcel 1 and to
encourage pedestrian accessibility. The maintenance of any pedestrian access
proposed on private property shall be the responsibility of the property owner.
         d.   Buffering: A thirty foot (30') buffer park shall be established
between parcels 2 and 3a, to screen the high density residential land use from
the medium density residential land use, with the burden of the provision of
the buffer being upon whichever parcel develops first. In addition, a thirty
foot (30') buffer park shall be established along the east and west boundary
lines of parcel 2, to screen the high density residential land use from the
single-family residential, manufactured housing districts and the minor
arterial street. The developer shall coordinate with the property owner to the
west to provide the berming and landscaping of the buffer park on the west side
of parcel 2 in conjunction with the berming and landscaping required for the
thirty foot (30') buffer park on the east side of parcel C in the 98th Street
PUD. Landscaping and berming of the buffer park shall be provided in accordance
with the West Des Moines buffer ordinance.
      3.   Parcel 3a: All general use regulations and provisions set forth in
title 9, "Zoning", of the city code for the RM residential medium density
district shall apply to any development proposal for all property within parcel
3a as shown on the sketch plan of the Maple Grove North PUD, unless noted
otherwise in this ordinance. Parcel 3a shall include approximately fourteen and
one-half (14.5) acres, with a maximum of one hundred nine (109) dwelling units
permitted at a maximum overall density of seven and one-half (7.5) dwelling
units per acre.
         a.   Development Standards: Allowed uses shall include all permitted
and permitted conditional (Pc) uses within the RM residential medium density
district. All building heights and setbacks within parcel 3a shall be in
accordance with the setback and bulk density regulations chapter of the West
Des Moines zoning ordinance unless noted otherwise in this ordinance. A minimum
twenty five foot (25') building setback shall be provided from the ultimate
right of way of the public street through parcel 3a as shown on the sketch
plan, provided that no unit shall have direct access to the public street. Any
units with direct access to the public street would need to comply with the RM
residential medium density district setbacks. A minimum fifty foot (50')
building setback shall be required from the ultimate right of way of 90th
Street. No garage opening be located closer than twenty five feet (25') from a
public street, private street or shared driveway. The minimum required open
space in this parcel shall be twenty five percent (25%) of the project area,
plus ten percent (10%) of the paved area.
         b.   Pedestrian Access: Pedestrian access shall be provided from
parcel 3a to the future commercial uses to be developed within parcel 1 and the
residential uses to be developed within parcel 2. The design and/or location of
the pedestrian walkways shall be determined at site plan development. The
intent of this requirement is to discourage the use of motorized vehicles for
residents of the parcels 2, 3a, and 3b desiring to frequent the commercial uses
within parcel 1 and to encourage pedestrian accessibility. The maintenance of
any pedestrian access proposed on private property shall be the responsibility
of the property owner.
         c.   Buffering: A thirty foot (30') buffer park shall be established
between parcels 2 and 3a, to buffer the high density residential land use from
the medium density residential land use, with the burden of the provision of
the buffer being upon whichever parcel develops first. In addition, a thirty
foot (30') buffer park shall be established along the east, west and south
boundary lines of parcel 3a, to screen the medium density residential land use
from the single-family residential and manufactured housing districts. The
developer shall coordinate with the property owner to the west to provide the
berming and landscaping of the buffer park on the west side of parcel 3a in
conjunction with the berming and landscaping required for the thirty foot (30')
buffer park on the east side of parcel C in the 98th Street PUD. Landscaping
and berming of the buffer park shall be provided in accordance with the West
Des Moines buffer ordinance.
      4.   Parcel 3b: All general use regulations and provisions set forth in
title 9, "Zoning", of the city code for the RS residential single-family
district shall apply to any development proposal for all property within parcel
3b as shown on the sketch plan of the Maple Grove North PUD, unless noted
otherwise in this ordinance. Parcel 3b shall include approximately twenty three
(23) acres.
         a.   Development Standards: Allowed uses shall include all permitted
and permitted conditional (Pc) uses within the RS residential single-family
district. All building heights and setbacks shall be in accordance with the
setback and bulk density regulations chapter of the West Des Moines zoning
ordinance, unless noted otherwise in this ordinance. The minimum lot width
within parcel 3b shall be fifty five feet (55'). The minimum lot size shall be
six thousand six hundred (6,600) square feet. The minimum front yard building
setback shall be thirty feet (30'). The minimum side yard building setback
shall be five feet (5'), provided that no part of any structure shall be
located closer than five feet (5') from the property line.
         b.   Pedestrian Access: Pedestrian access shall be provided from
parcel 3b to the commercial uses developed within parcel 1 and the residential
uses developed within parcels 2 and 3a. The design and/or location of the
pedestrian walkways shall be determined at the time of platting. The intent of
this requirement is to discourage the use of motorized vehicles for residents
of the parcels 2, 3a and 3b desiring to frequent the commercial uses within
parcel 1 and to encourage pedestrian accessibility.
         c.   Buffering: A thirty foot (30') buffer park easement shall be
established along the east and west boundary lines of parcel 3b, to screen the
single-family residential land use from the manufactured housing district to
the west and 90th Street to the east. The developer shall coordinate with the
property owner to the west to provide the berming and landscaping of the buffer
park on the west side of parcel 3b in conjunction with the berming and
landscaping required for the thirty foot (30') buffer park on the east side of
parcel C in the 98th Street PUD. Any double frontage lots within parcel 3b
shall provide a thirty foot (30') buffer park easement in accordance with the
West Des Moines buffer ordinance. In addition, a thirty foot (30') buffer park
easement shall be established along the south boundary line of the PUD, to
screen the single-family residential land use from the railroad. Fences shall
be allowed to be constructed within the thirty foot (30') buffer park easement
along the south boundary of the PUD provided that the fences are constructed on
the side and rear property lines only, and all fences are consistent in
material and appearance. Landscaping and berming of the buffer parks shall be
provided in accordance with the West Des Moines buffer ordinance.
      5.   Parcel 4: Due to its location east of 90th Street and its physical
proximity to undeveloped properties east of said street, parcel 4 shall be
designated as open space at this time. It is intended that parcel 4 be rezoned
and developed in conjunction with the undeveloped property to the east at a
future date. At the time that zoning is established for the property to the
east, this parcel shall be rezoned to be consistent with it. No development of
any type shall be permitted on this parcel until the zoning of the property has
been finalized and the appropriate entitlement permit process(es) completed.
(Ord. 1273, 10-20-1997)
      6.   Parcel 5: All general use regulations and provisions set forth in
title 9, "Zoning", of the city code for the CMC community commercial district
shall apply to any development proposal for all property within parcel 5 as
shown on the sketch plan of the Maple Grove North PUD, unless noted otherwise
in this ordinance. Parcel 5 shall incorporate a maximum of 4.42 acres.
         a.   Development Standards: Allowed uses shall include all permitted
and permitted conditional (Pc) uses within the CMC community commercial
district. All building heights and setbacks within parcel 1 shall be in
accordance with the setback and bulk density regulations chapter of the West
Des Moines zoning ordinance. All parking lot setbacks within parcel 1 shall be
in accordance with the off street parking and loading chapter of the West Des
Moines zoning ordinance. The minimum required open space in this parcel shall
be twenty five percent (25%) of the project area and all parking areas shall
include landscaped areas, islands, screens, etc., equal to not less than ten
percent (10%) of the total paved area and associated drives. Such parking lot
landscaped area shall be in addition to the open space requirements for the
project area. Landscaped islands within the parking area shall have ground
cover of grass (i.e., sod), shrubs or other acceptable living plant life,
unless an alternate ground cover is specifically approved as part of the site
plan review by the city. No parking space shall be greater than seventy five
feet (75') from a landscaped open space with a minimum area of two hundred
fifty (250) square feet. The narrowest dimension of a parking lot island shall
not be less than five feet (5').
Drive-throughs, except grocery pick up drive-throughs, banks, dry cleaners, and
one restaurant or one coffee shop up to two thousand eight hundred (2,800)
square feet gross floor area, and drugstores with appropriate screening and
buffering, shall be prohibited in this parcel. As a part of the review of a
site plan or permitted conditional use permit submitted for any allowed drive-
through facilities, the property owner/developer must demonstrate through
design and screening that the proposed drive-through facility will not
negatively impact the surrounding properties or create traffic congestion in
the area. All allowed drive-through facilities shall be designed to be screened
from the public right of way through the use of architectural features, earth
berming and landscaping, to minimize the visual impact of the drive-through.
         b.   Architecture: This parcel shall be developed with each building
compatible in design and use of materials so as to appear as a single unified
development with parcel 1. The architectural design of any building shall be
acceptable to the city and all buildings within the parcel shall have as a
primary element of the exterior being brick, with all sides of any building
built within the parcel consistent in design and use of materials. No wood,
masonite, aluminum siding, nonarchitectural sheet metal, concrete block, or
other similar materials shall constitute a portion of any building except as a
trim material, unless the city council of West Des Moines, after having
received a recommendation from the planning and zoning commission of West Des
Moines shall determine said material when used as a primary element, enhances
the physical appearance or provides continuity desired to unite all structures
within the parcel together into one project concept.
         c.   Pedestrian Access: Pedestrian access shall be provided from
parcel 5 to the residential uses developed or to be developed within parcels 2
and 3 and to the development in parcel 1. The design and/or location of the
pedestrian walkways shall be determined at site plan development. The intent of
this requirement is to discourage the use of motorized vehicles for residents
of the parcels 2 and 3 desiring to frequent the commercial uses within parcel 5
and to encourage pedestrian accessibility. The maintenance of any pedestrian
access proposed on private property shall be the responsibility of the property
owner.
         d.   Buffering: Adequate buffering of negative aspects of commercial
buildings (loading docks, garbage dumpsters, HVAC mechanical units and drive-
throughs) from any public street and adjoining properties shall be required.
Commercial retail buildings shall not be located and designed to expose loading
docks or doors, loading areas or the rear of the building to public streets
unless adequately screened from public view by berming and landscaping.
A thirty foot (30') buffer park shall be established along the south boundary
line of parcel 5 to screen the commercial uses from the adjoining residential
districts. Landscaping and berming of the buffer park shall be provided in
accordance with the West Des Moines buffer ordinance. (Ord. 1998, 8-19-2013)
046-04: BUILDING RESTRICTIONS, EASEMENTS AND COVENANTS:
The developer shall, with the approval of the city council, adopt building
restrictions, easements and covenants pertaining to the property as determined
necessary through the development entitlement process. Within parcel 3b, the
developer shall include a provision in the covenants that all fencing within
the thirty foot (30') buffer park easement along the south boundary of the PUD
be consistent in materials and appearance. (Ord. 1273, 10-20-1997)
046-05: ALL AREAS TO BE PLATTED:
Prior to, or in conjunction with development or transfer of ownership of any
portion of the PUD, said area shall be platted in accordance with the city's
subdivision ordinance to delineate within a plat, the parcel to be developed or
sold separately or any portion thereof. (Ord. 1273, 10-20-1997)
046-06: STORMWATER MANAGEMENT:
There shall be submitted to, and approved by the West Des Moines public works,
a complete stormwater management plan for the PUD to be prepared by the
developer prior to any development within the PUD and for all storm sewer,
drainage systems and detention areas within the PUD. (Ord. 1273, 10-20-1997)
046-07: TRAFFIC REPORTS:
Prior to, or in conjunction with the development of any parcel, or portion of a
parcel, the developer shall have the traffic report reviewed by a traffic
consultant to ensure that the provisions and assumptions of the original
traffic report are not negatively impacted or changed by the proposed
development. A written evaluation shall be submitted to the city that shall
identify what the impacts of the development of that parcel will have on the
existing street system and what improvements are necessary for the safe and
orderly movement of traffic in and around the area. The developer shall be
responsible for the full cost associated with the improvements necessary to
mitigate additional traffic generated as a result of the development. (Ord.
1273, 10-20-1997)
046-08: VEHICULAR ACCESS:
Vehicular access from University Avenue and 90th Street shall be restricted and
limited as deemed necessary and identified in the traffic study. This limited
access may require cross access easements within parcel 1, if it is to develop
as shown on the sketch plan with independent lots, which may not have direct
access to University or 90th Street. Access to parcels 1, 2, and 3 need to be
coordinated with properties to the north and east, as identified by the traffic
study. (Ord. 1273, 10-20-1997)
046-09: INFRASTRUCTURE:
The developer of the property within the PUD is responsible for the public
improvements that are necessary to serve the property. Those improvement
include the paving of public streets, sanitary sewer extension, water main
extension, storm sewer improvements and traffic signals. In conjunction with or
prior to development within any parcel of the PUD, public water and sanitary
sewer service shall be brought to the site and extended through the area being
developed to adjoining undeveloped properties in a manner acceptable to the
city and properly designed with sizes and materials compatible with the city's
plans for areawide water and sanitary sewer service.
The developer shall be responsible for the paving of 90th Street with a minimum
thirty one foot (31') back to back paving width at the time of platting. Prior
to, or in conjunction with the development of either parcel 1 or 2, the
developer shall be responsible for the paving of 94th Street and the east/west
street between parcels 1 and 2, with a minimum thirty one foot (31') back to
back paving width. In addition, prior to or in conjunction with the development
of parcel 1, the developer shall be responsible for the widening of the south
side of University Avenue adjacent to this property, up to a maximum twenty one
feet (21') paving width (33 feet from center) of eight inch (8") reinforced
concrete with CD joints and medians. The construction of medians may be
deferred until such time that traffic dictates (as determined by public works)
or that University Avenue is widened on the north side of the street. The city
may require the owner to execute a petition and waiver, as prepared by the
city, or an acceptable alternative, for the above mentioned street improvements
at the time of platting, site plan, or other development entitlement.
The owner on behalf of itself it successors and assigns agrees to commit to
cost associated with the provision of traffic signals as follows: one-half (1/
2) of the cost of signalization of the intersection of University Avenue and
90th Street; either one- fourth (1/4) or one-half (1/2) of the cost of
signalization of the intersection of 94th Street and University Avenue
(depending on whether or not the city of Waukee or the developer to the north
will contribute); and their proportional share of any other traffic signals
that are identified as a necessity in a traffic report for the safe movement of
vehicles. The city may require the owner to execute a petition and waiver, as
prepared by the city, or an acceptable alternative, for the installation of the
above mentioned traffic signals, at the time of platting, site plan, or other
development entitlement. (Ord. 1273, 10-20-1997)
046-10: STREET RIGHTS OF WAY:
The ultimate street right of way, as identified in the West Des Moines
comprehensive plan, shall be dedicated to the city for all public streets
within the Maple Grove North PUD at the time of platting. Additional right of
way width shall be required if landscaped islands are to be constructed as
shown in the attached sketch plan and shall be determined at the time of
platting or site plan.
Any proposed landscaped islands within public street right of way shall be
reviewed by public works and approved by the city council to ensure that the
landscaping does not interfere with vision, and that the maintenance of said
landscape islands has been properly addressed. The city shall not be
responsible for the maintenance of any proposed landscaped islands within the
Maple Grove North PUD. The developer shall submit a proposal for the private
long term landscaping and maintenance of any proposed islands, prior to
development within the PUD. The landscape design and maintenance arrangements
for any landscaped medians shall be reviewed and approved by the West Des
Moines city council. (Ord. 1273, 10-20-1997)
046-11: BUFFERS:
All development within the Maple Grove North PUD shall comply with the
buffering provisions of the buffer ordinance of the city code. In situations
where the PUD specifies the provision of a buffer park easement, the required
setbacks shall be measured from the easement line. In situations where this PUD
specifies the provision of a buffer park, the buffer park and the required
setback may be overlapped and whichever is more restrictive shall be adhered
to. (Ord. 1273, 10-20-1997)
046-12: SIGNAGE REGULATION:
No pole sign as defined by the West Des Moines sign ordinance shall be
incorporated into any development within the Maple Grove North PUD. Ground sign
standards shall be used for the construction of freestanding signage as set
forth within the West Des Moines sign ordinance. All wall signs will be
composed of solid individual letters attached to the building fascia, or
individual letters of anodized aluminum, galvanized metal, illuminated self-
contained with translucent plastic faces set in anodized aluminum returns and
trim; panel signs with letters incorporated or painted upon a panel or wall
area shall be prohibited. Permanent exposed neon signs shall be prohibited.
Advertising or promotional temporary signage attached to exterior windows or
walls visible from the exterior of the building shall be prohibited, except as
permitted with a temporary sign permit. (Ord. 1273, 10-20-1997)
046-13: DEFINITION:
The term "developer", for the purpose of this ordinance, shall mean any person,
individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation, estate, trust, entity,
or agent of same acting or proposing to subdivide land or develop a parcel of
land for the construction of a building or buildings. (Ord. 1273, 10-20-1997)
046-14: VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES:
Any person who violates the provisions of this ordinance upon conviction shall
be punished as set forth in section 1-4-1 of the city code. (Ord. 1998, 8-19-
2013)
046-99: LEGISLATIVE HISTORY:
Ord. 1246, 5-19-1997; Ord. 1273, 10-10-1997; Ord. 1998, 8-19-2013.
PUD #47
JORDAN CREEK TOWN CENTER
SECTION:
047-01: Legal Description
047-02: Primary Intended Use
047-03: Definitions
047-04: Parcel Identification Map
047-05: Conceptual Site Plan
047-06: Conditions
047-07: Signage Regulation
047-08: Building Restrictions, Easements And Covenants
047-09: All Areas To Be Platted
047-10: Stormwater Management
047-11: Traffic Impact Study
047-12: Right Of Way Dedication
047-13: Minor Modifications
047-14: Violations And Penalties
047-99: Legislative History
047-01: LEGAL DESCRIPTION:
Part of the West 1/2 of the Southwest 1/4 and the Southeast 1/4 of the
Southwest 1/4 of Section 12; and the East 1/2 of the Northwest 1/4, and the
East 1/2 of the West 1/2 of the Northwest 1/4 of Section 13; all in Township 78
North, Range 26 West of the 5th P.M., City of West Des Moines, Dallas County,
Iowa, described as follows:
Commencing at the Center of said Section 13; thence North 0°16'50" East, 83.10
feet along the East line of said Section 13; thence South 83°24'14" West, 9.87
feet; thence South 83°41'06" West, 100.64 feet to a point on the Northerly
right-of-way line of Mills Civic Parkway; thence South 83°41'06" West, 1842.46
feet along said line; thence North 0°28'49" East, 2272.70 feet; thence South
84°03'01" West, 562.16 feet to a point on the Easterly right-of-way line of
74th Street; thence North 0°35'03" East, 261.27 feet along said line; thence
North 0°43'00" West, 1750.20 feet along said line; thence North 43°30'34" East,
51.37 feet to a point on the Southerly right-of-way line of E.P. True Parkway;
thence North 86°18'09" East, 1166.56 feet along said line to a point on the
East line of the Northwest 1/4 of the Southwest 1/4 of said Section 12; thence
South 0°33'32" West, 403.38 feet to the Northwest corner of the Southeast 1/
4 of the Southwest 1/4 of said Section 12; thence North 83°25'03" East, 1216.21
feet along the North line of the Southeast 1/4 of the Southwest 1/4 of said
Section 12 to a point on the Westerly right-of-way line of Street; thence South
0°22'38" West, 1310.49 feet along said line; thence South 0°16'50" West,
2522.17 feet along said line; thence South 41°58'58" West, 52.26 feet to the
point of beginning, containing 197.001 acres more or less and is subject to
easement of record.
And also
Part of the Northwest 1/4 of the Southwest 1/4 of Section 12, Township 78
North, Range 26 West of the 5th P.M. in the City of West Des Moines, Dallas
County, Iowa described as follows:
Commencing at the West 1/4 corner of said Section 12; thence North 83°12'55"
East, 83.21 feet along the North line of the Northwest 1/4 of the Southwest 1/
4 of said Section 12 to the point of beginning; thence North 83°12'55" East,
1205.80 feet along the North Line of said Section 12 to the Northeast corner of
the Northwest 1/4 of the Southwest 1/4 of said Section 12; thence South
0°33'32" West, 758.89 feet along the East line of the Northwest 1/4 of the
Southwest 1/4 of said Section 12 to a point on the Northerly right-of-way line
of E.P. True Parkway; thence South 86°18'09" West, 1166.13 feet; thence North
46°29'26" West, 47.55 feet to a point on the Easterly right-of-way line of 74th
Street; thence North 0°43'00" East, 658.92 feet along said line to a point of
beginning, containing 19.942 acres more or less and is subject to easements of
record.
(Ord. 1481, 5-13-2002)
047-02: PRIMARY INTENDED USE:
It is the intent of the Jordan Creek Town Center PUD to provide for the
development of a planned regional commercial center that will service not only
the city, but also the surrounding market area. Such commercial center is
characterized by a single major structure, along with both attached and
freestanding retail, lodging, office, dining and entertainment establishments
served by common parking areas, and uniquely located on a tract of land that
has an area of approximately two hundred (200) acres. The regulations contained
in this ordinance will facilitate development in a planned, orderly fashion, so
as to protect the public health, safety, and general welfare, especially as it
relates to vehicular and pedestrian traffic. (Ord. 1481, 5-13-2002)
047-03: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this ordinance, the following terms shall be defined as
hereinafter set forth:
ANCHOR STORE: A store containing not less than thirty five thousand (35,000)
square feet of gross leasable floor area that is part of, or attached to, the
enclosed mall.
DEVELOPER:   GGP Jordan Creek LLC, a Delaware limited liability company; its
successors and assigns.
ENCLOSED MALL: For purposes of section
047-06 of this ordinance shall mean the enclosed mall portion of the project,
exclusive of the anchor stores.
FREESTANDING BUILDING: Any building or similar structure other than the
enclosed mall that houses a single tenant or owner, each of whom conducts a
separate business within that building or similar structure.
GROSS LEASABLE FLOOR AREA: The total floor area designed for the occupancy and
exclusive use of the tenants of a mall structure.
MULTIPLE ATTACHED BUILDING: Any building or similar structure that houses more
than a single tenant or owner, and in which numerous, discrete business
activities are conducted.
OUTPARCEL: A separately platted tract of land within any of the parcels that is
intended to legally support a freestanding or multiple attached buildings. The
number of outparcels within the parcel 3 is suggested by the conceptual site
plan and shall be determined at the time of plat approval under section
047-08 of this ordinance. (Ord. 1481, 5-13-2002)
047-04: PARCEL IDENTIFICATION MAP:
On file with the community development department of the city and made a part
of this rezoning approval for parcel delineation is the parcel identification
map for the "Jordan Creek Town Center PUD (Planned Unit Development)".
Districts within parcel 3 have also been identified for further application of
development standards. (Ord. 1939, 12-12-2011)
047-05: CONCEPTUAL SITE PLAN:
On file with the community development department of the city and made a part
of this rezoning approval for concept description and delineation is the
conceptual site plan document for the "Jordan Creek Town Center PUD (Planned
Unit Development)". It is recognized that modifications to conceptual plan
layout may be necessary and compatible with the need to acquire workable street
patterns, grades, and usable building sites. Significant changes to the
conceptual site plan shall be reviewed and approved by the development planning
and inspection manager unless otherwise referred to the plan and zoning
commission and city council for action. (Ord. 1481, 5-13-2002; amd. Ord. 1986,
5-13-2013)
047-06: CONDITIONS:
Whereas, title 9 of the city code includes chapter 9, "Planned Unit Development
District" and establishes certain regulations and guidelines pertaining to
accompanying information required on a plat, site plan, and/or permitted
conditional use permit documents.
Now, therefore, the following conditions, restrictions, and regulations are
adopted as part of this approval, to wit:
   A.   General Conditions: The parcel identification map and conceptual site
plan incorporate residential land uses (in parcel 1), open space and
recreational land uses (in parcel 2), and office and retail land uses (in
parcel 3) that shall be distributed by area, types, and location according to
the parcel identification map as presented.
In addition, the following general site plan criteria shall be integrated into
and made a part of the Jordan Creek Town Center PUD:
      1.   All subdivisions, public streets, public street rights of way and
general development shall adhere to the standards and design criteria set forth
in the West Des Moines subdivision ordinance and the most current design
standards adopted by the city of West Des Moines pertaining thereto unless
otherwise stated within this ordinance.
      2.   Unless otherwise specified herein, the development of the Jordan
Creek Town Center PUD shall comply with title 9, "Zoning", of the city code or
any other applicable city codes.
      3.   In all areas within a 100-year frequency flood hazard zone, or
adjoining drainageways, and detention ponding areas involving potential flood
hazards, no building shall be erected that has a lowest floor, including
basements, less than one foot (1') above the determined level of the 100-year
frequency flood event, and no building shall be located within twenty five feet
(25') of any easement or property boundary of a major drainageway, storm water
detention basin, or pond, unless said location is approved as part of a
development entitlement by the city council and said building is structurally
designed accordingly.
      4.   Except as otherwise provided in that certain development agreement
executed by the developer and the city dated March 6, 2000, or as amended, the
developer, its successors and assigns, if any, shall pay all construction and
engineering costs for the interior development of the planned unit development,
as required by this ordinance or any other applicable city codes.
   B.   Land Use Design Criteria; Parcels 1, 2, And 3: In addition to the
general conditions as stated in subsection A above, the parcel identification
map that is made a part of this rezoning action per section
047-04 of this ordinance delineates three (3) parcels of the PUD as parcels 1,
2, and 3, for application of specific standards of land use and development
regulations. These parcels (hereinafter referred to as the "Parcels") are
identified for application of specific standards of land use and development
regulation. The following land use design criteria, use regulations,
development standards, and landscaping regulations shall apply to the
development areas designated as parcels 1, 2, and 3 on the parcel
identification map, as applicable:
      1.   Parcel 1: Parcel 1 lies north of Jordan Creek. It is the intent of
the layout and design of the parcel to take full advantage of the Jordan Creek
Greenbelt Park setting on the south side of this parcel.
         a.   Land Use: The development standards and uses for this parcel
shall comply with the residential medium-density district, unless noted
otherwise herein. The maximum permitted density shall be eight (8) dwelling
units per acre with a maximum of four (4) units per building. Parcel 1 shall
incorporate a maximum of ten (10) acres.
         b.   Parking: Within this parcel the required parking shall be two (2)
off street spaces per unit and one space per three (3) units for visitor
parking. Tandem parking shall be allowed to meet the required parking
requirements. In addition, one space per one hundred (100) square feet of gross
floor area shall be provided for any building or portion of a building
designated for multipurpose recreational uses.
         c.   Building Height: Within this parcel, permitted building heights
will be a maximum of two (2) stories, not including basements, or thirty six
feet (36') above the average grade of the building.
         d.   Building Setbacks: Building setbacks shall be a minimum thirty
five feet (35') from the ultimate right-of-way of 74th Street and from the
perimeter of the parcel. Internal building setbacks shall be a minimum twenty
feet (20') from the right-of-way line or easement of the internal street;
however, garage openings shall be no closer than twenty five feet (25') from
said right- of-way line or easement. No unit shall be closer than twenty feet
(20') from another unit in a separate building.
         e.   Access: Primary vehicular access shall be provided from the
public street stub to the north.
         f.   Open Space/Buffer: The minimum required open space in this parcel
shall be equal to at least twenty five percent (25%) of the gross area of the
parcel. Common parking areas, except for driveways shall be effectively
screened from general public view by incorporating the natural landscape and
topography with the introduction of permanent earth berming of no less than two
and one-half feet (21/2') above the top of curb of the adjacent public street.
In any case, all parking areas shall include landscape areas, islands, screens,
etc., equal to not less than ten percent (10%) of the total paved area. Such
landscaped area shall be in addition to the open space requirements for the
total parcel. Landscaped islands within the parking area shall have ground
cover of grass (i.e., sod), shrubs or other acceptable living plant life,
unless the city specifically approves an alternate ground cover as part of the
site plan review.
A thirty foot (30') buffer park shall be established along the 74th Street
right-of-way. The buffer park shall be designed in accordance with the West Des
Moines buffer ordinance and shall be installed as a part of the site plan
development. Landscape within the buffer park shall be in addition to the
landscaped open space requirement.
         g.   Architectural Character: At the time of site plan development for
parcel 1, an architectural theme shall be developed for this parcel that is in
keeping with the overall architectural character of the area. Each neighborhood
unit should be developed to have a sense of identity and uniqueness while still
providing connecting links to other developments within the area. The
residential setting has a rolling topography falling toward the Jordan Creek
greenbelt, which will provide a good opportunity to develop walkouts.
Openings should be placed and spaced to provide privacy for the residents of
adjacent units. The homes should be compatible with surrounding structures, and
have well executed details that are consistent with the architectural design of
the total project.
Roof forms shall be pitched, hip, or gabled in design and shall demonstrate the
same character on all sides of the residences. Eave lines should align whenever
possible. Eaves and rakes should be articulated by multiple fascia boards, cove
and crown mould, or gutters. Gutters and downspouts should be used at all eave
lines unless deemed inappropriate by the developer at the time of site plan
review.
Consistency of detailing on all elevations should be maintained. Bay windows
are encouraged and should be carried down to grade or express visual support of
the cantilevered condition. When bay windows are stacked in a two (2) story
condition, the blank panel between all facets should be articulated.
At a minimum, masonry or stone facing elements shall be incorporated into the
front of the residences and any building wall that faces the Jordan Creek
greenbelt and should turn around a corner to a logical point of termination
such as an inside corner. Ending the veneer at an outside corner that would
expose the edge of the material shall not be permitted. Exposed concrete block
shall be prohibited.
         h.   Landscaping: Landscape will include the integration of overstory
and understory trees throughout. The minimum landscaping required shall be two
(2) (2-21/2 inch caliper) trees and three (3) (18 - 24 inch) shrubs per three
thousand (3,000) square feet of open space in the parcel in accordance with the
city code. An entrance with additional shrubs and flowers with monument signage
identifying the project may be permitted with the approval of a sign permit.
The maintenance of the sign shall be the responsibility of a homeowners'
association.
In order to facilitate pedestrian access into and out of this parcel to the
commercial area to the south of the Jordan Creek greenbelt, a pedestrian bridge
or crossing shall be constructed across the creek. This crossing shall be
identified as part of the circulation element of the site plan of any adjacent
parcel.
      2.   Parcel 2: The Jordan Creek greenbelt is a minimum of three hundred
feet (300') in width and spans the entire distance of the neighborhood from
74th Street to the eastern edge of the property. The owner and/or developer,
their assigns and successors, shall reserve for dedication to the city that
ground designated as parcel 2 as shown on the parcel identification map, on
file with the community development department of the city, for inclusion
within the Jordan Creek greenbelt for active park and open space use.
Furthermore, in consideration of the dedication of parcel 2, the city agrees to
waive the developer's share of the "mandatory fee payment for acquisition and/
or development of park system", required by title 10 of the city code. Said
area shall be platted with the platting of parcel 1 or parcel 3 or any portion
thereof, adjoining the greenbelt parcel's boundary. The property to be
dedicated to the city shall be free of any liens, encumbrances, and
assessments. A ten foot (10') wide bikeway/walkway/jogging trail is planned to
link the development to other parts of the city and metropolitan area and will
be constructed or bonded for as part of the public improvements at the time of
the platting of parcel 2.
Any impoundment of water in the greenbelt area shall be identified on the
master plan or site plan of any surrounding parcels, and shall be in compliance
with the 1993 Jordan Creek drainage basin study prepared by Veenstra and Kimm.
      3.   Parcel 3: In addition to the general conditions stated in subsection
A of this section, the following land use design criteria, use regulations,
development standards, landscaping regulations, and sign regulations shall
apply to the development area designated as parcel 3 on the parcel
identification map as applicable:
         a.   Allowed Uses: Unless otherwise provided in this ordinance, all
permitted and permitted conditional uses allowed within the RC regional
commercial shall be allowed in parcel 3 except as modified below: (Ord. 1481,
5-13-2002)
            (1)   The following uses shall be allowed as permitted uses:
Amusement and recreation services, not elsewhere classified (SIC 7999) (refer
to list of prohibited uses below for exceptions).
Automotive tire sale stores (SIC 5531 99 01), provided that such facility is an
accessory use to an anchor store or a freestanding building containing thirty
five thousand (35,000) square feet or more of gross leasable floor area within
Lots 6, 7, and 8 of Jordan Creek Town plat no. 1 - replat 1.
Cable and other pay TV services, except transmitting/receiving towers and/or
dishes (SIC 484).
Coffee shops, provided that no more than two (2) such coffee shops with drive-
through pick up service shall be permitted (the foregoing restriction shall not
be construed as limiting the number of coffee shops without drive-through
service).
Educational services (SIC 82).
Freestanding automatic teller machines (ATM) (SIC 60).
Gasoline service stations, without repair (SIC 554), provided that such
facility is an accessory use to a permitted use allowed within Lot 8 of Jordan
Creek Town plat no. 1 - replat 1 in conjunction with a price club organization,
and that the facility sells only gasoline and only to members. No accessory
products, such as windshield wiper fluid, oil, food, etc., shall be allowed to
be displayed or sold at the fuel dispensary location.
Justice, public order and safety (SIC 92).
Liquor stores (SIC 592).
Membership organizations with food/drink services and conference facilities
(SIC 869).
Membership sports and recreation clubs (SIC 7997).
Museums, art galleries, botanical and zoological gardens (SIC 84).
Pet and pet supply stores (SIC 5999).
Religious organizations (SIC 866).
Services, not elsewhere included (SIC 89).
Social associations with food/drink service (SIC 864).
Social services (SIC 83).
U.S. postal service (SIC 43).
Videotape rentals (SIC 784). (Ord. 1481, 5-13-2002; amd. Ord. 1578, 4-26-2004;
Ord. 1586, 7-19-2004)
            (2)   The following uses shall be prohibited:
Automotive repair, services, and parking (SIC 75) (except as permitted as an
accessory use below) and except that one SIC 7542, car wash shall be allowed
within the Jordan Creek Town Center PUD with approval of a permitted
conditional use.
Boarding services - kennels (SIC 0752).
Convenience stores (SIC 541).
Dating and escort services (SIC 7299-03).
Eating places with drive-throughs (SIC 5812).
Funeral service (SIC 726).
Gasoline service stations, with repair (SIC 554).
Go-carts, trapshooting, and shooting ranges (part of SIC 7999).
Hospitals (SIC 806).
Miscellaneous automotive repair services (SIC 7699).
Nursing and personal care facilities (SIC 805).
Public golf courses (SIC 7992).
Racing, including track operations (SIC 7948).
Recreational vehicle repair services (SIC 7699). (Ord. 1481, 5-13-2002; amd.
Ord. 1586, 7-19-2004; Ord. 2371, 7-1-2019)
            (3)   The following uses shall be permitted only as an accessory
use to an anchor store:
Automotive exhaust system repair shops (SIC 7533).
Automotive services, except repair and car washes (SIC 7549).
Automotive services, not elsewhere classified (SIC 7539).
         b.   Development Standards: Unless provided otherwise in this
ordinance, all general use regulations, performance standards and provisions
set forth in title 9, "Zoning", of the city code for the RC regional commercial
district shall apply to any development within parcel 3 as shown on the parcel
identification map. (Ord. 1481, 5-13-2002)
            (1)   Height: No part of any structure located in parcel 3 shall
exceed seventy five feet (75') in height measured from the average finished
grade, except any hotel/motel constructed on parcel 3 may be a maximum of ten
(10) stories and the sign structure for the theater building as referenced in
section
047-07 of this ordinance shall be permitted. No part of a freestanding building
located on an outparcel shall exceed thirty six feet (36') in height, measured
from the average finished grade, except for any hotel/motel that may be
constructed on an outparcel, which may be a maximum of ten (10) stories. (Ord.
1481, 5-13-2002; amd. Ord. 1578, 4-26-2004)
            (2)   Building Setback; Generally: Except as otherwise provided in
this ordinance, no part of any freestanding or multiple attached building under
twenty thousand (20,000) square feet GFA shall be erected within fifty feet
(50') of the perimeter of parcel 3. Except as otherwise provided in this
ordinance, no part of any freestanding or multiple attached building over
twenty thousand (20,000) square feet GFA shall be erected within one hundred
feet (100') of the perimeter of parcel 3, except for those buildings within
lots 7 and 8 of Jordan Creek Town Center plat 1 - replat 1, which shall have a
setback of eighty feet (80'), and except for a hotel building located on lot 5,
Jordan Creek Town Center plat 1, replat 1 which meets the requirements stated
elsewhere within this section, shall have a minimum setback of twenty five feet
(25'). (Ord. 2016, 12-30-2013)
            (3)   Building Setback; Enclosed Mall And Anchor Stores: No part of
the enclosed mall or anchor stores shall be erected within one hundred fifty
feet (150') of the perimeter of parcel 3. (Ord. 1481, 5-13-2002)
            (4)   Building Setback; Hotel: No part of any hotel under six (6)
stories in height shall be erected within one hundred feet (100') of the
perimeter of parcel 3 except for a hotel on lot 5, Jordan Creek Town Center
plat 1, replat 1 which may be located no closer than twenty five feet (25')
from the ultimate public street right of way line of S68th Street. No part of
any hotel, including a hotel on lot 5, Jordan Creek Town Center plat 1 - replat
1 over six (6) stories in height shall be erected within one hundred fifty feet
(150') of the perimeter of parcel 3. (Ord. 2016, 12-30-2013)
            (5)   Lot Area: Multiple buildings separated by parking areas or
drives and lots less than sixty thousand (60,000) square feet in size may be
considered acceptable within parcel 3 if supported by appropriate easements or
a reciprocal easement agreement; and if approved by the plan and zoning
commission and city council as part of a site plan, permitted conditional use
permit, or plat. (Ord. 1481, 5-13-2002)
            (6)   Cart Corrals: Cart corrals shall be permanent fixtures and
constructed with masonry, stone or block. No signage shall be located on the
cart corrals. (Ord. 1578, 4-26-2004)
         c.   Additional Standards And Requirements: The following standards
and requirements shall apply in parcel 3 and are in addition to other
applicable standards and requirements provided by the West Des Moines zoning
ordinance. To the extent that the provisions of this section conflict with or
are more restrictive than similar provisions provided elsewhere in the West Des
Moines zoning ordinance, the provisions of this section shall control.
            (1)   Open Space/Landscape/Buffers:
   (A) The minimum aggregate required open space in parcel 3 shall be thirty
five percent (35%) of the total site area. Feature lakes; detention pond areas;
easements for public amenities; sidewalks within open areas; pedestrian plazas;
and paved outdoor spaces (excluding parking lots) shall be counted toward open
space requirements. However, in the case of pedestrian plazas and paved outdoor
spaces, such areas shall not count if dedicated as a patron use area for a
specific business, e.g., outdoor seating for a restaurant. A pedestrian/bike
trail shall be constructed around and through parcel 3 that connects with the
Jordan Creek trail system and adjoining properties.
   (B) Two (2) trees and three (3) shrubs per three thousand (3,000) square
feet of required open space shall be provided within said open space. Ten
percent (10%) of all required trees shall be a minimum of three (3) to three
and one-half inch (31/2") caliper. Forty percent (40%) of all required trees
shall be a minimum of two (2) to two and one-half inch (21/2") caliper. The
balance of all required trees shall be one and one- half inch (11/2") caliper.
The minimum height for evergreens shall be six feet (6') and may be counted as
two (2) to two and one-half inch (21/2") caliper. (Ord. 1481, 5-13-2002)
   (C) With the exception of lot 5, Jordan Creek Town Center plat 1, replat 1,
buffer parks required along Jordan Creek Parkway (formerly known as 74th
Street), Mills Civic Parkway, E.P. True Parkway, and 68th Street shall be
established utilizing the standards set forth in the buffer ordinance.
Landscape within the buffer parks shall be in addition to the landscaped open
space requirement. For lot 5, Jordan Creek Town Center plat 1, replat 1, a
minimum twenty five foot (25') wide streetscape shall be provided parallel and
immediately adjacent to the ultimate public street right of way line of S68th
Street. Vegetation within the streetscape shall be provided in accordance with
that required by city code for a thirty foot (30') buffer park. Vegetation
required of the streetscape area shall be in addition to vegetation required of
parking, buffers, open space, and visual screening of parking and/or negative
site elements. Earthen berming shall be incorporated as necessary to provide
adequate visual mitigation of negative site elements, including parking and
mechanical equipment. (Ord. 2016, 12-30-2013)
   (D) The negative elements of such uses as loading docks; heating,
ventilation, or air conditioning (HVAC) units; or similar electrical or
mechanical appurtenances shall be designed to be screened and buffered from
view by the general public through the use of architectural features or earth
berming and landscaping.
            (2)   Access:
   (A) Pedestrian Access:
(i) The development of parcel 3 shall integrate trails and pathways within and
around the commercial area to link the surrounding areas with the pedestrian
plaza, in order to encourage interaction between plaza users. Connections shall
be provided from any internal pedestrian pathways to a perimeter trail system
and ultimately to the city's greenbelt trail system. The need for sidewalks and
trails within the public right of way will be evaluated at the time of site
plan review.
(ii) Outdoor entertainment, outdoor dining, and some seasonal or temporary
sidewalk shopping displays shall be allowed in the plaza areas with the
issuance of a temporary use permit by the city or as approved by the city
council as part of a site plan or permitted conditional use permit. Outdoor
display and storage of merchandise shall be prohibited except as permitted
above.
(iii) Bicycle parking facilities shall be incorporated into the development of
commercial areas, except hotels, as part of a site plan or permitted
conditional use permit approval.
   (B) Vehicular Access:
(i) Driveways shall be located so that no undue interference with the free
movement of road traffic will result, to provide the required sight distance
(AASHTO), and to provide the most favorable driveway grade.
(ii) Access points to the development shall be limited to what is shown on the
attached conceptual site plan, as evaluated in the traffic impact study. Any
deviation from this shall require the approval of the West Des Moines city
engineer.
            (3)   Grand Openings And Special Events: Grand openings and other
special events, except for usage of the planned amphitheater, shall require a
special event permit and/or sound permit. (Ord. 1481, 5-13-2002)
            (4)   Off Street Parking:
   (A) Parking Space Ratio: Parking shall be provided in parcel 3 based on the
aggregate ratio of 4.5 off street parking spaces per one thousand (1,000)
square feet of gross leasable floor area of improvements constructed in parcel
3. For purposes of the parking requirements applicable to Parcel 3,
restaurants, hotels, and other uses established on the outparcels shall not be
considered separate, stand alone parcels requiring parking ratios in excess of
4.5 off street parking spaces per one thousand (1,000) square feet of gross
leasable floor area. Hotels shall provide a minimum of one space per room
within the site or on a parcel immediately adjacent with that property owner's
approval. (Ord. 2016, 12-30-2013)
   (B) Landscape Areas:
(i) Off street parking areas containing twenty five (25) or more parking spaces
shall provide internal landscaping, other than that required in a buffer zone
or along the frontage, and shall be protected by a concrete curb. (Ord. 1481,
5-13-2002)
(ii) Landscape islands a minimum of seven feet (7') in width shall be provided
at the end of all parking rows. In addition, landscape islands a minimum of
five feet (5') in width or with diamond shapes shall be provided throughout the
parking lots and within the parking rows such that no parking space is farther
than one hundred twenty five feet (125') away from any landscaped open space.
All landscape islands within parking areas shall be deemed to apply toward the
satisfaction of the minimum aggregate open space requirement of thirty five
percent (35%) of Parcel 3. (Ord. 1578, 4-26-2004)
(iii) Landscaped areas shall be covered by grass or other living ground cover,
wood mulch, or acceptable alternatives approved in conjunction with a site plan
or permitted conditional use permit.
(iv) Required trees shall be located to minimize potential damage by vehicles,
to ensure adequate sight distance, and the maneuvering of emergency vehicles
within the development.
(v) The internal landscaped areas shall be located to direct traffic
(particularly near site entrances); dispersed through the lot to improve site
aesthetics, and installed so that, when mature, it does not obscure traffic
signs, fire hydrants, lighting, drainage patterns on site or adjacent
properties, or obstruct vision for safety of ingress or egress.
(vi) Parking areas shall be screened, recessed, or otherwise constructed and
located so as to prevent the glare from automobile headlights illuminating
adjacent properties and to minimize negative views from public streets.
(vii) Parking area lighting shall be shielded so as to prevent illumination of
adjacent properties. Wall pack lighting shall be prohibited. A photometric
lighting plan shall be submitted for review in conjunction with any site plan
or permitted conditional use permit within Parcel 3.
(viii) Off street loading areas shall not interfere with or impede the
circulation or flow of traffic. (Ord. 1481, 5-13-2002)
         d.   Architecture: The architectural design of any building shall be
acceptable to the City. The primary elements of the exterior of all buildings
in Parcel 3 shall be face brick. The City Council, after having received a
recommendation from the Plan and Zoning Commission, shall determine the
appropriateness of an architectural material when used as a building element as
to whether the material enhances the physical appearance of the development, or
provides continuity desired to unite all structures within the development into
one project concept.
It is the intent of the North Village District of Parcel 3 to develop into a
vibrant and eclectic main street atmosphere. It is anticipated that individual
tenants may want to incorporate materials, colors, details or an architectural
style that is specific to the tenant's corporate identity. Incorporation of
these elements into the existing context is encouraged, however prototypical
franchised architecture is not permitted. Use of bright, attention getting
materials and color choices should be limited to accent areas to avoid
expensive alterations of the facade with the transition of tenants.
Attention should be paid to breaking up solid walls by incorporating window
elements, introduction of multiple planes, and articulation of surfaces through
the use of various materials. Tower elements may be incorporated as an
enhancement of the architectural design of the building or tenant space.
Elements of a streetscape should be provided within the development where
possible. Such elements may include individual storefronts; sidewalks and
sidewalk amenities such as benches; planters; or other design elements; themed
pedestrian scale lighting and signage, and awnings. (Ord. 2291, 4-16-2018)
Any gas station and tire store must be situated such that they are not a
prominent feature from the public right-of- way or from any of the main entries
into the Jordan Creek Town Center. They shall meet development standards that
include, but are not limited to, the following:
            (1)   Gas Stations And Canopies: Pump stations and drive-through
canopies must be designated to incorporate the main building's architecture
through the use of similar building materials, roof design, and color,
including the application of brick or stone to canopy support columns. Canopy
lights shall be flush mounted.
            (2)   Overhead Doors: Any overhead doors necessary for tire sales
and service must be incorporated into the main building such that the doors and
the area around the doors are as attractive as the rest of the building. The
overhead doors shall incorporate the same glass and trim detail that is used on
the windows throughout the building. Doors must remain closed at all times
except when vehicles are entering or leaving.
            (3)   Pedestrian Scale: Pedestrian friendly details, such as
awnings, light fixtures, covered entryways, arcades, benches, flower pots, and
architectural details, such as medallions, cornices, trim, etc., shall be used
to soften any business that includes a fuel facility. The same level of
architecture shall be required on all sides of the structure. (Ord. 1586, 7-19-
2004)
            (4)   Screening: Screening shall be required parallel to any tire
sales or gasoline sales such that there is a complete screen that is opaque
(non-see through) from the ground to a height of at least six feet (6') for
tire sales and at least two feet (2') for gas sales. The opaque portion of the
screen must be opaque year round. If landscaping is used to produce the
screening, complete opacity shall be reached within five (5) years of planting.
The screen will need to be located and designed such that it does not interfere
with any other established landscaping scheme on the Jordan Creek Town Center
site, to the satisfaction of the Development Planning and Inspection Manager.
(Ord. 1586, 7-19-2004; amd. Ord. 1986, 5-13-2013)
047-07: SIGNAGE REGULATION:
The following standards and requirements shall apply in Parcel 3 and are in
addition to other applicable standards and requirements provided by the West
Des Moines zoning ordinance, particularly chapter 18 thereof. To the extent
that the provisions of this section conflict with or are more restrictive than
similar provisions provided elsewhere in the West Des Moines zoning ordinance,
the provisions of this section shall control.
This ordinance recognizes that because of the size and scope of the project,
and because access will be obtained to the development via large public
arterial streets, the project has an extraordinary need for flexibility in the
signage regulations applicable thereto. A sign plan is on file in the City as
exhibit C and is meant to clarify where the various types of signs are allowed
within this PUD.
   A.   Town Center Identification Signs: One Town Center identification sign
shall be allowed at the northwest corner of Parcel 3 in the vicinity of the
intersection of E.P. True Parkway and Jordan Creek Parkway (formerly 74th
Street) and one Town Center identification sign shall be allowed at the
southeast corner of Parcel 3 in the vicinity of the intersection of Mills
Parkway and 68th Street. The permitted Town Center identification signs shall
not exceed thirty five feet (35') in width and shall not exceed twelve feet
(12') in height, provided, however, that a decorative or architectural element,
with no text, shall be allowed at the base of each such Town Center
identification sign which does not exceed thirteen feet (13') in width or
thirty feet (30') in height. The usage and architectural treatment of the Town
Center identification signs shall be limited to identification of the
development itself, including the name and logo of the shopping center. Such
signs which are thirty feet (30') in height or less shall be set back a minimum
of ten feet (10') from the street right-of-way. Such signs that are greater
than thirty feet (30') in height shall be set back a minimum of thirty feet
(30') from the street right-of-way.
   B.   Town Center Entry Signs: In addition to the Town Center identification
signs described in subsection A of this section, one landscape entry sign not
exceeding ten feet (10') in height and not exceeding twenty six feet (26') in
width shall be allowed at each of the entrances to Parcel 3.
   C.   Landmark Style Statuary: Landmarks, which are statuary and unadorned
with advertising, shall be permitted as part of an approved site plan. Landmark
statuary shall not exceed fifteen feet (15') in height measured from grade and
shall not exceed twenty feet (20') in length unless a larger landmark style
statue is approved by the City Council of the City of West Des Moines, which
approval rights shall be expressly permitted under this ordinance. All
landmarks must be at least two hundred feet (200') away from public right-of-
way, and seventy five feet (75') from any other landmark style statuary. Paired
statuary shall be considered one landmark statue for purposes of the foregoing
minimum spacing requirement.
   D.   Project Wayfinding Signs: Project wayfinding signs shall be allowed on
the internal roadways, access roads, traffic lanes, walkways, sidewalks,
accessways and trails of Parcel 3 to help facilitate movement through and
around the parcel. The sign area and setback, of the project wayfinding signs
located within Parcel 3 shall be determined in conjunction with the issuance of
the sign permit for the development. The project wayfinding signs may contain
directional information about the location of individual businesses within the
development, and such information may set forth the name of the business and
use logos, service marks, or stylized letters that are identified with any such
individual business. Any project wayfinding sign for Parcel 3 may contain the
developer's logo for the center and/or the name of the center. Any such project
wayfinding signs which are internally illuminated must have routed face letters
and an opaque background. If such project wayfinding signs are externally
illuminated, the lighting system must be screened as required by the City sign
ordinance.
      1.   Vehicular Wayfinding Signs: Vehicular wayfinding signs shall be
allowed within Parcel 3. Vehicular wayfinding signs shall not exceed ten feet
(10') in height and twelve feet (12') in width.
      2.   Pedestrian Wayfinding Signs: Pedestrian wayfinding signs shall be
allowed within Parcel 3. Pedestrian wayfinding signs shall not exceed ten (10)
square feet per sign face with a maximum of four (4) sign faces per structure.
If attached to a light pole, the sign must have at least an eight foot (8')
clearance between the level of grade or sidewalk and the bottom of sign face
support structure.
Basic directional signs, such as signs indicating exit, loading, or parking
areas, shall be governed by the regulations set forth in title 9, chapter 18,
"Signs", of the City Code for directional signs.
   E.   Monument Signs: Internal monument signage may be allowed for individual
tenants or occupants to identify their location off internal driveways with the
approval of a sign permit. Internal monument signs shall be a maximum of five
feet (5') in height and shall contain a maximum of thirty five (35) square feet
of structure.
   F.   Wall Signs: All signage constructed as wall signs on building fascia
within Parcel 3 shall incorporate aesthetic features compatible with the
character of the development. Temporary advertising or promotional signage
attached to exterior windows or walls shall be allowed only with an approved
temporary signage permit issued through the Building Department under the
provisions for temporary signage in the City Code. Signs and exterior
architectural design treatments with exposed neon lights visible from the
exterior of the building shall be permitted, if used judiciously. Signs with
moving lights or flashing lights shall be prohibited.
If panel signs are used, they must be inset into the building so that the sign
is flush with the building wall.
Wall signs in the development shall be regulated generally under the sign
ordinance except as provided above and as otherwise hereinafter provided:
      1.   Lettering: The developer, its tenants, and owners or tenants of
anchor stores or any freestanding buildings are granted the right to
incorporate their respective logos, service marks, and stylized letters that
are identified with that business into wall signs affixed to buildings
constructed in Parcel 3. The size of such lettering and the area of such wall
signs shall be governed generally by the sign ordinance, except that all
buildings in Parcel 3 with a gross leasable floor area in excess of one hundred
thousand (100,000) square feet shall have the right to make at least one letter
or other character in any such sign up to ten feet (10') in height.
      2.   Anchor Stores: Each anchor store shall be allowed to erect wall
signs on each exterior wall at a rate for each such sign of one square foot of
sign area per linear foot of the longest wall of the anchor store; and one-half
(1/2) square foot of sign area per linear foot of all other exterior walls. In
the event there are two (2) building walls which qualify as being the longest
wall, then only one of such building walls may be considered the longest wall
for purposes of calculating the permitted signage under this section. For
purposes of the allocation of signs, no wall shall have more than a one to one
(1:1) area to linear wall measurement. (Ord. 1578, 4-26-2004)
      3.   Multi-Tenant Buildings: Wall signs allowable for multi-tenant
buildings in Parcel 3 shall be determined under the sign ordinance. Within the
North Village District, signage may be placed on tower elements above the main
roof of the building if the following criteria can be met:
         a.   Each tower element contains identification for only one tenant.
         b.   Panel signs are contoured to the shape of the logo minimizing the
amount of panel area and shall provide a 3-dimensional projection from the
background of the surrounding sign area.
         c.   The contoured panel portion of signs on towers may be internally
illuminated, however, the background within the sign shall be opaque and may
not be internally illuminated. Halo lighting from the dimensional portion of
the sign may be allowed to provide subtle background illumination within the
sign or the wall behind the sign. Architectural lighting shall be permitted
when incorporated as a building accent and shall not be considered part of a
tower sign.
         d.   The maximum square footage of signage on each tower does not
exceed forty (40) square feet. The square footage of signage placed on the
tower shall be included in the total square footage of allowed wall signage for
the tenant space of the advertised tenant and may be transferred to the tower
even if the tenant is not the tenant immediately below the tower element. (Ord.
2291, 4-16-2018)
      4.   Freestanding Buildings: Wall signs allowable for freestanding
buildings (whether or not located in outparcels) in Parcel 3 shall be
determined under the sign ordinance.
      5.   Theater Building: The occupant of the "Theater Building" premises as
designated on the site plan approved by the West Des Moines City Council shall
be permitted to have a sign structure not exceeding eighty three feet (83') in
height with a sign containing lines of letters not exceeding an area of one
hundred seventy (170) square feet. (Ord. 1578, 4-26-2004)
      6.   Projecting/Blade Signs: The use of projecting signs (which may also
be referred to as blade signs) shall be allowed within PUD as part of the wall
signage allowed for a tenant. Any projecting sign shall comply with the
applicable regulations in the West Des Moines Sign Code and the following
unless noted otherwise elsewhere in this PUD ordinance:
         a.   Only one projecting sign allowed per tenant space.
         b.   The projecting sign shall be counted as part of the allowed wall
signage for the tenant space and shall not be greater than one-half (1/2) of
the total allowed wall signage earned by the wall on which the sign will be
mounted.
         c.   The sign may have two (2) faces but only one side of the sign
will be counted to determine the size of the sign.
         d.   No projecting sign shall extend further away from the wall than
five feet (5') to the furthest edge.
         e.   All projecting signs shall be designed in such a manner that only
the text, or graphic is illuminated, not the entire background of the sign,
such as routered face or individual channel letters on an opaque backer.
         f.   The thickness measured between the principal faces of any
projecting sign shall not exceed eighteen inches (18").
         g.   The projecting sign shall not be permitted to extend above the
building roof more than one-half (1/2) the height of the sign. (Ord. 2023, 3-
10-2014)
   G.   Entry Identification Signs; Enclosed Mall: An identification sign shall
be allowed at each entrance to the enclosed mall. Letters on the entry
identification sign shall not exceed four feet (4') in height. The sign may
contain at least two (2) lines of letters contained in a rectangle, the
dimensions of which shall not exceed seven feet by twenty one feet (7' x 21').
The entry identification signs described in this subsection shall not count
against the limits imposed upon wall signs, as set forth in subsection F of
this section.
   H.   Art Elements And Murals: Art elements and murals shall be encouraged
provided that said element or mural does not include text that identifies a
particular tenant or store. Staff shall review all proposals and determine
whether the proposal is in compliance before they are installed. Art elements
and murals shall not include logos, be recognizable as part of a corporate
identity, draw attention to or otherwise advertise, identify or have a mental
connection to any one use, person, product, business, establishment, or
service. (Ord. 1578, 4-26-2004)
047-08: BUILDING RESTRICTIONS, EASEMENTS AND COVENANTS:
The developer shall adopt building restrictions, easements and covenants
pertaining to each parcel developed where the developer deems appropriate.
Without limiting the generality of the foregoing, the developer shall prepare a
reciprocal easement agreement ("REA") covering Parcel 3 and providing for,
among other matters, rights of ingress and egress between anchor stores, the
regional shopping center, the outparcels and public rights-of-way; pedestrian
access; and maintenance of common areas. (Ord. 1481, 5-13-2002)
047-09: ALL AREAS TO BE PLATTED:
   A.   Prior to, or in conjunction with the transfer of ownership of any
property within the PUD, said property shall be platted in accordance with the
City's Subdivision Ordinance to delineate within a plat the parcel to be sold
separately or any portion thereof.
   B.   In conjunction with the platting of Parcel 3 or any portion thereof,
section 10-3-2 of the City Code dealing with required improvements, is amended
with respect to Parcel 3 to provide as follows:
      1.   Sewer: The City shall provide public sewer service to Parcel 3 at
locations approved by the City in connection with applicable preliminary
platting and final platting procedures. However, neither the developer nor the
City shall be obligated to provide each lot in any subdivision in Parcel 3 with
connection to the public sewer system. Instead, a public manhole shall be
installed at the points designated by the City as the terminus of public sewer
service, and from that point on throughout the platted portions of Parcel 3,
the developer shall be allowed to have multiple users on private sewer lines,
and the relationship among developer and the owners of lots in such
subdivisions with respect to such private sewer lines shall be governed by
private agreement. (Ord. 1481, 5-13-2002)
047-10: STORMWATER MANAGEMENT:
There shall be submitted to, and approved by the West Des Moines City Engineer,
a complete stormwater management plan prepared by the developer in conformance
with the City's Subdivision Ordinance, prior to development and for all storm
sewer and drainage systems within the "PUD". (Ord. 1481, 5-13-2002)
047-11: TRAFFIC IMPACT STUDY:
A traffic impact study shall be required to be prepared under the standard
triparty engineering service agreement for traffic impact studies, at such time
that it is determined necessary by the West Des Moines City Engineer. (Ord.
1481, 5-13-2002)
047-12: RIGHT-OF-WAY DEDICATION:
The ultimate street right-of-way for all public streets adjacent to or within
this PUD shall be dedicated, at no cost to the City, at such time that the City
deems necessary. (Ord. 1481, 5-13-2002)
047-13: MINOR MODIFICATIONS:
Notwithstanding subsection 9-1-8A5b(2) of the City Code, site plan development
permits issued with respect to any portion of Parcel 3 shall be entitled to
unlimited minor modification requests. (Ord. 1578, 4-26-2004)
047-14: VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES:
Any person who violates the provisions of this ordinance upon conviction shall
be punished as set forth in section 1-4-1 of the City Code. (Ord. 1939, 12-12-
2011)
047-99: LEGISLATIVE HISTORY:
Ord. 1219, 12-2-1996; Ord. 1447, 6-11-2001; Ord. 1481, 5-13-2002; Ord. 1578, 4-
26-2004; Ord. 1586, 7-19-2004; Ord. 1939, 12-12-2011; Ord. 1986, 5-13-2013;
Ord. 2016, 12-30-2013; Ord. 2023, 3-10-2014; Ord. 2291, 4-16-2018; Ord. 2371,
7-1-2019.
PUD #48
BRIDGEWOOD
SECTION:
048-01: Legal Description
048-02: Sketch Plan
048-03: Conditions
048-04: Master Plan Requirements
048-05: Land Use Design Criteria
048-06: Street Improvements
048-07: Architecture
048-08: Pedestrian Access
048-09: Signage Regulation
048-10: Building Restrictions, Easements And Covenants
048-11: All Areas To Be Platted
048-12: Stormwater Management
048-13: Traffic Reports
048-14: Special Assessments
048-15: Mandatory Park Dedication Fees
048-16: Specific Development Exceptions
048-17: Master Property Owners' Association
048-18: Violations And Penalties
048-99: Legislative History
048-01: LEGAL DESCRIPTION:
The legal description for the Bridgewood PUD is as follows:
A parcel of land in the NW1/4NE1/4 and the NE1/4NE1/4 and the SE1/4NE1/4,
section 14, township 78 north, range 26 west of the 5th P.M., Dallas County,
Iowa, that is more particularly described as follows:
Beginning at the N1/4 Corner of said Section 14; thence N83°04'23"E, 2564.33
feet along the North line of said Section 14 to a point on the West right-of-
way (R.O.W.) line of Jordan Creek Parkway, said point being 55.00 feet West of
the East line of said Section 14; thence S00°07'43"E, 2431.26 feet along said
West R.O.W. line of Jordan Creek Parkway to a point; thence S83°52'35"W, 193.63
feet to a point; thence N03°27'25"W, 108.40 feet to a point; thence
S80°40'35"W, 200.20 feet to a point; thence S02°26"25"E, 252.35 feet to a point
on the North R.O.W. line of 335th Street, said point being 50.00 feet North of
the centerline of said Street; thence S82°57'35"W, 867.44 feet along said North
R.O.W. line of 335th Street to a point; thence N00°05'29"W, 1266.45 feet along
the West line of said SE1/4NE1/4 to the NW Corner of the SE1/4NE1/4 of Section
14; thence S83°00'59"W, 1310.99 feet along the South line of said NW1/4NE1/4 to
the SW Corner of NW1/4NE1/4 of Section 14; thence N00°03'16"W, 1318.23 feet
along the West line of said NW1/4NE1/4 to the point of beginning and containing
111.404 acres more or less.
AND
A parcel of land in the SE 1/4 of Section 11, Township 78 North, Range 26 West
of the 5th P.M., Dallas County, Iowa, more particularly described as follows:
Beginning at the South 1/4 Corner of said Section 11; thence N00°00'12"E,
2630.82 feet along the West line of said SE1/4 to the NW Corner of SE1/4 of
Section 11; thence N83°16'21"E, 1194.98 feet along the North line of said SE1/
4 to a point; thence S00°00'00"E, 309.05 feet to a point; thence N83°16'21"E,
1368.13 feet to a point on the West right-of-way (R.O.W.) line of Jordan Creek
Parkway, said point being 55.00 feet West of the East line of said Section 11;
thence S00°00'00"E, 296.99 feet along said West R.O.W. line to a point; thence
S02°51'45"W, 300.37 feet along said West R.O.W. line to a point; thence
S04°17'21"E, 200.56 feet along said West R.O.W. line to a point; thence
S23°44'58"E, 54.63 feet along said West R.O.W. line to a point; thence
S00°00'00"E, 215.00 feet along said West R.O.W. line to a point; thence
S90°00'00"W, 22.00 feet along said West R.O.W. line to a point; thence
S00°00'00"E, 1250.78 feet along said West R.O.W. line to a point on the South
line of said SE1/4 of Section 11, said point being 55.00 feet West of the East
line of Section 11; thence S83°04'23"W, 2564.33 feet along the South line of
said Section 11 to the point of beginning and containing 143.870 acres more or
less.
EXCLUDING
Parcel A of the survey of parcel Z in the SE 1/4 of section 11, township 78
north, range 26 west of the 5th P.M., city of West Des Moines, as shown in book
2002, page 17509 in the office of the recorder of Dallas County, Iowa, except
that part of said parcel A conveyed to the city of West Des Moines in deed
filed in book 2004, page 3761.
Said property is more particularly described as follows:
Commencing as a point of reference at the E 1/4 corner of section 11-78-26;
thence S00°00'07"W, 855.09 feet along the east line of section 11 to a point;
thence N89°59'59"W, 82.67 feet to the point of beginning on the west right-of-
way line of Jordan Creek Parkway; thence S00°00'07"W, 1105.69 feet along said
west right-of-way line to a point on the north line of lot 33, Bridgewood plat
1, an official plat; thence N89°59'53"W, 592.24 feet along said north line to a
point; thence S45°05'04"W, 94.76 feet to a point; thence N45°01'53"W, 126.89
feet to a point; thence N69°32'48"W, 204.69 feet to a point; thence
N44°10'53"W, 1027.22 feet to a point on the south line of Bridgewood School, an
official plat; thence N40°54'26"E, 186.35 feet along said south line to a
point; thence N12°58'12"W, 276.547 feet along the east line of Bridgewood
School to a point; thence N25°57'55"E, 204.18 feet along said east line to a
point on the south right-of-way line of E.P. True Parkway; thence S62°11'29"E,
371.10 feet along said south right-of-way line to a point of curvature; thence
easterly along a curve to the left having a radius of 960.00 feet, an arc
length of 465.91 feet and a chord bearing of S76°05'41"E to a point of
tangency; thence S89°59'53"E, 696.41 feet along said south right-of-way line to
a point; thence S44°52'19"E, 49.61 feet to the point of beginning and
containing 37.246 acres more or less.
AND
A parcel of land being a part of and lying entirely within the Southeast 1/
4 Quarter (SE 1/4), of the Northeast Quarter (NE 1/4), of Section 14, Township
78 North, Range 26 West of the 5th P.M., West Des Moines, Dallas County, Iowa,
and is more particularly described as follows:
Commencing at the East 1/4 Corner of Section 14;
Thence along and upon the South line of the Northeast Quarter (NE 1/4) of said
Section 14, N 83°41'21" E, a distance of 1312.13 feet to the Southwest corner
of the Southwest Quarter (SW 1/4), of the Northeast Quarter (NE 1/4), of said
Section 14;
Thence along the East line of the West 1/2, of the Northeast 1/4 of said
Section 14 & the West line of Parcel "K", a distance of 83.11 feet to the
Northerly Right-of-Way line of "Mills Civic Parkway" as presently established,
also being the Point of Beginning;
Thence continuing along said East line N 00°39'35" E for a distance of 1233.25
feet, to the South line of "Bridgewood South" subdivision;
Thence along said South line N 83°45'28" E, a distance of 95.63 feet to a point
on a non-tangent curve concave Northeasterly, having a radius of 328.00 feet,
said point being the Westerly corner of Lot 5 of "Gardens at Bridgewood" Plat
#2, an official plat, now forming and being a part of the City of West Des
Moines;
Thence running along a curve, said curve being the Southwesterly line of said
Lot 5, a distance of 259.39 feet, whose chord bears N 66°38'49" E, 252.68 feet;
Thence continuing along the Southerly line of said Lot 5, S 89°21'18" E, a
distance of 112.77 feet to the beginning of a curve concave Northerly, having a
radius of 371.00 feet, said point also being the Southeast corner of said Lot 5
and the Southwest corner of Lot 4;
Thence running along a curve, said curve being the Southerly line of said Lot
4, a distance of 100.53 feet, whose chord bears N 82°52'57" E, 100.22 feet to
the beginning of a curve concave Southerly, having a radius of 85.00;
Thence running along a curve, said curve being the Southerly line of said Lot
4, a distance of 58.87 feet, whose chord bears S 84°58'34" E, 57.70 feet;
Thence running along the extension of Southwesterly Right-of- Way line of
"South 76th Street" S 65°05'41" E, a distance of 39.03 feet;
Thence S 08°55'37" E, a distance of 99.88 feet to a point on a non-tangent
curve concave Northwesterly, having a radius of 650.00 feet;
Thence along said curve a distance of 179.84 feet, whose chord bears N
73°06'49" E, 179.27 feet;
Thence N 64°55'34" E, a distance of 53.93 feet to the beginning of a curve
concave Southeasterly, having a radius of 550.00 feet;
Thence along said curve a distance of 239.33 feet, whose chord bears N
77°53'36" E, 237.44 feet;
Thence S 89°24'29" E, a distance of 82.46 feet;
Thence S 44°26'06" E, a distance of 49.47 feet to a point on the Westerly
Right-of-Way line of "Jordan Creek Parkway" as presently established;
Thence along said Westerly Right-of-Way line, S 00°34'53" W, a distance of
870.88 feet to the Southerly corner on the East line of Parcel "L', as recorded
in Book 2005, Page 13730;
Thence along the North line of said Parcel "L", S 84°39'40" W, a distance of
166.17 feet;
Thence along the East line of said Parcel "L", N 02°43'21" W, a distance of
108.59' feet;
Thence along the North line of said Parcel "L", S 81°25'57" W, a distance of
200.34 feet;
Thence along the West line of Parcel "L", S 01°48'45" W, a distance of 220.13
feet, to a point on the Northerly Right-of- Way line of "Mills Civic Parkway"
as presently established;
Thence along said Northerly Right-of-Way line, S 83°41'21" W, a distance of
866.11 feet to the Point of Beginning.
Containing 28.646 acres, more or less. Subject to all easements of record.
AND
A parcel of land being a part of and lying entirely within Parcel "J" of the
Southeast (SE 1/4), of the Northeast Quarter (NE 1/4), of Section 14, Township
78 North, Range 26 West of the 5th P.M., West Des Moines, Dallas County, Iowa,
as recorded in Book 2002, Page 13008, and is more particularly described as
follows:
Commencing at the East Quarter of Section 14;
Thence along and upon the East Line of the Southeast Quarter (SE 1/4), of the
Northeast Quarter (NE 1/4), of said Section 14, N 00°34'53" E, a distance of
1186.15 feet;
Thence N 89°25'07" E, a distance of 60.00 feet to a point on a non-tangent
curve concave Southwesterly, having a radius of 25.00 feet, said point also
being on the East line of said Parcel "J";
Thence along said curve a distance of 39.28 feet, whose chord bears N 44°25'49"
W, 35.36 feet;
Thence along the north line of said Parcel "J", also being the Southerly Right-
of-Way Line of "Wistful Vista Drive", N 89°26'32" W, a distance of 81.01 to the
Point-of Beginning;
Thence continuing along the said Northerly line of said Parcel "J", N 89°26'32"
W, a distance of 243.77 feet to the beginning of a curve concave Northerly,
having a radius of 285.00 feet;
Thence along said curve a distance of 98.27 feet, whose chord bears N 79°26'54"
W, 97.78 feet, to the beginning of a curve concave Southerly, having a radius
of 25.00;
Thence along said curve a distance of 32.05 feet, whose chord bears S 74°29'06"
W, 29.90 feet to the beginning of a curve concave Easterly, having a radius of
140.00 feet;
Thence along said curve a distance of 70.87 feet, whose chord bears S 17°09'47"
W, 70.12 feet to the beginning of a curve concave Northeasterly, having a
radius of 35.00 feet;
Thence along said curve a distance of 71.95 feet, whose chord bears S 56°12'06"
E, 59.93 feet;
Thence N 65°02'12" E, a distance of 33.58 feet to the beginning of a curve
concave Southeasterly, having a radius of 650.00 feet;
Thence along said curve a distance of 283.33 feet, whose chord bears N
77°50'04" E, 281.09 feet;
Thence S 89°14'04" E, a distance of 34.28 feet;
Thence N 00°16'23" E, a distance of 15.11 feet to the Point of Beginning.
Containing 0.412 Acres, more or less. Subject to all easements of record.
(Ord. 2198, 2-21-2017)
048-02: SKETCH PLAN:
On file in the City and made a part of this document for concept description
and delineation is the sketch plan document for the Bridgewood PUD planned unit
development. Also on file in the City and made a part of this document is an
illustrative plan, which illustrates the general design and layout of the
streets, buildings, open spaces, etc., which is included to further delineate
the conceptual layout of the project. It is recognized, minor shifts or
modifications to sketch plan layout may be necessary and compatible with the
need to acquire workable street patterns, grades and usable building sites, but
the sketch plan layout, including the relationship of uses to each other and
the relationship of land use to the general plan framework, and development
requirements shall be used as the implementation guide.
Nothing contained within this ordinance shall prohibit the development of the
individual parcels within the PUD independent of one another, so long as the
minimum City Code requirements are met, unless modified herein. (Ord. 1322, 8-
10-1998; amd. Ord. 1809, 7-28-2008; Ord. 2198, 2-21-2017)
048-03: CONDITIONS:
Whereas, title 9 of the City Code includes chapter 9, PUD planned unit
development district, and establishes certain regulations and guidelines
pertaining to accompanying information required on a plat, permitted
conditional use and site plan documents. Now, therefore, the following
conditions, restrictions, and regulations are adopted as part of this approval,
to wit: (Ord. 1322, 8-10-1998)
   A.   General Conditions: The sketch plan incorporates land uses which shall
be distributed by area, types and location according to the sketch plan.
Wherever conflict occurs between the written text in this document and the
notations on the sketch plan, the written text shall prevail.
In addition, the following general site plan criteria shall be integrated into
and made a part of the development criteria for the Bridgewood PUD.
      1.   The PUD shall incorporate a maximum of eight hundred thirty eight
(838) residential dwelling units which shall be distributed by types and
location according to the sketch plan as presented. Parcel M has been shown in
the sketch plan to be developed as a church/daycare site. Should this parcel
not be developed as a church and/or a daycare facility, a maximum of thirty
five (35) additional single-family detached residential units may be developed
in Parcel M. Parcel A has been shown as a school/park site on the sketch plan.
Should Parcel A not be developed as a school/park site, a maximum of ninety
five (95) additional single-family detached residential units may be developed
in Parcel A under the development standards stated herein for Parcel A. The
standards for development of each parcel is further defined in the land use
design criteria section of this document. (Ord. 2198, 2-21-2017)
      2.   All subdivisions, public streets, public street rights-of- way and
general development shall adhere to the standards and design criteria set forth
in the West Des Moines subdivision ordinance and the Des Moines metropolitan
design standards as adopted by the City of West Des Moines pertaining thereto,
except as otherwise stated within this ordinance.
      3.   Any regulation, standard, provision or requirement that is not
specifically addressed within this document that is regulated elsewhere in the
City Code of West Des Moines, the requirements of the City Code shall still be
enforced.
      4.   In all areas within a 100-year frequency flood hazard zone, or
adjoining drainageways or detention areas involving potential flood hazards, no
building shall be erected which has a lowest floor, including basements, less
than one foot (1') above the determined level of the 100-year frequency flood
event or floodproofed to the same elevation in accordance with the West Des
Moines floodplain ordinance, and no building shall be erected within twenty
five feet (25') of any major drainage, storm water detention basin or pond.
      5.   The developer, their successors and assigns, if any, shall pay all
construction and engineering costs for the interior development of the planned
unit development, in accordance with the current city policies at the time of
development, as required by this ordinance, the subdivision ordinance of the
city of West Des Moines, and the Des Moines metropolitan design standards as
adopted by the city of West Des Moines, for all streets, storm sewers, sanitary
sewers, drainage improvements, detention basins, water mains, buffers and other
improvements within the PUD as may be required.
      6.   All development within the Bridgewood PUD shall comply with the
buffering provisions of the buffer ordinance of the West Des Moines city code.
In situations where the PUD specifies the provision of a buffer park easement,
the required setbacks shall be measured from the easement line nearest the
building. In situations where this PUD specifies the provision of a buffer
park, the buffer park and the required setback may be overlapped and whichever
is more restrictive shall be adhered to. (Ord. 1322, 8-10-1998)
048-04: MASTER PLAN REQUIREMENTS:
For the purpose of this ordinance, the information presented in the
illustrative plan on file in the city and made a part of this document, shall
serve as a general guide to the layout of the locations of proposed buildings,
parking lots and associated drives, pedestrian circulation system, greenbelts
and open spaces for the Bridgewood PUD. At the time of development of each
parcel or portion of a parcel, a more detailed master plan may be required to
assure workable traffic patterns, pedestrian circulation, utility layouts,
grades and usable building sites for that parcel and the surrounding parcels.
(Ord. 1322, 8-10-1998)
048-05: LAND USE DESIGN CRITERIA:
In addition to the general criteria as stated in section
048-03 of this chapter, the following land use design criteria shall apply to
the development areas designated on the sketch plan. The sketch plan document
which is made a part of this rezoning action per section
 048-02 of this chapter, delineates seventeen (17) parcels of the PUD as
parcels A, A-1, A-2, A-3, B, C, D, E, F, G, H, I, J, K, L, M and N for
application of specific development standards. The following development
standards and use regulations shall apply to each of the following development
parcels:
   A.   Parcel A: Parcel A, as shown on the sketch plan, shall include
approximately twenty two (22) acres to be reserved for acquisition and
development as a school for the Waukee School District and/or a park site and
shall be required to be platted at the time that any portion of parcel B or D,
abutting the greenbelt parcel (parcel A-1) is platted. The park/school land
shall be conveyed by warranty deed free and clear of any and all liens and
encumbrances including, but not limited to, all judgments, attachments,
mortgage liens, mechanics liens, and other liens.
The value of the land to be purchased by the city and/or Waukee School District
shall be established by mutual agreement at the time of purchase of said
property by the city or school district and shall be based upon the property's
current fair market value as undeveloped land, plus the cost of providing paved
street frontage, sanitary sewer, water service, and grading.
If the property, or any portion of the property, is not developed as a park or
school site, the property may be developed as single-family detached
residential dwelling units with a maximum of ninety five (95) additional
single-family detached residential units may be developed in parcel A. The
development standards for the property shall comply with the minimum standards
for the R-1 single-family residential district.
For any residentially developed property, a minimum thirty foot (30') buffer
park easement shall be required along 81st Street. Landscaping and berming in
the buffer park shall be provided in accordance with the West Des Moines buffer
ordinance. No driveway access from an individual dwelling unit shall be
permitted directly onto 81st Street. The layout of streets within this parcel
shall be established with the platting of the property for residential uses
prior to any residential development.
The equivalent of one-half (1/2) of the street right of way of 81st Street
along parcel A will be dedicated by the developer to the city at no charge at
the time of platting or sale.
Detention areas contained within the PUD shall remain private and maintained by
the master property owners' association.
   B.   Parcel A-1: The owner and/or developer shall reserve for dedication to
the city that ground designated as parcel A-1 as shown on the sketch plan, on
file in the city, for inclusion within Jordan Creek greenbelt for active park
and open space use at no cost to the city of West Des Moines. Said area shall
be platted and dedicated (except detention areas) to the city free of any
liens, encumbrances, and assessments with the platting of any portion of
parcels B or D which abut said parcel A-1.
The equivalent of one-half (1/2) of the street right of way of 81st Street
along parcel A-1 will be dedicated by the developer to the city at no charge at
the time of platting or sale.
Detention areas contained within the PUD shall remain private and maintained by
the master property owners' association.
The waiver of the developer's share of the mandatory fee payment would apply
($200.00/acre) to all land zoned residential contained within the Bridgewood
planned unit development, however, this shall not apply to parcel A-2 or A-3,
which will be privately owned.
As per the ordinance regarding mandatory fee payment and acquisition and/or
development of park system, these fees will not be eligible for the twenty five
percent (25%) credit for private amenities.
All land for street right of way and all street, sewer, water, storm sewer
improvements abutting parcel A-1 shall be provided by the developer at no
expense to the city. The improvements will be installed at the same time as
those in parcel B or D.
The detention pond shown on the north side of the road between parcels B and D
will be acceptable only if the developer retains ownership of the area and is
responsible for the development, maintenance, and liability thereof.
   C.   Parcel A-2: This parcel has been shown as a greenbelt corridor which is
intended to provide for pedestrian movement through the development and into
the Jordan Creek greenbelt system. This parcel shall be privately owned and
maintained by the owner or developer or by the master property owners'
association. Parcel A-2 shall be platted at the time that any portion of parcel
C, F or M are platted that abut said parcel A-2. At that time, consideration
will be given to establishing covenants, easements or other restrictions to
ensure the long term preservation of the area as open space.
The waiver of the developer's share of the mandatory fee payment would apply
($200.00/acre) to all land zoned residential contained within the Bridgewood
planned unit development; however, this shall not apply to parcel A-2 which
will be privately owned.
As per the ordinance regarding mandatory fee payment and acquisition and/or
development of park system, these fees will not be eligible for the twenty five
percent (25%) credit for private amenities.
All land for street right of way and all street, sewer, water, storm sewer
improvements abutting parcel A-2 shall be provided by the developer at no
expense to the city. The improvements will be installed at the same time as
those in parcel C, F, or M.
The detention pond shown on the north side of the road between parcels B and D
will be acceptable only if the developer retains ownership of the area and is
responsible for the development, maintenance, and liability thereof.
   D.   Parcel A-3: This parcel has been shown as a greenbelt corridor which is
intended to provide for pedestrian movement through the development and into
the Jordan Creek greenbelt system. This parcel shall be privately owned and
maintained by the owner or developer or by the master property owners'
association. Parcel A-3 shall be platted at the time that any portion of parcel
I, N, or K are platted that abut said parcel A-3. At that time, consideration
will be given to establishing covenants, easements or other restrictions to
ensure the long term preservation of the area as open space.
The waiver of the developer's share of the mandatory fee payment would apply
($200.00/acre) to all land zoned residential contained within the Bridgewood
planned unit development; however, this shall not apply to parcel A-2 which
will be privately owned.
As per the ordinance regarding mandatory fee payment and acquisition and/or
development of park system, these fees will not be eligible for the twenty five
percent (25%) credit for private amenities.
All land for street right of way and all street, sewer, water, storm sewer
improvements abutting parcel A-3 shall be provided by the developer at no
expense to the city. The improvements will be installed at the same time as
those in parcel I, K or N.
      1.   Other Provisions: At the time of development of parcel N, a public
access connection through parcel A-3 shall be provided to allow vehicular
access to the internal parking area intended to serve the commercial area,
which shall be designed to discourage cut through traffic into the residential
area. The location and design of the access driveway shall be determined at the
time of the review of the site plan for the development of parcel N. The
requirements of setbacks and buffering from adjoining properties shall be
determined at the time of review of the site plan.
At the time of development, consideration shall be given to landscaping and
berming to screen the visibility of any driveway and parking lot from the
public rights of way or from any adjoining property with the use of
predominately evergreen plant materials, berming and through the design of the
project.
   E.   Parcels D And F: All general use regulations and provisions set forth
in title 9, "Zoning", of the city code for the RS-6 single-family residential
district with a minimum lot size of six thousand six hundred (6,600) square
feet shall apply to any development proposals for all property within parcel D
as shown on the sketch plan of the Bridgewood PUD as herein amended, except as
otherwise provided in this ordinance.
All general use regulations and provisions set forth in title 9, "Zoning", of
the city code for the RS-5 single- family residential district with a minimum
lot size of five thousand (5,000) square feet shall apply to any development
proposal for all property within parcel F as shown on the sketch plan of the
Bridgewood PUD, except as otherwise provided in this ordinance.
      1.   Density:
Parcel D shall incorporate approximately thirteen (13) acres with a maximum of
thirty six (36) dwelling units permitted.
Parcel F shall incorporate approximately twelve (12) acres with a maximum of
fifty two (52) dwelling units permitted.
The maximum number of dwelling units specified for parcel D may be increased by
twelve percent (12%), provided that there is an equivalent and corresponding
reduction in the aggregate total number of dwelling units allowed for parcels D
and E, such that the aggregate total number of dwelling units for parcels D and
E does not exceed one hundred seventy eight (178).
Any shifting of density between parcels D and E will require an updated traffic
study to verify compliance with the traffic study Bridgewood North completed
June 11, 2008.
      2.   Setbacks: Residential structures and garages shall meet a minimum
front yard setback of twenty five feet (25') and porches shall meet a minimum
front yard setback of twenty feet (20') from the property line for those
properties that front on public streets. If the property abuts a private
street, the front setbacks shall be thirty five feet (35') measured from the
back of curb.
Any residential structure or attached accessory structure shall have a minimum
rear yard setback of thirty five feet (35').
There shall be a minimum separation distance of fourteen feet (14') between
residential structures as measured to the foundation wall, but in no case shall
any part of a structure be less than five feet (5') from any property line.
      3.   Buffers: A minimum thirty foot (30') buffer park easement shall be
required along 81st Street in parcel D, and along Bridgewood Boulevard in
parcels D and F. Landscaping and berming in the buffer park shall be provided
in accordance with the West Des Moines buffer ordinance.
      4.   Other Special Provisions: No driveway access from an individual
dwelling unit shall be permitted directly onto 81st Street or Bridgewood
Boulevard. The layout of streets within each of these parcels shall be
established with the platting of the property prior to any development.
The equivalent of one-half (1/2) of the street right of way for 81st Street
along parcel D will be dedicated by the developer to the city at no charge at
the time of platting or sale.
   F.   1. Parcels G And O: All general use regulations and provisions set
forth in title 9, "Zoning", of the city code for the residential single-family
district (RS-5) shall apply to any development proposal for all property within
parcels G and O and shall be developed as detached single-family dwelling units
as shown on the supplemental sketch plan of the Bridgewood PUD, except as
otherwise provided in this ordinance.
The units that are proposed on these parcels have been identified as bungalows
on the sketch plan. "Bungalows" are defined as detached townhomes, where each
unit is individually owned and the surrounding grounds are maintained by a
master property owners' association or similar organization to ensure the
continued maintenance of these areas.
         a.   Density:
Parcel G shall incorporate approximately thirteen (13) acres with a maximum of
seventy three (73) dwelling units permitted.
Parcel O shall incorporate approximately four (4) acres with a maximum of
twenty five (25) dwelling units permitted.
         b.   Setbacks:
Parcel G: Within Parcel G, Lots 1-36 and 41-47 residential structures and
garages shall meet a minimum front yard setback of twenty feet (20') and
porches shall meet a minimum front yard setback of fifteen feet (15') as
measured from the property line for those properties that front on public
streets or the curb or sidewalk of private streets, whichever is closer to the
dwelling structure. For Lots 26-53, any residential structure or attached
accessory structure shall have a minimum rear setback as measured to the
property line of five feet (5'), but in no case shall an above grade
improvement be closer than ten feet (10') to another residential structure as
measured to any portion of the structure.
Parcel O: Within Parcel O, for Lots 21-37, any residential structure or
attached accessory structure shall have a minimum rear setback as measured to
the property line of five feet (5'), but in no case shall an above grade
improvement be closer than ten feet (10') to another residential structure as
measured to any portion of the structure.
         c.   Buffers: A minimum thirty foot (30') buffer park easement shall
be established along Bridgewood Boulevard and 81st Street in parcels G and O.
Landscaping and berming in the buffer park shall be provided in accordance with
the West Des Moines buffer ordinance at the time of platting or review for
approval of site plan as determined by the city of West Des Moines.
         d.   Other Special Provisions: Right of way for 81st Street along
parcels G and O will be dedicated by the developer to the city at no charge at
the time of platting or sale in accordance with the provisions of section
048-06 of this chapter, street improvements, contained within this ordinance.
No driveway from an individual dwelling unit shall be permitted directly onto
Bridgewood Boulevard or 81st Street.
         e.   Architecture: Architectural design for detached townhome units
(having been referred to as bungalows or craftsman) shall attempt to express a
creative presentation of exterior building materials, exterior details and
texture, treatment of windows and doors, and use of angles and multiplicity of
planes within the wall and roof design to lessen the plainness of appearance
which can be characteristic of typical townhome buildings.
The design of the units shall convey a unifying theme that relates to the
overall concept of the Bridgewood development. The use of unifying elements,
such as front porches, similar rooflines, paint and materials, shall be
encouraged to unify the development while still providing each unit with its
own character.
The use of brick, stone, or "cultured stone" shall be incorporated into the
building architecture, unless the city council, after review by the planning
and zoning commission shall determine that the use of alternate building
materials enhances the physical appearance and accomplishes a compatible
structure with the residential uses in the neighborhood.
      2.   Parcels P And Q: All general use regulations and provisions set
forth in title 9, "Zoning", of the city code for RM residential medium-density
district shall apply to any development proposal for all property within
parcels P and Q and shall be developed as single-family attached dwellings as
shown on the sketch plan of the Bridgewood PUD, unless noted otherwise in this
ordinance.
         a.   Density:
Parcel P shall incorporate approximately five and one-half (5.5) acres, with a
maximum of fifty six (56) dwelling units permitted.
Parcel Q shall incorporate approximately seven (7) acres with a maximum of
fifty (50) dwelling units permitted.
No more than twelve (12) dwelling units per building or six (6) dwelling units
per side be permitted for any buildings within parcel P or Q.
         b.   Setbacks: Residential structures and garages shall meet a minimum
front yard setback of twenty five feet (25') and porches shall meet a minimum
front yard setback of twenty feet (20') as measured from the property line for
those properties that front on public streets, or curb or sidewalk of private
streets, whichever is closer to the dwelling structure. In no case shall any
residential structure be located any closer than five feet (5') from the back
of a curb or back of a sidewalk.
Any residential structure or attached accessory structure shall have a minimum
rear yard setback of five feet (5'), unless the rear yard abuts the south or
west property line. In this case the setbacks as shown on the final plat for
Parcels P and Q shall prevail. In no case shall an above grade improvement be
closer than ten feet (10') to another residential structure as measured to any
portion of the structure.
         c.   Buffers: A minimum thirty foot (30') buffer park easement shall
be established along the west boundary of parcel P along 81st Street.
Provisions for a buffer park in accordance with the buffer ordinance shall be
established along the southern boundaries of parcels P and Q prior to
development of said parcels.
Landscaping and berming shall be provided in accordance with the West Des
Moines buffer ordinance at the time of platting or review for approval of site
plan as determined by the city of West Des Moines.
         d.   Architecture: Architectural design for multi-family buildings
shall attempt to express a creative presentation of exterior building
materials, exterior details and texture, treatment of windows and doors, and
use of angles and multiplicity of planes within the wall and roof design to
lessen the plainness of appearance which can be characteristic of large
residential buildings. The use of building articulation that breaks up the
building mass into modules which reflect proportions similar to the single-
family residential dwellings on the adjacent parcels shall be required. Methods
used to create intervals which reflect and promote compatibility and which
respect the scale of the single-family detached residential dwellings include:
            (1)   Facade modulation - stepping back or extending forward a
portion of the facade,
            (2)   Repeating the window patterns at intervals equal to
articulated intervals,
            (3)   Providing the porch, patio, deck, or covered entry to the
articulation interval,
            (4)   Changing the rooflines by alternating dormers, stepped roofs,
gables, or other roof elements to reinforce the modulation or articulation
interval,
            (5)   Changing materials with the change in building plane,
            (6)   Providing a lighting feature, trellis, tree, or other
landscape feature with each interval,
            (7)   Using paint and materials that blend with the single-family
residential areas and to reinforce the modulation or articulated intervals.
The use of brick shall be incorporated into the building architecture on all
sides of the structure, unless the city council of West Des Moines, after
review by the planning and zoning commission of West Des Moines shall determine
that the use of alternate building materials, enhances the physical appearance
and accomplishes a compatible structure with the residential uses in the
neighborhood.
         e.   Other Special Provisions: All parking areas, except individual
unit driveways, shall be landscaped to screen their visibility from the public
rights of way or from any adjoining property with the use of predominately
evergreen plant materials, berming and through the design of the project and
shall be addressed at the time of review of the site plan for the development
of these parcels.
Right of way for 81st Street along parcels G and O will be dedicated by the
developer to the city at no charge at the time of platting or sale in
accordance with the provisions of section
048-06 of this chapter, street improvements, contained within this ordinance.
No driveway access for individual units shall be permitted directly onto
Bridgewood Boulevard.
   G.   Parcels I And J: All general use regulations and provisions set forth
in title 9, "Zoning", of the city code for RM residential medium-density
district shall apply to any development proposal for all property within
parcels I and J and shall be developed as single-family attached dwellings as
shown on the sketch plan of the Bridgewood PUD, unless noted otherwise in this
ordinance.
      1.   Density:
Parcel I shall incorporate approximately seven and five-tenths (7.5) acres,
with a maximum of forty eight (48) dwelling units permitted.
Parcel J shall incorporate approximately sixteen (16) acres with a maximum of
one hundred twenty five (125) dwelling units permitted.
No more than twelve (12) dwelling units per building or six (6) dwelling units
per side be permitted for any buildings within Parcel I or J.
The maximum number of dwelling units specified for each individual parcel may
be increased by up to twelve percent (12%), provided that there is an
equivalent and corresponding reduction in the aggregate total of dwelling units
allowed for Parcels G, H, I, J and K such that the aggregate total number of
dwelling units allowed for these parcels does not exceed four hundred seventeen
(417).
      2.   Setbacks: Residential structures and garages shall meet a minimum
front yard setback of twenty five feet (25') and porches shall meet a minimum
front yard setback of twenty feet (20') from the property line for those
properties that front on public streets. If the property abuts a private
street, garages shall meet a front yard setback of twenty five feet (25'), to
be measured from the garage opening to the back of curb or to the back of a
sidewalk, whichever is more restrictive. In no case shall any residential
structure be located any closer than fifteen feet (15') from the back of a curb
or back of a sidewalk.
Any residential structure or attached accessory structure shall have a minimum
rear yard setback of twenty feet (20'). All residential structures shall have a
minimum separation distance of twenty feet (20') between residential structures
measured to the foundation wall, but in no case shall any part of a structure
be less than five feet (5') from any property line.
      3.   Buffers: A minimum thirty foot (30') buffer park easement shall be
established along E. P. True Parkway along the north property line of Parcel I.
Landscaping and berming shall be provided in accordance with the West Des
Moines Buffer Ordinance at the time of platting or review for approval of site
plan as determined by the City of West Des Moines.
      4.   Architecture: Architectural design for multi-family buildings shall
attempt to express a creative presentation of exterior building materials,
exterior details and texture, treatment of windows and doors, and use of angles
and multiplicity of planes within the wall and roof design to lessen the
plainness of appearance which can be characteristic of large residential
buildings. The use of building articulation that breaks up the building mass
into modules which reflect proportions similar to the single-family residential
dwellings on the adjacent parcels shall be required. Methods used to create
intervals which reflect and promote compatibility and which respect the scale
of the single-family detached residential dwellings include:
         a.   Facade modulation - stepping back or extending forward a portion
of the facade,
         b.   Repeating the window patterns at intervals equal to articulated
intervals,
         c.   Providing a porch, patio, deck, or covered entry to the
articulation interval,
         d.   Changing the roof lines by alternating dormers, stepped roofs,
gables, or other roof elements to reinforce the modulation or articulation
interval,
         e.   Changing materials with the change in building plane,
         f.   Providing a lighting feature, trellis, tree, or other landscape
feature with each interval,
         g.   Using paint and materials that blend with the single-family
residential areas and to reinforce the modulation or articulated intervals.
The use of brick shall be incorporated into the building architecture on all
sides of the structure, unless the City Council of West Des Moines, after
review by the Planning and Zoning Commission of West Des Moines shall determine
that the use of alternate building materials, enhances the physical appearance
and accomplishes a compatible structure with the residential uses in the
neighborhood.
      5.   Other Special Provisions: All parking areas, except individual unit
driveways, shall be landscaped to screen their visibility from the public
rights-of-way or from any adjoining property with the use of predominately
evergreen plant materials, berming and through the design of the project and
shall be addressed at the time of review of the site plan for the development
of these parcels.
No driveway access for individual units shall be permitted directly onto E. P.
True Parkway.
   H.   Parcel K: All general use regulations and provisions set forth in title
9, "Zoning", of the city code for RM residential medium-density district shall
apply to any development proposal for all property within parcel K and shall be
developed as single-family attached dwellings as shown on the sketch plan of
the Bridgewood PUD, unless noted otherwise in this ordinance.
      1.   Density: Parcel K shall incorporate approximately nine (9) acres,
with a density of ten (10) dwelling units per acre or a maximum of eighty six
(86) dwelling units permitted.
No more than twelve (12) dwelling units per building or six (6) dwelling units
per side be allowed for any buildings within parcel K.
The maximum number of dwelling units specified for each individual parcel may
be increased by up to twelve percent (12%), provided that there is an
equivalent and corresponding reduction in the aggregate total number of
dwelling units allowed for parcels G, H, I, J and K such that the aggregate
total number of dwelling units allowed for these parcels does not exceed four
hundred seventeen (417).
      2.   Setbacks: Residential structures and garages shall meet a minimum
front yard setback of twenty five feet (25') and porches shall meet a minimum
front yard setback of twenty feet (20') from the property line for those
properties that front on public streets. If the property abuts a private
street, garages shall meet a front yard setback of twenty five feet (25'), to
be measured from the garage opening to the back of a curb or to the back of a
sidewalk, whichever is more restrictive. In no case shall any residential
structure be located any closer than fifteen feet (15') from the back of a curb
or back of a sidewalk.
Any residential structure or attached accessory structure shall have a minimum
rear yard setback of twenty feet (20').
All residential structures shall have a minimum separation distance of twenty
feet (20') between residential structures measured to the foundation wall, but
in no case shall any part of a structure be less than five feet (5') from any
property line.
      3.   Buffers: A minimum thirty foot (30') buffer park easement shall be
established along Jordan Creek Parkway in parcel K. Landscaping and berming in
the buffer park shall be provided in accordance with the West Des Moines buffer
ordinance at the time of platting or review for approval of site plan as
determined by the city of West Des Moines.
      4.   Architecture: Architectural design for multi-family buildings shall
attempt to express a creative presentation of exterior building materials,
exterior details and texture, treatment of windows and doors, and use of angles
and multiplicity of planes within the wall and roof design to lessen the
plainness of appearance which can be characteristic of large residential
buildings. The use of building articulation that breaks up the building mass
into modules which reflect proportions similar to the single-family residential
dwellings on other parcels within the development shall be required. Methods
used to create intervals which reflect and promote compatibility and which
respect the scale of the single-family detached residential dwellings include:
         a.   Facade modulation - stepping back or extending forward a portion
of the facade,
         b.   Repeating the window patterns at intervals equal to articulated
intervals,
         c.   Providing a porch, patio, deck, or covered entry to the
articulation interval,
         d.   Changing the rooflines by alternating dormers, stepped roofs,
gables, or other roof elements to reinforce the modulation or articulation
interval,
         e.   Changing materials with the change in building plane,
         f.   Providing a lighting feature, trellis, tree, or other landscape
feature with each interval,
         g.   Using paint and materials that blend with the single-family
residential areas and to reinforce the modulation or articulate interval.
The use of brick shall be incorporated into the building architecture on all
sides of the structure, unless the City Council of West Des Moines, after
review by the Planning and Zoning Commission of West Des Moines shall determine
that the use of alternate building materials, enhances the physical appearance
and accomplishes a compatible structure with the residential uses in the
neighborhood.
      5.   Other Special Provisions: All parking areas, except individual unit
driveways, shall be landscaped to screen their visibility from the public
rights-of-way or from any adjoining property with the use of predominately
evergreen plant materials, berming and through the design of the project and
shall be addressed at the time of review of the site plan for the development
of this parcel.
No driveway access for individual units shall be permitted directly onto Jordan
Creek Parkway.
   I.   Parcel L: Parcel L is hereby removed from the Bridgewood PUD.
   J.   Parcel E: All general use regulations and provisions set forth in title
9, "Zoning", of the City Code for RM Residential Medium-Density District shall
apply to any development proposal for all property within Parcel E and shall be
developed as single-family attached dwellings as shown on the sketch plan of
the Bridgewood PUD, unless noted otherwise in this ordinance.
      1.   Density: Parcel E shall incorporate approximately seventeen (17)
acres with a density of eight and four tenths (8.4) dwelling units per acre or
a maximum of one hundred forty two (142) dwelling units allowed.
No more than ten (10) dwelling units per building or five (5) dwelling units
per side will be allowed for any buildings in Parcel E.
      2.   Setbacks: Residential structures and garages shall meet a minimum
front yard setback of twenty feet (20') and porches shall meet a minimum front
yard setback of fifteen feet (15') as measured from the property line for those
properties that front on public streets, or curb or sidewalk of private
streets, whichever is closer to the dwelling structure. In no case shall any
residential structure be located any closer than five feet (5') from the back
of a curb or back of a sidewalk.
Any residential structure or attached accessory structure shall have a minimum
rear yard setback of five feet (5') from the footprint lot boundary, but in no
case shall an above grade improvement be closer than ten feet (10') to another
residential structure as measured to any portion of the structure.
      3.   Buffers: A minimum thirty foot (30') buffer park shall be
established along 81st Street, Bridgewood Boulevard, and Beechtree Lane in
Parcel E. Landscaping and berming in the buffer park shall be provided in
accordance with the West Des Moines buffer ordinance at the time of platting or
review for approval of a site plan as determined by the City of West Des
Moines.
      4.   Architecture: Architectural design for multi-family buildings shall
attempt to express a creative presentation of exterior building materials,
exterior details and texture, treatment of windows and doors, and use of angles
and multiplicity of planes within the wall and roof design to lessen the
plainness of appearance which can be characteristic of large residential
buildings. The use of building articulation that breaks up the building mass
into modules which reflect proportions similar to the single-family residential
dwellings on other parcels within the development shall be required. Methods
used to create intervals which reflect and promote compatibility and which
respect the scale of the single-family detached residential dwellings include:
         a.   Facade modulation - stepping back or extending forward a portion
of the facade,
         b.   Repeating the window patterns at intervals equal to articulated
intervals,
         c.   Providing a porch, patio, deck, or covered entry to the
articulation interval,
         d.   Changing the rooflines by alternating dormers, stepped roofs,
gables, or other roof elements to reinforce the modulation or articulation
interval,
         e.   Changing materials with the change in building plane,
         f.   Providing a lighting feature, trellis, tree, or other landscape
feature with each interval,
         g.   Using paint and materials that blend with the single-family
residential areas and to reinforce the modulation or articulate interval.
The use of brick or stone shall be incorporated into the building architecture
on all sides of the structure, unless the City Council of West Des Moines,
after review by the Planning and Zoning Commission of West Des Moines shall
determine that the use of alternate building materials, enhances the physical
appearance and accomplishes a compatible structure with the residential uses in
the neighborhood.
      5.   Other Special Provisions: All parking areas, except individual unit
driveways, shall be landscaped to screen their visibility from the public
rights-of-way or from any adjoining property with the use of predominately
evergreen plant materials, berming and through the design of the project and
shall be addressed at the time of review of the site plan for the development
of this parcel.
No driveway access for individual units shall be permitted directly onto 81st
Street, Beechtree Lane or Bridgewood Boulevard.
The equivalent of one-half (1/2) of the street right-of-way for 81st Street and
for Bridgewood Boulevard along Parcel E will be dedicated by the developer to
the City at no charge at the time of platting or sale.
   K.   Parcel M: Unless provided otherwise in this ordinance, all general use
regulations, performance standards and provisions set forth in title 9,
"Zoning", of the City Code for the Support Commercial (SC) District shall apply
to any development within Parcel M. To the extent that the provisions of this
section conflict with or are more restrictive than similar provisions provided
elsewhere in the West Des Moines zoning ordinance, the provisions of this
section shall control. The following land use design criteria, development
standards, and landscaping regulations shall apply to all lots within Parcel M.
Parcel M shall also be known as the Bridgewood Square specific plan.
      1.   Land Use: All land uses as set forth in title 9, "Zoning", of the
City Code for the Neighborhood Commercial (NC) and Support Commercial (SC)
Districts as permitted and permitted conditionally shall apply to Parcel M,
except as designated below:
         a.   Permitted Uses: All permitted (P) uses within the Neighborhood
Commercial (NC) and Support Commercial (SC) Districts shall be allowed, except
those that have been prohibited by this ordinance.
         b.   Permitted Conditional Uses: All permitted conditional (Pc) uses
within the Neighborhood Commercial (NC) and Support Commercial (SC) Districts,
except those that have been prohibited by this ordinance shall be allowed with
the approval of the appropriate review body. In addition, the following uses
may be permitted with a permitted conditional use (Pc):
 
SIC 87 Engineering, accounting, research, management and related services
 
         c.   Prohibited Uses: The following permitted and permitted
conditional uses otherwise allowed in the Neighborhood Commercial (NC) and/or
Support Commercial (SC) Districts shall be prohibited:
SIC 01      Agricultural production - crops
SIC 0752    Animal specialty services
SIC 0783    Ornamental shrub and tree services
SIC 46      Pipelines
SIC 49      Electric, gas and sanitary services
SIC 526     Retail nurseries and garden stores
SIC 541     Convenience stores
SIC 55      Automotive dealers and service stations
            Taproom/beer parlor in conjunction with a brewery of greater than
SIC 5813    five thousand (5,000) square feet and less than ten thousand
            (10,000) square feet
SIC 60      Freestanding ATM
SIC 701     Hotels/motels
SIC 726     Funeral service
SIC 7211    Power laundries, family and commercial
SIC 7212    Garment pressing and agents for laundries and dry cleaners
SIC 7215    Coin operated laundries and dry cleaning
SIC 7299-02 Massage therapy
SIC 7299-03 Dating and escort services
SIC 7299-11 Personal item care and storage services
SIC 75      Automotive repair, services, and parking
SIC 79      Amusement and recreation services - event venue five thousand
            (5,000) square feet or less
            Amusement and recreation services, not elsewhere classified (e.g.,
SIC 7999    golf courses - miniature, driving ranges, circus companies and
            fairs)
SIC 80      Health services, except SIC 801, 802, 803, 804, and 805 shall be
            permitted
SIC 807     Medical and dental laboratories
SIC 83      Social services
SIC 869     Membership organizations, not elsewhere classified - organizations
            with food/drink services and conference facilities
SIC 87      Engineering, accounting, research, management and related services
SIC 92      Justice, public order, and safety
 
      2.   Setbacks: Buildings shall be set back as follows. The setback shall
be measured from the perimeter property line of Parcel M to the primary wall of
the structure. Intermittent encroachment into the setback shall be allowed for
bump outs, roof overhangs, and pedestrian elements as long as minimum Building
Code and Fire Code requirements for building separations are provided.
         a.   South, east and west - minimum of thirty feet (30').
         b.   North - minimum of ten feet (10').
         c.   No setback (0 feet) shall be required from an adjoining lot which
is included within the overall boundaries of Parcel M, except that no structure
should be located closer than fifteen feet (15') to the back-of-curb of any
interior private drive, nor shall any building be so located so as to block
visibility at vehicle drive intersections and driveways.
         d.   Unless physically connected, all buildings shall maintain a
minimum separation of twenty five feet (25') unless otherwise required to be
larger per adopted Building and Fire Codes.
         e.   Detached accessory structures shall not be located in the front
yard of a lot fronting a public street and shall be set back a minimum of
thirty feet (30') from perimeter boundaries and fifteen feet (15') from
interior boundaries.
      3.   Building Height: Buildings within Parcel M shall not exceed thirty
six feet (36') in height, as measured from the average finished grade to the
top of the parapet wall.
      4.   Parking: Parking for a planned commercial center (multi- tenant
building) constructed within Parcel M shall be calculated according to
subsection 9-15-7B, "Planned Commercial Center", of the City Code. Any
standalone buildings constructed within Parcel M shall meet the parking
requirements of section 9-15-7 of the City Code for the specific use.
      5.   Parking Setbacks:
         a.   Off-street parking areas shall be set back from the perimeter
boundaries of Parcel M as follows:
            (1)   East, west and south - minimum thirty foot (30') setback.
            (2)   North - minimum ten foot (10') setback.
            (3)   There shall be no minimum parking lot setback between
internal lot boundaries except that parking areas should be set back a minimum
of ten feet (10') from the back of curb of internal private drives or as
otherwise necessary to accommodate the incorporation of landscape vegetation
for visual screening and mitigation of paving expanses associated with off-
street parking.
         b.   Parking stall measurements and drive aisle widths shall conform
to chapter 15 of the City's zoning ordinance.
         c.   No portion of any parking lot or drive aisle associated with
parking may be located within a required buffer or streetscape.
         d.   Care should be taken to ensure that parking does not block
visibility at vehicle drive intersections and driveways.
      6.   Vehicle Drive Thrus And Canopy Areas: The intent of this development
is not to encourage the use of automobiles; however, it is recognized that
drive-ups are a key component to the functionality of certain types of
businesses due to their convenience. If, through the design review process,
including an updated traffic analysis, if necessary, it can be demonstrated
that such uses do not cause traffic congestion, do not interfere with
pedestrian movements and can be designed to minimize their presence, a maximum
of two (2) businesses with drive-ups may be permitted within Parcel M. Drive-up
facilities may be allowed in conjunction with, but are limited to the following
types of businesses; bank, coffee shop, dry cleaner, pharmacies, and fast food
restaurants. A maximum of one drive-thru fast-food restaurant shall be allowed
within Parcel M. Walk-up or pedestrian ATMs with no vehicle access; and loading
zones in which the patron exits their vehicle and loads the merchandise/
materials themselves shall be allowed as needed.
         a.   The incorporation of drive-up facilities may be limited by the
type of use in association with the available vehicle trips allowed for Parcel
M.
         b.   In all instances, the presence of the drive-ups shall be
minimized through one or a combination of the following methods:
            (1)   Integration of the drive-thru into the building architecture
in order to eliminate the appearance as an added on canopy component.
            (2)   Situating the drive-thru between two (2) buildings in order
to limit the number of views thereof.
            (3)   Opaque visual screening to a minimum height of six feet (6').
May be achieved through the use of earthen berming with vegetation, solid
fencing, decorative walls, etc. Screening method shall provide for year round
visual mitigation of the drive thru.
         c.   Canopies, including gas pump stations and other drive thru
canopies must be designed to incorporate the building's architecture through
the use of similar building materials, roof design, and earth-tone colors so as
to blend with environment rather than draw attention to the element. The
application of brick or stone the entire height of canopy support columns is
required. When possible, canopies should be designed as an extension of the
building rather than an added on element. Gasoline canopies shall be situated
along the side of the store or interior to the site so as to minimize the
visible presence of the vehicle use element. Canopies shall not be located
parallel with and adjacent to public streets; however, may be located adjacent
to internal or private streets as long as measures such as earthen berming and
landscaping are implemented to minimize the presence thereof.
      7.   Buffers: The provision of adequate buffering and landscaping shall
be more thoroughly evaluated and approved as part of site plan approval. A
master landscaping plan for all buffers shall be designed and approved
concurrent with the preliminary plat for the site so as to create cohesiveness
amongst the buffers. Landscape plans for each lot containing a buffer area
shall include buffer landscaping consistent with the approved master
landscaping plan. Buffering between districts or parcels and uses shall not be
required as set forth in title 9, chapter 19 of the City Code.
         a.   Perimeter Boundaries: Buffers shall be provided along the
perimeter boundaries of the Bridgewood Square development as follows:
            (1)   South, east and west - thirty feet (30') from perimeter of
Parcel M.
            (2)   North - no buffer required; however, landscaping as required
for open space shall be implemented and visual mitigation of parking and
service areas shall be achieved.
            (3)   No buffers between internal parcels shall be required except
to mitigate undesirable elements and views and break up large expanses of
paving.
         b.   Thirty Foot Buffers:
            (1)   One overstory tree, two (2) ornamental trees and six (6)
shrubs shall be provided per thirty five (35) linear feet of required buffer.
            (2)   Existing trees and shrubs may be counted toward the required
tree and shrub plantings.
         c.   Vegetation Substitution:
            (1)   Two (2) ornamental trees, one evergreen tree, or six (6)
shrubs may be substituted for one required overstory tree; however, no more
than twenty five percent (25%) of the required number of overstory trees may be
substituted.
            (2)   A twenty five (25) square foot mass planting of perennials or
ornamental grasses may be substituted for three (3) shrubs.
            (3)   Plantings shall be a mix of deciduous and evergreen to ensure
year round color.
         d.   Views: It is recognized that some views of businesses are
desired; therefore, buffer vegetation along the south and east boundaries may
be clustered to open up view windows to the businesses. The buffer along the
west shall aim to block views of buildings and parking from the surrounding
single family lots.
      8.   Landscaping: The landscaping requirements specified herein are
intended to create an aesthetically pleasing development which enhances the
appearance and character of the City of West Des Moines, while protecting the
general health, safety and welfare of the citizens. Landscaping is required to
address the following primary aspects or consequences of development:
- Open space protection and enhancement
- Mitigation of paving expanses associated with off- street parking
- Visual screening of undesirable views, activities and/or site elements, and
- Street side enhancement ("streetscapes")
The attached Specific Plan Map illustrates the general landscaping concept:
this plan should be used as the guide for site plan development in respect to
the general locations of plant material to be provided. Additional vegetation
may be required in response to additional details of the use, buildings,
parking, etc., to be implemented. Details regarding specific varieties, exact
quantities, and the minimum size at time of planting shall be provided and
approved as part of the site plan submittal and shall meet the general
guidelines in respect to the minimum plant size traditionally applied to
development within the City. In the event that alternatives to what is shown on
the attached specific plan are desired, the minimum vegetation requirements
specified within this ordinance will need to be provided and the original
intent of the required vegetation met.
         a.   Open Space: The intent of open space is to allow for a balance
between natural areas and the built environment and to provide for the overall
beautification and "greening" of the City.
            (1)   A minimum of twenty percent (20%) open space shall be
provided within each lot within Parcel M.
            (2)   Open space shall be considered all areas unencumbered by
buildings or paved areas associated with parking, drive aisles, and loading
zones. Plaza areas, water features and structures such as gazebos, arbors,
pergolas, etc., that are associated with outdoor pedestrian use areas, as well
as designated and enhanced pedestrian walkways through and between parcels may
be counted towards fulfilling the minimum open space requirement.
            (3)   Vegetation at a rate of two (2) trees and three (3) shrubs
per three thousand (3,000) square feet of required open space shall be provided
within the parcel.
   (A) Required Plantings: Ten percent (10%) of all required trees shall be a
minimum of 3 inch - 31/2 inch caliper. Forty percent (40%) of all required
trees shall be a minimum of 2 inch - 21/2 inch caliper. The balance of all
required trees shall be one and one-half inch (11/2") caliper. The minimum
height for evergreens shall be six feet (6') and may be counted as 2 inch - 21/
2 inch caliper.
   (B) Vegetation Substitution:
(i) One evergreen tree or six (6) shrubs may be substituted for one required
tree; however, no more than twenty five percent (25%) of the required number of
trees may be substituted.
(ii) A twenty five (25) square foot mass planting of perennials or ornamental
grasses may be substituted for three (3) shrubs.
            (4)   Vegetation required as part of the open space may be placed
into off-street parking areas or required buffers; however the open space
vegetation is in addition to that which would be required of buffers or parking
islands/pods and may not be counted towards fulfilling the minimum amount of
vegetation required for these areas.
         b.   Off-Street Parking Areas:
            (1)   All off-street parking areas shall be landscaped at the
perimeter of the lot to screen their visibility from street rights-of-way and
adjoining property outside of the Bridgewood Square development.
            (2)   All off-street parking areas shall be aesthetically improved
to reduce obtrusive characteristics that are inherent to their function.
Multiple landscape islands combined with vegetation shall be incorporated to
effectively eliminate a "sea of asphalt/concrete" and to provide shade thus
decreasing heat reflection back into the environment. Landscape islands and/or
pods shall be implemented in accordance with the following:
   (A) Islands or open areas shall be located at the terminus end of all
parking rows. Terminal islands shall measure at least ten feet (10') in width
and shall match, at a minimum, the stall length unless otherwise allowed per
the discretion of the Director of Development Services.
   (B) If implemented, linear parking islands that run the length of the
parking row shall measure a minimum of eight feet (8') in width and shall be
heavily landscaped to provide a mass of "green" within the parking lot. The
incorporation of defined pedestrian pathways within linear islands is
encouraged; however, should not be used as a rationale to not implement
appropriate trees and shrubs.
   (C) Linear parking rows with greater than twelve (12) parking stalls shall
incorporate a landscape island or pod every six (6) stalls. At a minimum,
islands shall match the dimensions of one parking stall and pods shall measure
a minimum of six feet (6') from back-of-curb to back-of-curb. As an alternative
to the implementation of pods within a linear row of parking, the terminal
islands at each end of the row of parking may be increased in width by five
feet (5') for every two (2) pods within the row which are eliminated. In no
instance however, should there be greater than eighteen (18) parking stalls in
a row uninterrupted by a landscape island or pod. The width of landscape
islands within a linear row of parking need only match the minimum width of a
parking stall.
   (D) For every 9' x 17' landscape island and each landscape pod, one tree
shall be required within the parking area.
         c.   Visual Screening:
            (1)   Mechanical Equipment:
   (A) Views from public streets and adjoining property of the negative aspects
of development and land uses such as loading docks; heating, ventilation, or
air conditioning (HVAC) units; meters, or similar electrical or mechanical
appurtenances shall be adequately screened. Said screening shall be achieved
through the use of architectural features or earth berming and landscaping
consisting of predominately evergreen material.
   (B) All rooftop mechanical units shall be screened from views from public
and private streets and adjoining properties by the use of an opaque screening
material compatible with the architecture of the building. Whenever possible,
raised parapets as an extension of the building facade shall be utilized to
achieve screening. Architecturally designed screen walls, parapet walls,
penthouse, or other opaque material shall be comprised of materials consistent
with the associated primary structure. Screening measures and materials shall
be identified and reviewed as part of the site plan review process.
            (2)   Trash Enclosures: Trash receptacles and dumpsters shall be
screened on all sides by the use of a permanent enclosure. Whenever possible on
Parcel #1 and Parcel #3, the enclosure should be designed as an attached
extension to the primary structure rather than a free-standing structure and
shall be located away from adjacent residential areas. On Parcel #2, the
enclosure may be designed as a free-standing structure that is located directly
adjacent to the building. Enclosures shall be constructed of materials
consistent with or complementary to the primary structure. Additionally, the
enclosure should be landscaped to minimize the visual presence and impact of
the structure on surrounding properties, businesses, and public streets.
            (3)   Outdoor Storage: Unless otherwise allowed through the
issuance of a temporary use permit under the provisions of title 9, chapter 16,
"Temporary Use Permits", of the City Code or the site plan review process, all
outdoor display and storage shall be prohibited.
      9.   Pedestrian Elements: Parcel M, in alignment with Town Center Overlay
District Guidelines, aims to encourage pedestrian movement and opportunities
for pedestrian interaction through a series of interconnected sidewalks and
gathering areas. The attached Specific Plan Map indicates the locations and
type of anticipated plaza areas and pedestrian corridors. There are a total of
three (3) anticipated plaza areas as shown on the specific plan. Details for
each of these plaza areas shall be submitted, reviewed, and approved as part of
the site plan for the parcel.
         a.   Useable Open Space: All lots within Parcel M shall provide usable
open space or activity spaces through the integration of plazas, green spaces,
interconnected and enhanced pedestrian corridors and focal point elements.
            (1)   These areas shall encourage opportunities for interaction
among pedestrians through the provision of seating opportunities (benches,
chairs, tables, planter walls, etc.). Without compromising the design intent of
the plazas, the developer is encouraged to maximize the number of furniture/
seating opportunities throughout the development. Representations of the site
amenities, including street furniture that will be provided throughout this
development are included in the exhibit packet (attached or on file with the
City Clerk). Although deviations from the illustrations are permissible, the
street furniture is intended to serve as a unifying element throughout the
development.
            (2)   Open space plaza areas shall incorporate a variety of
hardscape landscape materials (stone pavers, stamped concrete, field boulders,
etc.) for visual interest and variety and shall implement landscape vegetation
to soften, enhance, and delineate the areas. All plaza/pedestrian areas are
required to incorporate "green" through the incorporation of planter beds,
containers, or raised planters.
            (3)   Appropriate lighting should be incorporated into the plaza
areas and along pedestrian pathways for safety reasons and to extend the
usability of the area into the evening hours. Such lighting may be provided by
either pole mounted fixtures or bollard style lighting. Primary pedestrian
pathways (those 5 feet and greater in width) and plaza areas identified on the
Specific Plan Map shall be lit to a minimum level of 0.50 foot candles.
            (4)   Plaza areas associated with establishments which serve
alcoholic beverages shall provide a definable boundary (change in material,
unmovable signage, physical feature, etc.) between the private establishments
in which alcohol consumption is allowed and the public area in which it is not.
A physical barrier (fencing, railing, landscaping, etc.) shall prohibit access
into the patio area from the public area; all access into the patio area shall
be through the interior of the establishment. The barrier specifications shall
be reviewed and approved as part of the alcohol permit application.
            (5)   Unless otherwise specified, the installation of these
pedestrian elements shall be by the developer of Parcel M in conjunction with
the development of a specific lot or adjoining building and shall be completed
prior to occupancy.
         b.   Pedestrian Connections: The overall development shall integrate
interconnected pedestrian walkways to allow and encourage pedestrian movement
from one establishment to another within the Parcel M development, as well as
to other surrounding developments.
            (1)   Pedestrian pathways internal to the development and across
parking areas and drive aisles shall be constructed with contrasting color,
paving material or pavement patterns to the adjoining paving in order to
provide a definable and highly visible crosswalk. Simply striping pedestrian
crosswalks shall not meet the intent of this section.
      10.   Lighting:
         a.   Fixtures used within off-street parking areas shall be consistent
with those illustrated in the exhibits packet (attached or on file with the
City Clerk). Although deviations from the illustrations are permissible, the
fixtures are intended to serve as a unifying element between parcels within the
development.
         b.   Said fixtures greater than one hundred fifty feet (150') from the
east property line of the Bridgewood residential lots shall not exceed twenty
eight feet (28') in height as measured from the ground to the top of the light
structure.
         c.   Said fixtures greater than one hundred feet (100') but less than
one hundred fifty feet (150') from the east property line of the Bridgewood
residential lots shall not exceed twenty two feet (22') in height as measured
from the ground to the top of the light structure.
         d.   Said fixtures less than one hundred feet (100') from the east
property line of the Bridgewood residential lots shall not exceed sixteen feet
(16') in height.
         e.   The footcandle level at the Bridgewood Square west property line
shall be zero (0).
         f.   The footcandle level at all other property lines shall be less
than one.
         g.   Said fixtures are to be downcast, cut-off variety to direct
lighting to parking areas and pedestrian pathways and eliminate glare to
neighboring properties. Bulbs shall not be exposed or extend down past the
fixture. Care should be taken to ensure that adjoining single family homes are
not looking up and into the bulbs of light fixtures.
         h.   No wall packs or floodlighting are allowed, except that sconces
or decorative lighting shall be permitted (except on the west side of the
buildings on Parcel #2). In addition to cut-off fixtures, particular attention
shall be given to eliminate hot spots and light glare. To achieve this,
additional measures may include, but are not limited to, lowering parking lot
light levels after business hours, turning off lights not necessary for
security purposes, and use of landscaping for light screening/blockage.
         i.   As a part of the review of each site plan, a photometric plan
must be submitted. During the review, the applicant must demonstrate how
lighting will not adversely affect adjoining properties.
         j.   Fixtures located one hundred fifty feet (150') or less from the
east property line of the existing Bridgewood residential lots (excluding
outlot Z, Bridgewood plat 1) shall be turned off no later than thirty (30)
minutes after the closing of the last business, except those lights necessary
for security purposes.
      11.   Architecture: The intent is to create building facades throughout
this development that are varied and articulated to provide visual interest to
pedestrians and to establish a unique identity for the development. The
architectural design of any building within this development shall be
acceptable to the City. The architecture shall attempt to express a creative
presentation by careful attention to exterior building materials and details,
use of fenestration, and change in building mass within the plan and roof
design to lessen the plainness of appearance which can be characteristic of
large commercial buildings. Building design, materials, and colors shall
provide continuity amongst buildings to unite all structures within the
development into one project concept. All sides to each building shall receive
high quality materials, finishes, and details (360 degree architectural
treatment). There are no "backs" to a building. Materials should be durable,
economically maintained and of a quality that will maintain their appearance
over a prolonged time.
On file with the City Clerk are conceptual architectural elevations to be
implemented illustrating the general architectural style and materials for each
building. Once City approval is gained on a particular building design, any
changes in design before or during construction must be reviewed and approved
by the City's Development Services Department.
         a.   All buildings within this development shall accommodate or
incorporate the following in building design and materials:
            (1)   Corporate architecture shall be prohibited.
            (2)   Buildings shall be organized to create a logical and
identifiable relationship with the site and other buildings, open spaces,
pedestrian circulation paths.
            (3)   The use of building articulation and materials which break up
the building mass into modules that respect a pedestrian scale and reflects
proportions similar to other buildings within the development.
            (4)   The building's design should meet context and site objectives
such as providing gateways, creating visual and physical linkages and framing
or terminating views.
            (5)   Variation in building height, mass and roof forms shall be
provided to create interest while still maintaining an overall building
continuity. Roofs should not be designed as attention-getting devices related
to the reinforcement of signage or as an identifiable corporate image.
            (6)   Entrances into buildings should be easily identified through
the use of building design and detailing. Projected or recessed entryways,
change in rooflines, addition of awnings or changes in building material are
examples that can create this effect.
            (7)   Shifts in building planes/facades and variation in exterior
materials shall be incorporated to minimize long expanses of wall. Long blank
walls shall be prohibited.
            (8)   Ground floor tenant areas should provide the maximum possible
glazing toward sidewalks to provide pedestrians with visual interest. Use of
reflective glass or mirrored glass is discouraged. Efforts should be made to
use clear glass on storefronts, windows and doors to promote the linkage of the
interior and exterior of buildings.
            (9)   Natural materials such as brick and stone shall be used as
the major elements of the facade, architectural precast concrete or metal
acceptable to the City can be incorporated in the design. The use of EIFS or
synthetic stucco and composite materials such as cement fiber shall be used in
moderation and primarily used as an accent or trim material and not within six
feet (6') of grade. Use of vinyl materials is prohibited.
            (10)   Variation in materials, material modules, expressed joints,
textures, colors and details should be used to break up the mass of the
buildings. Materials should change with the change in building planes.
            (11)   Trim and structural elements such as posts or columns shall
be sized to the scale of the building.
      12.   Signage: All proposed exterior signage requires a sign permit
issued by the City of West Des Moines through normal sign review procedures.
Unless otherwise prescribed herein, signage shall abide by the standards and
regulations as set forth in title 9, chapter 18, "Signs", of the City Code for
the Support Commercial (SC) District, as applicable to the allowed land uses
specified for each respective lot.
         a.   All Signs: Signs located within three hundred feet (300') of
residential property will be limited to exterior lit signs or halo lighting and
will be required to shut off at eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M. or within one hour
of close of the business if open after eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M.
         b.   Landscape/Development Sign: The Bridgewood development shall be
allowed to have a landscape/development sign on each corner of the intersection
of Bridgewood Boulevard and Jordan Creek Parkway within the Bridgewood PUD. The
sign shall be limited to only the development (Bridgewood) name and/or logo to
identify the development as a whole. A site plan shall require City Council
approval of the development sign. The development sign on the Bridgewood Square
property shall be allowed independent of the monument signs allowed within
Bridgewood Square.
         c.   Monument Signs:
            (1)   A maximum of two (2) monument signs shall be allowed within
Bridgewood Square. The signs may be located on the same frontage as long as
sign separation requirements are met as outlined below.
            (2)   Monument signs can be a maximum of five feet (5') tall,
thirty five (35) square feet in size and set back a minimum of ten feet (10')
from the public street right-of-way line. A monument sign may be increased to
seven feet (7') in height and sixty four (64) square feet in size if the sign
is set back a minimum of twenty feet (20') from the public street right-of-way
line.
            (3)   Monument signs shall be separated by a minimum of one hundred
fifty feet (150'), except that a monument sign may be located a minimum of one
hundred twenty five feet (125') from the existing "Bridgewood" subdivision
identification sign at the corner of Jordan Creek Parkway and Bridgewood
Boulevard.
            (4)   The copy area shall be comprised of individually attached and
illuminated letters or routered sign face with push through letters to
eliminated backlighting of the background areas.
            (5)   Said signs shall be landscaped at the base of the structure
and shall have a noticeable base and/or column element comprised of brick or
stone. Ground signs throughout the Bridgewood Square development shall be a
unifying element, consistent in design and materials. No additional mounding of
soil or berming shall be allowed to elevate the sign except as required as part
of a site plan for screening purposes.
            (6)   Monument signs may include any business within Bridgewood
Square regardless of property line locations.
         d.   Directional Signage: To help facilitate vehicular movement and
provide direction to patrons to various public streets and private internal
access drives, directional signage may be permitted within the Bridgewood
Square development at the discretion of the Director of Development Services or
their designee. The primary intent of directional signage is not to draw people
off of the public streets but rather direct them through the streets and drives
within the development. Sign locations are generally intended to be at interior
locations within the development, thus letter size is intended to be only large
enough for a vehicle in close proximity to read it and not such that it is
legible from the exterior of the property and/or public streets. Directional
signs shall not be larger than eight (8) square feet and a maximum of four feet
(4') in height. Said signs may only be located on private property within the
Bridgewood Square development; shall not be located within public utility
easements and shall be located outside of both pedestrian and vehicle vision
triangles at intersections. A sign permit shall be issued by the City prior to
installation of any direction signs.
         e.   Wall Signage: The regulations and provisions set forth in title
9, chapter 18, "Signs", of the City Code for the designated zoning
classification for the respective parcel shall govern sign design and placement
with the exception of the following: No lighted wall signage shall be allowed
on any wall facing single family residential properties. Wall signage for a
tenant in a multi-tenant building shall be located on the wall area of the
tenant's location within the building.
            (1)   Parcel #2 shall be allowed one and one-half (11/2) square
feet of wall signage per linear foot of tenant frontage which contains the
building's primary public entrance and Parcels 1 and 3 shall be allowed wall
signs in accordance with the regulations and provisions set forth in the City
Sign Code. The allowed signage may be divided into multiple signs as long as
the total amount of sign area earned, based upon the formulas above, is not
exceeded.
            (2)   All wall signage within the Bridgewood Square development
shall incorporate aesthetic features compatible with the overall character of
the development. All wall signs will be composed of either solid individual
letters of anodized aluminum or galvanized metal or plastic attached to the
building fascia, illuminated self-contained individual letters with translucent
plastic faces set in anodized aluminum returns and trim or solid metal panels
with routed letters illuminated by recessed cabinets. To the greatest extent
possible, signs shall be contoured to minimize the excess unused area of a sign
and to minimize the amount of glow. Logos may be incorporated into wall signage
but not be larger than one and one-half (11/2) times that size of the largest
letter in the sign. A contoured panel sign may be allowed for logo signs but
shall be designed so that only the logo is illuminated and background areas are
covered with opaque vinyl or a routed face design. The Sign Administrator shall
work with the applicant to accomplish a sign for the logo that allows for the
tenants identity to be recognized but minimizes the background illumination and
addresses the intent of this ordinance.
      13.   Vehicle Trip Allocation: As part of the 2015 amendment to the area
development plan for this site and consistent with the original traffic
analysis completed by Snyder & Associates (February 12, 2007), the Bridgewood
Plat 1 Lot 33 Traffic Impact Study (January 29, 2014) and the most recent
traffic analysis completed by the City (December 20, 2016), the area included
within the associated Bridgewood Square specific plan has been allocated eight
thousand thirty seven (8,037) average daily trips, five hundred thirty eight
(538) A.M. peak hour trips, and five hundred ninety (590) P.M. peak hour trips.
As development proposals are approved, the number of vehicle trips generated by
the proposed development (based upon the number of square feet of a proposed
specific use, in conjunction with any parameters established in the Traffic
Report) will be subtracted from the overall total trips allocated to the
development. Approval of this proposed specific plan does not constitute a
guarantee that the proposed plan can be implemented. Development of all lots
and implementation of desired land uses, including specific high traffic
generating tenants, will be limited by the available number of trips. Should
anticipated traffic exceed the total trips allocated for the Bridgewood Square
development prior to full build out, further development of lots may be limited
or prohibited. Alternate uses to those planned within the Traffic Report and
approved as part of Bridgewood Square specific plan ordinance may be allowed,
following completion of an amended traffic study analyzing the proposed
alternative and appropriate City approval of an amendment to the respective
specific plan ordinance and/or map, if necessary, if the existing uses and the
proposed change(s) collectively do not exceed the numbers of trips above.
      14.   Street Improvements:
         a.   Traffic Study: A Traffic Study has been prepared for this
development that outlines the ultimate traffic circulation requirements for the
roadways in the vicinity of Parcel M. Prior to, or in conjunction with the
development of any lot, or portion of a lot, the developer shall ensure that
the development is constructed in accordance with the assumptions for, and the
results of, the Traffic Study.
Increases in land use density and/or other changes to the specific plan
ordinance that would alter the original traffic analysis (i.e., change in
internal street layout or access locations), will require an amended traffic
study, to be completed by the City.
         b.   Related Public Street Improvements: Street improvements
identified in the Traffic Study that are necessary to mitigate impacts from
traffic generated by the Parcel M development are listed below. (Refer to the
Traffic Study for specific details pertaining to lane configuration or required
geometric details.)
            (1)   Jordan Creek Parkway (Public Street): This street is
classified as a major arterial street. The developer is responsible to
construct a right turn lane at the right- in/right out access off Jordan Creek
Parkway. Developer shall construct a one hundred twenty five foot (125')
southbound right turn lane into this access drive from Jordan Creek Parkway.
         c.   Construction Phasing Of Internal Driveway Improvements: The
developer will be required to have the improvements listed below complete prior
to issuance of any type of occupancy for each building.
            (1)   The eastern north/south drive shall be constructed from the
existing Jordan West development driveway to the right in only entrance from
Bridgewood Boulevard.
            (2)   The right in/right out driveway from Jordan Creek Parkway
shall be constructed from Jordan Creek Parkway to the eastern north/south
drive.
            (3)   The full access driveway connection to Bridgewood Boulevard
shall be constructed.
   L.   Parcel N: All general use regulations and provisions set forth in title
9, "Zoning", of the City Code for CVC Convenience Commercial District shall
apply to any development proposal for all property within Parcel N, as shown on
the sketch plan, unless noted otherwise in this ordinance. The commercial area
within Parcel N shall be limited to a maximum of five (5) acres of developable
area within the maximum eight (8) acre parcel identified on the sketch plan. A
minimum of three (3) acres shall be used as open space for the development.
      1.   Allowed Uses: Uses allowed within Parcel N shall be permitted in
accordance with the zoning ordinance for all uses allowed within the
Neighborhood Commercial District (NC) pursuant to title 9 of the City Code,
unless noted otherwise within this section.
In addition to those uses listed as a permitted use in the commercial use
matrix, the following uses shall also be permitted:
U.S. Postal Service (SIC 43).
Dairy products stores, except no drive-through (SIC 545).
Photo finish labs (SIC 7384).
Office related business services, not elsewhere classified (e.g., arbitration
services, interior decorating, notaries public, etc.) (SIC 7389).
Walk-up ATM machines (part of SIC 60).
Grocery stores, meat and fish markets (SIC 542), fruit and vegetable markets
(SIC 543) with a maximum of twenty thousand (20,000) square feet of floor area
shall be permitted.
Cable and pay TV services (except transmitting/receiving towers and/or dishes)
(SIC 484).
The following uses shall be permitted with a maximum of six thousand (6,000)
square feet of floor area for any one use and no outdoor storage shall be
permitted:
Paint, glass and wallpaper store (SIC 523).
Hardware store (SIC 525).
Miscellaneous general merchandise store (SIC 539).
Apparel and accessory store (SIC 5699).
Miscellaneous home furnishing store (SIC 5719).
Radio, TV and electronics (SIC 5731).
Used merchandise store (SIC 593).
Bicycle shop (SIC 5941).
Luggage and leather goods (SIC 5948).
Batteries (nonautomotive) (SIC 5999).
Clothing rental store (SIC 7299).
Watch, clock and jewelry repair (SIC 763).
Lock and key services (SIC 7699).
Hobby and collector services (5945).
Physical fitness facility (SIC 7999).
      2.   Parking: Parking for the planned commercial center constructed in
parcel N shall be calculated according to subsection 9-15-7B, "Planned
Commercial Center", of the city code. In no case will the uses included in the
planned commercial center exceed a parking requirement of two hundred ninety
four (294) spaces when calculated according to this method.
      3.   Buffers: A minimum sixty foot (60') buffer park shall be required
along Jordan Creek Parkway, a minimum thirty foot (30') buffer park shall be
required along E.P. True Parkway, and a thirty foot (30') buffer park
requirement shall be required between parcel N and parcel K. Landscaping and
berming in the buffer park shall be provided in accordance with the West Des
Moines buffer ordinance at the time of platting or review for approval of site
plan as determined by the city of West Des Moines.
The buffering of any negative element, such as parking and drop off drives,
trash enclosure, heating, ventilation, and air conditioning equipment. Utility
meters shall be screened from view through architectural mechanisms. The
buffering of any negative elements shall be screened from the public view and
from adjacent residential properties through the use of berming and
landscaping.
      4.   Setbacks: All commercial structures shall be required to maintain a
minimum fifty foot (50') setback from all residential structures. A zero
setback requirement will be allowed between parcels N and I and parcel A-3, as
well as between parcel N and the noncommercial area identified as open space.
All buildings shall maintain a minimum distance of one hundred feet (100') from
the Jordan Creek Parkway right of way.
      5.   Open Space: In parcel N, the minimum required open space in this
parcel shall be thirty percent (30%) of the project area. Within the eight (8)
acre parcel, a maximum of five (5) acres shall be allowed to be developed with
buildings, parking and associated drives. The remaining area shall be
incorporated into open space, pedestrian plazas, landscape features, etc. A
sixty foot (60') buffer park shall be required along the Jordan Creek Parkway
right of way and shall be landscaped with the minimum planting requirements of
a thirty foot (30') buffer park per the buffer ordinance. The buffer park
landscaping shall be in addition to any other landscaping required for the
development.
All parking areas shall include landscaped areas, islands, screens, etc., equal
to not less than ten percent (10%) of the total paved area and associated
drives. Such landscaped area shall be in addition to the open space
requirements for the project area. Landscaped islands within the parking area
shall have ground cover of grass (i.e., sod), shrubs or other acceptable living
plant life, unless an alternate ground cover is specifically approved as part
of the site plan review by the city. No parking space shall be greater than
seventy five feet (75') from a landscaped open space with a minimum area of two
hundred fifty (250) square feet. The narrowest dimension of a parking lot
island shall not be less than ten feet (10').
      6.   Architecture: All buildings within parcel N shall be limited to
single-story buildings. Architectural design for nonresidential buildings shall
attempt to express a creative presentation of exterior building materials,
exterior details and texture, treatment of windows and doors, and use of angles
and multiplicity of planes within the wall and roof design to lessen the
plainness of appearance which can be characteristic of large nonresidential
buildings. Roofline shall be of pitched, gabled or hipped style to be
compatible with the residential character of the neighborhood. The use of
building articulation that breaks up the building mass into modules which
reflect proportions similar to the single-family residential on other parcels
within the development shall be required. Methods used to create intervals
which reflect and promote compatibility and which respect the scale of the
single-family detached residential dwellings include:
         a.   Facade modulation - stepping back or extending forward a portion
of the facade,
         b.   Repeating the window patterns at intervals equal to articulated
intervals,
         c.   Providing a porch, patio, deck, or covered entry to the
articulation interval,
         d.   Changing the rooflines by alternating dormers, stepped roofs,
gables, or other roof elements to reinforce the modulation or articulation
interval,
         e.   Changing materials with the change in building plane,
         f.   Providing a lighting feature, trellis, tree, or other landscape
feature with each interval,
         g.   Using paint and materials that blend with the single-family
residential areas and to reinforce the modulation or articulate interval.
Design elements, such as clock towers, as focal points shall be allowed to
exceed the maximum height through the approval by the planning and zoning
commission and the city council.
The use of brick shall be incorporated into the building architecture on all
sides of the structure, unless the city council of West Des Moines, after
receiving a recommendation from the planning and zoning commission, determines
that the use of alternate building materials enhances the physical appearance
and accomplishes a compatible structure with the residential uses in the
neighborhood. The design of any nonresidential building shall present a
pleasing appearance from all sides and not de-emphasize the appearance of the
rear of the building.
      7.   Other Special Provisions: No driveway access from an individual
dwelling unit shall be permitted directly onto Jordan Creek Parkway or E.P.
True Parkway. The layout of streets and drives within this parcel shall be
established with the platting of the property prior to any development.
Nonresidential uses shall be limited to one shared access drive onto Jordan
Creek Parkway and one shared access drive onto E.P. True Parkway, unless the
city council determines that additional access points are acceptable following
a recommendation from the city engineer.
At the time of development of parcel N, a public access connection through
parcel A-3 shall be provided to allow vehicular access to the internal parking
area intended to serve the commercial area, which shall be designed to
discourage cut through traffic into the residential area. The location and
design of the access driveway shall be determined at the time of the review of
the site plan for the development of parcel N. The requirements of setbacks and
buffering from adjoining properties shall be determined at the time of review
of the site plan.
At the time of development, consideration shall be given to landscaping and
berming to screen the visibility of any driveway and parking lot from the
public rights of way or from any adjoining property with the use of
predominately evergreen plant materials, berming and through the design of the
project.
Outdoor use areas, such as dining areas, gathering and sitting areas, etc.,
shall be encouraged. Light standards shall be limited to a maximum of twenty
five feet (25') in height. Bicycle parking shall be provided.
Fencing within the planning unit shall be coordinated to ensure compatibility
with the architecture of surrounding properties and to maintain the aesthetic
qualities by providing a continuous theme within the community.
      8.   Signage: No pole sign as defined by the West Des Moines city sign
code shall be incorporated into the development; ground sign standards shall be
used for construction of freestanding signage with a maximum of ten feet (10')
in height. All signage constructed as wall signs on the building fascia shall
incorporate individual internally lighted or individual solid letters and
logos, except as may be provided elsewhere herein, and shall be restricted to
no more than the name, address, crest, or insignia, occupation or profession of
an occupant. Panel signs and exposed neon signage shall be prohibited for use
as wall signs and architectural elements. Any lettering over eight inches (8")
in height shall be required to be channel letters and no raceways will be
permitted, except where signage is mounted on the open wire mesh materials.
Then, the raceway shall be mounted on the back of the mesh material and painted
to match the color of said mesh material. All channel letters shall be
internally lighted.
Additional wall signage will be allowed on the tower element which shall be
integrated and considered part of the architectural design of the building. A
maximum of six (6) square feet will be allowed for each individual sign with a
maximum of eight (8) signs, four (4) signs per each face of the tower, or a
maximum of fifty (50) square feet of signage shall be allowed on the tower.
Raceways will need to be located on the back of the open mesh material and
painted to match the color of the mesh material used in the design of the
tower. Signs shall be of individual channel letters. (Ord. 1322, 8-10-1998;
amd. Ord. 1335, 10-19-1998; Ord. 1438, 4-2-2001; Ord. 1482, 5-28-2002; Ord.
1628, 4-25-2005; Ord. 1809, 7-28-2008; Ord. 1962, 10-29-2012; Res. 13-06-10-13,
6-10-2013; Ord. 2198, 2-21-2017; Ord. 2220, 5-15-2017; Ord. 2331, 11-26-2018;
Ord. 2361, 5-20-2019; Ord. 2448, 11-2-2020)
048-06: STREET IMPROVEMENTS:
   A.   E.P. True Parkway: The minimum right of way width as required by the
comprehensive plan for a minor arterial shall be dedicated to the city for that
portion of E.P. True Parkway located wholly within the boundaries of the PUD.
Additional right of way width may be required to be dedicated to the city if
landscaped boulevards are considered. The width of the right of way, for any
boulevard streets shall be determined at the time of platting. The developer
shall plat the right of way and convey it to the city as a part of the plat for
any parcel abutting the right of way of E.P. True Parkway. The developer shall
be responsible for the paving of the equivalent of a thirty one foot (31') b/
b street, including intersection improvements as required by the traffic report
for the safe movement of traffic, which shall be installed as a part of the
public improvements of the plat.
   B.   81st Street: In accordance with the comprehensive plan, this street is
considered to be a major collector. At the time that any portion of the
property which abuts said right of way is platted, the developer shall provide
the necessary improvements by choosing one of the two (2) options outlined as
follows, unless the City Council determines that the paving of this street is
premature and the issue is addressed as part of a development agreement:
As part of the Village Center subarea plan of the comprehensive plan, the
alignment of 81st Street was located to be centered on the property line. If,
after identifiable good-faith efforts, the developer is unable to reach an
agreement, with the property owner to the west, for the appropriate right-of-
way dedication and joint construction of the street, the developer may be
required to dedicate the full right-of-way necessary for the construction of
the street. Alternatively, at the request of the developer, the City, at its
sole discretion, may initiate eminent domain procedures to acquire the
necessary right-of-way with all costs incurred being the responsibility of the
developer. However, the public street that is constructed, whether Option 1 or
Option 2 is selected, shall be required to have two (2) travel lanes.
   C.   74th Street And George M. Mills Civic Parkway: The developer of the
abutting parcels shall be required to dedicate to the City the equivalent of
one-half (1/2) of the minimum right-of-way width as required by the
comprehensive plan for a major arterial for that portion of 74th Street and
George M. Mills Civic Parkway which abut the boundaries of the PUD. Additional
right-of-way width may be required to be dedicated to the City if landscaped
boulevards are considered. The width of the right-of-way, for any boulevard
streets shall be determined at the time of platting. The developer shall plat
the right-of-way and convey it to the City as a part of the plat for any parcel
abutting the right-of-way of 74th Street or George M. Mills Civic Parkway. The
developer shall be responsible for the paving of the equivalent of one-half (1/
2) of a thirty one foot (31') b/b street, including intersection improvements
as required by the traffic report for the safe movement of traffic, which shall
be installed as a part of the public improvements of the plat. In lieu of
immediately constructing the improvements and with the prior approval of the
City, a bond in the amount to cover said cost may be posted, or an acceptable
alternative in the amount to cover said cost may be utilized, prior to the
recording of the final plat for the adjacent site.
   D.   Northern And Southern Collectors: These streets are shown on the sketch
plan and will function as minor collectors. The minimum right-of-way width as
required by the comprehensive plan for a minor collector shall be dedicated to
the City at the time that these streets are platted, which shall occur at the
time that any adjoining property is platted. Additional right-of-way width may
be required to be dedicated to the City if landscaped boulevards are
considered. The width of the right-of-way, for any boulevard streets shall be
determined at the time of platting. The developer shall be responsible for the
paving of the equivalent of a thirty one foot (31') b/b street and associated
improvements, including intersection improvements and traffic signals, as
required by the traffic report for the safe movement of traffic, which shall be
installed as a part of the public improvements of the plat.
All internal public streets shall be required to have a minimum of sixty feet
(60') of right-of-way and with a minimum of twenty six feet (26') of paving
width. The location of the intersections onto the major arterial streets
abutting the PUD shall be coordinated with the alignment of streets and drives
on the adjoining properties to the east and south of the PUD. (Ord. 1322, 8-10-
1998)
048-07: ARCHITECTURE:
All of the land uses in the Bridgewood PUD will share a common architectural
character so that visitors will feel they are in a unified residential
community and not merely in a series of independent projects. The architectural
design will incorporate exterior materials and design elements that have
withstood the test of time. The City Council of West Des Moines, after having
received a recommendation from the Planning and Zoning Commission of West Des
Moines, shall determine the appropriateness of an architectural material when
used as a primary element as to whether it enhances the physical appearance, or
provides continuity desired to unite all structures within the property
together into one project concept. Care shall be taken to design structures of
integrity, continuity and a sense of proportion. Emphasis shall be placed on
designing buildings that will have an equally attractive appearance on all
sides of the structure. (Ord. 1322, 8-10-1998)
048-08: PEDESTRIAN ACCESS:
The pedestrian walkway and bike trails within the PUD shall form an on-site
circulation system that minimizes the conflict between pedestrians/bikes and
vehicular traffic. The single- family residential developments within the
Bridgewood PUD and their relationship with multi-family residential and
commercial/office uses will be organized so as to promote pedestrian travel
within various uses in the Bridgewood development and surrounding activity
centers. That promotion will include care with respect to how the uses relate
to one another, and the use of pedestrian walkways, greenbelt and open space
areas. Particular emphasis shall be placed upon providing safe and convenient
pedestrian access to the office and commercial areas adjoining the property to
encourage the residents of the development to utilize alternative modes of
transportation. Bikeways shall be provided, where possible, to link the
internal open space areas with the peripheral open space areas and activity
centers, including, but not limited to, the Jordan Creek Greenbelt, the future
park/school site and the Village Center Commercial area. Location and design of
the trail system, whether public or privately owned and maintained, should be
coordinated with the West Des Moines Parks and Recreation Department. (Ord.
1322, 8-10-1998)
048-09: SIGNAGE REGULATION:
Signage restrictions shall be imposed to limit and reduce the negative impacts
of sign clutter. Signage within the residential areas of the PUD shall comply
with the sign standards of the applicable residential district. All signs shall
comply with all provisions of the City Sign Code. All signage constructed as
wall signs on building fascia within the PUD shall incorporate aesthetic
features compatible with the overall character of the development. All wall
signs will be composed of solid individual letters attached to the building
fascia, or individual letters of anodized aluminum, galvanized metal,
illuminated self-contained with translucent plastic faces set in anodized
aluminum returns and trim; panel signs with letters incorporated or painted
upon a panel or wall area shall be prohibited. Exposed neon signage shall be
prohibited. Temporary advertising or promotional signage attached to exterior
windows or walls shall be allowed only with an approved temporary signage
permit issued through the Building Division of the City under the provisions
for temporary signage in the City Code. (Ord. 1322, 8-10-1998)
048-10: BUILDING RESTRICTIONS, EASEMENTS AND COVENANTS:
The developer shall, with the approval of the City Council, adopt building
restrictions, easements and covenants pertaining to the property where the
developer and the City deem appropriate. (Ord. 1322, 8-10-1998)
048-11: ALL AREAS TO BE PLATTED:
Prior to, or in conjunction with development or transfer of ownership of any
portion of the PUD, said area shall be platted in accordance with the City's
Subdivision Ordinance to delineate within a plat, the parcel to be developed or
sold separately or any portion thereof. (Ord. 1322, 8-10-1998)
048-12: STORM WATER MANAGEMENT:
There shall be submitted to and approved by the West Des Moines Public Works
Department, a master storm water management plan for the entire development
which shall govern the overall storm water management of the development. More
specific storm water management proposals may be required with the development
of each parcel, which shall be prepared by the developer prior to development
within the parcel. The method of storm water management and the conveyance
system shall be determined and approved prior to the development of any portion
of the property within the PUD. (Ord. 1322, 8-10-1998)
048-13: TRAFFIC REPORTS:
A traffic report has been prepared for this development that outlines what the
ultimate paving requirements will be for the major road ways in the vicinity of
the Bridgewood development. Prior to, or in conjunction with the development of
any parcel, or portion of a parcel, the developer shall have the traffic report
reviewed by the City's traffic consultant to ensure that the provisions and
assumptions of the original traffic report are not negatively impacted or
changed by the proposed development. A written evaluation shall be submitted to
the City that shall identify what the impacts of the development of that parcel
will have on the existing street system and what improvements are necessary for
the safe and orderly movement of traffic in and around the area. (Ord. 1322, 8-
10-1998)
048-14: SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS:
The developer of the property within the PUD is responsible for the public
improvements that are necessary to serve the property. Those improvements
include the paving of public streets, sanitary sewer extension, water main
extension, storm sewer improvements and traffic signals. In the event that the
City deems that certain public improvements are necessary for the public
health, safety and welfare, prior to the developer's schedule of installation
of certain public improvements, the property may be subject to future area-wide
assessments, including, but not limited to, the reconstruction, construction,
widening, and/or improvements to E. P. True Parkway, Fuller Road/George M.
Mills Civic Parkway, 81st Street, and 74th Street, as shall be permitted and
limited by the laws of the State of Iowa to be observed by municipalities.
   A.   E. P. True Parkway, Fuller Road/George M. Mills Civic Parkway, 81st
Street And 74th Street: With respect to any future assessments by the City of
West Des Moines of special benefits conferred upon the property within the PUD,
or any portion thereof, as a result of the repaving and widening of that
portion of E. P. True Parkway, Fuller Road/George M. Mills Civic Parkway, 81st
Street, and 74th Street that provides access to said property, the owner, on
behalf of itself and its successors and assigns (collectively by the "owner"),
agrees that such assessments may be spread against all of said parcels, as said
parcels exist on the date of assessment, by the City of West Des Moines on an
area basis.
   B.   Water Service Improvements: With respect to any assessments by the City
of West Des Moines of special benefits conferred upon the property within the
PUD, or any portion thereof, as a result of the design and construction of
potential area-wide water service improvements as determined by engineering
studies approved by the City of West Des Moines, the owner, on behalf of itself
and its successors and assigns (collectively by the "owner"), agrees that such
assessments may be spread against all of said parcels, as said parcels exist on
the date of assessment, by the City of West Des Moines on an area basis.
   C.   Sanitary Sewer Service Improvements: With respect to any assessments by
the City of West Des Moines of special benefits conferred upon the property
within the PUD, or any portion thereof, as a result of the design and
construction of potential area-wide sanitary sewer service improvements as
determined by engineering studies approved by the City of West Des Moines, the
owner, on behalf of itself and its successors and assigns (collectively by the
"owner"), agrees that such assessments may be spread against all of said
parcels, as said parcels exist on the date of assessment, by the City of West
Des Moines on an area basis.
   D.   Traffic Signals: The owner on behalf of itself, it successors and
assigns, agrees to commit to cost associated with the provision of traffic
signals as follows: one-half (1/2) of the cost of signalization at the
intersection of E. P. True Parkway and 74th Street, and one-half (1/2) of the
cost for signalization at the intersection of E. P. True Parkway and 81st
Street ; all of the cost of signalization at the intersection of E. P. True
Parkway and the north-south collector; one-quarter (1/4) of the cost of
signalization of the intersection of Fuller Road/George M. Mills Civic Parkway
and the north-south collector; and their proportional share of any other
traffic signals that were identified as a necessity in a traffic report for the
safe movement of vehicles.
With respect to any assessments by the City of West Des Moines of special
benefits conferred upon the property within the PUD, or any portion hereof, as
a result of the design and construction of other area-wide traffic signal
improvements as determined by engineering studies approved by the City of West
Des Moines, the owner, on behalf of itself and its successors and assigns
(collectively by the "owner"), agrees that these costs will be paid by the
owner on behalf of itself, its successors and/or assigns. (Ord. 1322, 8-10-
1998)
048-15: MANDATORY PARK DEDICATION FEES:
In lieu of the dedication of Parcel A-1 to the City for inclusion in the Jordan
Creek Greenbelt, the City agrees to waive the developer's share of the
mandatory fee payment and acquisition and/or development of park system, which
is typically required at the time of platting by Title 10, Section 10-1-4A of
the City Code.
At the time of site plan development, the developer may submit a request to the
City for consideration of a credit for recreational amenities to be developed
with the project, not to exceed twenty five percent (25%) of the total
dedication fee due at the time of the issuance of building permits under
subsection 10-1-4B of the City Code. The credit may be granted by the City for
permanent recreational facilities and amenities in private developments wherein
said facilities and amenities are available for common use, without rental
charge, by residents within the development or the general public. The master
plan of amenities shall be prepared prior to the filing of any plat. A credit
of up to twenty five percent (25%) of the total builder's fee for private
amenities, shall be given with the following conditions:
The installed cost of the private amenities equals or exceeds the projected
dollar value of the credit.
   A.   Amenities to be constructed or other assurance be provided that is
acceptable to the City for the construction of the private amenities. The Parks
and Recreation Department shall have the primary role in determining which
amenities are eligible for credit. A strict interpretation of the term amenity
shall be used. Credits shall apply to playgrounds, pools, court games, athletic
apparatus, and picnic shelters. Credits shall not apply to landscaping, the
value of the land, or parking lots.
   B.   Bikeway credits shall be acceptable unless the bikeway is installed in
lieu of a sidewalk at the front of the housing developments. In this case, the
bikeway shall be viewed not as an additional amenity but rather as a necessity
for safe pedestrian circulation.
   C.   The credit against the dedication fee shall be determined by taking the
total value of the recreational facilities and amenities provided within the
private development which are for common use, without rental charge, by
residents within the PUD development.
   D.   Recreational facilities and amenities which are to be considered in
establishing a credit include, but are not limited to, swimming pools, wading
pools, court games facilities, athletic field apparatus, bike/pedestrian trails
and playground equipment but shall not include the value of any land where the
facilities and amenities are located or any open recreational spaces.
   E.   The value of the credited recreational facilities or amenities shall be
verified by the person or entity seeking the credit and reviewed by the
Director of Parks and Recreation or their designee. The request shall be
presented to the City Council for acceptance prior to the granting of the
credit by the City.
   F.   The fees shall be used to acquire and develop Parcel A.
   G.   These fees shall also be used for the entire Neighborhood Park District
#11 as shown on the master parks plan.
   H.   Mandatory park fees shall first be used for those improvements
constituting initial development, i.e., grading, seeding, street frontage,
utility hookups, and sidewalks within Neighborhood Park District #11. (Ord.
1322, 8-10-1998)
048-16: SPECIFIC DEVELOPMENT EXCEPTIONS:
As a part of the approval of the rezoning of this property, the City Council
has granted exceptions to the typical development standards of the City of West
Des Moines in an effort to promote this innovative approach to land development
and to encourage a sense of identity and uniqueness of the Bridgewood
development. (See Exhibit I Streetscape, on file with the Community Development
Department.)
   A.   Street Trees: The use of any planting materials within the public
street right-of-way shall be in accordance with the provisions of the
comprehensive urban forestry program of the City of West Des Moines, unless
noted otherwise in this Ordinance.
      1.   Trees or shrubs shall not be planted closer than five feet (5') to a
curb, to a sidewalk, to an alley right-of-way line, or to any impervious
material as measured from the center of the tree or shrub trunk. The planting
of trees or shrubs on corner lots or adjacent to an alley within the area
bounded by the street or alley lines of such lots and a line adjoining points
along said street or alley lines twenty five feet (25') from the point of
intersection of the public right-of-way lines shall be prohibited. This area is
defined as the site triangle. No tree shall be permitted within the sight
triangle of a public street intersection.
      2.   Existing trees or shrubs which are located within this area shall be
pruned between a height of two feet (2') and ten feet (10') above the curb
elevation to create an unobstructed view of the intersection. If pruning will
not alleviate the vision obstruction then the developer shall remove said tree
or shrub.
      3.   Trees are to be located with the following minimum clearances:
Three feet (3') from any water main
   Five feet (5') from any gas box
   Five feet (5') from any inlet or manhole
   Ten feet (10') from any fire hydrant
Fifteen feet (15') from any street light
   Five feet (5') from any underground utility
      4.   a. Any street trees that measure a minimum of eight feet (8') in
height with a minimum caliper of two and one-half inches (21/2") shall be
spaced a minimum of thirty five feet (35') on center, plus or minus five feet
(±5'). Trees that are a minimum of six feet (6') in height and a caliper of one
and one-half inches (11/2") shall be spaced a minimum of twenty five feet (25')
on center, plus or minus five feet (±5').
         b.   Shade trees are to be a minimum of two to two and one-half inches
(2 - 21/2") caliper with a minimum height of ten feet (10'). Any flowering
trees shall be a minimum of one and one- half inch (11/2") caliper with a
minimum height of six feet (6').
         c.   All species shall be approved by the Public Works Department. No
tree shall be permitted in green space that is less than a minimum width of six
feet (6') between the sidewalk and the curb. Maintenance and removal of any
street trees shall be the responsibility of the Master Property Owners
Association.
         d.   Pruning as required to meet the standard sign specifications.
   B.   Roundabout:
      1.   A traffic circle (roundabout) shall be permitted to be constructed
within the public street between Parcels G and H that will connect 74th Street
with 81st Street. This shall be constructed with a minimum of a thirty foot
(30') inside radius with a landscaped island. Curb and gutter must be used
within the limits of the traffic circle, inside radius and outside radius to
the point of curvature of curb and gutter on the connecting streets. No
driveway apron extension shall be located any closer than twenty five feet
(25') of the point of curvature of curb and gutter at the intersection. The
maintenance of the roundabout, including snow removal shall be the
responsibility of the Master Property Owners Association.
      2.   The sidewalk shall extend along the intersection truncation, one
foot (1') from the property line. Sidewalk ramps shall be located at the end of
each curb tangent on each leg of the intersection.
      3.   The landscaping of the inside circle (roundabout) shall be reviewed
for approval at the time of the preliminary plat and installed with the
platting of the abutting property. All maintenance shall be the responsibility
of the Master Property Owners Association.
   C.   Accent Paving:
      1.   Accent paving shall be permitted to identify pedestrian circulation
throughout the community with trails, greenbelts, attractive sidewalks, etc.
The pavers shall be colored concrete (not stamped) or brick pavers and will be
located at strategic places in public streets, such as crosswalks, some
intersections, and incorporated into the design of the roundabout. All
maintenance and repairs of all accented paving would be the responsibility of
the Master Property Owners Association.
      2.   Design standards and installation shall be according to the
Metropolitan Design Standards. (Ord. 1322, 8-10-1998)
   D.   Medians And Cul-De-Sac Islands: Landscaping and irrigation within
medians in public streets, cul-de-sacs, and other islands shall be permitted.
Medians, cul-de-sacs shall be installed by the developer and designed to meet
the Metropolitan Design Standards with adequate radii to accommodate the
turning radius of a tandem garbage truck without encroaching into the median.
The medians within Bridgewood Boulevard between Jordan Creek Parkway and 81st
Street shall be maintained by the City of West Des Moines. The remaining
medians and cul-de-sac islands (roundabouts) within the Bridgewood development
shall be maintained by the Master Property Owners Association to enhance the
character and increase the overall aesthetic value of the development. (Ord.
2219, 5-15-2017)
   E.   Meandering Sidewalks: Meandering sidewalks/bikepaths shall be permitted
along 74th Street, E.P. True Parkway and 81st Street and shall be designed and
installed at the time of the development of the adjacent property. A layout of
the sidewalks/bike trail shall be submitted with the preliminary plat of the
adjacent property and reviewed for approval as part of the platting of the
adjacent property. The sidewalk shall not encroach into the private property
greater than twenty feet (20') from the right-of-way line and a pedestrian
access easement shall be established at the time of platting. The maintenance
of the sidewalk shall be the responsibility of the Master Property Owners'
Association.
   F.   Private Streets: A minimum access easement fifty feet (50') in width
shall be provided for all private streets with a minimum width of twenty six
feet (26') of paving from back of curb and will be privately maintained by the
Master Property Owners' Association.
   G.   Utilities: There will be a ten foot (10') public utility easement
established on each side of the public street right- of-way for the location of
gas mains and sanitary sewers in order to accommodate street tree plantings in
the right-of- way. This easement area shall be identified as a no build area
and addressed in the Master Property Owners' Association documents or
restrictive covenants that run with the land to ensure public access to this
area for maintenance and reconstruction of the utility. (Ord. 1322, 8-10-1998)
048-17: MASTER PROPERTY OWNERS' ASSOCIATION:
With the first development proposal for the rezoned property as acted upon
herein and legally described in section
048-01 of this ordinance, proper action shall be taken to establish a Master
Property Owners' Association with said property into the Bridgewood LTD
Property Owners' Association and all building restrictions, covenants, and
other associated conditions attached to the Bridgewood PUD shall be made to
also apply to said property. The Bridgewood Property Owners' Association shall
be responsible for the ongoing upkeep and maintenance of any privately owned
common grounds, structures, signs, etc., as outlined in the association
documents and any other specific development improvements noted as their
responsibility in this ordinance. (Ord. 1322, 8-10-1998)
048-18: VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES:
Any person who violates the provisions of this ordinance upon conviction shall
be punished as set forth in sections 1-4-1 and 1-4-2 of the City Code of the
City of West Des Moines, Iowa. (Ord. 1962, 10-29-2012)
048-99: LEGISLATIVE HISTORY:
Ord. 1276, 11-17-1997; Ord. 1322, 8-10-1998; Ord. 1335, 10-19-1998; Ord. 1401,
4-3-2000; Ord. 1438, 4-2-2001; Ord. 1482, 5-28-2002; Ord. 1628, 4-25-2005; Ord.
1748, 5-21-2007; Ord. 1809, 7-28-2008; Ord. 1962, 10-29-2012; Res. 13-06-10-13,
6-10-2013; Ord. 2198, 2-21-2017; Ord. 2219, 5-15-2017; Ord. 2220, 5-15-2017;
Ord. 2331, 11-26-2018; Ord. 2361, 5-20-2019; Ord. 2448, 11-2-2020
PUD #49
ASHAWA
SECTION:
049-01: Legal Description
049-02: Sketch Plan
049-03: General Conditions
049-04: Building Restrictions, Easements And Covenants
049-05: All Areas To Be Platted
049-06: Storm Water Management
049-07: Traffic Reports
049-08: Vehicular Access
049-09: Infrastructure
049-10: Public Street Improvements
049-11: Street Rights-Of-Way
049-12: Buffers
049-13: Signage Regulation
049-14: Definition
049-99: Legislative History
049-01: LEGAL DESCRIPTION:
The legal description for the Ashawa PUD is as follows:
Beginning at the Northwest Corner of the Northeast Quarter of the Northeast
Quarter (NWC, NE1/4, NE1/4), Section 17, Range 78 North, Range 25 West of the
5th P.M., City of West Des Moines, Polk County, Iowa; thence S00°16'23"W along
the west line of said NE1/4 of the NE1/4, 700.00 feet to a point which lies 100
feet north of the north right-of-way line of George M. Mills Civic Parkway
(which shall be referred to as Civic Parkway); thence N90°00'00"E, parallel to
said north right-of-way line 91.09 feet to a point; thence S00°12'09"E, 100.00
feet to a point on the north line of said Civic Parkway, thence N90°00'00"E
along said north line, 304.53 feet to a point of curvature; thence along a
curve to the left having a radius of 820.00 feet, an arc length of 471.56 feet,
and a chord bearing of N73°31'31"E to a point of tangency; thence N57°03'03"E
continuing along the northwesterly right-of-way line of said Civic Parkway,
96.18 feet to a point of curvature; thence along a curve to the left having a
radius of 600.00 feet, and an arc length of 594.92 feet, and a chord bearing of
N28°38'44"E to a point of tangency; thence N00°14'25"E along the westerly line
of said Civic Parkway, 114.82 feet to a point on the north line of said Section
17; thence N90°00'00"W along said north line 1193.48 feet to the point of
beginning.
Said parcel contains 18.916 acres, more or less and is subject to any and all
easements of record.
(Ord. 1281, 12-29-1997)
049-02: SKETCH PLAN:
On file with the Community Development Department of the City and made a part
of this rezoning approval, for concept description and delineation is the
sketch plan document for the Ashawa PUD. It is recognized that minor shifts or
realignments of roadways may be necessary and compatible with the need to
acquire workable street patterns, grades and usable building sites, but the
general plan layout including the relationship of uses to each other and the
relationship of dwelling unit types to the general plan framework, traffic
layout and development requirements shall be used as the implementation guide.
Wherever conflict occurs between the written text in this document and the
notations on the sketch plan, the written text shall prevail. The sketch plan
is a graphic representation of the property included in the PUD delineating the
approximate location and configuration of the parcels for the purpose of easier
reference for the applicable regulations of this Ordinance. (Ord. 1281, 12-29-
1997)
049-03: GENERAL CONDITIONS:
Whereas, Title 9 of the West Des Moines City Code includes Chapter 9, PUD
Planned Unit Development District, and establishes certain regulations and
guidelines pertaining to accompanying information required on a plat, site plan
and permitted conditional use documents.
   A.   Now, therefore, the following conditions, restrictions, and regulations
are adopted as part of this approval and the following general site plan
criteria shall be integrated into and made a part of the development criteria
for the Ashawa PUD, to wit:
      1.   All subdivisions, public streets, public street rights-of-way and
general development shall adhere to the standards and design criteria set forth
in the West Des Moines Subdivision Ordinance and the Des Moines Metropolitan
Design Standards as adopted by the City of West Des Moines pertaining thereto,
unless otherwise stated within this Ordinance.
      2.   Any regulation, standard, provision or requirement that is not
specifically addressed within this document that is regulated elsewhere in the
City Code of West Des Moines, the requirements of the City Code shall still be
enforced.
      3.   In all areas within a 100-year frequency flood hazard zone, or
adjoining drainageways or detention areas involving potential flood hazards, no
building shall be erected which has a lowest floor, including basements, less
than one foot (1') above the determined level of the 100-year frequency flood
event or floodproofed to the same elevation in accordance with the West Des
Moines Floodplain Ordinance, and no building shall be erected within twenty
five feet (25') of any major drainage, storm water detention basin or pond.
      4.   The developer, their successors and assigns, if any, shall pay all
construction and engineering costs for the interior development of the planned
unit development, in accordance with the current City policies at the time of
development, as required by this Ordinance, the Subdivision Ordinance of the
City of West Des Moines, and the Des Moines Metropolitan Design Standards as
adopted by the City of West Des Moines, for all streets, storm sewers, sanitary
sewers, drainage improvements, detention basins, water mains, buffers and other
improvements within the PUD as may be required.
   B.   Land Use Design Criteria: In addition to the general conditions
requirement stated within this document, the following land use design criteria
shall apply to the development areas designated by parcel on the sketch plan.
The sketch plan document, which is made a part of this document by reference in
Section
049-02 of this PUD, delineates three (3) parcels of the PUD, each denoted with
a specific parcel letter, for application of specific standards of land use and
development regulations. The following development standards and use
regulations shall apply to development within each of the individual parcels,
or portion of a parcel, as applicable.
      1.   Parcel A: All general use regulations and provisions set forth in
Title 9, Zoning, of the West Des Moines City Code for the NC Neighborhood
Commercial District shall apply to any development proposal for all property
within Parcel A as shown on the sketch plan of the Ashawa PUD, unless noted
otherwise in this Ordinance. Parcel A shall incorporate a maximum net
developable acreage of four and one-tenth (4.1) acres.
         a.   Development Standards: Allowed uses within this parcel shall be
limited to those uses listed for the NC Neighborhood Commercial District as
outlined in the commercial use matrix in the West Des Moines City Code unless
otherwise modified herein.
The following uses shall be prohibited:
Amusement and recreation services (SIC 7999)
Coin-operated amusements (SIC 7993)
Drinking places (SIC 5813)
Gasoline service stations without repair (SIC 554)
All building heights and setbacks within Parcel A shall be in accordance with
the setback and bulk density regulations of the West Des Moines Zoning
Ordinance for NC Neighborhood Commercial District unless otherwise herein
modified. The minimum front yard setback for this parcel shall be a one hundred
feet (100'). The minimum rear yard setback shall be fifty feet (50'). The
minimum side yard setback shall be fifty feet (50'). If the side yard abuts a
similar district, then it may have a zero foot (0') side yard setback. All
parking lot setbacks within Parcel A shall be designed in accordance with the
requirements of the Off-Street Parking and Loading chapter of the West Des
Moines Zoning Ordinance. The minimum required open space in this parcel shall
be twenty five percent (25%) of the project area. In addition to the open space
requirements for the project area, all parking areas shall include landscaped
areas, islands, screens, etc., equal to not less than ten percent (10%) of the
total paved area and associated drives. Landscaped islands within the parking
area shall have ground cover of grass (i.e., sod), shrubs or other acceptable
living plant life, unless an alternate ground cover is specifically approved as
part of the site plan review by the City. No parking space shall be greater
than seventy five feet (75') from a landscaped open space with a minimum area
of two hundred fifty (250) square feet. The narrowest dimension of a parking
lot island shall not be less than five feet (5').
Drive-thrus shall be prohibited in this parcel except those for grocery pickup
drive, banks, dry cleaners and drug stores, with appropriate screening and
buffering. As a part of the review of a site plan or permitted conditional use
permit submitted for any allowed drive-thru facilities, the property owner/
developer must demonstrate through design and screening that the proposed
drive-thru facility will not negatively impact the surrounding properties or
create traffic congestion in the area. All allowed drive-thru facilities shall
be designed to be screened from the public right-of-way through the use of
architectural features, earth berming and landscaping, to minimize the visual
impact of the drive-thru.
         b.   Architecture: This parcel shall be developed with each building
compatible in design and use of materials so as to appear as a single unified
development. The architectural design of any building shall be acceptable to
the City and all buildings within the parcel shall have as a primary element of
the exterior being brick, with all sides of any building built within the
parcel consistent in design and use of materials. No wood, masonite, E.I.F.S.
type materials, metal or plastic siding, nonarchitectural sheet metal, concrete
block, or other similar materials shall constitute a portion of any building
except as a trim material, unless the City Council of West Des Moines, after
having received a recommendation from the Planning and Zoning Commission of
West Des Moines shall determine said material when used as a primary element,
enhances the physical appearance or provides continuity desired to unite all
structures within the parcel together into one project concept.
         c.   Pedestrian Access: Public sidewalks shall be provided along all
public street rights-of-way as each parcel is developed. Connections shall also
be made between said public sidewalks and internal sidewalks. Pedestrian access
shall also be provided between Parcels A and B. The design and/or location of
the pedestrian walkways and sidewalks shall be determined at the site plan or
permitted conditional use permit development review process.
         d.   Buffering: Adequate buffering of negative aspects of commercial
buildings (loading docks, garbage dumpsters and HVAC mechanical units) from any
public street and adjoining properties shall be required. Commercial retail
buildings shall be not be located and designed to expose loading docks or
doors, loading areas or the rear of the building to public streets unless
adequately screened from public view by berming and landscaping.
A sixty foot (60') buffer park shall be established along George M. Mills Civic
Parkway, along the south and east boundary lines of Parcel A and along the
south boundary lines of Parcels B and C, to screen the commercial uses from the
adjoining public and open space districts. Landscaping and berming of the
buffer park shall be provided in accordance with the West Des Moines Buffer
Ordinance.
      2.   Parcels B And C: All general use regulations and provisions set
forth in Title 9, Zoning, of the West Des Moines City Code for the PCP
Professional Commerce Park District shall apply to any development proposal for
all property within Parcels B and C as shown on the sketch plan of the Ashawa
PUD, unless noted otherwise in this Ordinance. Parcel B shall incorporate a
maximum net developable acreage of three and eight-tenths (3.8) acres and
Parcel C shall incorporate a maximum net developable acreage of ten and one-
half (10.5) acres.
         a.   Development Standards: Allowed uses within these parcels shall be
limited to those uses listed for the PCP Professional Commerce Park District as
outlined in the commercial use matrix in the West Des Moines City Code unless
otherwise modified herein.
The following uses shall be prohibited:
Hospitals (SIC 806)
Hotels and motels (SIC 701)
All building heights and setbacks within Parcels B and C shall be in accordance
with the Setback and bulk density regulations chapter of the West Des Moines
Zoning Ordinance unless otherwise herein modified. The minimum front yard and
rear yard setback for Parcel B and C, if it is developed for office/commercial
purposes, shall be a one hundred feet (100'). If the parcel(s) is/are developed
for the expansion of the existing electrical utility substation, then the
setbacks shall be a minimum front yard setback of twenty feet (20'). The
expansion of the existing electrical utility substation may have a zero foot
(0') side yard setback if said side yard is adjoining a commercial or office
district.
Any expansion of the existing electrical utility substation shall include
providing solid fencing or dense landscaping and a chain link fence, or a
combination thereof, for the entire site, to the satisfaction of the Community
Development Department Director. If the dense landscaping and chain link
fencing option is chosen by the utility for the expansion of the existing
electrical utility substation, the dense landscaping may be located within the
twenty foot (20') front yard setback and the chain link fence may encroach
seven and one-half feet (7.5') inside said twenty foot (20') front yard
setback, (12.5 feet from the ultimate right-of-way line). If the solid fencing
option is chosen by the utility for the expansion of an existing electrical
utility substation, the solid fencing shall comply with the twenty foot (20')
setback requirements. Nothing stated above shall be construed as permitting any
required solid fencing, dense landscaping, or chain link fencing to be located
within the required sixty foot (60') buffer park. All parking lot setbacks
within these parcels shall be in accordance with the off-street parking and
loading chapter of the West Des Moines Zoning Ordinance. The minimum required
open space in this parcel shall be thirty five percent (35%) of the project
area and all parking areas shall include landscaped areas, islands, screens,
etc., equal to not less than ten percent (10%) of the total paved area and
associated drives unless otherwise herein modified. The expansion of existing
electrical utility substations shall have a minimum open space requirement of
no less than twenty five percent (25%). Such parking lot landscaped area shall
be in addition to the open space requirements for the project area. Landscaped
islands within the parking area shall have ground cover of grass (i.e., sod),
shrubs or other acceptable living plant life, unless an alternate ground cover
is specifically approved as part of the site plan review by the City. No
parking space shall be greater than seventy five feet (75') from a landscaped
open space with a minimum area of two hundred fifty (250) square feet. The
narrowest dimension of a parking lot island shall not be less than five feet
(5').
Drive-thrus shall be prohibited in Parcels B and C except those for grocery
pickup drives, banks, dry cleaners and drug stores, with appropriate screening
and buffering. As a part of the review of a site plan or permitted conditional
use permit submitted for any allowed drive-thru facilities, the property owner/
developer must demonstrate through design and screening that the proposed
drive-thru facility will not negatively impact the surrounding properties or
create traffic congestion in the area. All allowed drive-thru facilities shall
be designed to be screened from the public right-of-way through the use of
architectural features, earth berming and landscaping, to minimize the visual
impact of the drive-thru.
         b.   Architecture: These parcels shall be developed with each building
compatible in design and use of materials so as to appear as a single unified
development. The architectural design of any building shall be acceptable to
the City and all buildings within the parcel shall have as a primary element of
the exterior being brick, with all sides of any building built within the
parcel consistent in design and use of materials. No wood, masonite, E.I.F.S.
type materials, metal or plastic siding, nonarchitectural sheet metal, concrete
block, or other similar materials shall constitute a portion of any building
except as a trim material, unless the City Council of West Des Moines, after
having received a recommendation from the Planning and Zoning Commission of
West Des Moines shall determine said material when used as a primary element,
enhances the physical appearance or provides continuity desired to unite all
structures within the parcel together into one project concept.
         c.   Pedestrian Access: Public sidewalks shall be provided along all
public street rights-of-way as each parcel is developed. Connections shall also
be made between said public sidewalks and internal sidewalks. Pedestrian access
shall also be provided between Parcels A and B. The design and/or location of
the pedestrian walkways and sidewalks shall be determined at the site plan or
permitted conditional use permit development review process.
         d.   Buffering: Adequate buffering of negative aspects of commercial
buildings (loading docks, garbage dumpsters and HVAC mechanical units) from any
public street and adjoining properties shall be required. Commercial retail and
office buildings shall be not be located and designed to expose loading docks
or doors, loading areas or the rear of the building to public streets unless
adequately screened from public view by berming and landscaping.
A sixty foot (60') buffer park shall be established along George M. Mills Civic
Parkway, along the south and east boundary lines of Parcel A and along the
south boundary lines of Parcels B and C, to screen the commercial uses from the
adjoining public and open space districts. Landscaping and berming of the
buffer park shall be provided in accordance with the West Des Moines Buffer
Ordinance. (Ord. 1281, 12-29-1997)
049-04: BUILDING RESTRICTIONS, EASEMENTS AND COVENANTS:
The developer shall, with the approval of the City Council, adopt building
restrictions, easements and covenants pertaining to the property as determined
necessary through the development entitlement process. (Ord. 1281, 12-29-1997)
049-05: ALL AREAS TO BE PLATTED:
Prior to, or in conjunction with development or transfer of ownership of any
portion of the PUD, said area shall be platted in accordance with the City's
Subdivision Ordinance to delineate within a plat the parcel to be developed or
sold separately or any portion thereof. (Ord. 1281, 12-29-1997)
049-06: STORM WATER MANAGEMENT:
There shall be submitted to, and approved by the West Des Moines Public Works,
a complete storm water management plan for the PUD to be prepared by the
developer prior to any development within the PUD and for all storm sewer,
drainage systems and detention areas within the PUD. (Ord. 1281, 12-29-1997)
049-07: TRAFFIC REPORTS:
In conjunction with the amendment to the comprehensive plan in 1997, a traffic
report was prepared (dated September 29, 1997) which was based upon certain
assumptions for the future development of the property. Prior to, or in
conjunction with the development of any parcel, or portion of a parcel, the
developer shall have the traffic report reviewed by a traffic consultant to
ensure that the provisions and assumptions of the original traffic report are
not negatively impacted or changed by the proposed development. A written
evaluation shall be submitted to the City that shall identify what the impacts
of the development of that parcel will have on the existing street system and
what improvements are necessary for the safe and orderly movement of traffic in
and around the area. The developer shall be responsible for the full cost
associated with the improvements necessary to mitigate additional traffic
generated as a result of the development. (Ord. 1281, 12-29-1997)
049-08: VEHICULAR ACCESS:
Vehicular access from E. P. True Parkway and George M. Mills Civic Parkway
shall be restricted and limited as deemed necessary and shall be limited to the
accesses as shown in the sketch plan with Parcels A and B sharing drive
accesses. The limited access and shared drives will require cross access
easement to be provided between Parcels A and B at the time said parcels are
platted. All drives shall align with the existing drive accesses of the
adjacent properties and shall be constructed to as per the September 29, 1997,
Osco Drug Traffic Impact Study prepared Snyder & Associates and as required and
approved by the City.
Accesses for Parcel C shall be reviewed at the site plan or permitted
conditional use permit review process and/or at the time Parcel C is platted,
and the City may require a traffic study be conducted to determine the impact
of the development and driveway locations. (Ord. 1281, 12-29-1997)
049-09: INFRASTRUCTURE:
The developer of the property within the PUD is responsible for the public
improvements that are necessary to serve the property. Those improvements
include, but are not limited to, the paving of public streets, sanitary sewer
extension, water main extension, and storm sewer improvements. In conjunction
with or prior to development within any parcel of the PUD, public water and
sanitary sewer service shall be brought to the site and extended through the
area being developed to adjoining undeveloped properties in a manner acceptable
to the City and properly designed with sizes and materials compatible with the
City's plans for area-wide water and sanitary sewer service. (Ord. 1281, 12-29-
1997)
049-10: PUBLIC STREET IMPROVEMENTS:
At the time a site plan or permitted conditional use permit is approved for
Parcel A and/or B, the owner of Parcel A and/or B shall construct, at no cost
to the City, the improvements as listed in the September 29, 1997, Osco Drug
Traffic Impact Study prepared Snyder & Associates, except as provided herein,
see list of improvements here below:
   A.   Construct left turn lanes for the north Osco Drug driveway and the
commercial driveway to the north. In order to construct the left turn lanes,
the existing forty nine feet (49') back to back (B/B) typical cross section of
E. P. True Parkway will need to be widened and the sixty five foot (65') B/
B cross section extended to the west approximately three hundred forty feet
(340'). The left turn lanes should provide seventy five feet (75') of storage
for traffic turning left into the proposed development for the commercial
driveway to the north. A two hundred foot (200') taper will transition from the
proposed sixty five foot (65') B/B cross section to the existing forty nine
foot (49') B/B cross section.
   B.   At the intersection of E. P. True Parkway and G. M. Mills Civic Parkway
the eastbound left turn lane storage length should be extended to increase the
queuing capacity of the turning lane. The eastbound left turn lane should be
lengthened an additional eighty five feet (85') to a total of two hundred
seventy five feet (275') to eliminate potential blockage of the through lanes
of travel.
   C.   At the intersections of G. M. Mills Civic Parkway with the south
driveway and the Parcel A driveway, one hundred foot (100') left turn lanes
should be constructed for traffic turning into the site.
The southern left turn lane on George M. Mills Civic Parkway for the southern
drive on Parcel B shall be constructed by the owner at no cost to the City at
the time: 1) a site plan or permitted conditional use permit is approved for
Phase 2 of Parcel A, and/or 2) a site plan or permitted conditional use permit
is approved for Parcel B of the PUD for any use, other than the expansion of
existing electrical utility substations. (Ord. 1281, 12-29-1997)
049-11: STREET RIGHTS-OF-WAY:
The ultimate street right-of-way, as identified in the West Des Moines
comprehensive plan, shall be dedicated to the City for all public streets
within the Ashawa PUD at the time of platting. (Ord. 1281, 12-29-1997)
049-12: BUFFERS:
All development within the Ashawa PUD shall comply with the buffering
provisions of the Buffer Ordinance of the West Des Moines City Code. In
situations where the PUD specifies the provision of a buffer park easement, the
required setbacks shall be measured from the easement line. In situations where
this PUD specifies the provision of a buffer park, the buffer park and the
required setback may be overlapped and which ever is more restrictive shall be
adhered to. (Ord. 1281, 12-29-1997)
049-13: SIGNAGE REGULATION:
All signage shall comply with the West Des Moines Sign Ordinance regulations
for the NC Neighborhood Commercial District and PCP Professional Commerce Park
District.
Parcels A and B shall be allowed a maximum of two (2) monument signs each: one
per street frontage. (Ord. 1281, 12-29-1997)
049-14: DEFINITION:
The term "developer", for the purpose of this Ordinance, shall mean any person,
individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation, estate, trust, entity,
or agent of same acting or proposing to subdivide land or develop a parcel of
land for the construction of a building or buildings. (Ord. 1281, 12-29-1997)
049-99: LEGISLATIVE HISTORY:
Ord. 1281, 12-29-1997.
PUD #50
VALLEY GREEN
SECTION:
050-01: Legal Description
050-02: Sketch Plan
050-03: General Conditions
050-04: Building Restrictions, Easements And Covenants
050-05: All Areas To Be Platted
050-06: Storm Water Management
050-07: Traffic Reports
050-08: Infrastructure
050-09: Buffers
050-10: Signage Regulation
050-11: Definition
050-99: Legislative History
050-01: LEGAL DESCRIPTION:
The legal description for the Valley Green PUD is as follows:
Lots 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, and 14, Raaz Place, an Official Plat in the City of
West Des Moines, Polk County, Iowa, containing 1.38 acres more or less.
(Ord. 1320, 7-13-1998)
050-02: SKETCH PLAN:
On file with the Community Development Department and made a part of this
rezoning approval, for concept description and delineation is the sketch plan
document for the Valley Green PUD. It is recognized that minor shifts or
realignments of roadways may be necessary and compatible with the need to
acquire workable street patterns, grades and usable building sites, but the
general plan layout, including the relationship of uses to each other and the
relationship of dwelling unit types to the general plan framework, traffic
layout, and development requirements shall be used as the implementation guide.
Wherever conflict occurs between the written text in this document and the
notations on the sketch plan, the written text shall prevail. The sketch plan
is a graphic representation of the property included in the PUD delineating the
approximate location and configuration of the parcels for the purpose of easier
reference for the applicable regulations of this Ordinance. (Ord. 1320, 7-13-
1998)
050-03: GENERAL CONDITIONS:
Whereas, Title 9 of the West Des Moines City Code includes Chapter 9, PUD
Planned Unit Development District, and establishes certain regulations and
guidelines pertaining to accompanying information required on a plat, site plan
and permitted conditional use documents.
   A.   Now, therefore, the following conditions, restrictions, and regulations
are adopted as part of this approval and the following general site plan
criteria shall be integrated into and made a part of the development criteria
for the Valley Green PUD, to wit:
      1.   This PUD was established for this property as a City-initiated in-
fill housing project aimed at creating affordable, owner-occupied, housing for
seniors fifty five (55) years of age or older.
         a.   Any and each residential dwelling located within this PUD shall
be occupied by a senior person or senior persons fifty five (55) years of age
or older, and their family, if applicable. This restriction shall run with the
land within this PUD in perpetuity unless this restriction is specifically
removed by the City of West Des Moines.
         b.   Any and each residential dwelling located within this PUD shall
be owner-occupied for a period no less than ten (10) years from the date of the
first occupancy of each unit. For the purpose of family estate planning, the
term owner-occupied may include ownership of the dwelling unit by an immediate
family member of the fifty five (55) years of age or older person or persons
residing at the residence.
         c.   The owner/developer shall be responsible for compliance with the
Fair Housing Act.
      2.   All subdivisions, public streets, public street rights-of-way and
general development shall adhere to the standards and design criteria set forth
in the West Des Moines Subdivision Ordinance and the Des Moines Metropolitan
Design Standards as adopted by the City of West Des Moines pertaining thereto,
unless otherwise stated within this Ordinance.
      3.   Any regulation, standard, provision or requirement that is not
specifically addressed within this document that is regulated elsewhere in the
City Code of West Des Moines, the requirements of the City Code shall still be
enforced.
      4.   In all areas within a 100-year frequency flood hazard zone, or
adjoining drainageways or detention areas involving potential flood hazards, no
building shall be erected which has a lowest floor, including basements, less
than one foot (1') above the determined level of the 100-year frequency flood
event or floodproofed to the same elevation in accordance with the West Des
Moines Floodplain Ordinance, and no building shall be erected within twenty
five feet (25') of any major drainage, storm water detention basin or pond.
      5.   The developer, their successors and assigns, if any, shall pay all
construction and engineering costs for the interior development of the planned
unit development, in accordance with the current City policies at the time of
development, as required by this Ordinance, the Subdivision Ordinance of the
City of West Des Moines, and the Des Moines Metropolitan Design Standards as
adopted by the City of West Des Moines, for all streets, storm sewers, sanitary
sewers, drainage improvements, detention basins, water mains, buffers and other
improvements within the PUD as may be required.
   B.   Land Use Design Criteria: In addition to the general conditions
requirement stated within this document, the following land use design criteria
shall apply to the development areas designated by parcel on the sketch plan.
The sketch plan document, which is made a part of this document by reference in
Section
050-02 of this Ordinance, delineates one parcel within the PUD, denoted as
Parcel A, for application of specific standards of land use and development
regulations. The following development standards and use regulations shall
apply to development within said Parcel A, or portion of said parcel, as
applicable.
      1.   Parcel A: All general use regulations and provisions set forth in
Title 9, Zoning, of the West Des Moines City Code for the RM-9-CP Residential
Medium-Density District shall apply to any development proposal for all
property within Parcel A as shown on the sketch plan of the Valley Green PUD,
unless noted otherwise in this Ordinance. Parcel A shall incorporate a maximum
net developable acreage of one and thirty-eight hundredths (1.38) acres with a
density no greater than eight (8) dwelling units per acre.
         a.   Development Standards: Allowed uses within this parcel shall be
limited to those uses listed for the RM-8-CP Residential Medium-Density
District as outlined in the residential use matrix in the West Des Moines City
Code unless otherwise modified herein.
All building heights and setbacks within Parcel A shall be in accordance with
the setback and bulk density regulations of the West Des Moines Zoning
Ordinance for the RM-8-CP Residential Medium-Density District unless otherwise
herein modified.
         b.   Platting: Parcel A shall be subdivided, per State and City Code,
into eleven (11) postage stamp type lots a minimum forty five feet (45') long
by twenty eight feet (28') wide. In no case shall any postage stamp type lot be
located closer than fifteen feet (15') of the perimeter property line of Parcel
A.
Parcel A shall also be subdivided, per State and City Code, with eleven (11)
garage lots a minimum twenty feet (20') long by eleven feet (11') wide. In no
case shall any garage lot be located closer than twenty five feet (25') of the
perimeter property line of Parcel A.
Said garage lots shall only be allowed for the construction of a single stall
garage or an uncovered parking stall. Said garage lots shall be permanently
attached to each corresponding postage stamp type lot and shall not be sold
separately. Each garage must be used by the owner of each corresponding postage
stamp lot and shall not be sold, leased, or rented to any other for purposes of
storage or other use.
The remaining common area shall be platted as a common area outlot.
         c.   Setbacks: Single-family attached dwelling units may be
constructed on platted postage stamp type lots with no required setbacks within
said postage stamp type lots. Said single-family attached dwelling units may be
constructed within twenty five feet (25') of the perimeter property line of
Parcel A. In no case shall any dwelling unit encroach into any required buffer
park.
The minimum required separation between principal structures shall be twenty
feet (20').
Garages maybe constructed on the garage lots with no required setbacks within
said garage lot. In no case shall any garage be located closer than twenty five
feet (25') of the perimeter property line of Parcel A.
The minimum required separation between principal and nonprinciple structures
shall be twenty feet (20').
         d.   Fences: Fences up to four feet (4') in height may be constructed
within the property lines of each postage stamp type lot. In no case shall any
fence or part of any fence be located closer than fifteen feet (15') from the
perimeter property line of Parcel A and shall not block or cause any traffic
visual hazards. All fences shall be constructed of wood and shall be uniform
throughout Parcel A and/or as required in any homeowners association or
restrictive covenants.
         e.   Patios/Decks: Uncovered patios and decks may be constructed
within the property line of each postage stamp type lot. In no case shall any
patio or deck or part of any patio or deck be located closer than fifteen feet
(15') from the perimeter property line of Parcel A.
         f.   Architecture: This parcel shall be developed with each building
compatible in design and use of materials so as to appear as a single unified
development. The architectural design of any building shall be acceptable to
the City and shall be consistent with the surrounding area.
         g.   Pedestrian Access: Public sidewalks shall be provided along all
public street rights-of-way. Connections shall also be made between said public
sidewalks and internal sidewalks. The design and/or location of the pedestrian
walkways and sidewalks shall be determined at the site plan or permitted
conditional use permit development review process.
         h.   Buffering: Adequate buffering of negative aspects of commercial
buildings (garbage dumpsters and HVAC mechanical units) from any public street
and adjoining properties shall be required.
A thirty foot (30') buffer park shall be established along the west property
line of Parcel A. To screen the existing single-family dwellings to the west of
said parcel from this multi-family development, per City Code. Landscaping and
berming of the buffer park shall be provided in accordance with the West Des
Moines Buffer Ordinance at a rate of one-half (1/2) of the landscaping
requirements for a thirty foot (30') buffer park.
No buildings, fences, playground equipment, dog runs, animal shelters, or other
structures shall be constructed within the buffer park except as provided
herein. (Ord. 1320, 7-13-1998)
050-04: BUILDING RESTRICTIONS, EASEMENTS AND COVENANTS:
The developer shall, with the approval of the City Council, adopt building
restrictions, easements and covenants pertaining to the property as determined
necessary through the development entitlement process. (Ord. 1320, 7-13-1998)
050-05: ALL AREAS TO BE PLATTED:
Prior to, or in conjunction with development or transfer of ownership of any
portion of the PUD, said area shall be platted in accordance with the City's
Subdivision Ordinance to delineate within a plat, the lots to be developed or
sold separately or any portion thereof. (Ord. 1320, 7-13-1998)
050-06: STORM WATER MANAGEMENT:
There shall be submitted to, and approved by the West Des Moines Public Works,
a complete storm water management plan for the PUD to be prepared by the
developer prior to any development within the PUD and for all storm sewer,
drainage systems and detention areas within the PUD. (Ord. 1320, 7-13-1998)
050-07: TRAFFIC REPORTS:
A traffic study was not required for this PUD because it was determined that
the change in land use from single-family detached units to single-family
attached units designated for senior persons fifty five (55) years of age or
older would not cause a significant increase in traffic. If this property is
ever developed with a more intensive use, the City reserves its right to
require the developer to cause and pay for a traffic study to be conducted by
an engineering firm approved by the City, and the developer shall be
responsible for the full cost associated with the improvements outlined or
determined by said traffic study as necessary to mitigate additional traffic
generated as a result of the proposed development. (Ord. 1320, 7-13-1998)
050-08: INFRASTRUCTURE:
The developer of the property within the PUD is responsible for the public
improvements that are necessary to serve the property. Those improvements
include but are not limited to the paving of public streets, sanitary sewer
extension, water main extension, and storm sewer improvements. In conjunction
with or prior to development within any parcel of the PUD, public water and
sanitary sewer service shall be brought to the site and extended through the
area being developed to adjoining undeveloped properties in a manner acceptable
to the City and properly designed with sizes and materials compatible with the
City's plans for area-wide water and sanitary sewer service. (Ord. 1320, 7-13-
1998)
050-09: BUFFERS:
All development within the Valley Green PUD shall comply with the buffering
provisions of the Buffer Ordinance of the West Des Moines City Code. In
situations where the PUD specifies the provision of a buffer park easement, the
required setbacks shall be measured from the easement line. In situations where
this PUD specifies the provision of a buffer park, the buffer park and the
required setback may be overlapped and which ever is more restrictive shall be
adhered to. (Ord. 1320, 7-13-1998)
050-10: SIGNAGE REGULATION:
All signage shall comply with the West Des Moines Sign Ordinance regulations
for the Residential Medium-Density District. (Ord. 1320, 7-13-1998)
050-11: DEFINITION:
The term "developer", for the purpose of this Ordinance, shall mean any person,
individual firm, partnership, association, corporation, estate, trust, entity,
or agent of same acting or proposing to subdivide land or develop a parcel of
land for the construction of a building or buildings. (Ord. 1320, 7-13-1998)
050-99: LEGISLATIVE HISTORY:
Ord. 1320, 7-13-1998.
PUD #51
5940 UNIVERSITY
SECTION:
051-01: Legal Description
051-02: Sketch Plan
051-03: Conditions
051-04: Signage Regulation
051-05: Traffic Study
051-06: Infrastructure
051-07: Vehicular Access
051-08: Traffic Signals
051-09: Storm Water Management
051-10: Definition
051-11: Violations And Penalties
051-99: Legislative History
051-01: LEGAL DESCRIPTION:
The legal description for the 5940 University PUD is as follows:
Lots 2 and 9, West Lakes Office Park plat 9 and lots 1 and 2, West Lakes Office
Park plat 10, both official plats, city of West Des Moines, Dallas County,
Iowa.
(Ord. 1746, 4-23-2007)
051-02: SKETCH PLAN:
On file in the city and made a part of this rezoning approval, for concept
description and delineation is the sketch plan document for the 5940 University
PUD marked exhibit A. It is recognized that minor shifts or realignments of
roadways may be necessary and compatible with the need to acquire workable
street patterns, grades and usable building sites, but the general plan layout,
including the relationship of uses to each other and the relationship of
dwelling unit types to the general plan framework, traffic layout, and
development requirements shall be used as the implementation guide. Wherever
conflict occurs between the written text in this document and the notations on
the sketch plan, the written text shall prevail. The sketch plan is a graphic
representation of the property included in the PUD delineating the approximate
location and configuration of the parcels for the purpose of easier reference
for the applicable regulations of this ordinance. (Ord. 1746, 4-23-2007)
051-03: CONDITIONS:
Whereas, title 9, chapter 9, "Planned Unit Development District", of the city
code establishes certain regulations and guidelines pertaining to accompanying
information required on a plat, site plan, and permitted conditional use permit
documents. Now, therefore, the following conditions, restrictions, and
regulations are adopted as part of this approval, to wit:
   A.   General Conditions: The following general site plan criteria shall be
integrated into and made a part of the 5940 University PUD:
      1.   All subdivisions, public streets, public street rights of way and
general development shall adhere to the standards and design criteria set forth
in the West Des Moines subdivision ordinance and the Des Moines metropolitan
design standards as adopted by the city of West Des Moines pertaining thereto
unless otherwise stated within this ordinance.
      2.   Any regulation, standard, provision or requirement that is not
specifically addressed within this document that is regulated elsewhere in the
city code, the requirements of the city code shall still be enforced.
      3.   In all areas within a 100-year frequency flood hazard zone, or
adjoining drainageways or detention areas involving potential flood hazards, no
building shall be erected which has a lowest floor, including basements, less
than one foot (1') above the determined level of the 100-year frequency flood
event, and no building shall be erected within twenty five feet (25') of any
major drainageway, storm water detention basin or pond.
      4.   The developer, their successors and assigns, if any, shall pay all
construction and engineering costs for the interior development of the planned
unit development, as required by this ordinance, or the subdivision ordinance
of the city of West Des Moines, Iowa, for all streets, storm sewers, sanitary
sewers, drainageway improvements, detention basins, water mains, buffers and
other improvements within the PUD as may be required by the city code or this
ordinance.
   B.   Land Use Design Criteria: In addition to the general conditions as
stated in subsection A of this section, the following land use design criteria
shall apply to the following parcels as identified on the sketch plan:
      1.   All Parcels:
         a.   Allowed Uses: Allowed uses within all parcels of the PUD shall
include all permitted uses and permitted conditional uses within the support
commercial district (SC), except for automobile repair services (SIC 75) and
automobile dealers and service stations (SIC 55), which shall not be permitted.
In addition, the following uses shall be allowed within parcel D of this PUD
with the approval of a permitted conditional use permit:
Amusement parks, indoor operations only (SIC 7996)
Amusement rides and concessions (SIC 7999)
Coin operated amusement devices, except gambling machines (SIC 7993)
Indoor laser tag (SIC 7999)
Motion picture theaters, except drive-in (SIC 7832)
Roller and ice skating rink operations (SIC 7999)
         b.   Parking, Loading And Internal Drive Setbacks: Off street parking
lots, loading areas and internal drives shall be sufficiently set back a
minimum of fifteen feet (15') from property lines and ultimate right of way
lines. Parking, loading and internal drive setbacks shall be designed to be
effectively screened from public view with the use of landscaping, earth
berming and/or wall structures and presenting an attractive view or element to
the area. Landscape buffering shall be reviewed and approved as part of any
site plan submittal or entitlement request.
         c.   Drive-Throughs: One drive-through facility for use by a bank,
pharmacy, or dry cleaner; and one restaurant with a drive-through shall be
allowed within parcel B or C of the PUD.
As a part of the review of a site plan or permitted conditional use permit
submitted for any allowed drive- through facility, the property owner/developer
must demonstrate through design and screening that the proposed drive-through
facility will not negatively impact the surrounding properties or create
traffic congestion in the area. All allowed drive-through facilities shall be
designed to be screened from the public right of way through the use of
architectural features, earth berming and landscaping, to minimize the visual
impact of the drive-through.
         d.   Architecture: All buildings within the PUD shall be compatible in
design and use of materials so as to appear as a single unified development.
The architectural design of any building shall be acceptable to the city and
all buildings within the parcel shall have as a primary element of the exterior
being brick, with all sides of any building built within the parcel consistent
in design and use of materials. No wood, masonite, EIFS type materials, visible
asphaltic exterior wall or roof materials, metal or plastic siding,
nonarchitectural sheet metal, concrete block, or other similar materials shall
constitute a portion of any building except as a trim or accent material,
unless the city council of West Des Moines, after having received a
recommendation from the plan and zoning commission of West Des Moines shall
determine said material when used as a primary element, enhances the physical
appearance or provides continuity desired to unite all structures within the
parcel together into a single project concept.
         e.   Buffering: Adequate buffering of negative aspects of commercial
buildings (loading docks, garbage dumpsters and HVAC mechanical units) from any
public street and adjoining properties shall be required. Commercial retail
buildings shall not be located and designed to expose loading docks or doors,
loading areas or the rear of buildings to public streets. All rooftop
mechanical units shall be screened from views from the adjacent public streets
with the use of architecturally designed screen walls, parapet walls,
penthouse, or other opaque material, and shall be identified as part of the
site plan submittal or entitlement request.
      2.   Parcels B And C: All general use regulations, performance standards
and provisions set forth in title 9, "Zoning", of the city code for the support
commercial district (SC) shall apply to any development proposal within the PUD
except as modified herein. The following development standards and use
regulations shall apply to any development within the PUD as applicable:
         a.   Open Space Required: On each lot there shall be provided an open
space equal to at least twenty five percent (25%) of the total lot area; said
space shall be unencumbered with any structure or off street parking and shall
be landscaped and well maintained with grass, trees and shrubbery, except for
areas used as pedestrian walks and ingress-egress drives. In addition, all
parking areas shall include landscape areas, islands, screens, etc., equal to
not less than ten percent (10%) of the total paved area. Such landscaped area
shall be in addition to the open space requirements noted above for the total
lot area. Landscaped islands within the parking area shall have ground cover of
grass (i.e., sod), shrubs or other acceptable living plant life, unless an
alternate ground cover is specifically approved as part of the site plan review
by the City. Inorganic mulches in the landscape islands shall not be considered
acceptable. No parking space shall be greater than seventy five feet (75') from
a landscaped open space with a minimum area of two hundred fifty (250) square
feet. (Ord. 1746, 4-23-2007)
      3.   Parcels A And D: All general use regulations, performance standards
and provisions set forth in title 9, "Zoning", of the City Code for the
Professional Commerce Park (PCP) District shall apply to any development
proposal within the PUD except as modified herein. The following development
standards and use regulations shall apply to any development within the PUD as
applicable:
         a.   Building Setbacks: The setback requirements of the Professional
Commerce Park (PCP) District shall apply to all lots within the PUD boundaries
with the exception of the west boundary (60th Street) of Parcels A and D which
shall have a one hundred foot (100') building setback. Unless otherwise
required by Building or Fire Codes, there shall be no internal building
setbacks between Parcels A and D.
         b.   Parking Requirements:
            (1)   For all traditional nonmedical office uses, the minimum
number of parking stalls required shall conform to title 9, chapter 15 of the
City Code.
            (2)   All medical office uses shall provide a minimum of one space
per three hundred (300) square feet of gross leasable area (gla).
            (3)   At the discretion of the Director of Development Services, a
less stringent parking calculation may be used provided the applicant can
demonstrate that a parking rate less than the required will adequately provide
for the site due to shared parking or offsetting peak use times.
         c.   Open Space Required: A minimum of thirty percent (30%) open space
shall be provided within each lot within the PUD. "Open space" shall be defined
as those areas unencumbered by buildings or paved areas associated with
parking, drive aisles, and loading zones. Plaza areas, water features and
structures such as gazebos, arbors, pergolas, etc., that are associated with
common outdoor pedestrian use areas available for use by the general public, as
well as designated pedestrian walkways through and between parcels may be
counted towards fulfilling the minimum open space requirement.
            (1)   Vegetation Required:
   (A) Vegetation at a minimum rate of two (2) trees and three (3) shrubs per
three thousand (3,000) square feet of required open space shall be provided
within each parcel.
   (B) Ten percent (10%) of all required trees shall be a minimum of three inch
(3") to three and one-half inch (31/2") caliper. Thirty percent (30%) of all
required trees shall be a minimum of two inch (2") to two and one-half inch
(21/2") caliper. The balance of all required trees shall be eight feet (8') to
ten feet (10') or one and one-half inch (11/2") caliper. The minimum height for
evergreens shall be six feet (6') and may be counted as two inch (2") to two
and one-half inch (21/2") caliper.
            (2)   Substitution Allowed:
   (A) Two (2) ornamental trees, one evergreen tree, or six (6) shrubs may be
substituted for one required overstory tree; however, no more than twenty five
percent (25%) of the required number of overstory trees may be substituted.
   (B) A twenty (20) square foot mass planting of perennials or ornamental
grasses may be substituted for three (3) shrubs.
            (3)   Off Street Parking Areas: Vegetation required as part of the
open space may be placed into off street parking areas; however the open space
vegetation is in addition to that which would be required of parking areas and
may not be counted towards fulfilling the minimum amount of vegetation required
for these areas.
         d.   Off Street Parking Areas: All off street parking areas shall be
aesthetically improved to reduce obtrusive characteristics that are inherent to
their function. Trees and shrubs shall be implemented within landscape islands,
pods, or strips to effectively eliminate a "sea of asphalt/concrete" and to
provide shade thus decreasing heat reflection back into the environment.
Landscaping shall be implemented in accordance with the following:
            (1)   Islands or open areas shall be located at the terminus end of
all parking rows. Terminal islands shall match, at a minimum, the stall length
and measure at least ten feet (10') in width unless otherwise allowed per the
discretion of the Development Services Director.
            (2)   Islands shall measure a minimum of nine feet (9') in width
and shall match, at a minimum the stall length. Pods shall measure a minimum of
six feet (6') from the back of curb to back of curb.
            (3)   With the exception of stalls implemented as part of a parking
structure, for every ten (10) parking stalls implemented, one tree and two (2)
shrubs or a twenty (20) square foot massing of perennials or ornamental grasses
shall be located within the parking islands, pods, or strips within the parking
area or in open areas immediately adjacent to the perimeter boundary of the
parking area. Perennials and grasses located within pods shall be a minimum of
three feet (3') in height in order to be visible between the cars.
            (4)   Vegetation substitution allowed:
   (A) One tree may be substituted for six (6) shrubs.
   (B) A twenty (20) square foot mass planting of perennials or ornamental
grasses may be substituted for three (3) required shrubs.
            (5)   Vegetation required as part of off street parking areas is in
addition to that which would be required of open space and may not be counted
towards fulfilling the minimum amount of vegetation required for open space.
         e.   Building Height: No part of any structure on Parcel D shall
exceed eighty feet (80') in height as measured from the average finished grade.
(Ord. 2341, 2-4-2019)
051-04: SIGNAGE REGULATION:
All signage for all parcels within the PUD shall comply with the provisions of
the West Des Moines Sign Code for the Support Commercial District (SC) unless
noted otherwise herein. No pole sign as defined by the West Des Moines City
Sign Code shall be incorporated into any development within the PUD.
Each parcel within the PUD shall be allowed ground signs in accordance with
Support Commercial District (SC) regulations except one additional freestanding
sign shall be allowed within Parcel D for a sign to be placed near the
intersection of 60th Street and 59th Place.
All signage constructed as wall signs on building fascia within the PUD shall
incorporate aesthetic features compatible with the overall character of the
development. All wall signs will be composed of solid individual letters
attached to the building fascia, or individual letters of anodized aluminum,
galvanized metal, illuminated self-contained with translucent plastic faces set
in anodized aluminum returns and trim; panel signs with letters incorporated or
painted upon a panel or wall area shall be prohibited. Temporary advertising or
promotional signage attached to exterior windows or walls shall be allowed only
with an approved temporary signage permit issued through the Building
Department under the provisions for temporary signage in the City Code. Signs
with exposed neon lights, moving lights or flashing lights visible from the
exterior of the building shall be prohibited. The maximum height of any
individual letter within a wall sign shall not exceed six feet (6') in height
except any use that occupies in excess of one hundred thousand (100,000) square
feet shall be allowed to have individual letters not to exceed eight feet (8')
in height.
Logo or graphic symbols associated with a tenant larger than the maximum
individual letter size may be allowed with the City Council approval of such as
part of the site plan approval. (Ord. 1880, 8-9-2010)
051-05: TRAFFIC STUDY:
In conjunction with the review of the permitted conditional use permit for the
Carmike Cinemas Family Entertainment Center, a traffic study was prepared
(dated August 24, 1998) which was based upon certain assumptions for the future
development of the property. An updated traffic study was completed for
proposed development of Parcels A, D, and E in conjunction with the Mercy West
Lakes Hospital project immediately to the east (Snyder & Associates, December
2006). Per that updated traffic analysis and based on an ultimate build-out of
two hundred forty thousand (240,000) square feet, Parcels A, D, and E
collectively have been allocated eight thousand six hundred seventy two (8,672)
average daily trips (ADT); five hundred ninety six (596) A.M. peak; and eight
hundred ninety three (893) P.M. peak vehicle trips. Should anticipated traffic
for these parcels exceed the total trips allocated prior to full build-out,
further development of parcels may be limited or prohibited. Alternate uses to
those planned for within the traffic analysis may be allowed, following
completion of an amendment to the approved traffic study analyzing the proposed
alternative, if necessary. The developer shall be responsible for the full cost
associated with the improvements necessary to mitigate additional traffic
generated as a result of the development. (Ord. 1746, 4-23-2007)
051-06: INFRASTRUCTURE:
The developer of the property within the PUD is responsible for the public
improvements that are necessary to serve the property. Those improvements
include, but are not limited to, the paving of public streets, sanitary sewer
extension, water main extension, and storm sewer improvements. In conjunction
with or prior to development within any parcel of the PUD, public water and
sanitary sewer service shall be brought to the site and extended through the
area being developed to adjoining undeveloped properties in a manner acceptable
to the City and properly designed with sizes and materials compatible with the
City's plans for areawide water and sanitary sewer service. (Ord. 1746, 4-23-
2007)
051-07: VEHICULAR ACCESS:
Vehicular access from University Avenue and 60th Street may be restricted and
limited as deemed necessary by the West Des Moines City Engineer. Access point
will be reviewed and approved at the time of site plan or permitted conditional
use permit review for each parcel. All proposed drives shall align with the
existing drive accesses of adjacent properties.
Based upon the traffic study (dated August 24, 1998) prepared for this site,
development within the PUD shall also meet the following conditions:
   A.   All full access points shall have three (3) lanes to minimize delays
(inbound/outbound left/outbound right).
   B.   A deceleration lane eastbound on University Avenue shall be provided
for the single site access to University Avenue in conjunction with the
development of Parcel D.
   C.   Access points off of University Avenue and 60th Street are not proposed
for signals.
   D.   There shall be no individual access off of University Avenue for
Parcels A, B, and C, only the single access to University Avenue for the entire
site.
   E.   The northernmost access to 60th Street from the site shall be removed
as deemed necessary by the City. (Ord. 1746, 4-23-2007)
051-08: TRAFFIC SIGNALS:
The owner, on behalf of itself, its successors and assigns, commits to one-half
(1/2) of the cost of signalization of the intersection of University Avenue and
59th Place, or one- fourth (1/4) of the cost in the event that the City of
Clive or the developer to the north of the intersection contributes one-half
(1/2) of the cost of signalization. The developer of Parcels A, D and E shall
also be responsible for one-fourth (1/4) of the cost of a signal at the
intersection of 60th Street and 59th Place and one-half (1/2) of the cost of a
signal at the intersection of 60th Street and the applicant's southern access
drive.
All traffic signals shall be installed at such time that warrants are met, as
determined by the City. (Ord. 1746, 4-23-2007)
051-09: STORMWATER MANAGEMENT:
There shall be submitted to, and approved by the West Des Moines City Engineer,
a stormwater management plan for each parcel, prior to its development. (Ord.
1746, 4-23-2007)
051-10: DEFINITION:
The term "developer", for the purpose of this ordinance, shall mean any person,
individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation, estate, trust, entity,
or agent of same acting or proposing to subdivide land or develop a parcel of
land for the construction of a building or buildings. (Ord. 1746, 4-23-2007)
051-11: VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES:
Any person who violates the provisions of this ordinance upon conviction shall
be punished as set forth in section 1-4-1 of the City Code. (Ord. 1746, 4-23-
2007)
051-99: LEGISLATIVE HISTORY:
Ord. 1329, 10-5-1998; Ord. 1458, 10-15-2001; Ord. 1746, 4-23-2007; Ord. 1880,
8-9-2010; Ord. 2341, 2-4-2019.
PUD #52
COLBY OFFICE PARK
SECTION:
052-01: Legal Description
052-02: Sketch Plan
052-03: Conditions
052-04: Building Restrictions, Easements And Covenants
052-05: All Areas To Be Platted
052-06: Stormwater Management
052-07: Street Rights Of Way
052-08: Signage Regulation
052-09: Definition
052-10: Violations And Penalties
052-99: Legislative History
052-01: LEGAL DESCRIPTION:
The legal description for the Colby Office Park PUD is as follows:
An irregular shaped portion of Lot 12 Colby's Office Park, West Des Moines,
Polk County, Iowa, all of which is described as follows: Beginning at the
southwest corner of said Lot 12; thence N00°03'15"E, along the West line of
said Lot 12, 847.75 feet, to a point on the southerly right-of-way line of
Interstate Highway 235; thence S76°50'00", along said southerly right-of-way
line 96.25 feet; thence S64°46'47"E, along said southerly right-of-way line,
228.04 feet; thence S52°15'45"E, along said southerly right-of-way line, 216.75
feet; thence S00°00'00"E, 611.80 feet, to a point on the south line of said Lot
12; thence N88°05'00"W, along the south line of said Lot 12, 472.50 feet to the
Point of Beginning.
Said tract of land contains 8.1812 acres more or less and is subject to any and
all easements of record.
(Ord. 1331, 10-5-1998)
052-02: SKETCH PLAN:
On file with the community development department of the city and made a part
of this rezoning approval, for concept description and delineation is the
sketch plan document for the Colby Office Park.
It is recognized that minor shifts or realignments of roadways may be necessary
and compatible with the need to acquire workable street patterns, grades and
usable building sites, but the general plan layout, including the relationship
of uses to each other and the relationship of building types to the general
plan framework, traffic layout, and development requirements shall be used as
the implementation guide. Wherever conflict occurs between the written text in
this document and the notations on the sketch plan, the written text shall
prevail. The sketch plan is a graphic representation of the property included
in the PUD delineating the approximate location and configuration of the parcel
for the purpose of easier reference for the applicable regulations of this
ordinance. (Ord. 1331, 10-5-1998)
052-03: CONDITIONS:
Title 9 of the city code includes chapter 9, "Planned Unit Development
District", and establishes certain regulations and guidelines pertaining to
accompanying information required on a plat, site plan and permitted
conditional use documents; therefore, the following conditions, restrictions,
and regulations are adopted as part of this approval and the following general
site plan criteria shall be integrated into and made a part of the development
criteria for the Colby Office Park PUD, to wit:
   A.   General Conditions:
      1.   All subdivisions, public streets, public street rights of way and
general development shall adhere to the standards and design criteria set forth
in the West Des Moines subdivision ordinance and the Des Moines metropolitan
design standards as adopted by the city of West Des Moines pertaining thereto,
unless otherwise stated within this ordinance.
      2.   Any regulation, standard, provision or requirement set forth in the
city code not specifically addressed within this document shall still be
enforced. Any regulation, standard provision or requirement set forth in the
city code not specifically addressed within this document are applicable to
this PUD and shall be enforced.
      3.   In all areas within a 100-year frequency flood hazard zone, or
adjoining drainageways or detention areas involving potential flood hazards, no
building shall be erected which has a lowest floor, including basements, less
than one foot (1') above the determined level of the 100-year frequency flood
event or floodproofed to the same elevation in accordance with the West Des
Moines floodplain ordinance, and no building shall be erected within twenty
five feet (25') of any major drainage, stormwater detention basin or pond.
      4.   The developer, their successors and assigns, if any, shall pay all
construction and engineering costs for the interior development of the planned
unit development, in accordance with the current city policies at the time of
development, as required by this ordinance, the subdivision ordinance of the
city of West Des Moines, and the Des Moines metropolitan design standards as
adopted by the city of West Des Moines, for all streets, storm sewers, sanitary
sewers, drainage improvements, detention basins, water mains, buffers and other
improvements within the PUD as may be required. (Ord. 1331, 10-5-1998)
   B.   Land Use Design Criteria: In addition to the general conditions
requirement stated within this document, the following land use design criteria
shall apply to the development area designated on the sketch plan. The sketch
plan document referred to in section
052-02 of this ordinance, delineates a single parcel of the PUD for application
of specific standards of land use and development regulations. The following
development standards and land use regulations shall apply to the development
within this individual parcel.
      1.   All general use regulations and provisions set forth in title 9,
"Zoning", of the city code for the OF office district shall apply to any
development proposal for all property contained within the Colby Office Park
PUD as shown on the sketch plan, unless noted otherwise in this ordinance.
         a.   Development Standards: Allowed general use regulations and
provisions set forth in title 9, "Zoning", of the city code for the OF office
district as outlined in the commercial use matrix in the city code shall apply
to any development proposal within this PUD unless modified herein.
The following uses shall be prohibited:
Restaurants (SIC 5812).
Hotels and motels (SIC 701).
The following uses shall be allowed when in accordance with all applicable
policies, procedures, and obligations of authorized governing agencies,
including, but not limited to, the board of pharmacies, the department of
radiological health, the department of transportation, and the FDA:
In vitro and in vivo diagnostic substances (SIC 2835). (Ord. 1989, 6-10-2013)
All building heights and setbacks shall be in accordance with the setback and
bulk density regulations of the West Des Moines zoning ordinance for OF office
district unless modified and noted otherwise herein. The minimum front yard
shall be fifty feet (50'). The minimum rear yard shall be fifty feet (50'). The
minimum side yard shall be thirty feet (30'). If the side yard abuts a similar
district, then it may have a zero foot (0') side yard setback provided that all
construction is built in accordance with applicable building and fire codes.
All parking lot setbacks shall be designed in accordance with the requirements
of the off street parking and loading chapter of the West Des Moines zoning
ordinance. The minimum required open space shall be twenty five percent (25%)
of the total project area. In addition to the open space requirements for the
total project area, all parking areas shall include landscaped areas, islands,
screens, etc., equal to not less than ten percent (10%) of the total paved area
and associated drives. Landscaped islands within the parking area shall have
ground cover of grass (i.e., sod), shrubs or other acceptable living plant
life, unless an alternate ground cover is specifically approved as part of the
site plan review by the city. No parking space shall be greater than seventy
five feet (75') from a landscaped open space area with a minimum of two hundred
fifty (250) square feet. The narrowest dimension of a parking lot island shall
not be less than five feet (5').
The project site shall be developed with each building being compatible in
design and use of materials so as to appear as a single unified development.
The architectural design and use of materials for the construction of any
building within the PUD shall be accomplished in a manner compatible with PCP
professional commerce park zone district building standards. The architectural
design of any building shall be acceptable to the city and no wood, masonite,
metal plastic siding, nonarchitectural sheet metal, concrete block, or other
similar materials shall constitute a portion of any building except as a trim
material, unless the city council of West Des Moines, after receiving a
recommendation from the planning and zoning commission of West Des Moines,
shall determine said material when used as a primary element, enhances the
physical appearance or provides continuity desired to unite all structures
within the parcel together into one project concept.
         b.   Pedestrian Access: A public sidewalk shall be provided along the
public street right of way and connections shall also be made between said
public sidewalk and internal sidewalks. The design and/or location of the
pedestrian walkways and sidewalks shall be determined at the site plan or
permitted conditional use permit development review process.
         c.   Buffering: Adequate buffering of negative aspects of commercial
buildings (loading docks, garbage dumpsters, and HVAC mechanical equipment)
from any public street and adjoining properties shall be required.
A thirty foot (30') buffer park shall be established along the northwest
boundary line to screen the commercial uses from the adjoining residential
district. Landscaping and berming of the buffer park shall be provided in
accordance with the West Des Moines buffer ordinance. Sidewalks and pedestrian
plaza areas shall be allowed to be located within the buffer park; however, no
other types of structures will be permitted. The location and design of
pedestrian facilities within the buffer park shall be designed to provide
pleasant outdoor spaces for the office uses without negatively affecting the
residential uses on the adjacent property. (Ord. 1331, 10-5-1998)
052-04: BUILDING RESTRICTIONS, EASEMENTS AND COVENANTS:
The developer shall, with the approval of the city council, adopt building
restrictions, easements, and covenants pertaining to the property as determined
necessary through the development entitlement process. (Ord. 1331, 10-5-1998)
052-05: ALL AREAS TO BE PLATTED:
Prior to, or in conjunction with the development or transfer of ownership of
any portion of the PUD, said area shall be platted in accordance with the
city's subdivision ordinance to delineate within a plat, the parcel to be
developed or sold separately or any portion thereof. (Ord. 1331, 10-5-1998)
052-06: STORMWATER MANAGEMENT:
There shall be submitted to and approved by the West Des Moines public works, a
complete stormwater management plan for all storm sewer, drainage systems and
detention areas within the PUD, to be prepared by the developer prior to any
development within the PUD. (Ord. 1331, 10-5-1998)
052-07: STREET RIGHTS OF WAY:
The ultimate right of way for Office Park Road, as identified in the West Des
Moines comprehensive plan, shall be dedicated to the city at the time of site
plan development. (Ord. 1331, 10-5-1998)
052-08: SIGNAGE REGULATION:
All signage shall comply with the West Des Moines sign ordinance regulations
for OF office district. (Ord. 1331, 10-5-1998)
052-09: DEFINITION:
The term "developer", for the purpose of this ordinance, shall mean any person,
individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation, estate, trust, entity,
or agent of same acting or proposing to subdivide land or develop a parcel of
land for the construction of a building or buildings. (Ord. 1331, 10-5-1998)
052-10: VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES:
Any person who violates the provisions of this ordinance upon conviction shall
be punished as set forth in section 1-4-1 of the city code. (Ord. 1989, 6-10-
2013)
052-99: LEGISLATIVE HISTORY:
Ord. 1331, 10-5-1998; Ord. 1989, 6-10-2013.
PUD #53
GREENWAY CROSSING
SECTION:
053-01: Legal Description
053-02: Sketch Plan
053-03: Land Use Design Criteria
053-04: Architecture
053-05: Open Space
053-06: Parking
053-07: Buffering
053-08: Pedestrian Circulation
053-09: Signage
053-10: Building Restrictions, Easements, And Covenants
053-11: Storm Water Management
053-12: Sanitary Sewer
053-13: Traffic Reports
053-14: Public Street Improvements And Right-Of-Way Dedication
053-15: Streetlights
053-16: Park Land Dedication
053-17: Master Property Owners' Association
053-18: Lighting
053-19: Violations And Penalties
053-99: Legislative History
053-01: LEGAL DESCRIPTION:
Lots 1-30 of GreenWay Crossing, now included in and forming a part of the City
of West Des Moines, Dallas County, Iowa. (Ord. 1785, 10-22-2007)
053-02: SKETCH PLAN:
On file in the City and made a part of this rezoning approval, for concept
description and delineation is the sketch plan document for the GreenWay
Crossing PUD marked exhibit A. Wherever conflict occurs between the written
text in this document and the notations on the sketch plan, the written text
shall prevail. The sketch plan is a graphic representation of the property
included in the PUD delineating the approximate location and configuration of
the parcels for the purpose of easier reference for the applicable regulations
of this ordinance. (Ord. 1785, 10-22-2007)
053-03: LAND USE DESIGN CRITERIA:
In addition to the general conditions and requirements stated within this
document, the following land use design criteria shall apply to the development
areas designated by parcel on the sketch plan: (Ord. 1785, 10-22-2007)
   A.   Parcels A, B, C, And D: All general use regulations and provisions set
forth in title 9, "Zoning", of the City Code for the Community Commercial
District (CMC), shall apply to any development proposal for any of these
parcels as shown on the sketch plan for the GreenWay Crossing PUD ordinance,
unless noted elsewhere within this ordinance.
      1.   Allowed Uses: Allowed uses within all parcels shall include all uses
in the Community Commercial District (CMC) except for the following exceptions:
         a.   One convenience store with eight (8) gas pumps and gasoline
canopy with a maximum size of nine thousand (9,000) square feet shall be a
permitted use within Parcel A or C. (Ord. 2312, 7-9-2018)
         b.   Any adult entertainment establishments (SIC 5999) shall be
strictly prohibited within Parcels A, B, C, and D.
      2.   Bulk Regulations: The bulk regulations for all lots and structures,
except the private lift station but including any gasoline canopy, shall be as
follows:
Minimum lot area   43,560 square feet
Minimum setback:
 Front yard        50 feet1
 Rear yard         50 feet
 Side yard         50 feet2
Minimum lot width  125 feet
Maximum height     36 feet3
                   15 feet measured from the irrevocable offer of ROW
Parking lot        dedication line, 82.5 feet from the centerline of University
                   Avenue
 
   Notes:
       1.    The setback of all structures except the private lift station but
including any gasoline canopy will be measured from the established ROW line of
60 feet from the centerline of University Avenue.
       2.    Setback of 0 feet allowed if the property abuts a similar
district. (However, there is a 15.5 foot side yard setback between Parcel A for
the portion that abuts Parcel B and a 15.5 foot side yard setback for Parcel B
along the west property line to allow for a 31 foot access drive.)
       3.    Additional 12 feet of height allowed for each additional 10 feet
of setback.
      3.   Buffers: A thirty foot (30') buffer park will be required to be
provided along 92nd Street at the time that a development plan is submitted for
Parcel A.
      4.   Outdoor Use Areas: Outdoor use areas, i.e., sitting and gathering
areas shall be encouraged.
      5.   Light Standards: Light standards shall be limited to a maximum of
twenty five feet (25') and the use of any wall pack lighting on buildings shall
be strictly prohibited. The provision of bicycle parking should be considered
to be provided.
      6.   Gasoline Canopy: The size of the canopy, architectural and visual
interest will be enhanced by changes to the plane of the canopy; brick
surrounds on the perimeter canopy columns, and flush mounted lighting. All
canopy columns will be faced with the same material used for the main
buildings. Canopy height will need to be a minimum of fourteen feet (14') for
clearance of safety vehicles and the maximum size of the gasoline canopy will
be limited to nine thousand (9,000) square feet.
      7.   Screening: Vegetation or other measures, with or without berming,
shall be required to provide opaque screening of all parking areas, dumpsters,
mechanical equipment, etc., from view from all streets (public and private) and
adjoining dissimilar land uses. (Ord. 1785, 10-22-2007)
   B.   Parcels E And F: All general use regulations and provisions set forth
in title 9, "Zoning", of the City Code for the Office District (OF), shall
apply to any development proposal for any of these parcels as shown on the
sketch plan for the GreenWay Crossing PUD ordinance, unless noted elsewhere
within this ordinance.
      1.   Allowed Uses:
         a.   Allowed uses within Parcels E and F shall include all office uses
within the OF Office District except for the following uses which shall not be
permitted in their entirety:
Child daycare services (SIC 835).
Depository institutions (SIC 60).
Eating and drinking places (SIC 58).
Educational services (SIC 82).
Massage therapy establishments and steam bath services (SIC 7299-02).
News dealers and newsstands (SIC 5994).
Nursing and personal care facilities (SIC 805).
Physical fitness facilities (SIC 7991). (Ord. 2044, 7-14-2014; amd. Ord. 2318,
7-23-2018)
         b.   Allowed uses within Parcel F shall include, notwithstanding the
excepted uses in the previous paragraph, all office uses within the OF Office
District. Additionally, the following use shall be allowed as a permitted use
in Parcel F:
Facility rental and party planning services (SIC 7299). (Ord. 2044, 7-14-2014)
      2.   Bulk Regulations: All building heights and setbacks shall be in
accordance with the Office District standards established in the setback and
bulk density chapter of the West Des Moines zoning ordinance unless otherwise
stated in this PUD.
      3.   Lot Size For Typical Office Lots:
 
Minimum lot size 1 acre
Maximum lot size 5 acres
 
(Ord. 2018, 1-13-2014)
      4.   Postage Stamp Lots: Postage stamp lots will be allowed with the
establishment of a property owners' association of which each lot has an
ownership interest. An operation and easement declaration (OEA) shall be
established by the developer for the property encompassing any office
development utilizing postage stamp lots. The OEA shall identify requirements
for the ongoing upkeep and maintenance of any privately owned common grounds,
structures and signs and any other specific development improvements required
by the developer in this ordinance. Unless otherwise specifically noted or
delineated, the developer and individual lot owners shall have equal
responsibility for the obligations specifically set forth in this section or as
generally noted in this ordinance. Buildings on postage stamp lots within
Parcel E or F must meet the following bulk regulations: (Ord. 2018, 1-13-2014;
amd. Ord. 2318, 7-23-2018)
         a.   No building shall be closer than thirty feet (30') from a public
right-of-way line.
         b.   No building shall be closer than thirty five feet (35') from a
property line of a property with dissimilar zoning.
         c.   Principal buildings must be no closer than twenty feet (20')
apart.
         d.   No building shall be closer than five feet (5') to a postage
stamp lot line. (Ord. 2018, 1-13-2014)
      5.   Buffers: A thirty foot (30') buffer park will be required to be
provided along the west and south boundary of Parcel E and on the south
boundary of Parcel A at the time that a development plan is submitted for the
parcel. (Ord. 2318, 7-23-2018)
      6.   Screening: Vegetation or other measures, with or without berming,
shall be required to provide opaque screening of all parking areas, dumpsters,
mechanical equipment, etc., from view from all streets (public and private) and
adjoining dissimilar land uses. (Ord. 2018, 1-13-2014)
   C.   Parcel G: All general use regulations and provisions set forth in title
9, "Zoning" of the City Code for the Residential High Density District (RH-18)
shall apply to any development proposal for Parcel G as shown on the sketch
plan for the GreenWay Crossing PUD ordinance, unless noted below or elsewhere
within this ordinance.
      1.   Uses: Uses in Parcel G will be restricted to senior housing only.
      2.   Setbacks And Building Height: The following bulk density regulations
for setbacks and building height shall be as follows:
         a.   Minimum setbacks from all property lines shall be a minimum
thirty foot (30') for no more than a three story building. Additional setback
of ten feet (10') for each additional twelve feet (12') in height above three
(3) stories shall be required. Setbacks shall be measured from the property
line to the foundation or outside edge of a deck; however, no part of a
building shall be closer than twenty feet (20') from the curb line of a private
drive.
      3.   Buffers: Buffers shall be provided as follows and landscape
requirements will be in addition to open space or parking lot landscaping. The
location of detention basins within the buffer areas does not negate the buffer
requirements.
         a.   A thirty foot (30') landscape buffer shall be installed along
90th Street to be consistent with other parcels along 90th Street. Buffer width
shall be measured from the property line along the public street and the curb
line along private streets. Landscape requirements shall be in accordance with
City Code for a thirty foot (30') buffer.
         b.   With the zone change of Parcel G to Residential High Density, the
burden of providing a buffer between dissimilar land uses (commercial to
residential) lies with Parcel G.
The buffer width along the north boundary shall be thirty feet (30') with
landscaping provided according to City Code for a thirty foot (30') buffer. The
width shall be measured from the curb line along a private drive or the
property line along a public street.
The buffer width along the west boundary will be twenty feet (20') with
landscaping provided at two-thirds (2/3) of the requirement of a thirty foot
(30') buffer as provided in City Code. The width of the buffer will be measured
from the curb line of a private street or the property line along a public
street.
No buffer is required along Bishop Drive due to the existing residential high
density development in Parcel H.
      4.   Screening: Vegetation or other measures, with or without berming,
shall be required to provide opaque screening of all parking areas, dumpsters,
mechanical equipment, etc., from view from all streets (public and private) and
adjoining dissimilar land uses.
      5.   Parking: Parking space requirements shall be governed by title 9,
Zoning, chapter 15, Off-Street Parking And Loading. The parking space
requirement shall follow the parking ratio for multi-family housing as outlined
in the City Code. Dwelling units intended for sale shall be provided a minimum
of one covered parking space that shall be tied with the dwelling unit. Covered
spaces (i.e., underground parking or surface garages) may be counted towards
meeting the requirement at a 1 to 1 ratio if separate secured storage is
provided for the residents.
         a.   For multi-purpose space incorporated in the building design, the
requirements for parking shall be as follows:
            (1)   If the space is rentable to non-residents, the parking ratio
will be one space per fifty (50) square feet of multi-purpose space square
footage, in addition to the parking required for the residents.
            (2)   If the space is not rentable to non-residents, there will be
no additional parking requirement. (Ord. 2318, 7-23-2018)
   D.   Parcels H And J: All general use regulations and provisions set forth
in title 9, "Zoning", of the City Code for the Residential High-Density
District (RH-16) shall apply to any development proposal for Parcels H and J as
shown on the sketch plan for the GreenWay Crossing PUD ordinance, unless noted
elsewhere within this ordinance.
      1.   Setbacks: All building heights and setbacks shall be in accordance
with the setback and bulk density regulations chapter of the West Des Moines
zoning ordinance, and the following:
         a.   Dimension of "driveway parking area" (face of garage to back of
curb, or edge of pavement of private street or alley) shall be at least twenty
five feet (25').
         b.   Thirty foot (30') front yard setback for two-story buildings in
Parcel H and thirty five foot (35') front yard setback for two-story buildings
in Parcel J.
         c.   Sixty foot (60') front yard setback for three-story buildings.
         d.   Twenty foot (20') minimum separation between buildings. (Ord.
2223, 5-30-2017; amd. Ord. 2318, 7-23-2018)
      2.   Buffers: Buffers will be established according to the requirements
of the PUD and in accordance with title 9, "Zoning", chapter 19, "Landscaping",
of the City Code. A minimum thirty foot (30') buffer will be required to be
provided along 90th Street, with the option of providing a forty five foot
(45') buffer, planted at thirty foot (30') buffer landscaping requirements,
with a public sidewalk within a dedicated easement with the proposal of three-
story buildings. A minimum thirty foot (30') buffer will be required to be
provided along 92nd Street and the south boundary of Parcel J at the time that
a development plan is submitted for Parcel J. (Ord. 2018, 1-13-2014; amd. Ord.
2318, 7-23-2018)
   E.   Parcel K: All general use regulations and provisions set forth in title
9, "Zoning", of the City Code for the Residential Single-Family District (RS-6)
shall apply to any development proposal for Parcel K as shown on the sketch
plan for the GreenWay Crossing PUD ordinance, unless noted elsewhere within
this ordinance.
      1.   Setbacks: All building heights and setbacks shall be in accordance
with the setback and bulk density regulations chapter of the West Des Moines
zoning ordinance, unless noted elsewhere within this ordinance. A five foot
(5') side yard building setback will be allowed with the provision that no part
of any structure, including cantilevers, overhangs, etc., shall be closer than
five feet (5') to a property line.
   F.   Parcel L: All general use regulations and provisions set forth in title
9, "Zoning", of the City Code for the Residential Medium-Density District (RM-
8) shall apply to any development proposal for Parcel L as shown on the sketch
plan for the GreenWay Crossing PUD ordinance, unless noted elsewhere within
this ordinance.
Parcel L shall be developed as detached townhome units and shall be platted as
postage stamp lots with a forty five foot (45') minimum lot width and a minimum
lot size of four thousand five hundred (4,500) square feet allowed. A thirty
foot (30') minimum rear yard building setback and a five foot (5') side yard
building setback will be allowed for the development of Parcel L, with the
provision that no part of any structure, including cantilevers, overhangs,
etc., shall be closer than five feet (5') to a property line.
The required dimension of "driveway parking area" (face of garage to back of
curb, or edge of pavement of private street or alley) be at least twenty five
feet (25') or no greater than ten feet (10'). (Ord. 1785, 10-22-2007; amd. Ord.
2318, 7-23-2018)
053-04: ARCHITECTURE:
The architectural design of any commercial or office buildings within the PUD
shall be acceptable to the City, provided acceptance shall not be unreasonably
held, and all buildings shall have as a primary element being fascia glass,
face brick, or stone with consistency of design and use of materials on all
sides of any building. The design of any building shall incorporate elements
that provide a common theme or compatibility with residential uses in the
neighborhood. The use of brick shall be incorporated into the building
architecture on all sides of the structure, unless the City Council of West Des
Moines, after review by the Plan and Zoning Commission of West Des Moines,
determines that the use of alternate building materials enhances the physical
appearance and accomplishes a compatible structure with the residential uses in
the neighborhood. No wood, masonite, visible asphaltic exterior wall or roof
material, aluminum siding, nonarchitectural sheet metal, concrete block, EIFS,
stucco, or other similar materials shall constitute a portion of any building
except as trim material, unless the City Council of West Des Moines, after
having received a recommendation from the Plan and Zoning Commission of West
Des Moines, shall determine said material when used as a primary element,
enhances the physical appearance, or provides continuity to unite all
structures within the parcel together into one project concept.
   A.   No commercial or office building shall exceed a maximum height allowed
according to the provisions of the zoning ordinance. Design elements such as
clock towers, as focal points shall be allowed to exceed the maximum building
height through review by the Plan and Zoning Commission and the approval of the
City Council.
   B.   Architectural design for multi-family buildings shall express a
creative presentation of exterior building materials, exterior details and
texture, treatment of windows and doors, and use of angles and multiplicity of
planes within the wall and roof design to lessen the plainness of appearance
which can be characteristic of large residential buildings. The use of building
articulation that breaks up the building mass into modules which reflect
proportions similar to the single-family residential dwellings on the adjacent
parcels shall be required. Methods used to create intervals which reflect and
promote compatibility and which respect the scale of the single-family detached
residential dwellings include:
      1.   Facade modulation - stepping back or extending forward a portion of
the facade,
      2.   Repeating the window patterns at intervals equal to articulated
intervals,
      3.   Providing the porch, patio, deck, or covered entry to the
articulation interval,
      4.   Changing the rooflines by alternating dormers, stepped roofs,
gables, or other roof elements to reinforce the modulation or articulation
interval,
      5.   Changing materials with the change in building plane,
      6.   Providing a lighting feature, trellis, tree, or other landscape
feature with each interval,
      7.   Using paint and materials that blend with the single-family
residential areas and to reinforce the modulation or articulated intervals.
   C.   Asphaltic shingles shall be allowed provided the shingle materials are
of a heavier grade that produces a shake or shadowing effect and is consistent
with the color and materials used for the multi-family residential developments
on Parcel J. (Ord. 1785, 10-22-2007)
053-05: OPEN SPACE:
The minimum open space required to be provided for any parcel shall include
twenty five percent (25%) of the total area of the property. Features such as,
but not limited to, pedestrian plazas, sidewalks connections, public gathering
areas with benches, and landscape features, i.e., fountains, flower gardens,
should be considered in order to provide and promote a pedestrian orientation
between the commercial and the other adjoining residential uses within the
entire PUD. (Ord. 2018, 1-13-2014)
053-06: PARKING:
Parking shall be provided for any development within any parcel and shall
comply with the provisions of the City Code, unless noted elsewhere in this
section. Parking for Parcels H and J shall comply with the provisions of the
City Code requirements for attached single-family residential development and
one hundred percent (100%) of the garage spaces may be counted toward meeting
the requirement. Additional parking for guests in Parcels H and J shall be
provided at the ratio of one space for every three (3) residential units and
approved at the time of site plan review unless specified elsewhere in this
ordinance. (Ord. 2018, 1-13-2014)
053-07: BUFFERING:
All development within the GreenWay Crossing PUD shall comply with the
buffering provisions of the landscape ordinance of the city code. In situations
where this PUD specifies the provision of a buffer, the buffer may be included
within the setback. Any fencing shall be constructed outside any required
buffer, unless a landscape plan is submitted by the developer showing how the
fence will be designed to blend with the architectural elements of the
residential neighborhood with brick or stone posts to be spaced no more than
twenty feet (20') on center per the requirements of the city code and is
approved by the plan and zoning commission and city council. (Ord. 2018, 1-13-
2014)
053-08: PEDESTRIAN CIRCULATION:
A master pedestrian circulation plan shall be prepared and submitted with any
development proposal for any parcel within the PUD. The plan shall provide
internal access connections to minimize pedestrian conflicts with traffic
movements to areas within the PUD as well as providing access to public
facilities, i.e., parks, schools, etc. Pedestrian walkways and bike trails
within the PUD shall form an on site circulation system that minimizes the
conflict between pedestrians/bikes and vehicular traffic. The relationship
between the proposed single-family residential, the multi-family residential,
and the commercial uses within the PUD will be organized so as to promote
pedestrian travel and access within the various land uses within the PUD and to
the public trail along 92nd Street. (Ord. 1785, 10-22-2007)
053-09: SIGNAGE:
Signage restrictions shall be imposed to limit and reduce the negative impacts
of sign clutter. Signage within the residential areas of the PUD shall comply
with the sign standards of the applicable residential district. All signs shall
comply with all provisions of the city sign code. All signage constructed as
wall signs on building fascias within the PUD shall incorporate aesthetic
features compatible with the overall character of the development. All wall
signs will be composed of solid individual letters attached to the building
fascia, or individual letters of anodized aluminum, galvanized metal
illuminated self-contained with translucent plastic faces set in anodized
aluminum returns and trim; panel signs with letters incorporated or painted
upon a wall or panel shall be prohibited. Exposed neon signage shall also be
prohibited. Temporary advertising or promotional signage attached to exterior
windows or walls shall be allowed only with an approved temporary signage
permit issued by the city under the provisions for temporary signage in the
city code. (Ord. 1785, 10-22-2007)
053-10: BUILDING RESTRICTIONS, EASEMENTS, AND COVENANTS:
The developer shall, with the approval of the city council, adopt building
restrictions, easements, and covenants pertaining to the property where the
developer and the city deem appropriate. (Ord. 1785, 10-22-2007)
053-11: STORMWATER MANAGEMENT:
Specific stormwater management plans will be required with the development of
each parcel, demonstrating compliance with the approved PUD (GreenWay Crossing)
master stormwater management plan, on file with the city's public works
department. The developer will have said specific stormwater management plans
prepared by a professional engineer licensed in the state of Iowa, prior to the
submittal of any specific development proposals within the PUD. All development
within the PUD shall require a stormwater management plan that demonstrates
compliance with the "GreenWay Crossing PUD master stormwater management plan"
and the city's stormwater design standards. The method of stormwater management
and the stormwater conveyance system shall be determined prior to city approval
of any development within any portion of the property within the GreenWay
Crossing PUD. (Ord. 1785, 10-22-2007)
053-12: SANITARY SEWER:
Any proposed change in approved land use densities for the GreenWay Crossing
PUD will require an analysis of the downstream sanitary sewer capacity to
assure that adequate capacity is available for the proposed change in approved
land use densities.
Parcels A, B, C, D, G, and F, will be served by a private sanitary sewer force
main. Said private sanitary sewer force main will be owned and maintained by
the property owners' association.
The private sanitary sewer lift station will require a DNR permit (approved
copy to be provided to the city); will need to be designed by a professional
engineer; and be designed, constructed, operated and maintained in accordance
with the DNR design standards and permit requirements. Upon completion of the
installation, the professional engineer of record will be required to provide
certification to the city (attention: case advisor) the lift station was
constructed in accordance with the DNR approved construction plans before the
approval and release of a final plat of any parcel utilizing said lift station.
The lift station must be set back forty feet (40') from the sixty foot (60')
ROW line measured from the fence enclosure. (Ord. 2018, 1-13-2014)
053-13: TRAFFIC REPORTS:
A traffic impact study, dated July 2005, has been prepared for the GreenWay
Crossing (formerly known as Braun) PUD. This traffic impact study outlines what
the ultimate transportation needs will be for the GreenWay Crossing PUD area
and the surrounding impacted area. Any changes to the development of the PUD
that exceeds the maximum A.M. peak generation of nine hundred ninety two (992),
P.M. peak generation of one thousand seventy seven (1,077) and/or the total
sixteen thousand six hundred six (16,606) ADT (average daily traffic) as
specified by the July 2005 traffic study and as amended for this PUD will
require a traffic update to be finalized and the approval of an amendment to
this PUD ordinance by the city. Specific PUD parcels are further limited to
maximum trip generation as follows:
 
          Parcels    Parcels    Parcels Total
          A, B, C, D E, F, G, H J, K, L
A.M. peak 635        242        115     992
P.M. peak 684        254        139     1,077
ADT       13,084     2,000      1,522   16,606
 
As development proposals are approved the number of vehicle trips generated by
the proposed development (based upon the number of square feet of a proposed
specific use or number of dwelling units, in conjunction with any parameters
established in the traffic analysis) will be subtracted from the overall total
trips allocated to the development. Approval of this planned unit development
does not constitute a guarantee that the proposed plan can be implemented.
Development of all parcels and implementation of desired land uses, including
specific high traffic generating tenants, will be limited by the available
number of trips. Should anticipated traffic exceed the total trips allocated
for the commercial parcels of the GreenWay Crossing development prior to full
build-out, further development of parcels may be limited or prohibited. (Ord.
2018, 1-13-2014)
053-14: PUBLIC STREET IMPROVEMENTS AND RIGHT OF WAY DEDICATION:
At time of subdivision platting within the GreenWay Crossing PUD, the
subdivider shall be responsible for construction and/or installation of all
required public infrastructure improvements in accordance with the city's
subdivision ordinance, and as indicated on the approved GreenWay Crossing PUD
sketch proposal. With any subdivision plat within the GreenWay Crossing PUD,
the subdivider shall be responsible for constructing and/or installing the
public infrastructure necessary to support development within the subdivision
in a manner that will assure that the public infrastructure functions at an
acceptable level of service (per the city's comprehensive plan) and that
complies with all city ordinances.
   A.   At such time of platting or development, the petitioner proposing said
platting and/or development shall be responsible for:
      1.   Construction of 91st Street, from University Avenue to Bishop Drive:
A thirty one foot (31') wide street shall be constructed (2 lanes) and will be
a private street.
      2.   Construction of 90th Street adjacent to parcels J, K and L: A twenty
six foot (26') street shall be constructed.
      3.   Construction of 90th Street adjacent to parcels C, D, E, F, and G: A
thirty seven foot (37') street shall be constructed.
      4.   Construction of 88th Street from University Avenue to the south
boundary of this PUD: A thirty one foot (31') wide street (2 lanes) shall be
constructed.
      5.   Construction of Bishop Drive from 92nd Street to 88th Street: A
thirty seven foot (37') wide street shall be constructed (3 lanes).
   B.   At such time of platting or development of any parcel or portion of the
area contained within the GreenWay Crossing PUD, the petitioner proposing said
platting and/or development shall deed to the city:
      1.   The applicant shall dedicate sixty feet (60') of right of way from
the centerline of University Avenue on the property adjacent to University
Avenue in fee title. In addition, the applicant shall provide to the city an
irrevocable offer of right of way dedication for the property adjacent to
University Avenue in this development. The amount of right of way to be
dedicated in said irrevocable offer shall be 22.5 additional feet for a total
of 82.5 feet. At such time the city determines it is necessary, the applicant
shall dedicate 22.5 additional feet of right of way to the city in fee title.
      2.   Additional 92nd Street ROW necessary to provide sixty feet (60') of
ROW from the centerline of street.
      3.   Sixty feet (60') of ROW for 91st Street.
      4.   Sixty feet (60') of ROW for 90th Street adjacent to parcels J, K and
L.
      5.   Seventy feet (70') of ROW for 90th Street adjacent to parcels C, D,
E, F, and G.
Note: There will be a ROW transition from sixty feet (60') to seventy feet
(70') which will parallel the street transition from twenty six feet (26') to
thirty seven feet (37'). This will occur between parcel J and the intersection
of Bishop Drive and 90th Street.
      6.   Sixty feet (60') of ROW for 88th Street.
      7.   Seventy feet (70') of ROW for Bishop Drive.
   C.   To provide logical and orderly development within the PUD, allowable
street access locations are defined on the PUD plan. All development within the
PUD shall comply with the allowable access locations indicated on the PUD plan.
      1.   Access to 92nd Street shall be permitted at the following locations
only:
Bishop Drive.
Private driveway approximately nine hundred feet (900') south of Bishop Drive.
      2.   All access points to the public street not divided by a median will
need to align with existing driveway across the street (no staggered
driveways).
      3.   Driveway locations on parcels E, F, G, and H between 92nd Street and
90th Street need to be one hundred fifty feet (150') measured from the
centerline of the public street intersections.
      4.   Driveway locations on parcels E and F need to be one hundred fifty
feet (150') minimum from the street intersection of 88th Street/Bishop Drive
and 90th Street/Bishop Drive. (Ord. 2018, 1-13-2014)
053-15: STREETLIGHTS:
At such time of platting or development within the PUD, the petitioner
proposing said platting and/or development shall be responsible for cost and
installation of required streetlights for all public streets within or adjacent
to the proposed plat/development. (Ord. 1785, 10-22-2007)
053-16: PARK LAND DEDICATION:
An area calculated by a set formula based upon the size and density of the
proposed development will be required to be provided for purposes of a public
park and greenbelt areas. A letter of agreement, acceptable to the park and
recreation department, detailing the specifics related to the park land
dedication requirements for the development of any area contained within the
PUD will be required to be submitted prior to the submittal of any development
proposal for any parcel located within the GreenWay Crossing PUD. (Ord. 1785,
10-22-2007)
053-17: MASTER PROPERTY OWNERS' ASSOCIATION:
With the first development proposal for the rezoned property as acted upon
herein and legally described in section
053-01 of this ordinance, proper action shall be taken to establish a master
property owners' association with said property into the GreenWay Crossing
property owners' association and all building restrictions, covenants, and
other associated conditions attached to the GreenWay Crossing PUD shall be made
to also apply to said property. The GreenWay Crossing property owners'
association shall be responsible for the ongoing upkeep and maintenance of any
privately owned common grounds, structures, signs, etc., as outlined in the
association documents and any other specific development improvements noted as
their responsibility in this ordinance. (Ord. 1785, 10-22-2007)
053-18: LIGHTING:
Wall pack lighting shall be prohibited. All lighting shall be of a cutoff type
to eliminate glare and spillover lighting beyond a property line.
Any lighting used to illuminate any off street parking or loading area shall be
so arranged as to divert the light away from adjoining residential uses or
premises in any residential district and away from the traveled roadway of
public streets; lighting levels shall be one foot-candle level at the property
lines and a photometric plan shall be required by the city at the time of site
plan or permitted conditional use permit review. (Ord. 1785, 10-22-2007)
053-19: VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES:
Any person who violates the provisions of this ordinance upon conviction shall
be punished as set forth in section 1-4-1 of the City Code. (Ord. 1785, 10-22-
2007)
053-99: LEGISLATIVE HISTORY:
Ord. 1349, 1-25-1999; Ord. 1661, 11-7-2005; Ord. 1704, 8-14-2006; Ord. 1785,
10-22-2007; Ord. 1838, 8-24-2009; Ord. 2018, 1-13-2014; Ord. 2044, 7-14-2014;
Ord. 2223, 5-30-2017; Ord. 2312, 7-9-2018; Ord. 2318, 7-23-2018.
PUD #54
WEST GRAND BUSINESS PARK
SECTION:
054-01: Legal Description
054-02: Sketch Plan And Phasing Plan
054-03: General Conditions
054-04: Master Plan Requirements
054-05: Land Use Design Criteria
054-06: Signage Regulation
054-07: Building Restrictions, Easements And Covenants
054-08: All Areas To Be Platted
054-09: Traffic Reports
054-10: Stormwater Management And Hydrology Study
054-11: Lighting Requirements
054-12: Public Improvements And Special Assessments
054-13: Buffers
054-14: Violations And Penalties
054-99: Legislative History
054-01: LEGAL DESCRIPTION:
The legal description for the West Grand Business Park PUD is as follows:
A tract of land in Sections 22, 23, 24, 25, 26 and 27, Township 78 North, Range
26 West of the 5TH Principal Meridian, West Des Moines, Dallas County, Iowa.
This tract of land is more particularly described as follows:
Beginning at the Southeast Corner of Section 24, Township 78 North, Range 26
West of the Fifth Principal Meridian, Dallas County, Iowa;
Thence North, along the East line of said Section 24, to the centerline of
Booneville Road as presently established;
Thence Westerly, along the centerline of said Booneville Road, to the East line
of Section 23, Township 78 North, Range 26 West of the Fifth Principal
Meridian, Dallas County, Iowa;
Thence continuing Westerly, along the centerline of said Booneville Road, to a
point on the West line of the East Half of the Southwest Quarter of said
Section 23. Said point being the Northeast Corner, of the Southwest Quarter of
the Southwest Quarter, of said Section 23;
Thence West, along the North line of the Southwest Quarter, of the Southwest
Quarter of said Section 23, to the Northeast Corner, of the Southeast Quarter
of the Southeast Quarter of Section 22, Township 78 North, Range 26 West of the
Fifth Principal Meridian, Dallas County, Iowa;
Thence West, along the North line of the Southeast Quarter of the Southeast
Quarter of said Section 22, to the Northwest Corner of the East 14 acres of the
Southeast Quarter of the Southeast Quarter of said Section 22;
Thence South, along the West line of the East 14 acres of the Southeast Quarter
of the Southeast Quarter of said Section 22, to the Southwest Corner of the
East 14 acres of the Southeast Quarter of the Southeast Quarter of said Section
22;
Thence to the Northwest Corner of the East 14 acres of the Northeast Quarter of
the Northeast Quarter of Section 27, Township 78 North, Range 26 West of the
Fifth Principal Meridian, Dallas County, Iowa;
Thence South, along the West line of the East 14 acres of the Northeast Quarter
of the Northeast Quarter of said Section 27, to the Southwest Corner of the
East 14 acres of the Northeast Quarter of the Northeast Quarter of said Section
27;
Thence East, along the South line of the Northeast Quarter of the Northeast
Quarter of said Section 27, to the Southeast Corner of the Northeast Quarter of
the Northeast Quarter of said Section 27;
Thence South, along the East line of said Section 27, to the centerline
intersection of Dallas County Highway F90 as presently established;
Thence Easterly, along the centerline of said Dallas County Highway F90, to a
point on the West line of Section 25, Township 78 North, Range 26 West of the
Fifth Principal Meridian, Dallas County, Iowa;
Thence South, along the West line of said Section 25, to the Northwest Corner
of the Southwest Quarter of said Section 25;
Thence East, along the North line of the Southwest Quarter of said Section 25,
to the center of the Raccoon River;
Thence Easterly, along the center of the Raccoon River, to a point on the East
line of the Southwest Quarter of said Section 25;
Thence North, along the East line of the Southwest Quarter of said Section 25,
to the Southwest Corner, of the Northeast Quarter of said Section 25;
Thence East, along the South line of the Northeast Quarter of said Section 25,
to a point 1150.43 feet West of the Southeast Corner of the Northeast Quarter,
of said Section 25;
Thence North 67°33'51" East (assumed), a distance of 35.43 feet;
Thence North 15°37'44" East, a distance of 503.33 feet;
Thence North 02°36'25" East, a distance of 808.12 feet, to the Southerly right-
of-way line of Dallas County Highway F90;
Thence South 76°46'20" East, along the Southerly right-of-way line of Dallas
County Highway F90, a distance of 50.87 feet;
Thence South 02°36'25" West, a distance of 804.48 feet;
Thence South 15°37'44" West, a distance of 469.85 feet;
Thence North 67°33'51" East, a distance of 65.15 feet;
Thence North 86°57'49" East, a distance of 343.49 feet;
Thence South 89°48'42" East, a distance of 251.06 feet, to a point on the South
line of the Northeast Quarter of said Section 25. Said point being 400.41 feet
West of the Southeast Corner of the Northeast Quarter of said Section 25;
Thence East, along the South line of the Northeast Quarter of said Section 25,
to the Southeast Corner of the Northeast Quarter of said Section 25;
Thence North, along the East line of the Northeast Quarter of said Section 25,
to the point of beginning.
And
A tract of land in Sections 19 and 30, Township 78 North, Range 25 West of the
5th Principal Meridian, West Des Moines, Polk County, Iowa. This tract of land
is more particularly described as follows:
The West Half of the Southwest Fractional Quarter of Section 19 (except the
land lying North of the public highway now in use running through said Section
19); also Government Lot 4 in Section 30 (except right-of-way of Chicago Rock
Island and Pacific Railway Company and except the land deeded to the State of
Iowa for a public highway) and in Township 78 North of Range 25, West of the
5th P.M., now in and forming a part of the City of West Des Moines, Polk
County, Iowa.
(Ord. 1373, 6-28-1999)
Except
Parcel "BB" book 2013, page 1937 and a part of an acquisition plat book 2009,
page 5064 filed in the Dallas County Recorder's Office and being a part of the
southeast 1/4 of the southeast 1/4 of section 22, the south 1/2 of the
southwest 1/4 of section 23, the north 1/2 of the northwest 1/4 of section 26,
and the northeast 1/4 of the northeast 1/4 of section 27, township 78 north,
range 26 west of the 5th P.M., City of West Des Moines, Dallas County, Iowa and
described as follows:
Beginning at the southwest corner of the northwest 1/4 of the northwest 1/4 of
section 26, township 78 north, range 26 west of the 5th P.M. also being a
southerly corner of said Parcel "BB"; thence north 00°32'57" east along the
south line of said Parcel "BB", 61.81 feet; thence south 83°53'23" west
continuing along said southerly line, 493.76 feet to the southwest corner of
said Parcel "BB"; thence north 00°42'13" east along the west line of said
Parcel "BB", 1593.01 feet to the northwest corner of said Parcel "BB"; thence
north 89°59'09" east along the north line of said Parcel "BB", 1763.44 feet;
thence south 86°12'46" east continuing along said north line, 112.82 feet;
thence north 88°58'59" east continuing along said north line, 2.03 feet to the
northeast corner of said Parcel "BB" and to the northwest corner of said
acquisition plat; thence south 89°51'59" east along the north line of said
acquisition plat, 30.02 feet; thence north 89°55'13" east continuing along said
north line, 69.10 feet; thence south 45°00'29" east continuing along said north
line, 56.51 feet; thence south 00°02'27" east, 787.77 feet; thence southerly
along a curve concave easterly whose radius is 1688.00 feet, whose arc length
is 387.01 feet and whose chord bears south 06°36'52" east, 386.16 feet to the
south line of said acquisition plat; thence south 76°26'17" west along said
southerly line, 188.33 feet to the southeast corner of said Parcel "BB"; thence
south 76°26'17" west along the south line of said Parcel "BB", 1448.69 feet to
the point of beginning and containing 67.64 acres (2,946,269 s.f.).
(Ord. 2299, 5-14-2018)
054-02: SKETCH PLAN AND PHASING PLAN:
On file with the Community Development Department of the City and made a part
of this rezoning approval for concept description and delineation is the sketch
plan document for the West Grand Business Park Planned Unit Development. It is
recognized, minor shifts or modifications to general plan layout may be
necessary and compatible with the need to acquire workable street patterns,
grades and usable building sites, but the general plan layout, including the
relationship of uses to each other and the relationship of land use to the
general plan framework, and development requirements shall be used as the
implementation guide. Where ever conflict occurs between the written text in
this document and the notations on the sketch plan, the written text shall
prevail. The sketch plan is a graphic representation of the property included
in the PUD delineating the approximate location and configuration of the
parcels for the purpose of easier reference for the applicable regulations of
this ordinance.
Also on file with the Community Development Department of the City and made a
part of this rezoning approval for identification of the anticipated phased
development of the West Grand Business Park Planned Unit Development, is the
phasing plan. It is not anticipated that the property within the West Grand
Business Park will be developed all at one time and the phasing plan is
recognized as an effort to identify the possible incremental development of the
property. It is recognized minor shifts or modifications to the phasing plan
may be necessary and compatible with the need to provide for the incremental
development of the property and the provision of development parcels, but the
general plan layout, including the relationship of phasing parcels to each
other, development requirements shall be used as the implementation guide.
Nothing contained within this ordinance shall prohibit the development of the
individual parcels, or portion of a parcel, within the PUD independent of one
another, so long as the minimum City Code requirements are met, unless modified
herein. (Ord. 1373, 6-28-1999)
054-03: GENERAL CONDITIONS:
Whereas, Title 9 of the West Des Moines City Code includes Chapter 9, PUD
Planned Unit Development District, and establishes certain regulations and
guidelines pertaining to accompanying information required on a plat and site
plan documents.
   A.   Now, therefore, the following conditions, restrictions, and regulations
are adopted as part of this approval and the following general site plan
criteria shall be integrated into and made a part of the development criteria
for the West Grand Business Park PUD, to wit:
      1.   All subdivisions, public streets, public street rights-of- way and
general development shall adhere to the standards and design criteria set forth
in the West Des Moines Subdivision Ordinance and the Des Moines Metropolitan
Design Standards as adopted by the City of West Des Moines pertaining thereto,
unless otherwise modified within this Ordinance.
      2.   Except as may be modified by the specific terms of this document,
all regulations, standards, provisions or requirements that are regulated
elsewhere in the City Code of West Des Moines, shall still be enforced.
      3.   In all areas within a 100-year frequency flood hazard zone, or
adjoining drainageways or detention areas involving potential flood hazards, no
building shall be erected which has a lowest floor, including basements, less
than one foot (1') above the determined level of the 100-year frequency flood
event or floodproofed to the same elevation in accordance with the West Des
Moines Floodplain Ordinance, and no building shall be erected within twenty
five feet (25') of any major drainage, storm water detention basin or pond.
      4.   Adequate buffering of negative aspects of commercial/office/
industrial buildings (loading docks, garbage dumpsters and HVAC mechanical
units) from any public street and adjoining properties shall be addressed at
the time of the review of the site development plan. Roof equipment on all
structures should be screened from view from adjacent properties and public
rights-of-way, especially the upland areas, by means which are architecturally
integrated into the structure. Commercial retail buildings shall not be located
and designed to expose loading docks or doors, loading areas or the rear of
buildings to public streets. All off-street parking lots and loading areas
shall be sufficiently screened, as practical, from public street views with the
use of landscaping, earth berming and/or wall structures as may be required by
the City Code and any other applicable ordinances.
      5.   No building shall be located closer than twenty five feet (25') from
the back of curb of a private street.
      6.   The filing of a preliminary plat, final plat, site plan, permitted
conditional use permit, or master plan to the City for review by the Planning
and Zoning Commission and the City Council within one year of the date that all
infrastructure improvements are extended to the boundary of the PUD, shall be
deemed to comply with the requirements outlined in Title 9, Section 9-9-6,
Final Plan Submittal, of the West Des Moines City Code. (Ord. 1373, 6-28-1999)
054-04: MASTER PLAN REQUIREMENTS:
A general conceptual street layout plan (on file with the Community Development
Department), showing the conceptual layout of the street system within the PUD,
has been submitted and approved in conjunction with this Ordinance. As the
properties within the PUD are proposed to be developed, a detailed master plan
shall be required for each development parcel prior to the development of any
portion of the parcel. The master plan shall be designed to provide
coordination of the transportation system, storm water management, flood
control, buffering, and the preservation of existing vegetation and topography.
Specific attention should be given to addressing future connection of major
street links. The sketch plan has been phased, such that each phase of the
development of the property would be master planned independent of any others.
However, development of, or amendments to, later master plans shall respect the
elements established in the earlier master plan(s). The master plan for each
phase of development as shown on the phasing plan, and any later amendments,
shall be reviewed and approved by the City Council, after receiving a
recommendation from the Planning and Zoning Commission, prior any development
of any portion of the parcel.
Each master plan will serve as a more detailed guide to provisions that will be
required as the varying parcels are developed. The specifics of each master
plan are intended to provide unity and continuity between the various
developments within the PUD. This listing of elements to be included in each
master plan is not intended to be all inclusive. Other elements may need to be
included to ensure the desired unity and continuity of the overall development.
At a minimum, each master plan shall address the following elements:
   A.   Vehicle, Bike And Pedestrian Circulation Element: The circulation
element of each master plan shall show the general layout and location of
existing and proposed public and private streets within or adjoining the PUD in
order to assure workable street patterns, grades and usable building sites.
Site plans shall incorporate an internal pedestrian and bicycle trail system,
if applicable, which connects to public transit and the City-wide trails
system. This element shall deal with proposed land uses and how vehicle
circulation, parking, pedestrian movements, etc., will be coordinated to avoid
conflict and ensure the safe and orderly movement of vehicles, products and
materials, bikes and pedestrians in and though the development. The integration
of the trails and walkways to provide corridors and pathways to link the
residential areas with Raccoon River Greenbelt system and other destinations in
and around the development shall be encouraged.
   B.   Master Street Design And Layout: All subdivisions and streets will
adhere to the standards and design criteria set forth in the West Des Moines
Subdivision Ordinance and the Des Moines Metropolitan Design Standards, as
adopted by the City of West Des Moines unless modified otherwise in this
Ordinance.
   C.   Landscape And Open Space Element: The landscape element of each master
plan shall identify proposed open spaces and recreational areas and any
environmentally sensitive areas that should be protected and preserved as part
of the development of the area. Environmental resources (trees, drainageways,
natural areas, and open space, etc.) shall be preserved, wherever practical,
through the design development and protection measures. Master landscaping and
lighting themes should be set in the plan to ensure an image of unity and
quality both day and night. Sculptures shall be encouraged as design features
within commercial and industrial developments. Lighting and signage should be
located, designed and directed in such a way as to not disturb adjacent uses.
   D.   Utility Element: In order to insure the logical and planned extension
of sanitary sewers, storm sewers and water lines, an element of each master
plan shall identify the proposed locations of these facilities. The possibility
of municipal water well sites in the PUD shall be reviewed as part of the
master planning of any portion of the PUD east of the proposed 74th Street
extension.
   E.   Storm Water Management And Floodplain: For the purpose of establishing
the requirements for this element of each master plan, the PUD will be
identified as the northern portion of the PUD, which includes all areas within
the PUD that are north of the existing alignment of Grand Avenue, and the
southern portion, which is all areas within the PUD that are located south of
the existing alignment of Grand Avenue. This division is due to the fact that
the West Des Moines comprehensive plan, as adopted in 1993, identifies these
areas in two (2) different subareas with different requirements.
      1.   The Northern Portion: This area of the property is located in the
Grand Avenue subarea in the West Des Moines comprehensive plan. As part of the
master planning of any portion of the property in the northern portion of the
PUD, the developer shall identify natural scenic features such as mature trees,
rock outcroppings, watercourses, and views and these features should be
integrated into the project design. Grading should be kept to a minimum in
order to preserve the natural character of the hillsides; unavoidable grading
should complement the existing land forms. Each master plan for the northern
portion of the PUD shall include information and/or an analysis addressing
floodways, wetlands, wooded areas, and streams and tributaries as well as other
natural features identified as significant. The Dallas County Conservation
Board shall be notified of development proposals within this area, and
requested to respond in writing concerning its comments on the proposed
development. For that portion of the northern portion of the PUD that is
located wholly or partially within the 100-year flood plain as identified on
the most recent FEMA flood insurance rate map, the Department of Natural
Resources (DNR) shall also be notified of development proposals and requested
to respond in writing concerning its comments on the proposed development.
      2.   The Southern Portion: The Raccoon River Corridor is a unique and
fragile resource which provides opportunities and constraints for future
development. This area is located in a portion of the Raccoon River Corridor
Subarea of the West Des Moines comprehensive plan. In accordance with the
comprehensive plan, the Dallas County Conservation Board and the Department of
Natural Resources (DNR) shall be notified of development proposals within this
area, and requested to respond in writing concerning its comments on the
proposed development. Each master plan for the southern portion of the PUD
shall include information and/or an analysis addressing floodways, wetlands,
wooded areas, and streams and tributaries as well as other features identified
as significant to the Raccoon River corridor. The master planning of this area
should address uses for the greenbelt, including up-to-date options for
recreational uses, as well as providing opportunities for pedestrian linkages
to other areas, and regional recreational trails and facilities.
Any and all development proposed within the PUD shall undergo a thorough and
coordinated development review prior to the initiation of any grading,
construction, or alteration of the existing natural conditions on site
including vegetation and tree cover, unless modified otherwise in this
ordinance. (Ord. 1373, 6-28-1999)
054-05: LAND USE DESIGN CRITERIA:
In addition to the general conditions and master plan requirements stated
within this document, the following land use design criteria shall apply to the
development areas designated by parcel on the sketch plan. The sketch plan
document referred to in section
054-02 of this ordinance, delineates planning parcels, each denoted with a
specific number, for application of specific standards of land use and
development regulations. (It should be noted that Parcels #10 and #12 were
originally included in the plan but were later deleted and the remaining
parcels were not renumbered. Parcel #10 has since been re-added onto the sketch
plan.) The City of West Des Moines has adopted the Standard Industrial
Classification Manual (1987 edition) as prepared by the U.S. Office of
Management and Budget, hereinafter referred to as SIC, as a method of
classifying and defining specific permitted uses in a particular parcel. The
following development standards and use regulations shall apply to development
within each of the individual parcels, or portion of a parcel, as applicable.
   A.   Parcel 1: All general use regulations and provisions set forth in title
9, Zoning, of the West Des Moines City Code for the SC Support Commercial
District shall apply to any development in Parcel 1 as shown on the sketch plan
for the West Grand Business Park PUD, unless modified otherwise within this
ordinance. The maximum net developable acreage within Parcel 1 shall not exceed
fourteen (14.0) acres.
      1.   Allowed Uses: Uses allowed within this parcel shall be permitted by
right and include all uses allowed within the SC Support Commercial District
pursuant to title 9 of the West Des Moines City Code, unless modified otherwise
within this section. The following uses shall be allowed only with the approval
as a permitted conditional use (Pc):
Telephone communications, (except: Transmitting/receiving towers and/or dishes)
(SIC 481)
Wall mounted antennas and/or dishes (part of SIC 489)
Electric services (SIC 491)
Natural gas transmission (except: natural gas storage and 4925) (SIC 4922)
Mixed, manufactured, or liquefied petroleum gas production and/or distribution
(except: production and manufacturing) (SIC 4925)
Combination utility services (SIC 493)
Water supply (SIC 494)
Sanitary services, sewerage systems (SIC 4952)
Sanitary services, not elsewhere classified (SIC 4959)
Convenience stores (a part of SIC 541)
Gasoline service stations (SIC 554)
Drinking places (SIC 5813)
Freestanding ATM machines (a part of SIC 60)
Massage therapy establishments and steam bath services and dating and escort
services (a part of SIC 7299)
Photo finish labs (SIC 7384)
Automotive repair, services, and parking (SIC 75) (except SIC 752 and 7532)
Miscellaneous automotive repair services (all part of SIC 7549)
Physical fitness facilities (SIC 7991)
Coin-operated amusement devices (video arcades) (SIC 7993)
Membership sports and recreation clubs (SIC 7997)
Educational services (SIC 82)
Child day care services (SIC 835)
Museums, art galleries, botanical and zoological gardens (SIC 84)
Membership organizations, with food/drink services and conference facilities
(part of SIC 86)
Religious organizations (SIC 866)
Courts (SIC 921)
Police protection (SIC 9221)
Fire protection (SIC 9224)
Recreational vehicle repair services, agricultural equipment repair services
(part of 7699)
The following uses shall be prohibited in this parcel:
New and used car dealers (SIC 551)
Used car dealers (SIC 552)
Boat dealers (SIC 555)
Recreational vehicle dealers - campers and travel trailers (SIC 555)
Motorcycle dealers (SIC 557)
Automotive dealers, not elsewhere classified (SIC 559)
Automotive parking (SIC 752)
Top, body, and upholstery repair, paint shops (SIC 7532)
      2.   Other Use Restrictions: Outside displays for retail sales shall only
be allowed with the issuance of a temporary use permit under the provisions of
title 9, chapter 16, Temporary Use Permits, of the City Code. Freestanding pump
island canopies shall be allowed within the front yard setback; however, they
shall not be located closer than thirty five feet (35') from the ultimate
public street right-of-way.
Drive-thru facilities shall be allowed in Parcel 1 provided that at site plan
review, the property owner/developer can demonstrate through design and
screening that the proposed drive-up facility will not negatively impact the
surrounding residential properties or create traffic congestion in the area.
Any drive-up facility shall be designed to be screened with architectural and/
or landscape features from the adjacent public street right-of-way and adjacent
residential properties to minimize the visual impact of the drive-up.
Any news dealers and newsstands (SIC 5994) shall be required to comply with the
City of West Des Moines Adult Entertainment Ordinance.
      3.   Architecture: Architecture and use of materials for the construction
of any building within Parcel 1 shall be principally brick exterior veneer with
compatible coloring and size for the all buildings within the parcel. No wood,
masonite, visible asphaltic exterior wall material, metal and plastic siding,
nonarchitectural sheet metal, concrete block, decorative concrete block, or
other similar materials shall constitute a portion of any building except as a
trim material, unless the City Council of West Des Moines, after having
received a recommendation from the Planning and Zoning Commission of West Des
Moines, shall determine said material when used as a primary element, enhances
the physical appearance, or provides continuity desired to unite all structures
within the parcel together into one project concept. All sides of any building
shall be compatible in design and use of materials.
Multiple use of a site by more than one building shall be permitted provided
that the multiple buildings on the site are consistent in architectural design
and use of materials and organized utilizing a compatible planned open space,
landscape plan, and parking plan to serve and maintain a unified master plan
concept.
      4.   Bulk Regulations: The bulk regulations and setbacks of the Support
Commercial District shall apply to any development in Parcel 1, unless modified
otherwise herein.
 
Minimum lot area           1 acre
Minimum front yard setback 100 feet
Minimum rear yard setback  20 feet (0' required if abutting similar district)
Minimum side yard setback  25 feet (0' required if abutting similar district)
Minimum lot width          50 feet
Maximum building height    40 feet maximum
 
      5.   Open Space Required: On each lot there shall be provided an open
space equal to at least twenty five percent (25%) of the total lot area; said
space shall be unencumbered with any structure or off-street parking and shall
be landscaped and well maintained with grass, trees and shrubbery, except for
areas used as pedestrian walks and ingress-egress drives. In addition, all
parking areas shall include landscape areas, islands, screens, etc., equal to
not less than ten percent (10%) of the total paved area. Such landscaped area
shall be in addition to the open space requirements noted above for the total
lot area. Landscaped islands within the parking area shall have ground cover of
grass (i.e., sod), shrubs or other acceptable living plant life, unless an
alternate ground cover is specifically approved as part of the site plan review
by the City. Inorganic mulches in the landscape islands shall not be considered
acceptable.
   B.   Parcel 2: All general use regulations and provisions set forth in Title
9, Zoning, of the West Des Moines City Code for the PCP Professional Commerce
Park District shall apply to any development in Parcel 2 as shown on the sketch
plan for the West Grand Business Park PUD, unless modified otherwise within
this Ordinance. The maximum net developable acreage within Parcel 2 shall not
exceed twenty five (25.0) acres.
      1.   Allowed Uses: Uses allowed within this parcel shall include all uses
allowed within the PCP Professional Commerce Park District pursuant to Title 9
of the West Des Moines City Code, unless modified otherwise within this
Section. The following uses shall be allowed only with the approval as a
permitted conditional use (Pc):
Telephone communications, (EXCEPT: transmitting/receiving
towers and/or dishes) (SIC 481)
Wall mounted antennas and/or dishes (part of SIC 489)
Electric services (SIC 491)
Natural gas transmission (EXCEPT: natural gas storage and 4925) (SIC 4922)
Mixed, manufactured, or liquefied petroleum gas production
and/or distribution (EXCEPT: production and manufacturing)
(SIC 4925)
Combination utility services (SIC 493)
Water supply (SIC 494)
Sanitary services, sewerage systems (SIC 4952)
Sanitary services, not elsewhere classified (SIC 4959)
Eating places, sit-down eating places, eating places with
take-out only - no drive-thrus (SIC 5812)
Freestanding ATM machines (a part of SIC 60)
Physical fitness facilities (SIC 7991)
Membership sports and recreation clubs (SIC 7997)
Nursing and personal care facilities (SIC 805)
Hospitals (SIC 806)
Educational services (SIC 82)
Child day care services (SIC 835)
Museums, art galleries, botanical and zoological gardens (SIC 84)
Membership organizations, with food/drink services and
conference facilities (part of SIC 86)
Religious organizations (SIC 866)
Courts (SIC 921)
Police protection (SIC 9221)
Fire protection (SIC 9224)
      2.   Other Use Restrictions: Drive-thru facilities shall be allowed in
Parcel 2 provided that at site plan review, the property owner/developer can
demonstrate through design and screening that the proposed drive-up facility
will not negatively impact the surrounding residential properties or create
traffic congestion in the area. Any drive-up facility shall be designed to be
screened with architectural and/or landscape features from the adjacent public
street right-of-way and adjacent residential properties to minimize the visual
impact of the drive-up.
Any news dealers and newsstands (SIC 5994) shall be required to comply with the
City of West Des Moines Adult Entertainment Ordinance.
      3.   Architecture: Architecture and use of materials for the construction
of any building within Parcel 2 shall be principally brick exterior veneer with
compatible coloring and size for the all buildings within each of the parcels.
No wood, masonite, visible asphaltic exterior wall material, metal and plastic
siding, nonarchitectural sheet metal, concrete block, decorative concrete
block, or other similar materials shall constitute a portion of any building
except as a trim material, unless the City Council of West Des Moines, after
having received a recommendation from the Planning and Zoning Commission of
West Des Moines, shall determine said material when used as a primary element,
enhances the physical appearance, or provides continuity desired to unite all
structures within the parcel together into one project concept. All sides of
any building shall be compatible in design and use of materials.
Multiple use of a site by more than one building shall be permitted provided
that the multiple buildings on the site are consistent in architectural design
and use of materials and organized utilizing a compatible planned open space,
landscape plan, and parking plan to serve and maintain a unified master plan
concept.
      4.   Bulk Regulations: The bulk regulations and setbacks of the
Professional Commerce Park District shall apply to any development in Parcel 2,
unless modified otherwise herein.
 
Minimum lot area           30,000 square feet
Minimum front yard setback 50 feet
Minimum rear yard setback  20 feet (0' required if abutting similar district)
Minimum side yard setback  10 feet (0' required if abutting similar district)
Minimum lot width          80 feet
Maximum building height    40 feet maximum
 
      5.   Open Space Required: On each lot there shall be provided an open
space equal to at least thirty five percent (35%) of the total lot area; said
space shall be unencumbered with any structure or off-street parking and shall
be landscaped and well maintained with grass, trees and shrubbery, except for
areas used as pedestrian walks and ingress-egress drives. In addition, all
parking areas shall include landscape areas, islands, screens, etc., equal to
not less than ten percent (10%) of the total paved area. Such landscaped area
shall be in addition to the open space requirements noted above for the total
lot area. Landscaped islands within the parking area shall have ground cover of
grass (i.e., sod), shrubs or other acceptable living plant life, unless an
alternate ground cover is specifically approved as part of the site plan review
by the City. Inorganic mulches in the landscape islands shall not be considered
acceptable.
   C.   Parcel 3: All general use regulations, performance standards and
provisions set forth in Title 9, Zoning, for the PCP Professional Commerce Park
District, shall apply to any development proposal for all property within
Parcel 3 as shown on the sketch plan for the West Grand Business Park PUD,
unless modified otherwise within this Ordinance.
      1.   Allowed Uses: Uses allowed within this parcel shall be permitted by
right and include all uses allowed within the PCP Professional Commerce Park
District and the OF Office District pursuant to Title 9 of the West Des Moines
City Code, unless modified otherwise within this Section. The following uses
shall be allowed only with the approval as a permitted conditional use (Pc):
Telephone communications, (EXCEPT: transmitting/receiving
towers and/or dishes) (SIC 481)
Wall mounted antennas and/or dishes (part of SIC 489)
Electric services (SIC 491)
Natural gas transmission (EXCEPT: natural gas storage and 4925) (SIC 4922)
Mixed, manufactured, or liquefied petroleum gas production
and/or distribution (EXCEPT: production and manufacturing)
(SIC 4925)
Combination utility services (SIC 493)
Water supply (SIC 494)
Sanitary services, sewerage systems (SIC 4952)
Sanitary services, not elsewhere classified (SIC 4959)
Eating places, sit-down eating places, eating places with take-out only - no
drive-thrus (SIC 5812)
Freestanding ATM machines (a part of SIC 60)
Physical fitness facilities (SIC 7991)
Membership sports and recreation clubs (SIC 7997)
Nursing and personal care facilities (SIC 805)
Hospitals (SIC 806)
Educational services (SIC 82)
Child day care services (SIC 835)
Museums, art galleries, botanical and zoological gardens (SIC 84)
Membership organizations, with food/drink services and
conference facilities (part of SIC 86)
Religious organizations (SIC 866)
Courts (SIC 921)
Police protection (SIC 9221)
Fire protection (SIC 9224)
      2.   Other Use Restrictions: Drive-thru facilities shall be allowed in
Parcel 3 provided that at site plan review, the property owner/developer can
demonstrate through design and screening that the proposed drive-up facility
will not negatively impact the surrounding residential properties or create
traffic congestion in the area. Any drive-up facility shall be designed to be
screened with architectural and/or landscape features from the adjacent public
street right-of- way and adjacent residential properties to minimize the visual
impact of the drive-up.
Any news dealers and newsstands (SIC 5994) shall be required to comply with the
City of West Des Moines Adult Entertainment Ordinance.
      3.   Architecture: Architecture and use of materials for the construction
of any building within Parcel 3 shall be principally brick exterior veneer with
compatible coloring and size for the all buildings within the parcel. No wood,
masonite, visible asphaltic exterior wall material, metal and plastic siding,
nonarchitectural sheet metal, concrete block, decorative concrete block, or
other similar materials shall constitute a portion of any building except as a
trim material, unless the City Council of West Des Moines, after having
received a recommendation from the Planning and Zoning Commission of West Des
Moines, shall determine said material when used as a primary element, enhances
the physical appearance, or provides continuity desired to unite all structures
within the parcel together into one project concept. All sides of any building
shall be compatible in design and use of materials.
Multiple use of a site by more than one building shall be permitted provided
that the multiple buildings on the site are consistent in architectural design
and use of materials and organized utilizing a compatible planned open space,
landscape plan, and parking plan to serve and maintain a unified master plan
concept.
      4.   Bulk Regulations: The bulk regulations and setbacks of the
Professional Commerce Park District shall apply to any development in Parcel 3,
unless modified otherwise herein.
 
Minimum lot area           30,000 square feet
Minimum front yard setback 50 feet
Minimum rear yard setback  20 feet (0' required if abutting similar district)
Minimum side yard setback  10 feet (0' required if abutting similar district)
Minimum lot width          80 feet
Maximum building height    40 feet maximum
 
      5.   Open Space Required: On each lot there shall be provided an open
space equal to at least thirty five percent (35%) of the total lot area; said
space shall be unencumbered with any structure or off-street parking and shall
be landscaped and well maintained with grass, trees and shrubbery, except for
areas used as pedestrian walks and ingress-egress drives. In addition, all
parking areas shall include landscape areas, islands, screens, etc., equal to
not less than ten percent (10%) of the total paved area. Such landscaped area
shall be in addition to the open space requirements noted above for the total
lot area. Landscaped islands within the parking area shall have ground cover of
grass (i.e., sod), shrubs or other acceptable living plant life, unless an
alternate ground cover is specifically approved as part of the site plan review
by the City. Inorganic mulches in the landscape islands shall not be considered
acceptable.
   D.   Parcels 4 And 7: All general use regulations and provisions set forth
in title 9, Zoning of the West Des Moines City Code for the RM Residential
Medium Density District shall apply to any development in Parcels 4 and 7 as
shown on the sketch plan for the West Grand Business Park PUD, unless modified
otherwise within this ordinance. The maximum density for any development within
these parcels shall not exceed twelve (12) dwelling units per acre.
      1.   Allowed Uses: Uses allowed within these parcels shall be permitted
as identified pursuant to table 5.1 of title 9 of the West Des Moines City Code
for the RM Residential Medium Density District, unless modified otherwise
within this section. In addition to the uses listed in table 5.1 for the RM
District of title 9 of the City Code the following uses shall be permitted:
Agricultural production - crops (SIC 01) including sod farms and noncommercial
grain storage.
      2.   Architecture Requirements: The architecture of multiple- family
buildings within these parcels shall be acceptable to the City and accomplished
in a manner compatible with the adjoining residential uses in the neighborhood.
Architectural design for multi-family buildings shall attempt to express a
creative presentation of exterior building materials, exterior details and
texture, treatment of windows and doors, and use of angles and multiplicity of
planes within the wall and roof design to lessen the plainness of appearance
which can be characteristic of large residential buildings. No more than eight
(8) dwelling units side by side in a row on any side of a building shall be
permitted. A maximum of twelve (12) dwelling units per building shall be
permitted. Brick elements shall be incorporated into the architecture of all
sides of a building to integrate the commercial and residential uses through
similarity of building materials and style.
      3.   Bulk Regulations: The bulk regulations and setbacks of the
Residential Medium Density District shall apply to any development in Parcels 4
and 7, unless modified otherwise herein.
      4.   Open Space Required: Within each development there shall be provided
an open space equal to at least twenty five percent (25%) of the total lot
area; said space shall be unencumbered with any structure or off-street parking
and shall be landscaped and well maintained with grass, trees and shrubbery,
except for areas used as pedestrian walks and ingress-egress drives. In
addition, all parking areas shall include landscape areas, islands, screens,
etc., equal to not less than ten percent (10%) of the total paved area. Such
landscaped area shall be in addition to the open space requirements noted above
for the total lot area. Landscaped islands within the parking area shall have
ground cover of grass (i.e., sod), shrubs or other acceptable living plant
life, unless an alternate ground cover is specifically approved as part of the
site plan review by the City. Inorganic mulches in the landscape islands shall
not be considered acceptable.
Emphasis should be placed on the protection and preservation of any
environmentally sensitive areas as part of the development of the property.
Environmental resources (trees, drainageways, natural areas, and open space,
etc.) shall be preserved, wherever practical, through the design development
and protection measures.
      5.   Pedestrian Access: Site plans and plats shall incorporate an
internal pedestrian and bicycle trail system which connects to public transit
and City-wide trails system adjacent to the project. Particular emphasis shall
be placed upon providing pedestrian access, if possible, to the office,
commercial, and industrial areas adjoining the property to encourage the
residents of the development to utilize alternative modes of transportation.
   E.   Parcels 5 And 6: All general use regulations, performance standards and
provisions set forth in title 9, Zoning of the West Des Moines City Code, for
the BP Business Park District, shall apply to any development proposal for all
property within Parcels 5 and 6 as shown on the sketch plan for the West Grand
Business Park PUD, unless modified otherwise within this ordinance.
      1.   Allowed Uses: Uses allowed within this parcel shall be permitted by
right and include all uses allowed within the PCP Professional Commerce Park
District, the OF Office District, and the BP Business Park District pursuant to
Title 9 of the West Des Moines City Code, unless modified otherwise within this
Section. The following uses shall be allowed only with the approval as a
permitted conditional use (Pc):
Jewelry, silverware and plated ware (except 3914) (SIC 391)
Costume jewelry and notions (SIC 396)
Heliport/helistop (part of SIC 4581)
Telephone communications, (EXCEPT: transmitting/receiving
towers and/or dishes) (SIC 481)
Wall mounted antennas and/or dishes (part of SIC 489)
Electric services (SIC 491)
Natural gas transmission (EXCEPT: natural gas storage and
4925) (SIC 4922)
Mixed, manufactured, or liquefied petroleum gas production
and/or distribution (EXCEPT: production and manufacturing)
(SIC 4925)
Combination utility services (SIC 493)
Water supply (SIC 494)
Sanitary services, sewerage systems (SIC 4952)
Sanitary services, not elsewhere classified (SIC 4959)
Lumber and construction materials (SIC 503)
Paints, varnishes and supplies (part of SIC 519)
Dry cleaning plants, except rug cleaning (SIC 7216)
Eating places, sit-down eating places, eating places with take-out only - no
drive-thrus (SIC 5812)
Freestanding ATM machines (a part of SIC 60)
Dry cleaning plants, except rug cleaning (SIC 7216)
Carpet and upholstery cleaning (SIC 7217)
Photo finish labs (SIC 7384)
Top, body, and upholstery repair, paint shops (SIC 7549)
Automobile exhaust system repair shops (SIC 7533)
Automotive glass replacement shops (SIC 7536)
Automobile transmission repair shops (SIC 7537)
General automotive repair shops (SIC 7538)
Automotive repair shops, not elsewhere classified (SIC 7539)
Physical fitness facilities (SIC 7991)
Membership sports and recreation clubs (SIC 7997)
Nursing and personal care facilities (SIC 805)
Hospitals (SIC 806)
Educational services (SIC 82)
Child day care services (SIC 835)
Museums, art galleries, botanical and zoological gardens (SIC 84)
Membership organizations, with food/drink services and
conference facilities (part of SIC 86)
Religious organizations (SIC 866)
Courts (SIC 921)
Police protection (SIC 9221)
Fire protection (SIC 9224)
Ordnance and accessories, except vehicles and guided missiles (SIC 348)
Tire retreading and repair shops (SIC 7534)
Transportation services, not elsewhere classified (SIC 4789)
Railroad transportation (SIC 40)
Local and suburban transit and inter-urban highway passenger
transportation (SIC 41)
Rental of railroad cars (SIC 474)
The following uses shall be prohibited in these parcels:
Coating, engraving and allied services (SIC 347)
Special warehousing and storage, not elsewhere classified
(liquid storage and automobile dead storage) (part of SIC
4226)
      2.   Other Use Restrictions: Any enterprise which cannot wholly enclose
its functions within the principal structures, shall be prohibited.
As a part of the review of a site plan or permitted conditional use submitted
for any allowed drive-thru facilities, the property owner/developer must
demonstrate through design and screening that the proposed drive-up facility
will not negatively impact the surrounding residential properties or create
traffic congestion in the area. Any drive-up facility shall be designed to be
screened with architectural and/or landscape features from the adjacent public
street right-of-way and adjacent residential properties to minimize the visual
impact of the drive-up.
Any news dealers and newsstands (SIC 5994) shall be required to comply with the
City of West Des Moines Adult Entertainment Ordinance.
      3.   Architecture: Architecture and use of materials for the construction
of any building within Parcels 5 and 6 shall be compatible in coloring and type
for all the buildings within each of the parcels. The use of brick as accents
on all sides of each of the buildings should be encouraged. No wood, masonite,
visible asphaltic exterior wall material, metal and plastic siding,
nonarchitectural sheet metal, nondecorative concrete block (i.e., plain faced
concrete block), or other similar materials shall constitute a portion of any
building except as a trim material, unless the City Council of West Des Moines,
after having received a recommendation from the Planning and Zoning Commission
of West Des Moines, shall determine said material when used as a primary
element, enhances the physical appearance, or provides continuity desired to
unite all structures within the parcel together into one project concept. All
sides of any building shall be compatible in design and use of materials.
Adequate buffering of negative aspects of commercial buildings (loading docks,
garbage dumpsters and HVAC mechanical units) from any public street and
adjoining properties shall be required. The design of the project shall address
the screening of negative views from the public street and adjoining property
through the use of one, or a combination of the following methods: landscaping,
berming and architectural means. It is recognized that certain uses within
these parcels may require railroad access and there will be loading areas
abutting the railroad right-of-way which may be visible from the public street
(existing Grand Avenue) south of the railroad. At the time of site plan
development, the layout of these sites should be designed to minimize the
negative views. Wherever practical as determined by the City Council as a part
of the review of a development application, buildings shall not be located and
designed to expose loading docks or doors, loading areas or the rear of
buildings to public streets, unless adequate screening can be provided. Roof
equipment on all structures should be screened from view from adjacent
properties and public rights-of-way, especially the upland areas, by means
which are architecturally integrated into the structure.
      4.   Bulk Regulations: The bulk regulations and setbacks of the BP
Business Park District shall apply to any development in Parcels 5 and 6,
unless modified otherwise herein.
 
Minimum lot area           20,000 square feet
Minimum front yard setback 50 feet
Minimum rear yard setback  25 feet (0 feet required if abutting similar
                           district)
Minimum side yard setback  25 feet (0 feet required if abutting similar
                           district)
Minimum lot width          75 feet
Maximum building height    40 feet maximum
 
      5.   Open Space Required: On each lot there shall be provided an open
space equal to at least thirty five percent (35%) of the total lot area; said
space shall be unencumbered with any structure or off-street parking and shall
be landscaped and well maintained with grass, trees and shrubbery, except for
areas used as pedestrian walks and ingress-egress drives. In addition, all
parking areas shall include landscape areas, islands, screens, etc., equal to
not less than ten percent (10%) of the total paved area. Such landscaped area
shall be in addition to the open space requirements noted above for the total
lot area. Landscaped islands within the parking area shall have ground cover of
grass (i.e., sod), shrubs or other acceptable living plant life, unless an
alternate ground cover is specifically approved as part of the site plan review
by the City. Inorganic mulches in the landscape islands shall not be considered
acceptable.
   F.   Parcel 8: All general regulations and provisions set forth in Title 9,
Zoning of the West Des Moines City Code for the Professional Commerce Park
(PCP) District shall apply to Parcel 8, however, a primary use of SIC 8221:
Colleges, Universities and Professional Schools and uses subordinate to or
serving a purpose customarily incidental to a medical school shall be the only
uses allowed.
      1.   Developer Requirements: Unless otherwise agreed upon by the City
Council and/or the Board of Trustees for West Des Water Works, as applicable,
the developer shall be responsible for the following improvements. The
obligations of the developer identified herein shall not preclude the developer
from entering into private agreements for shared construction responsibilities
and/or financing with property owners/developers of ground on adjacent
properties and or benefiting from the improvements.
         a.   Adjacent Street Improvements:
            (1)   Booneville Road: The developer will be responsible for 1½
lanes of reconstructing Booneville Road adjacent to Parcel 8. Since a half of
lane cannot be constructed, if the property owner on the opposite side of the
roadway is unwilling to participate at the time of construction, the applicant
will need to construct two (2) full lanes.
               (A)   That portion of Booneville Road from S 88th Street east to
the proposed future access drive to Parcel 8 as indicated on the campus master
plan (on file with the City) shall be installed at such time that a drive
connection from Parcel 8 to Booneville Road is made, unless otherwise
determined to be necessary sooner by an associated traffic study for
improvements within Parcel 8.
               (B)   Unless otherwise negated due to the relocation of
Booneville Road from its current alignment, the balance of Booneville Road from
the aforementioned access drive east along the frontage of Parcel 8 shall be
installed at such time that the developer makes a secondary access connection
from Parcel 8 to Booneville Road, or unless otherwise determined to be
necessary sooner by an associated traffic study for improvements within Parcel
8.
               (C)   In order to maintain the functional class of the City’s
roadway system as set forth in the comprehensive plan, one half (½) of the
right of way necessary for Booneville Road (a Major Collector) shall be
dedicated to the City in fee title, when requested by the City. Additionally,
as needed, the developer shall provide at no cost to the City temporary
easements necessary for the construction of roadways adjacent to the
development.
            (2)   S Jordan Creek Parkway and S 88th Street: Since the proposed
development of Parcel 8 will result in the removal of the two north/south
streets through the parcel as shown in the traffic study dated September 22,
1997 and Exhibit C of Ordinance No. 1373, the developer shall be required to
install one additional traffic lane to S Jordan Creek Parkway and one
additional traffic lane to S 88th Street.
            (3)   Grand Avenue: Developer requirements for the widening of
Grand Avenue will be based on a traffic impact study indicating the need for
additional capacity on Grand Avenue due to events occurring at Des Moines
University or the construction of additional buildings in the future.
         b.   Water main Installation:
            (1)   A twelve-inch (12") water main along Booneville Road shall be
constructed from the existing stub at S. 88th Street east to the proposed
future access to Parcel 8 from Booneville Road. Construction of this portion of
the water main shall be initiated with phase 1 building construction occurring
within Parcel 8 and shall be completed and operational prior to issuance of a
final occupancy permit for any building within phase 1.
            (2)   Unless otherwise provided, the remainder of the required
water main along existing Booneville Road east of the Booneville access drive
and adjacent to Parcel 8 shall be required to be constructed at such time that
existing Booneville Road is reconstructed. A bond for this future work shall be
submitted to West Des Moines Water Works by the developer of Parcel 8 before
the issuance of any building water meter within Parcel 8. Should Booneville
Road be moved to a new alignment to the north, Parcel 8 would be released of
their bond obligations of any portion of the water main along their north
frontage of the current Booneville Road that is vacated by the City.
         c.   Traffic Signals: Developer will be responsible for the payment of
twenty five percent (25%) of the cost of a fully operational traffic signal at
the intersections of S 88th Street and Booneville Road, S. 88th Street and
Grand Avenue and S Jordan Creek Parkway and Grand Avenue at such time that
traffic warrants. Additionally, the developer shall be responsible for the
payment of fifty percent (50%) of the cost of a fully operational traffic
signal at the full access intersections to the site from Grand Avenue at such
time that traffic warrants.
         d.   Streetlights: The developer of Parcel 8 shall be responsible for
the cost of all streetlights required along Grand Avenue, S 88th Street, and S
Jordan Creek Parkway adjacent to Parcel 8. Additionally, the developer shall be
responsible for streetlights along Booneville Road at such time that portions
of existing Booneville Road is improved.
         e.   Public sidewalks, or trail if applicable, shall be constructed
along all public roadways adjacent to the property by the developer. With the
exception of Booneville Road, unless otherwise deferred by the City Council,
said sidewalks/trails shall be installed in conjunction with Phase 1
development within the site. Sidewalk/trail shall be implemented adjacent to
Booneville Road at such time that the adjacent portion of existing Booneville
Road is improved. Unless otherwise agreed upon by the City, the installation of
public trails shall be constructed under the terms of a 60/40 Trail Agreement.
         f.   A signed Storm Water Management Facility Maintenance Agreement,
along with required as-built drawings and certifications of the detention
facilities, shall be submitted by the developer of Parcel 8 prior to issuance
of the first final occupancy permit for any building within the site.
      2.   Architecture: Architecture and use of materials for the construction
of any building within Parcel 8 shall be principally brick exterior veneer with
compatible coloring and size for all buildings within the parcel. No wood,
masonite, visible asphaltic exterior wall material, metal and plastic siding,
non-architectural sheet metal, concrete block, decorative concrete block, or
other similar materials shall constitute a portion of any building except as a
trim material, unless the City Council of West Des Moines, after having
received a recommendation from the Plan and Zoning Commission of West Des
Moines, determines said material when used as a primary element, enhances the
physical appearance, or provides continuity desired to unite all structures
within the parcel together into one project concept. All sides of any building
shall be compatible in design and use of materials.
      Multiple use of a site by more than one building shall be permitted
provided that the multiple buildings on the site are consistent in
architectural design and use of materials and organized utilizing a compatible
planned open space, landscape plan, and parking plan to serve and maintain a
unified master plan concept.
      3.   Bulk Regulations: The bulk regulations and setbacks of the
Professional Commerce Park District shall apply to any development in Parcel 8,
unless modified otherwise herein.
 
                                        60,000 square feet. Lot areas less than
                                        60,000 square feet shall be considered
                                        acceptable if supported by reciprocal
                                        ingress/egress and parking easements
Minimum lot area                        and if approved by the appropriate
                                        approval body as part of a plat.
                                        Multiple buildings may be allowed on a
                                        single lot with appropriate master
                                        planning of the site and approval by
                                        the City.
Minimum front yard setback (Grand
Avenue, S. 88th Street, S. Jordan Creek 50 feet
Parkway)
Minimum rear yard setback (Booneville   50 feet (25 feet if abutting similar
Road)                                   district)
Minimum side yard setback (adjacent to  50 feet (25 feet if abutting similar
the property on the far northeast       district)
corner of Parcel 8)
Minimum lot width                       150 feet
                                        60 feet: an additional 12 feet of
Maximum building height                 building height is allowed with every
                                        additional 10 feet of building setback
 
      4.   Parking: Off-street parking areas shall adhere to the minimum
requirements as provided in Title 9, Chapter 15 of the West Des Moines City
Code.
      5.    Landscaping: The developers of Parcel 8 desire to create a campus
with a naturalized planting, reminiscent of native prairie landscape and oak
savannah. This landscape will be characterized by native grasses and forbs with
minimal intrusion of woody plants.
         a.   Open Space Required: On each lot there shall be provided open
space area equal to at least twenty-five percent (25%) of the total lot area.
Open space shall be considered to be all areas unencumbered by buildings or
paved areas associated with parking, drive aisles, and loading docks or zones.
Plaza areas, water features and structures such as gazebos, arbors, pergolas,
etc., that are associated with outdoor pedestrian use areas, as well as
designated and enhanced pedestrian walkways through and between areas within
the development may be counted towards fulfilling the minimum open space
requirement. Open space areas shall be landscaped and well maintained with lawn
grass, trees, shrubbery or prairie grasses and flowers. Open space vegetation
shall be provided within PUD parcel 8 at a rate of two (2) trees and three (3)
shrubs per three thousand (3,000) square feet of required open space based on
twenty-five percent (25%) of a lot. Of the open space required vegetation,
twenty percent (20%) of all trees required shall be evergreen in nature.
         b.   Off-Street Parking Areas: Parking lot landscaping shall be
installed according to Title 9, Chapter 19 of the West Des Moines City Code,
except that landscape pods may be omitted where linear islands run the length
of a parking row between every other bay of parking, provided that one tree is
planted in the linear island for every six (6) parking stalls. These trees
shall be equally distributed along the length of the linear landscape islands.
Landscaped islands within the parking area shall include a tree as required by
City Code and have ground cover of grass (i.e., sod), shrubs or other
acceptable living plant life, unless an alternate ground cover is specifically
approved as part of the site plan review by the City. Inorganic mulches in the
landscape islands shall not be considered acceptable.
         c.   Buffers: Existing trees shall be maintained along the common
property lines with Parcel 7, except that invasive species may be removed as
needed. If the adjacent residential property owner provides a written waiver
stipulating that they are in agreement with not requiring a buffer along the
common property lines, a buffer shall not be required. If the adjoining
property owner does not sign off on waiving the buffer, the developer shall
provide a typical thirty foot (30') wide buffer with vegetation per code;
however, earthen berming shall not be required. Existing vegetation that is not
on the City’s prohibited species list may be counted towards fulfilling the
minimum vegetation requirements. The buffer shall be installed prior to
issuance of first occupancy permit for any building within the campus.
         d.   Landscape vegetation requirements for one purpose or area (for
example, buffers) are in addition to landscape vegetation required for another
purpose or area (open space, parking lot landscaping, etc.). While the
implementation of evergreen trees is desired for winter visual interest, due to
the intent to replicate a native prairie appearance within the site, the total
number of evergreen trees required within the site shall be reduced to twenty
percent (20%) of all overstory trees required (sum of open space, buffer and
off-street parking).
      6.   Signage: The need to provide clear guidance to students, staff and
visitors of where to go for the various activities possible within the site is
critical. A Signage Plan has been developed identifying the regulations, design
and placement locations for the following: Landscape signs, Monument Signs,
Directional Signs and Project Construction Signs. Any signage not otherwise
detailed in the Signage Plan on file with the City, shall comply with
regulations for the Professional Commerce Park District stated within Title 9,
Chapter 18 of the West Des Moines City Code.
         a.   Landscape Signs: Up to three (3) Landscape signs, located and
sized according to city code, shall be allowed generally at the southeast,
northwest and southwest corners of the site. These signs shall only identify
DMU.
         b.   Monument Signs: Signage intended to identify Des Moines
University and direct patrons as they enter the site to specific locations
within the campus shall be allowed consistent with regulations for a monument
sign as provided in Title 9, Chapter 18 of the West Des Moines City Code, with
the following exceptions:
            (1)   A maximum of two (2) primary monument signs shall be allowed;
one (1) at the main entrance off of Grand Avenue and one (1) off of S 88th
Street, both at a minimum twenty foot (20') setback from the ultimate street
right-of-way. Each sign shall be allowed up to a maximum of fourteen feet (14')
in height to accommodate for the difference in property elevation as it relates
to the adjoining roadways. The copy on each sign shall not exceed thirty-five
(35) square feet per side.
            (2)   One (1) secondary monument sign shall be allowed at each
other vehicle entrance, current and future. Said signs shall be allowed up to a
maximum of seven feet (7') in height at a minimum twenty-foot (20') setback
from the ultimate street right-of-way. The copy on each sign shall not exceed
thirty-five (35) square feet per side.
         c.    Pedestrian Signs: Signage to direct pedestrians within the site
shall be consistent with City Code for Directional Signs. These signs shall be
located interior to the site (not legible from bordering perimeter roadways) as
desired. Logos shall be permitted on directional signs up to a maximum of five
inches (5") in height.
         d.    Project Construction Signs: Total signage allowed to be
displayed on the property during construction shall be calculated based on
sixty-four (64) square feet per property frontage on a public street. Multiple
signs without sign separation and multiple locations of signage shall be
allowed; however, no more than one hundred twenty-eight (128) square feet of
signage shall be allowed in a single location. All signs greater than sixty-
four (64) square feet shall be located a minimum of fifty feet (50') from the
ultimate street right-of-way lines; signs less than sixty-four (64) square feet
shall comply with sign code regulations. Illumination of the signs shall be
allowed by ground lights directed at the sign face with implementation of all
measures possible to negate any light spillover beyond the face of the sign.
Said signage shall not be erected on the property until such time that a phased
or full site plan or subdivision plat for the property containing the sign has
been approved by the City and development of the parcel upon which the sign is
located is imminent. Said signage shall be allowed to remain until such time
that the first occupancy permit, including temporary occupancy permits are
issued for any building within the site.
   G.   Parcel 9: All general use regulations and provisions set forth in title
9, Zoning of the West Des Moines City Code for the CVC Convenience Commercial
District shall apply to any development in Parcel 9 as shown on the sketch plan
for the West Grand Business Park PUD, unless modified otherwise within this
ordinance. The total net developable acreage of Parcel 9 shall not exceed five
(5.0) acres.
      1.   Allowed Uses: Uses allowed within this parcel shall be permitted by
right and include all uses allowed within the CVC Convenience Commercial
District pursuant to title 9 of the West Des Moines City Code, unless modified
otherwise within this section. The following uses shall be allowed only with
the approval as a permitted conditional use (Pc):
Telephone communications, (EXCEPT: transmitting/receiving towers and/or dishes)
(SIC 481)
Wall mounted antennas and/or dishes (part of SIC 489)
Electric services (SIC 491)
Natural gas transmission (EXCEPT: natural gas storage and 4925) (SIC 4922)
Mixed, manufactured, or liquefied petroleum gas production and/or distribution
(EXCEPT: production and manufacturing) (SIC 4925)
Combination utility services (SIC 493)
Water supply (SIC 494)
Sanitary services, sewerage systems (SIC 4952)
Sanitary services, not elsewhere classified (SIC 4959)
Convenience stores (a part of SIC 541)
Meat and fish markets (SIC 542)
Fruit and vegetable markets (SIC 543)
Gasoline service stations - without repair (SIC 554)
Eating places, sit-down eating places, eating places with take-out only - no
drive-thrus (SIC 5812)
Freestanding ATM machines (a part of SIC 60)
Garment pressing, and agents for laundries and dry cleaners with drive-thrus
(part of SIC 7212)
Photo finish labs (SIC 7384)
Dance, studios, schools and halls (SIC 791)
Educational services (SIC 82)
Child day care services (SIC 835)
Museums, art galleries, botanical and zoological gardens (SIC 84)
Religious organizations (SIC 866)
Courts (SIC 921)
Police protection (SIC 9221)
Fire protection (SIC 9224)
      2.   Other Use Restrictions: Outside displays for retail sales shall only
be allowed with the issuance of a temporary use permit under the provisions of
title 9, chapter 16, Temporary Use Permits, of the City Code. All uses shall be
designed to buffers the negative aspects of the use from the adjacent
residential areas. Gasoline pump island canopies proposed as freestanding
accessory structures shall be allowed within the front yard setback however,
they shall not be located closer than thirty feet (30') from the ultimate
public street right- of-way.
Drive-thru facilities which are allowed within Parcel 9, shall be reviewed at
the time of site plan or permitted conditional use permit review, and the
property owner/developer must demonstrate through design and screening that the
proposed drive-up facility will not negatively impact the surrounding
residential properties or create traffic congestion in the area. Any drive-up
facility shall be designed to be screened with architectural and/or landscape
features from the adjacent public street right-of-way and adjacent residential
properties to minimize the visual impact of the drive-up.
Any news dealers and newsstands (SIC 5994) shall be required to comply with the
City of West Des Moines Adult Entertainment Ordinance.
      3.   Architecture: Architecture and use of materials for the construction
of any building within Parcel 9 shall be accomplished in a manner compatible
with residential uses within the area. Buildings within this parcel shall be
principally brick exterior veneer with compatible coloring and size for all of
the building in the parcel. No wood, masonite, visible asphaltic exterior wall
material, metal and plastic siding, nonarchitectural sheet metal, concrete
block, decorative concrete block, or other similar materials shall constitute a
portion of any building except as a trim material, unless the City Council of
West Des Moines, after having received a recommendation from the Planning and
Zoning Commission of West Des Moines, shall determine said material when used
as a primary element, enhances the physical appearance, or provides continuity
desired to unite all structures within the parcel together into one project
concept. Roof styles shall be residential in character, principally of a gable
or hip style design. All heating, ventilation, and air conditioning mechanical
units shall be located on the ground and shall be screened from all adjoining
properties and roadways. All sides of the building shall be compatible in
design and use of materials. Strip commercial centers should be avoided.
Multiple use of a site by more than one building shall be permitted provided
that the multiple buildings on the site are consistent in architectural design
and use of materials and organized utilizing a compatible planned open space,
landscape plan, and parking plan to serve and maintain a unified master plan
concept.
      4.   Bulk Regulations: The bulk regulations and setbacks of the
Convenience Commercial District shall apply to any development in Parcel 9,
unless modified otherwise herein.
 
Minimum lot area           40,000 square feet
Minimum front yard setback 45 feet
Minimum rear yard setback  35 feet (0 feet required if abutting similar
                           district)
Minimum side yard setback  50 feet (0 feet required if abutting similar
                           district)
Minimum lot width          50 feet
Maximum building height    30 feet
 
      5.   Open Space Required: On each lot there shall be provided an open
space equal to at least twenty five percent (25%) of the total lot area; said
space shall be unencumbered with any structure or off-street parking and shall
be landscaped and well maintained with grass, trees and shrubbery, except for
areas used as pedestrian walks and ingress-egress drives. In addition, all
parking areas shall include landscape areas, islands, screens, etc., equal to
not less than ten percent (10%) of the total paved area. Such landscaped area
shall be in addition to the open space requirements noted above for the total
lot area. Landscaped islands within the parking area shall have ground cover of
grass (i.e., sod), shrubs or other acceptable living plant life, unless an
alternate ground cover is specifically approved as part of the site plan review
by the City. Inorganic mulches in the landscape islands shall not be considered
acceptable.
   H.   Parcel 10: All general regulations and provisions set forth in title 9,
Zoning of the West Des Moines City Code for the Business Park (BP) District
shall apply to Parcel 10 unless provided otherwise in this ordinance.
      1.   Allowed Uses: The site shall be developed under SIC 7999: amusement
and recreation services, not elsewhere classified, consisting of a combination
of an indoor recreation complex and outdoor sports fields. In addition to the
primary activity of sporting events, the indoor complex shall be allowed to
serve as a venue for various events such as, but not limited to, conferences
and meeting space, exhibition hall, concerts, graduations, etc. Uses ancillary
to the primary recreational use(s) may also be incorporated within the indoor
complex and may include retail, sports-related pro-shop, restaurant/
concessions, sports related medical and physical therapy offices and clinics,
sports training, and offices for operational staff for the complex and sport
groups and associations under contract with the City.
      2.   Bulk Regulations: All development regulations pertaining to the
Business Park Zoning District contained in title 9, Zoning, of the West Des
Moines City Code shall be adhered to unless otherwise modified by this
ordinance:
 
Minimum lot area           20,000 square feet
Minimum front yard setback 50 feet
Minimum rear yard setback  50 feet
Minimum side yard setback  50 feet
Minimum lot width          75 feet
                           60 feet: an additional 12 feet of building height is
Maximum height             allowed with every additional 10 feet of building
                           setback
Minimum parking setback    25 feet from perimeter of property
 
      3.   Parking: With the exception of that indicated below, off- street
parking areas shall adhere to the minimum requirements as provided in title 9,
chapter 15 of the West Des Moines City Code.
Parking within the site shall be provided at the following ratios:
         a.   Arena: One parking space per four (4) fixed seats.
         b.   Fieldhouse: One parking space per one thousand (1,000) square
feet of court or turf area.
         c.   Meeting rooms: One parking space per fifty (50) square feet.
         d.   Outdoor fields: Eighty five (85) parking spaces per field.
         e.   Offices: One parking space per two hundred seventy five (275)
square feet of office area, including reception and common areas.
         f.   No parking shall be required of ancillary uses located within the
building (i.e.: restaurant, pro-shop, sports related medical and physical
therapy offices and clinics, and sports training) which typically would not
provide services to patrons not otherwise at the complex for another reason.
Ancillary uses that may operate independently of the complex which would draw
their own patrons in addition to activities or uses already occurring in the
complex shall be parked for each use according to title 9, chapter 15 of the
City Code.
It is recognized that operationally individual areas of the complex may be
configured and/or used in a variety of ways and with multiple uses occurring
within the site at a given time which may affect the amount of parking needed.
Use of the complex shall be limited by available parking within the site unless
alternate parking accommodations, such as shuttle service from off-site parking
fields and/or off-peak parking agreements with nearby establishments are
secured. Additional parking will be required to be constructed within the site
or operations restricted when on-site events result in the parking of vehicles
on grass or in other non-designated parking areas or parking is occurring on
nearby properties without the consent of those property owners. At such time
when it is demonstrated on multiple occurrences that there is not enough
parking to accommodate events held on-site, the City reserves the right to
require modifications in operations or an increase in the number of parking
stalls either through construction on-site, execution of shared-parking
agreements with businesses within one thousand feet (1,000') of the RecPlex
property or securing of off-site parking areas with shuttle services. Prior to
implementation of additional parking within the site, submittal and approval of
a Minor Modification Site Plan application will be required which details the
location of additional parking and engineering details.
      4.   Open Space And Landscaping Required:
         a.   Open Space: On each lot there shall be provided open space equal
to at least twenty five percent (25%) of the total lot area; said space shall
be unencumbered with any structure, vehicle use areas or off-street parking and
shall be landscaped and well maintained with grass, trees and shrubbery. The
area of open-air outdoor recreation fields shall be allowed to count towards
provision of the minimum required open space within the site. A minimum of two
(2) trees and three (3) shrubs shall be provided for every three thousand
(3,000) square feet of required open space. As part of the site plan review and
approval process, a landscape concept for the entire site shall be provided
that illustrates anticipated location of vegetation, type of plant and the
phase in which the vegetation will be installed. All vegetation must be
installed within three (3) years of the issuance of the first occupancy permit,
whether temporary or final. The site plan shall use a symbol to identify the
type of plant (overstory, understory, evergreen tree, deciduous shrub,
evergreen shrubs, ornamental grass, and perennials) and shall include a list
for possible varieties that may be chosen from for each plant type. Prior to
installation, a Minor Modification Level 1 application which details final
location and plant variety for each respective phase shall be provided to and
approved by the Development Services Department.
         b.   Trees: At least twenty five percent (25%) of all trees required
on the site (sum of open space, buffer, and parking lot trees required) shall
be evergreen species to ensure year- round visual interest and aid in the
effectiveness of screening.
         c.   Parking Areas: All parking areas shall include landscape areas,
islands, tree-pods, etc., equal to not less than ten percent (10%) of the total
paved parking area and drive aisles. Such landscaped area shall be in addition
to the open space requirements noted above for the total lot area. One tree
shall be installed for every 9' x 17' area of a parking lot island and in a
tree diamond. Landscaped islands within the parking area shall have ground
cover of grass (i.e., sod), shrubs or other acceptable living plant life,
unless an alternate ground cover is specifically approved as part of the site
plan review by the City. Inorganic mulches in the landscape islands shall not
be considered acceptable.
         d.   Views: Views from any street or adjacent PUD parcel of off-
street parking areas shall be mitigated to a height of three feet (3') through
the use of earthen berming, vegetation, or a combination of the two. To the
greatest extent possible, plants used for screening shall be coniferous in
order to provide for year-round visual mitigation.
         e.   Buffering: Adequate buffering of negative aspects such as, but
not limited to, service areas, loading docks, garbage dumpsters and HVAC
mechanical units, from any street and adjoining PUD parcels shall be required
through the use of one, or a combination of the following methods: landscaping,
berming and architectural means. At the time of site plan development, the
layout of these sites should be designed to minimize the negative views.
Wherever practical as determined by the City Council as a part of the review of
a development application, buildings shall not be located and designed to
expose service areas or loading docks or doors to streets, unless adequate
screening can be provided. Roof top equipment on all structures should be
screened from view from streets and adjacent properties, especially the upland
areas, by means which are architecturally integrated into the structure.
         f.   Plant Substitutions: Plant substitutions shall comply with title
9, chapter 19 of City Code. In addition to that allowed in chapter 19,
ornamental grasses shall be allowed to count toward open space, buffer, and
parking lot shrub requirements on a one to one basis. If the specific variety
of vegetation specified on the approved site plan is not available,
substitutions may be made with the approval of the City Landscape Architect;
however, any replacement needs to be the same type as the one being replaced
(i.e., only an overstory tree can replace an overstory tree, only an evergreen
tree can replace an evergreen tree, etc.). If substitutions are made from that
provided on the approved site plan, a level 1 minor modification will need to
be submitted to the Development Services Department which details all changes
made.
         g.   Minimum Vegetation Size: Vegetation shall meet the following
minimum sizes at time of planting:
            (1)   Overstory Trees: Minimum 1.5 inch caliper.
            (2)   Understory/Ornamental Trees: Minimum 1.0 inch caliper if
single-stem; minimum five feet (5') if multi-stem.
            (3)   Conifer Trees: Minimum four foot (4') height if grown in
root-pruned bags, otherwise minimum six feet (6') in height.
            (4)   Shrubs:
   (A) Deciduous shrubs that reach a mature height greater than five feet (5')
shall be installed at a minimum of three feet (3') in height.
   (B) Deciduous shrubs that reach a mature height between three feet (3') and
five feet (5') shall be installed at a minimum of two feet (2') in height.
   (C) Deciduous shrubs that reach a mature height of less than three feet (3')
shall be installed at a minimum height of fifteen inches (15").
            (5)   Conifer Ground Cover (Mat Evergreens): Minimum fifteen inch
(15") spread.
            (6)   Ornamental Grasses: Minimum one-gallon container size.
            (7)   Perennials: Minimum four inch (4") container size.
      5.   Architecture: The architectural intent for this parcel is to
establish a unique and high-quality identity for a recreational complex.
Architectural design for any building in this parcel shall be acceptable to the
City. Building form and facades shall be varied and articulated to provide
visual interest and lessen the plainness of appearance which can be
characteristic of large prefabricated buildings. All facades shall receive high
quality materials, finishes, and details (360-degree architectural treatment).
         a.   All buildings within this development shall accommodate or
incorporate the following in building design and materials:
            (1)   Corporate architecture shall be prohibited. Limited use of
corporate colors in building materials or exterior accent lighting that are
characteristic of the sponsors or building users may be allowed at the
discretion of the Director of Development Services or the appropriate reviewing
and approval body. Implementation of colors or lighting shall not be a visual
distraction and shall be implemented as part of the overall architectural
design for the building.
            (2)   Any elevations that are facing a street should avoid the
appearance of being the "back of the building". The level of design and detail
can be reduced on the facades not facing a street as long the same or similar
materials and design elements are included on all facades.
            (3)   Buildings shall be organized to create a logical and
identifiable relationship with the site and other buildings, open spaces, and
pedestrian circulation paths.
            (4)   Variation in building height, mass and roof forms shall be
provided to create interest while still maintaining an overall building
continuity, paying careful attention to exterior building materials and
details, use of fenestration, and change in building mass within the plan and
roof design.
            (5)   Entrances into buildings should be easily identified through
the use of building design and detailing. Projected or recessed entryways,
change in rooflines, addition of awnings or changes in building material are
examples that can create this effect.
            (6)   The use of building articulation shall be reinforced with
variation in materials, material modules, expressed joints, textures, colors
and details to break up the mass of the building. Materials should change with
the change in building planes and be arranged to have the appearance of three-
dimensional elements to the greatest extent possible.
            (7)   Trim and structural elements such as posts or columns shall
be sized to the scale of the building.
            (8)   Whenever possible and logical, the ground floor should
provide the maximum possible glazing toward pedestrian areas (walks, plaza
spaces) to provide pedestrians with visual interest. Use of reflective glass or
mirrored glass is discouraged to promote the linkage of the interior and
exterior of the building.
         b.   Materials should be durable, economically maintained and of a
quality that will maintain their appearance over a prolonged time. Allowed
building materials include, but are not limited to, brick and stone veneers,
architectural metal cladding, metal or composite rain screen panel systems,
cast in place concrete panels and decorative concrete block. No wood, synthetic
stucco, non-architectural metal cladding, plain concrete block, or other
similar materials shall constitute a portion of a building except as a trim
material, unless the City Council, after having received a recommendation from
the Plan and Zoning Commission, shall determine said material, when used as a
primary element, enhances the physical appearance of the building.
      6.   Signage: Due to the size and layout of the recreational complex and
anticipated high percentage of patrons that may not be regular attendees to the
facility, the need to provide clear guidance to visitors of where to go for the
various activities possible within the site is critical. A Signage Plan (on
file with the City) has been developed identifying the regulations, design and
placement locations for specific signs for the following purposes: Main
Entrance Identification, Vehicle Wayfinding or Direction, Pedestrian Wayfinding
or Direction, Outdoor Recreational Field Identification, including sponsorship
identification, video and non-video scoreboards and Rules and Regulations.
Wherever conflict occurs between the written text in this document and the
details on the Signage Plan, the details on the Signage Plan shall prevail.
         a.   Monument Signs: Signage intended to identify the name of the
development/complex which may also include wayfinding information to direct
patrons to specific locations within the complex shall be allowed consistent
with regulations for a monument sign as provided in title 9, chapter 18 of the
West Des Moines City Code, with the following exceptions:
            (1)   A maximum of two (2) signs shall be allowed within the site
at a minimum twenty-foot (20') setback from a public street right-of-way.
            (2)   A minimum one hundred fifty feet (150') shall be maintained
between signs.
            (3)   These signs shall not exceed seven feet six inches (7'6") in
height and sixty-seven (67) square feet of structure size.
            (4)   The sign structure shall be designed to create visual
interest and be unified with the architecture, colors and materials that are
relevant to the overall site. Said signs must be more than just a box placed on
a slab in the ground; they shall too be an attractive feature, incorporating
architectural elements on the sides, bottom and top to frame the sign area.
            (5)   Sign copy shall not be required to comply with the minimum
three-fourths inches (¾”) dimensional lettering requirements of the code.
         b.   Wayfinding Signage: These signs are intended to provide
instruction and/or information to the public to direct them into and around a
site. Two types of wayfinding signs are defined based upon the method of
movement within the site.
            (1)   Vehicular Wayfinding Signage intended to aid motoring
visitors:
               a)   The height of these signs shall not exceed seven feet six
inches (7'6") in height and twenty-five (25) square feet in structure size.
               b)   Sign copy shall not be required to comply with the minimum
three-fourths inches (¾”) dimensional lettering requirements of the code.
            (2)   Pedestrian Wayfinding Signage intended to aid walking
visitors:
               a)   The height of these signs shall not exceed seven feet six
inches (7'6") in height and ten (10) square feet in structure size.
               b)   Sign copy shall not be required to comply with the minimum
three-fourths inches (¾”) dimensional lettering requirements of the code.
         c.   Field Identification: While per code these signs would not be
allowed to display any corporate identification, due to the community benefit
of this facility that was made possible in part through donations and funding
by various corporate sponsors, business identification of financial
contributors will be allowed on these signs. Signage identifying individual
recreation fields may be located adjacent to each recreation field consistent
with the following:
            (1)   The size of these signs shall not exceed nine feet (9') in
height and thirty (30) square feet in structure size.
            (2)   The copy identifying the field number may be a maximum of two
(2) feet in height and may be illuminated but must be shut off between 11:00 pm
and 5:00 am unless the field is in use. In that case, the illumination must be
shut off within one hour of the end of the use of the field for that day. The
field number identification shall not be required to comply with the minimum
three-fourths inches (¾”) dimensional letter requirement.
            (3)   Sponsor names or logos: may be displayed on the signs but
shall not exceed four (4) square feet in total copy area and shall not be
internally illuminated. The top edge of the copy shall be no higher than five
feet (5') from the ground.
            (4)   Sign copy shall not be required to comply with the minimum
three-fourths inches (¾”) dimensional lettering requirements of the code.
            (5)   A maximum of one sign shall be allowed per field.
         d.   Scoreboards: Scoreboards with video display capabilities shall
comply with regulations for scoreboards as provided in title 9, chapter 10 of
West Des Moines City Code. Non-video display scoreboards associated with a
recreational field shall be allowed in addition to field identification
signage.
         e.   Rules and Regulations signs: These signs are informational signs
to communicate rules and regulations to patrons and visitors to the site. These
signs shall be allowed on poles with the top of the sign at a maximum of seven
feet (7') high with a sign area not to exceed six (6) square feet in size.
These signs may include the RecPlex logo or identification; however, no
additional square footage of sign area will be granted to accommodate their
identification.
         f.   Building Signage: Due to the scale of the building and the
setback from the public street, the total amount of building signage (wall
signs) shall be calculated based upon the length of the building facing north
(Grand Avenue) at one point seven five (1.75) square foot per linear foot of
building frontage. The City of West Des Moines logo may exceed the maximum six-
foot (6') height allowed by code but shall not exceed eight feet (8') in
height. The logo in combination with the city’s name text shall not exceed a
maximum of fourteen feet six inches (14'6") in height. All other wall signage
including size of logos and collective total square footage of all wall signs
allowed at the one point seven five (1.75) square foot per linear foot rate
shall comply with city code requirements for wall signage.
   I.   Parcel 11: All general use regulations, performance standards and
provisions set forth in title 9, Zoning, of the West Des Moines City Code for
the LI Light Industrial District, shall apply to any development proposal for
all property within Parcel 11 as shown on the sketch plan for the West Grand
Business Park PUD, unless modified otherwise within this ordinance.
      1.   Allowed Uses: Uses allowed within this parcel shall be permitted by
right and include all uses allowed within the LI Light Industrial District
pursuant to title 9 of the West Des Moines City Code, unless modified otherwise
within this section. The following uses shall be allowed only with the approval
as a permitted conditional use (Pc):
Lawn and garden services (SIC 0782)
Ornamental shrub and tree services (SIC 0783)
Construction and contractor's operations and storage yards (SIC 15, 16 and 17)
Wood containers (SIC 244)
Misc. wood products (except 2491 and 2492) (SIC 249)
Fabricated structural metal products (except 3442 and 3444) (SIC 344)
Jewelry, silverware and plated ware (SIC 391)
Costume jewelry and notions (SIC 396)
Railroad transportation (SIC 40)
Local and suburban transit and inter-urban highway passenger transportation
(SIC 41)
Mini-warehouses/self-storage (including caretaker's facilities) (part of SIC
4225)
Terminal and joint terminal maintenance facilities for motor freight
transportation (SIC 423)
Heliport/helistop (part of SIC 4581)
Rental of railroad cars (SIC 474)
Transportation services, not elsewhere classified (SIC 4789)
Telephone communications, (except: transmitting/receiving towers and/or dishes)
(SIC 481)
Wall mounted antennas and/or dishes (part of SIC 489)
Electric services (SIC 491)
Natural gas transmission (except: natural gas storage and 4925) (SIC 4922)
Mixed, manufactured, or liquefied petroleum gas production and/or distribution
(except: production and manufacturing) (SIC 4925)
Combination utility services (SIC 493)
Water supply (SIC 494)
Sanitary services, sewerage systems (SIC 4952)
Sanitary services, not elsewhere classified (SIC 4959)
Paints, varnishes and supplies (part of SIC 519)
Dry cleaning plants, except rug cleaning (SIC 7216)
Carpet and upholstery cleaning (SIC 7217)
Photo finish labs (SIC 7384)
Physical fitness facilities (SIC 7991)
Educational services (SIC 82)
Museums, art galleries, botanical and zoological gardens (SIC 84)
Religious organizations (SIC 866)
Courts (SIC 921)
Police protection (SIC 9221)
Fire protection (SIC 9224)
Fats and oils (SIC 207)
Cement, hydraulic (SIC 324)
Ready-mix concrete (SIC 3273)
Ordnance and accessories, except vehicles and guided missiles (SIC 348)
The following uses shall be prohibited in these parcels:
Coating, engraving and allied services (SIC 347)
Special warehousing and storage, not elsewhere classified (liquid storage and
automobile dead storage) (part of SIC 4226)
      2.   Other Use Restrictions: Any outdoor storage within these parcels
shall only be allowed with the approval of a permitted conditional use permit
by the City Council that specifically addressed the outdoor storage as a part
of the development application. Any outdoor storage areas shall be screened
from views from the public streets with the use of a combination of two (2) or
more of the following mitigation measures; architectural elements, berming and
dense landscape plantings consistent with the requirements of a thirty foot
(30') buffer park.
As a part of the review of a site plan or permitted conditional use submitted
for any allowed drive-thru facilities, the property owner/developer must
demonstrate through design and screening that the proposed drive-up facility
will not negatively impact the surrounding residential properties or create
traffic congestion in the area. Any drive-up facility shall be designed to be
screened with architectural and/or landscape features from the adjacent public
street right-of-way and adjacent residential properties to minimize the visual
impact of the drive-up.
      3.   Architecture: Architecture and use of materials for the construction
of any building within Parcel 11 shall be compatible in coloring and type for
all buildings within the parcel. The use of brick as accents on all sides of
each of the buildings should be encouraged. No wood, masonite, visible
asphaltic exterior wall material, metal and plastic siding, nonarchitectural
sheet metal, nondecorative concrete block (i.e., plain faced concrete block),
or other similar materials shall constitute a portion of any building except as
a trim material, unless the City Council of West Des Moines, after having
received a recommendation from the Planning and Zoning Commission of West Des
Moines, shall determine said material when used as a primary element, enhances
the physical appearance, or provides continuity desired to unite all structures
within the parcel together into one project concept. All sides of any building
shall be compatible in design and use of materials.
Adequate buffering of negative aspects of commercial buildings (loading docks,
garbage dumpsters and HVAC mechanical units) from any public street and
adjoining properties shall be required. It is recognized that certain uses
within this parcel may require railroad access and there will be loading areas
abutting the railroad right-of-way which may be visible from the public street
(existing Grand Avenue) south of the railroad. At the time of site plan
development, the layout of these sites should be designed to minimize the
negative views. Wherever practical, buildings shall not be located and designed
to expose loading docks or doors, loading areas or the rear of buildings to
public streets, unless adequate screening can be provided. Roof equipment on
all structures should be screened from view from adjacent properties and public
rights-of-way, especially the upland areas, by means which are architecturally
integrated into the structure.
      4.   Bulk Regulations: The bulk regulations and setbacks of the LI Light
Industrial District shall apply to any development in Parcel 11, unless
modified otherwise herein.
 
Minimum lot area           20,000 square feet
Minimum front yard setback 45 feet
Minimum rear yard setback  20 feet (0 feet required if abutting similar
                           district)
Minimum side yard setback  50 feet (0 feet required if abutting similar
                           district)
Minimum lot width          75 feet
Maximum building height    60 feet maximum (additional 12 feet of height
                           allowed for each additional 10 feet of setback)
 
      5.   Open Space Required: On each lot there shall be provided an open
space equal to at least twenty percent (20%) of the total lot area; said space
shall be unencumbered with any structure or off street parking and shall be
landscaped and well maintained with grass, trees and shrubbery, except for
areas used as pedestrian walks and ingress-egress drives. In addition, all
parking areas shall include landscape areas, islands, screens, etc., equal to
not less than ten percent (10%) of the total paved area. Such landscaped area
shall be in addition to the open space requirements noted above for the total
lot area. Landscaped islands within the parking area shall have ground cover of
grass (i.e., sod), shrubs or other acceptable living plant life, unless an
alternate ground cover is specifically approved as part of the site plan review
by the City. Inorganic mulches in the landscape islands shall not be considered
acceptable.
   J.   Parcels 13, 14 And 15: The Raccoon River, as well as other creeks and
intermittent streams in these parcels, presents an opportunity for a
significant linear open space through the development. The Raccoon River
represents the most significant environmental resource in the area of the PUD.
All general use regulations and provisions set forth in title 9, "Zoning", of
the City Code for the RE Residential Estate Use District shall apply to any
development in Parcels 13, 14 and 15 as shown on the sketch plan for the West
Grand Business Park PUD, unless modified otherwise within this ordinance.
      1.   Allowed Uses: All uses allowed within these parcels shall be
permitted as identified pursuant to table 5.1 through 5.6, inclusive, of title
9 of the City Code for the RE Residential Estate District, unless modified
otherwise within this section. In addition to the uses listed in table 5.1
through 5.6, inclusive, for the RE District of title 9 of the City Code, the
following uses shall also be permitted:
Agricultural production - crops (SIC 01).
      2.   Pre-Existing Or Pre-Approved Uses: Uses which are in existence, as
shown on exhibit E for Parcel 14 and exhibit F for Parcel 13 on file with the
Community Development Department, of the date of the adoption of this ordinance
which are not listed as uses that are allowed in the RE District of the West
Des Moines City Code, shall be allowed uses and regulated as such, unless
modified otherwise within this ordinance.
Further, as to the existing facilities and proposed facilities as outlined in
paragraph 2 of this subsection, additional and/or changes in on-site
improvements are not required, i.e., landscaping, fencing, brick facades or
other surfaces on the buildings, septic, water wells or water systems for the
public or irrigation, hard surface parking lot, additional green spaces,
lighting systems (the range lights, miniature golf lights, and parking lot
lights) and existing signage.
A plan for the development of Parcel 14 had previously been reviewed and
approved by Dallas County prior to annexation of the property into the City of
West Des Moines which was being constructed as a phased development. Certain
portions of the plan may not have been permitted pursuant to the provisions of
this ordinance; however, the City hereby adopts by reference the previously
approved plan filed with Dallas County, and the owner shall be permitted to
complete construction of the development pursuant to such plan. A copy of that
plan is on file in the Office of Community Development of the City of West Des
Moines (SP-98-38) and is attached to and made a part of this ordinance (exhibit
E) along with a letter from the Dallas County Director of Planning and
Development (exhibit D) identifying the development standards of the
recreational complex. Said exhibits are on file with the Community Development
Department. No further review of the continued phased development of Parcel 14
as shown in the aforementioned plan will be required by the City, either
through the site plan review process or the permitted conditional use permit
use review process. Any structure which requires a building permit by the West
Des Moines City Code which has not been constructed prior to the adoption date
of this ordinance shall be required to obtain a building permit prior to
construction.
In the event that any building or structure constructed under the provisions of
this section are damaged by fire, flood, explosion, war, riot or act of God, to
an extent of fifty percent (50%) or more of its assessed value, the use shall
be considered conforming and allowed to continue, however, the building or
structure shall only be allowed to be reconstructed upon approval of a site
plan by the West Des Moines City Council and the issuance of a building permit.
Any building or structure rebuilt under these provisions shall be designed and
constructed in accordance with the applicable Building, Plumbing, Mechanical
and Fires Codes at that time.
A golf course has also been a use that was permitted by right in Dallas County
and is proposed to be built on Parcels 14 and 13 for which the plan is on file
with the Community Development Department and by this reference made a part of
this ordinance. This shall also be allowed to be constructed without any
further review by the City, except for any structure which requires a building
permit by the West Des Moines City Code which has not been constructed prior to
the adoption date of this ordinance. For such structures, a building permit
must be obtained prior to construction.
      3.   Additional Allowed Uses: In addition to the uses allowed under the
provisions of the West Des Moines City Code for an RE District and those uses
pre-approved and allowed as outlined in paragraph 2 of this subsection, the
following uses are also allowed with the approval of a permitted conditional
use permit by the West Des Moines City Council:
Boarding services for horses (part of SIC 0752)
Riding stables, academies, clubs and saddle horse rental (part of SIC 79)
Batting cages (part of SIC 7999)
Miniature golf course operation (part of SIC 7999)
Golf courses (part of SIC 79)
Golf practice center and driving range with associated usage, i.e. clubhouse
facility with associated retail, food and beverage sales, golf lessons, etc.
(parts of SIC 79)
Volleyball courts (part of SIC 79)
Private and publicly owned recreational facilities, such as parks, playgrounds,
swimming pools and passive recreational areas (part of SIC 79)
Campgrounds (part of SIC 703)
Greenhouses and nurseries (part of SIC 0181)
Kennels for the raising, breeding and boarding of dogs and other domestic
animals (part of SIC 0279)
      4.   Architecture Requirements: All structures shall be constructed in
accordance with applicable floodplain requirements of the City of West Des
Moines, Dallas County and the State of Iowa, whichever is most restrictive. The
architecture within these parcels shall be residential in character with a
residential style roof design, e.g., mansard, pitched, gabled, etc. Brick
elements shall be incorporated into the architecture of all sides of a
building. Wood or metal siding shall be allowed provided it is installed in a
horizontal ship-lapped manner similar to the majority of other residential
structures within the City. No other wood, masonite, visible asphaltic exterior
wall material, metal and plastic siding, nonarchitectural sheet metal,
nondecorative concrete block (i.e., plain faced concrete block), or other
similar materials shall constitute a portion of any building except as a trim
material, unless the City Council of West Des Moines, after having received a
recommendation from the Planning and Zoning Commission of West Des Moines,
shall determine said material when used as a primary element, enhances the
physical appearance, or provides continuity desired to unite all structures
within the parcels together into one project concept. All sides of any building
shall be compatible in design and use of materials.
      5.   Bulk Regulations: All uses that are not pre-existing or pre-approved
as a part of this ordinance at the time of its adoption shall comply with the
bulk regulations and setbacks of the RE Residential Estate District for any
development within Parcels 13, 14 and 15.
      6.   Open Space Required: Within each development there shall be provided
an open space equal to at least seventy five percent (75%) of the total lot
area; said space shall be unencumbered with any structure or off-street parking
and shall be landscaped and well maintained with grass, trees and shrubbery,
except for areas used as pedestrian walks and ingress-egress drives. In
addition, all parking areas shall include landscape areas, islands, screens,
etc., equal to not less than ten percent (10%) of the total paved area. Such
landscaped area shall be in addition to the open space requirements noted above
for the total lot area. Landscaped islands within the parking area shall have
ground cover of grass (i.e., sod), shrubs or other acceptable living plant
life, unless an alternate ground cover is specifically approved as part of the
site plan review by the City. Inorganic mulches in the landscape islands shall
not be considered acceptable.
Emphasis should be placed on the protection and preservation of any
environmentally sensitive areas as part of the development of the property.
Environmental resources (trees, drainageways, natural areas, and open space,
etc.) shall be preserved, wherever practical, through the design development
and protection measures.
      7.   Pedestrian Access: The West Des Moines comprehensive plan shows a
bike trail along the river that is proposed to be a major component of the
trail system of the community. As part of any development of these parcels or
as part of a master plan, the owner shall identify and preserve a corridor for
the trail system. Site plans and plats shall incorporate an internal pedestrian
and bicycle trail system which connects to public transit and City-wide trails
system adjacent to the project to encourage the use of use of alternative modes
of transportation. (Ord. 1373, 6-28-1999; amd. Ord. 1812, 9-8-2008; Ord. 2299,
5-14-2018; Ord. 2359, 5-6-2019; Ord. 2360, 5-20-2019; Ord. 2446, 10-19-2020;
Ord. 2460, 3-15-2021; Ord. 2462, 4-5-2021)
054-06: SIGNAGE REGULATION:
All signage within the PUD shall be designed, constructed and maintained in
accordance with the West Des Moines Sign Code, unless otherwise outlined in
each parcel’s regulations within the Land Use Design Criteria section. (Ord.
1373, 6-28-1999; amd. Ord. 2462, 4-5-2021)
054-07: BUILDING RESTRICTIONS, EASEMENTS AND COVENANTS:
The developer shall with the approval of the City Council adopt building
restrictions, easements and covenants pertaining to the property where the
developer and/or the City deem appropriate. (Ord. 1373, 6-28-1999)
054-08: ALL AREAS TO BE PLATTED:
Prior to, or in conjunction with development or transfer of ownership (transfer
of ownership being to a third party and which would not include any transfers
between W & G McKinney Farms, L.C., or any entity that the McKinneys have a
majority interest) of any portion of the PUD, said area shall be platted in
accordance with the City's Subdivision Ordinance to delineate within a plat,
the parcel to be developed or sold separately or any portion thereof. (Ord.
1373, 6-28-1999)
054-09: TRAFFIC REPORTS:
Prior to, or in conjunction with the development of any parcel, or portion of a
parcel, the developer shall pay the reasonable costs associated with having a
traffic report prepared that identifies the overall street improvements that
will be necessary to facilitate the safe and orderly movement of traffic in and
through the PUD. This statement shall not be misconstrued to indicate that the
City shall bear any burden for costs of the original traffic report, or any
subsequent traffic reports that are required by changes in the PUD or the
comprehensive plan that modify the basic assumptions of the original traffic
report. The report should identify the phasing of the improvements and the
anticipated triggering points that will require additional improvements to the
street system to maintain safe levels of service. As projects are submitted in
the future, the developer shall have the traffic report reviewed by a traffic
consultant to insure that the provisions and assumptions of the original
traffic report are not negatively impacted or changed by the proposed
development. A written evaluation shall be submitted to the City that shall
identify what the impacts of the development of that parcel will have on the
existing street system and what improvements are necessary for the safe and
orderly movement of traffic in and around the area. (Ord. 1373, 6-28-1999)
054-10: STORM WATER MANAGEMENT AND HYDROLOGY STUDY:
There shall be submitted to, and approved by the West Des Moines City Engineer,
a complete storm water management plan for that phase of the PUD as identified
in the phasing plan, on file with the Community Development Department, which
shall be prepared by the developer prior to any development within each phase
of the PUD and for all storm sewer and drainage systems within the PUD. (Ord.
1373, 6-28-1999)
054-11: LIGHTING REQUIREMENTS:
Prior to, or in conjunction with the submittal of a site plan or permitted
conditional use permit for development of any portion of the PUD that abuts or
is within an existing residential district or property, or residential district
or property which is identified in the comprehensive plan as future residential
use, a photometric lighting plan with twenty foot (20') grid centers shall be
submitted to the City for review. The lighting plan shall show the location,
height, and the type of lighting fixture proposed for use on the site. The
lighting of any development within the PUD shall be designed to cast light
downward onto the site and minimize the glare and reflection onto the adjacent
residential properties. The maximum light levels at the boundary of the PUD
shall not exceed one footcandle and the lighting with in the parking lot shall
not exceed a ratio of nine to one (9:1). (Ord. 1373, 6-28-1999)
054-12: PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS AND SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS:
Owners of the property within the West Grand Business Park PUD are responsible
for the public improvements that are necessary to serve the property, except as
outlined and limited within this Section. These improvements include the paving
of public streets, sanitary sewer extension, water main extension, storm sewer
improvements and traffic signals. In the event that the City deems that certain
public improvements are necessary for the public health, safety and welfare,
prior to the owners schedule of installation of certain public improvements,
the property may be subject to future special assessments as shall be permitted
and limited by the laws of the State of Iowa to be observed by municipalities.
(Ord. 1373, 6-28-1999)
"Owners", as referred to in this Section and all its subparts, shall refer to a
person or entity holding title to property within this PUD at the time a public
improvement is to be completed and whose land includes, or is determined to be
benefitted by, the public improvement.
   A.   Traffic Signals: The cost of installing traffic signals as may be
required pursuant to the policies of the City of West Des Moines shall be
divided equally between the owners of the property located immediately
adjoining the four (4) corners (quadrants) of the intersections at which the
traffic signals are installed. If traffic signals are needed at the
intersection of South 88th Street and Grand Avenue, the owners will be
responsible for two (2) quadrants of the cost of installation, with the City or
other property owners being responsible for the remaining two (2) quadrants. If
the City utilizes other than general, road use or debt services funds to pay a
portion of the cost of installation of this traffic signal, the cost-share
responsibility of each quadrant shall be reduced accordingly.
   B.   Public Streets: Owners adjacent to streets shall be responsible for the
following:
      1.   The proportional share of reconstructing Booneville Road up to the
cost of constructing a thirty-one foot (31') back-to-back street to the
appropriate thickness with six inch (6") curb and gutter at the general
locations shown in the traffic study dated September 22, 1997 and Exhibit C of
Ordinance No. 1373; and
      2.   No costs are to be assessed or borne by the owners within the PUD
for the reconstruction or repaving of existing Grand Avenue south of the
railroad right-of-way as it is anticipated that the proposed realigned Grand
Avenue will carry the bulk of the new traffic generated by the development and
existing Grand Avenue is not anticipated to need to be widened because the
anticipated uses south of the railroad will not be high traffic generating uses
that will require the roadway to be widened in the future; and
      3.   All costs necessary to make additional traffic improvements due to
requested developments which create a greater impact on the public street
system above and beyond the traffic generation assumptions set forth in a
traffic study dated September 22, 1997 for the West Grand Business Park
prepared by Snyder & Associates, Inc., and which were not initially anticipated
by said traffic study, shall be paid by the owners causing the need for those
improvements.
   C.   Sanitary Sewer Improvements: The cost of the construction of the
sanitary sewer through the property shall be in accordance with the provisions
of the Southwest Service Area Sanitary Sewer Connection Fee District, Ordinance
1374. The fees required for connection to the sanitary sewer within this
district, shall be required to be paid in accordance with the schedule outlined
in the aforementioned Ordinance 1374 and shall be paid at the time of platting
or building/plumbing permit, whichever comes first.
   D.   Water Main Improvements: Owners shall bear all costs (construction,
engineering, and other overhead costs) of water main extensions within and
immediately adjacent to the PUD. The owners agree that all water service to the
PUD will be provided by the West Des Moines Water Works at the duly adopted
retail water rates offered to other customers of the water works within the
City. No water service shall be provided directly by other water utility(ies)
to any development within the PUD, regardless of the presence of pipes within
the PUD which are owned and/or operated by other water utility(ies), except as
set out hereinafter. This provision shall not in any manner prevent the West
Des Moines Water Works from purchasing water from said other water utility(ies)
through connections to said pipes for resale to any development within the PUD
or to developments served by the water works in other locations within or
without the City's corporate limits.
Water service on a standby basis, only, may be provided by other utility(ies)
to development existing as of the date hereof which development is located
within Parcels 13, 14 and 15 of the PUD (the approximately 161 acres of land
south of Grand Avenue). Owners agree that if water service is to be provided
upon any basis other than standby, or additional development is to be served,
this provision shall not apply and water service shall be provided by West Des
Moines Water Works in the manner stated hereinbefore.
In the event connections are planned to be made to pipes within the PUD which
are owned and/or operated by other water utility(ies), the owners shall provide
the West Des Moines Water Works the opportunity to review and approve such
connections as to their size, location and general arrangement, with the view
of facilitating the development of the overall water distribution system in the
area. The review and approval shall take place prior to any construction, or
any commitment for construction, of such connections taking place. Such review
shall be accomplished by the West Des Moines Water Works in an expeditious
manner and such approval shall not be unreasonably withheld.
For those connections to the water mains of other utility(ies) which West Des
Moines Water Works, in its sole opinion, shall deem to be unusable by water
works in the development of its water distribution facilities, water works
shall pay the amount of the design, construction and construction management
costs of such water metering facilities, provided such facilities are
constructed to the standards used elsewhere in the Des Moines metropolitan area
for similar facilities. Water Works has been advised of the locations for four
(4) connection points given to the McKinneys by the Des Moines Municipal Water
Works into the feeder main which will be constructed through the McKinney
Property. Water Works agrees to install, at its cost, the meter pit at the
eastern most connection point (No. 4) as the Water Works has determined that
this meter pit will be usable by Water Works in future water distribution
facilities. Water Works will evaluate further requests for meter pit
construction at the time the requests are made to determine whether payment for
meter pits is appropriate.
   E.   Storm Sewer Improvements: All storm sewer improvements shall be borne
by the owners of property necessitating such improvements and in accordance
with the policies of the City of West Des Moines in existence at the time of
development.
   F.   Easements For Public Improvements: All rights-of-way shall be given by
deed or easement(s) by owners to the City at no cost to the City to comply with
the right-of-way requirements of the comprehensive plan at the time of site
plan, permitted conditional use permit approval, or platting (whichever comes
first) of property containing such improvements within the West Grand Business
Park PUD.
   G.   Railroad Crossing And Signalization: Costs for installation of railroad
crossings and signalization will be the responsibility of the owners
immediately adjacent to the intersection where the crossing and signalization
is requested. The City will provide all reasonable cooperation, at the owner's
request, to file applications with the Iowa Department of Transportation for
funding assistance and in discussions with the railroad regarding securing
permits, licenses, and easements to allow for such construction. Any expense of
the City in providing reasonable cooperation shall be reimbursed by the owner
(s). (Ord. 1373, 6-28-1999; amd. Ord. 2462, 4-5-2021)
054-13: BUFFERS:
All development within the West Grand Business Park PUD shall comply with the
buffering provisions of the Buffer Ordinance, Ordinance 1073, of the City Code.
(Ord. 1373, 6-28-1999)
054-14: VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES:
Any person who violates the provisions of this ordinance upon conviction shall
be punished as set forth in 1-4-1 of the City Code of the City of West Des
Moines, Iowa. (Ord. 2299, 5-14-2018)
054-99: LEGISLATIVE HISTORY:
Ord. 1373, 6-28-1999; Ord. 1812, 9-8-2008; Ord. 2299, 5-14-2018; Ord. 2359, 5-
6-2019; Ord. 2360, 5-20-2019; Ord. 2446, 10-19-2020; Ord. 2460, 3-15-2021; Ord.
2462, 4-5-2021.
PUD #55
MILLS CROSSING
SECTION:
055-01: Legal Description
055-02: Intent
055-03: Required Plans
055-04: Conditions
055-05: Requirements
055-06: Architecture
055-07: Signage
055-08: Vehicle Trip Allocation
055-09: Stormwater Management Plan
055-10: Utilities
055-11: Fire Access
055-12: Public Streetlights
055-13: Ingress/Egress Agreement
055-14: Public Street Improvements
055-15: Violations And Penalties
055-99: Legislative History
055-01: LEGAL DESCRIPTION:
The legal description for Mills Crossing specific plan is as follows:
Except West Glen Town Center Plat 1-S20A Lot 1 Partition Plat, the Southwest 1/
4 of the Northwest 1/4 and the North 1/2 of the Southwest 1/4 and the North 1/
2 of the Southeast 1/4 less roadway in Section 18-78-25, West Des Moines, Polk
County, Iowa.
(Ord. 2060, 11-3-2014)
055-02: INTENT:
To develop a planned commercial development which complements other development
in the surrounding area by capitalizing upon and further promoting a mix of
uses and activities. (Ord. 2060, 11-3-2014)
055-03: REQUIRED PLANS:
The following plans shall be required as a part of the processing of any
development application for any property within the Mills Crossing specific
plan:
   A.   Area Development Plan: An area development plan is a plan that
identifies planning units, major circulation patterns, master stormwater
drainage and detention concepts, utilities, shared public spaces, land use
assumptions and proposed densities. It is intended to be a tool used to promote
the communication and cooperation between adjacent property owners and
developers to ensure cohesive and unified development.
An area development plan shall be reviewed by the Plan and Zoning Commission
and approved by the City Council prior to, or in conjunction with, the review
of the specific plan for any property within said specific plan area. No change
to the area development plan shall be made without approval of an amended plan
from the appropriate reviewing bodies.
Exhibit I on file in the City is the City Council approved area development
plan for this property. (Ord. 2060, 11-3-2014)
   B.   Specific Plan: A specific plan identifies development intent for each
planning unit indicated on the area development plan or more specifically
delineated on the specific plan map. The specific plan shall conform to the
general development intent identified in the approved area development plan, as
well as the Town Center Overlay District guidelines. The specific plan shall be
reviewed by the Plan and Zoning Commission and adopted by the City Council by
ordinance.
This document shall constitute the specific plan ordinance for Mills Crossing.
A specific plan map that illustrates the overall site layout concept for Mills
Crossing (Exhibit II) is on file in the City. This document and the associated
exhibits (on file in the City) are intended to specify the components,
parameters, and requirements to be adhered to and implemented in order to
ensure the realization of Mills Crossing development concept. It is recognized
that modifications and changes in building footprints and layout, including the
combining of two (2) smaller buildings into one (1) larger building, may be
necessary in response to market demands and specific tenants. Additionally, it
is recognized that square footages of one (1) building may be shifted to
another or increased to accommodate specific user's needs. These changes may be
allowed with the appropriate City approvals if the shift does not have a
negative impact on the traffic patterns for the building/area and the total
number of vehicle trips does not exceed that which has been allocated to the
overall Mills Crossing Development. At the discretion of the Director of
Development Services, changes to the layout of the development that are deemed
to be "major" changes shall require an amendment to the specific plan map and/
or ordinance, whichever is applicable. Major amendments shall require the
review and approval of the Plan and Zoning Commission and City Council.
Where the specific plan map and specific plan ordinance conflict, the specific
plan ordinance shall prevail. (Ord. 2060, 11-3-2014; amd. Ord. 2190, 12-27-
2016)
   C.   Development Applications (Overlay District Site Plans): Site plans for
all buildings and land area within the Mills Crossing Development must meet the
intent of the approved specific plan. Site plans shall be submitted to the City
of West Des Moines for review and approval prior to the development of any
portion of the associated supporting lot. Site plans for permitted uses which
comply (as determined by the Director of Development Services) with the design
intent as set forth in this specific plan will be subject to administrative
review and approval by the Director of Development Services. A one (1) week
review and comment period by each and all available members of the Plan and
Zoning Commission and City Council shall precede the administrative approval.
If upon review, two (2) or more members of the City Council, Plan and Zoning
Commission, or a combination thereof request such; or if the Director of
Development Services deems the proposed site plan is not in compliance with the
approved specific plan or is potentially controversial, the site plan will be
processed through the traditional full site plan review and approval process.
Site plans for permitted conditional uses (Pc) as defined in the City Code,
unless otherwise amended within this ordinance, shall be approved by the
appropriate review body. At the discretion of the Director of Development
Services, an amendment to Mills Crossing specific plan ordinance may be
required to bring consistency between the ordinance and site plan development
proposed.
An overlay district site plan must be approved prior to the issuance of any
building permit, including footing and foundation permits, for construction of
any structure within the area proposed for development.
   D.   Development Improvements, Agreement: An agreement shall be established
by the developer for the property encompassed by the Mills Crossing
development. This agreement shall identify requirements for the ongoing upkeep
and maintenance of any privately owned common grounds, structures and signs and
any other specific development improvements required by the developer in this
ordinance. In addition, a reciprocal cross access/shared parking agreement
shall be executed across all parcels included within the Mills Crossing
development.
Said agreements are hereby made a part of this specific plan ordinance by
reference. These agreements shall be executed prior to the approval of the
first overlay district site plan for any parcel within the development.
   E.   Preliminary And Final Platting: Platting for any PUD parcel shall be at
the discretion of the developer. Platting, if needed for subdivision or right-
of-way dedication, shall be done in accordance with the City's subdivision
ordinance. Lots to be platted without public street frontage, in accordance
with the City Code requirements, may be allowed provided the frontage
requirements of the Code have been met by an abutting or surrounding lot which
is under common ownership under an owners' association, or a cross parking and
access easement has been executed which provides for the unrestricted use and
access of the drives and parking. Platted outlots are not buildable until such
time that they are replatted through the City's subdivision process.
   F.   Roads And Utilities: Unless otherwise specifically restricted by City
Council action, ground work and construction of private roads and utilities may
be started, at the developer's risk, upon approval of a preliminary plat or
overlay district site plan by the City Council. Public street and utility
construction may begin, at the risk of the developer, after approval of the
preliminary plat or overlay district site plan which includes the improvements
by the City Council and construction improvement plans by the City of West Des
Moines.
Prior to approval of the final plat or first overlay district site plan, unless
otherwise allowed by Council, the developer shall provide the appropriate
agreements, easements, and sureties for all public rights-of-way and other
public improvements (utilities, sidewalks, streetlights, etc.) within and
associated with the development. (Ord. 2060, 11-3-2014)
055-04: CONDITIONS:
Whereas, title 9 of the West Des Moines City Code includes chapter 9, PUD
Planned Unit Development District and establishes certain regulations and
guidelines pertaining to accompanying information required on plat and site
plan documents. Now, therefore, the following conditions, restrictions, and
regulations are adopted as part of this approval, to wit:
In addition to the specific plan map, the following general development
criteria shall be integrated into and made a part of this Specific Plan
Ordinance:
   A.   General Conformance To Subdivision Ordinance: All subdivisions, public
streets, public street rights-of-way, and general development shall adhere to
the standards and design criteria set forth in the West Des Moines Subdivision
Ordinances and the most current design standards adopted by the City of West
Des Moines pertaining thereto unless otherwise stated within this ordinance.
   B.   General Conformance To Zoning Ordinance: Unless otherwise specified
herein, the development of the Mills Crossing specific plan shall comply with
title 9, Zoning, of the City Code or any other applicable codes.
   C.   Flood Hazard: In all areas within a 100-year frequency flood hazard
zone, or adjoining drainageways, and detention ponding areas involving
potential flood hazards, no building shall be erected that has a lowest floor,
including basements, less than one foot (1') above the determining level of the
100-year frequency flood event, and no building shall be located within twenty
five feet (25') of any easement or property boundary of a major drainageway,
stormwater detention basin, or pond, unless said location is approved as part
of a development entitlement by the City Council and said building is
structurally designed accordingly.
   D.   Developer Responsibilities: Unless otherwise specifically approved by
the City Council, the developer, its successors and/or assigns, if any, shall
pay all planning, engineering, and construction costs for the development of
the planned unit development as required by this ordinance, and shall pay all
costs related to approved site plans, which may include, but is not limited to,
the cost of all streets, storm sewers, sanitary sewers, water mains and service
lines, drainageway improvements, detention basins, buffers, and other
improvements as required. No occupancy permits, either temporary or permanent,
shall be issued until all necessary improvements applicable to the area/lot or
structure requesting occupancy are installed and accepted by the City of West
Des Moines. Nothing in this ordinance shall be construed to prevent the
developer, its successors and/or assigns, if any, from entering into private
agreement(s) as it/they may desire to share the cost of improvements.
   E.   Common Use Areas; Stormwater Detention Facilities: Prior to approval of
the first overlay district site plan, the developer shall put in place an
agreement that shall identify responsibility for the maintenance of all common
use areas and stormwater detention facilities in perpetuity. (Ord. 2060, 11-3-
2014)
055-05: REQUIREMENTS:
Unless provided otherwise in this ordinance, all general use regulations,
performance standards and provisions set forth in title 9, Zoning, of the City
Code for the Support Commercial (SC) District shall apply to the development
within the Mills Crossing specific plan area. To the extent that the provisions
of this section conflict with or are more restrictive than similar provisions
provided elsewhere in the West Des Moines Zoning Ordinance, the provisions of
this section shall control. The following land use design criteria, development
standards, and landscaping regulations shall apply to all parcels within the
Mills Crossing specific plan area:
   A.   Land Use: For PUD parcels A through G, all land uses as set forth in
title 9, Zoning, of the City Code for the Support Commercial (SC) District as
permitted and permitted conditionally shall apply except as designated below:
(Ord. 2060, 11-3-2014)
      1.   Permitted Uses: Permitted uses shall include the following:
         a.   All permitted (P) uses allowed within the Support Commercial (SC)
District except those that have been prohibited by this ordinance.
         b.   All permitted conditional (Pc) uses allowed within the Support
Commercial (SC) District except those that have been prohibited by this
ordinance may be allowed with the approval of the appropriate review body.
         c.   The following size and use limitations shall apply to allowed
uses:
 
        Convenience stores with gasoline sales shall be limited to one
SIC 541 establishment within the development. Maximum gas pump numbers and
        canopy size shall be in accordance with City Code for the Support
        Commercial (SC) Zoning District.
 
(Ord. 2060, 11-3-2014; amd. Ord. 2368, 6-17-2019)
      2.   Prohibited Uses: The following permitted and permitted conditional
uses otherwise allowed in the Support Commercial (SC) District shall be
prohibited:
SIC 0742 Veterinary services for animal specialties with outdoor runs or
         overnight animal boarding.
SIC 0752 Boarding services with kennels and grooming services.
SIC 4522 Heliport/helistop.
SIC 55   Automotive dealer and service stations.
SIC 75   Automotive repair, services, and parking.
SIC 7699 Recreational vehicle repair services.
SIC 7699 Household appliance repair services.
SIC 7699 Miscellaneous automotive repair services.
SIC 7832 Motion picture theaters, including drive-in.
SIC 806x Hospitals of any kind or service (general, psychiatric, respiratory,
         etc.).
 
   B.   Lot Area: If subdivided, lot areas less than minimum square footage or
acres required by code for the Support Commercial District shall be considered
acceptable if supported by reciprocal ingress/egress and parking easements and
if approved by the appropriate approval body as part of an overlay district
site plan, permitted conditional use permit or plat.
   C.   Building Setback: Buildings shall be set back as follows. The setback
shall be measured from the perimeter PUD boundary line, unless otherwise
indicated, to the visible primary vertical foundation wall. Intermittent
encroachment into the setback for canopies, awnings, building bump-outs,
outdoor dining areas, etc., may be allowed at the discretion of the Director of
the Development Services Department.
      1.   North - Minimum of fifty feet (50').
      2.   East - Minimum of twenty five feet (25').
      3.   South - Minimum sixty feet (60').
      4.   West - Minimum thirty feet (30')
      5.   No setback (0') shall be required between internal PUD parcels, or
lots if platted, unless otherwise required by building separation requirements
within adopted Building and Fire Codes.
   D.   Building Height:
      1.   All buildings shall abide by the maximum height restrictions of the
Support Commercial (SC) District as measured from the average finished grade to
the top of the parapet wall. An additional twelve feet (12') of height shall be
allowed for each additional ten feet (10') of setback.
      2.   Vertical architectural features upon the building itself and
freestanding place making elements and landmarks such as clock towers may
exceed the maximum allowable height of the Support Commercial (SC) District to
a maximum height of forty five feet (45').
   E.   Parking Ratios:
      1.   Parking ratios for restaurants (sit down and fast food) shall
provide within each PUD parcel, or area immediately surrounding the proposed
establishment a minimum of one space per two hundred (200) square feet of gross
building or use square footage. Establishments with a drive-through component
shall provide eleven (11) queuing spaces per drive-through. Five (5) of the
spaces shall be designed for the ordering station if it is separate from the
pick up window. For coffee shops, a minimum of one parking space per two
hundred (200) square feet of gross building area or use square footages shall
be provided. A minimum of five (5) queuing spaces shall be designed for the
ordering station if it is separate from the pick up window, with at least four
(4) of those spaces out of the main traffic lanes of the site. Vehicle queuing
shall not impede traffic circulation within the site or immediately surrounding
area.
      2.   Parking ratios for all other uses shall provide within each PUD
parcel a minimum of one space per three hundred (300) square feet of building
or use square footage.
      3.   At the discretion of the Development Services Director, a less
stringent parking calculation may be used provided the applicant can
demonstrate a parking rate less than the above is adequate due to the type of
potential use, shared uses or off peak uses.
      4.   If not already established as a blanket easement, developers of PUD
parcels must provide a cross access parking and ingress/egress easement.
   F.   Parking Setbacks:
      1.   The location of parking and vehicle use areas at major street
intersections shall be discouraged. Parking and vehicle use areas should be
located in areas away from the street and behind the building pad whenever
possible.
      2.   Off street parking areas shall be set back from the perimeter
boundaries of the Mills Crossing development as follows:
         a.   North - Minimum fifteen feet (15').
         b.   East - Minimum twenty five feet (25').
         c.   South - Minimum sixty feet (60').
         d.   West - Minimum thirty feet (30').
         e.   There shall be no minimum parking lot setback between internal
lot boundaries if lots are designed as one continuous parking field. Lots not
designed as one shall provide a minimum of ten feet (10') between parking
fields to allow for the placement of landscape vegetation.
      3.   Minimum parking stall measurements and drive aisle widths shall
conform to chapter 15 of the city's zoning ordinance.
      4.   No portion of any parking lot or drive aisle associated with parking
may be located within a required buffer or streetscape.
   G.   Vehicle Drive-Throughs And Canopy Areas: The intent of this development
is not to encourage the use of automobiles; however, it is recognized that
drive-ups are a key component to the functionality of certain types of
businesses due to their convenience. If, through the design review process,
including an updated traffic analysis, if necessary, it can be demonstrated
that such uses do not cause traffic congestion, do not interfere with
pedestrian movements and can be designed to minimize their presence, a maximum
of three (3) businesses with drive-up may be permitted within the overall Mills
Crossing development. Walk-up or pedestrian ATMs with no vehicle access; and
loading zones in which the patron exits their vehicle and load merchandise/
materials themselves shall be allowed as needed with the appropriate visual
screening measures, subject to required site plan review and approval.
      1.   Drive-Up Facilities With Canopies: The incorporation of drive- up
facilities and uses with canopies over the vehicle use areas may be limited by
the type of use in association with the available vehicle trips allowed for the
entire Mills Crossing development.
         a.   In all instances, the presence of the drive-ups shall be
minimized through one or a combination of the following methods:
            (1)   Integration of the drive-through or canopy into the building
architecture in order to eliminate the appearance as an added on canopy
component.
            (2)   Situating the drive-through or canopy between two (2)
buildings in order to limit the number of views thereof.
            (3)   Opaque visual screening through implementation of vegetation,
decorative walls, fencing, etc., to a height of a minimum of four feet (4').
      2.   Canopies, Including Gas: Pump stations and other drive-through
canopies must be designed to incorporate the building's architecture through
the use of similar building materials, roof design and color, including the
application of brick or stone to canopy support columns. When possible,
canopies should be designed as an extension of the building rather than an
added on element.
   H.   Buffers: The provision of adequate buffering and landscaping shall be
more thoroughly evaluated and approved as part of the overlay district site
plan approval. Additional buffer and landscaping may be required at that time
in response to additional details of the use, buildings, parking, loading
docks, mechanical equipment, etc., to be implemented.
      1.   Buffering between districts or parcels and uses shall not be
required as set forth in title 9, chapter 19 of the city code.
      2.   Buffers shall be provided along the perimeter boundaries of the
Mills Crossing development as follows:
         a.   North - None required; however, adequate visual mitigation of
undesirable site elements and views shall be provided.
         b.   East - None required; streetscape required in lieu of.
         c.   West - Minimum thirty feet (30') from ultimate right of way line
of South 60th Street.
         d.   South - Minimum sixty feet (60') from ultimate street right of
way line of Mills Civic Parkway.
         e.   No buffers between internal PUD parcels shall be required except
to mitigate undesirable site elements and views.
      3.   The implementation of vegetation as indicated below shall be
required. Earth berming shall be implemented whenever possible to enhance
buffering and screening of otherwise negative site elements and to aid in
ensuring year round screening, but is not required. Buffers should be designed
to achieve the maximum amount of screening of negative elements from the
maximum number of viewpoints with vegetation layered to ensure adequate
blockage of views and to create depth and a sense of naturalness. Care should
be taken to ensure that "through views" under tree canopies are adequately
blocked. It is recognized that some views of businesses are desired; therefore,
buffer vegetation may be clustered and situated to screen parking and drive-
throughs associated with the businesses and other negative site elements such
as trash enclosures, transformers, loading docks, etc.
      4.   The minimum landscaping within required buffers shall be provided as
follows. Buffers shall be so designed so as to serve as a visual continuation
of existing buffers and/or as a unifying element within the development.
Buffers adjacent to streetscapes shall make a natural transition in order to be
visually cohesive.
         a.   Sixty foot (60') buffer:
            (1)   One overstory tree and three (3) ornamental or evergreen
trees, and three (3) shrubs shall be provided per thirty five (35) linear feet
of required buffer.
         b.   Vegetation substitution:
            (1)   Two (2) ornamental trees, one evergreen tree, or six (6)
shrubs may be substituted for one required overstory tree; however, no more
than twenty five percent (25%) of the required number of overstory trees may be
substituted.
            (2)   A twenty five (25) square foot mass planting of perennials or
ornamental grasses may be substituted for three (3) shrubs.
         c.   Landscape vegetation required within buffer areas is in addition
to the landscape vegetation required of open space, parking areas, and that
necessary to achieve adequate visual mitigation of undesirable site elements
and views.
      5.   Ponds, lakes, wetlands, or other water features may be placed within
the buffer area given the following:
         a.   Such water features constantly contain water at a level visible
from adjoining properties and public streets;
         b.   Pond edge treatments are incorporated to enhance the
attractiveness of the element (no "wild overgrown pond edge" allowed); and
         c.   The appropriate water circulation and clarification measures are
implemented, including water fountains or jets when implemented which project
water high enough to be visible from adjoining properties and public streets.
   I.   Landscaping: The landscaping requirements specified herein are intended
to create an aesthetically pleasing development which enhances the appearance
and character of the city of West Des Moines, while protecting the general
health, safety and welfare of the citizens. Landscaping is required to address
the following primary aspects or consequences of development:
• Open space protection and enhancement
• Mitigation of paving expanses associated with off street parking
• Visual screening of undesirable views, activities and/or site elements, and
• Street side enhancement ("streetscapes")
At the time of overlay district site plan review for each PUD parcel,
landscaping shall be evaluated to ensure achievement of the standards stated
within this specific plan ordinance. Additional vegetation beyond that required
herein may be required to be implemented in response to additional details of
the use, buildings, parking, site layout, etc. Details regarding specific
varieties, exact quantities, and the minimum size at time of planting shall be
provided and approved as part of the site plan submittal for each PUD parcel
and shall meet the general guidelines in respect to the minimum plant size
traditionally applied to development within the city.
      1.   Open Space: The intent of open space is to allow for a balance
between natural areas and the built environment and to provide for the overall
beautification and "greening" of the city.
         a.   A minimum of twenty percent (20%) open space shall be provided
within each PUD parcel as identified on the specific plan map.
         b.   Open space shall be considered all areas unencumbered by
buildings or paved areas associated with parking, drive aisles, and loading
docks or zones. Plaza areas, water features and structures such as gazebos,
arbors, pergolas, etc., that are associated with outdoor pedestrian use areas,
as well as designated and enhanced pedestrian walkways through and between
areas within the development may be counted toward fulfilling the minimum open
space requirement.
         c.   Vegetation at a rate of two (2) trees and three (3) shrubs per
three thousand (3,000) square feet of required open space shall be provided
within the parcel.
            (1)   Vegetation substitution:
   (A) One evergreen tree or six (6) shrubs may be substituted for one required
tree; however, no more than twenty five percent (25%) of the required number of
trees may be substituted unless specifically approved by the director of
development services in order to meet a defined design intent.
   (B) A twenty five (25) square foot mass planting of perennials or ornamental
grasses may be substituted for three (3) shrubs.
         d.   Vegetation required as part of the open space may be placed into
off street parking areas, streetscapes or required buffers; however the open
space vegetation is in addition to that which would be required of buffers or
parking islands/pods and may not be counted toward fulfilling the minimum
amount of vegetation required for these areas.
      2.   Off Street Parking Areas:
         a.   All off street parking areas shall be landscaped to screen their
visibility from street rights of way and adjoining property outside of Mills
Crossing development.
         b.   All off street parking areas shall be aesthetically improved to
reduce obtrusive characteristics that are inherent to their function. Multiple
landscape islands combined with vegetation shall be incorporated to effectively
eliminate a "sea of asphalt/concrete" and to provide shade thus decreasing heat
reflection back into the environment. Landscape islands and/or pods shall be
implemented in accordance with the following:
• Islands or open areas shall be located at the terminus end of all parking
rows. Terminal islands shall measure at least ten feet (10') in width and shall
match, at a minimum, the stall length unless otherwise allowed per the
discretion of the director of development services.
• Linear parking islands that run the length of the parking row shall be
implemented every six (6) rows of parking. Said linear islands shall measure a
minimum of eight feet (8') in width and shall be landscaped to provide "green"
within the parking lot. The incorporation of defined pedestrian pathways within
these linear islands is encouraged.
• Landscaped islands shall be placed, at a minimum, every eighteen (18) stalls
within a linear row of parking. Landscaped pods (tree diamonds) within a linear
row of parking shall be evenly spaced between the islands; however, shall be
spaced no farther than nine (9) parking stalls from another landscape pod or
landscaped islands. At a minimum, islands shall match the dimensions of one
parking stall and pods shall measure a minimum of six feet (6') from back of
curb to back of curb.
         c.   Landscape vegetation shall be provided as follows:
            (1)   Two (2) trees in each nine foot by thirty four foot (9' x
34') island.
            (2)   One tree in each nine foot by seventeen foot (9' x 17')
island.
            (3)   One tree in each landscape pod.
            (4)   Additional shrubs, ground covers, grasses, and flowers may be
provided in landscaped islands but is not required.
      3.   Visual Screening:
         a.   Mechanical Equipment:
• Views from public streets and adjoining properties of the negative aspects of
development and land uses such as loading docks; heating, ventilation, or air
conditioning (HVAC) units; or similar electrical or mechanical appurtenances
shall be adequately screened. Said screening shall be achieved through the use
of architectural enclosures and/or earth berming and landscaping consisting of
evergreen material for year round screening.
• All rooftop mechanical units shall be screened from ground level views from
public streets and adjoining properties through architecturally incorporated
opaque screen walls, raised parapet walls, penthouse feature, or other opaque
material comprised of materials consistent with the associated primary
structure. Screening measures and materials shall be reviewed as part of the
site plan review process. Due to variation in building heights at and adjacent
to the northern end of the development, it is recognized that complete opaque
screening of views from the taller buildings of rooftop equipment on single-
story or lower buildings may not be achievable.
         b.   Trash Enclosures: Trash receptacles and dumpsters shall be
screened by the use of a permanent enclosure. Whenever possible, the enclosure
should be designed as an attached extension to the primary structure rather
than a freestanding structure. Enclosures shall be constructed of materials
consistent with or complementary to the primary structure. Additionally, the
enclosure should be landscaped to minimize the visual presence and impact of
the structure on surrounding properties, businesses, and public streets.
         c.   Loading Docks: Loading docks located at the north end of the
property shall be screened from the adjacent property by the use of landscaping
and evergreen materials or opaque fencing in combination with landscaping to
soften the presence of the fence. The vegetation species shall be selected for
its density and height.
         d.   Canopies: Canopies, including gas pump stations and other drive-
through canopies must be designed to incorporate the building's architecture
through the use of similar building materials, roof design and color, including
the application of brick or stone to canopy support columns. When possible,
canopies should be designed as an extension of the building rather than an
added on element.
• Unless appropriate site design measures are implemented to mitigate the
presence and visibility thereof, canopies shall not be located at the
intersection of major streets.
         e.   Vehicle Use Area: The vehicle use area will be screened through
landscaping to minimize the visual presence and impact of the structure on
surrounding properties, businesses, and public streets. Said screening shall be
achieved through the use of location and/or earth berming and landscaping
consisting of evergreen material for year round screening.
      4.   Streetscaping: A landscaped edge or "streetscape" shall be provided
along all public streets which are not required to provide a buffer. These
streetscapes are intended to provide desired green to the city, interest,
comfort to pedestrians, visual softening of pavement expanses, bring human
scale to adjoining buildings, minimize heat reflection, and provide traffic
calming benefits. The streetscape should have a noticeable pattern, design, or
plant variety and should attempt to serve as a distinguishing or identifiable
landmark for the development.
         a.   Unless otherwise required to be located differently due to
presence of existing utilities and/or easements, streetscaping shall be located
within the first fifteen feet (15') parallel and adjacent to the public street
right of way or back of curb of private streets and primary access drives.
         b.   Vegetation within streetscape areas shall be provided at a rate
of one tree and three (3) shrubs per thirty five (35) linear feet of
streetscape. A twenty five (25) square foot mass planting of perennials or
ornamental grasses may be substituted for three (3) shrubs.
         c.   Vegetation required of streetscapes shall be in addition to
vegetation required of parking and open space. Vegetation required as part of
open space may be placed into streetscapes; however the open space vegetation
may not be counted toward fulfilling the minimum amount of vegetation required
for the streetscape.
   J.   Pedestrian Use Areas And Elements: The Mills Crossing development, in
alignment with town center overlay district guidelines, aims to encourage
pedestrian movement and opportunities for pedestrian interaction through a
series of interconnected sidewalks and gathering areas. The specific plan map
on file in the city indicates the locations and type of anticipated plaza areas
and pedestrian corridors. Conceptual illustrations for the plaza areas
indicated are included in the exhibit packet (on file in the city). Specific
details and final materials and layouts for each of these plaza areas shall be
submitted, reviewed, and approved as part of the site plan for the associated
PUD parcel.
      1.   Pedestrian Elements: Mills Crossing, in accordance with the town
center overlay district guidelines, will encourage pedestrian movement and
opportunities for pedestrian interaction through a series of interconnected
sidewalks and gathering areas. The specific plan on file with the city
indicates locations and type of anticipated plaza areas and pedestrian
corridors. Details for each of these plaza areas shall be submitted, reviewed,
and approved as part of the overlay district site plan for each of the PUD
parcels. In addition to the plaza areas indicated on the specific plan map, the
incorporation of plazas and pedestrian use areas shall be encouraged as part of
each building/parcel development.
         a.   These areas shall encourage opportunities for interaction among
pedestrians through the provision of seating opportunities (benches, chairs,
tables, planter walls, etc.). Without compromising the design intent of the
plazas, the developer is encouraged to maximize the number of furniture/seating
opportunities throughout the development. Representations of the site
amenities, including street furniture that will be provided throughout this
development are included in the exhibit packet (on file in the city). Although
deviations from the illustrations are permissible, the street furniture is
intended to serve as a unifying element throughout the development.
         b.   Open space plaza areas shall incorporate a variety of hardscape
landscape materials (stone pavers, stamped concrete, field boulders, etc.) for
visual interest and variety and shall implement landscape vegetation to soften,
enhance, and delineate the areas. All plaza/pedestrian areas are required to
incorporate "green" through the incorporation of planter beds, containers, or
raised planters.
         c.   Appropriate lighting should be incorporated into the plaza areas
and along pedestrian pathways for safety reasons and to extend the usability of
the area into the evening hours. Such lighting may be provided by either pole
mounted fixture or bollard style lighting.
         d.   Plaza areas associated with establishments which serve alcoholic
beverages shall provide a definable boundary (change in material, unmovable
signage, physical feature, etc.) between the private establishments in which
alcohol consumption is allowed and the public area in which it is not. A
physical barrier (fencing, railing, landscaping, etc.) shall prohibit access
into the patio area from the public area; all access into the patio area shall
be through the interior of the establishment. The barrier specifications shall
be reviewed and approved as part of the alcohol permit application.
         e.   Unless provided prior to site development, the installation of
these pedestrian elements shall occur in conjunction with the development of a
specific PUD parcel and shall be completed prior to issuance of a final
occupancy permit.
      2.   Pedestrian Connections: The overall development shall integrate
interconnected pedestrian walkways to allow and encourage pedestrian movement
from one establishment to another within the Mills Crossing development, as
well as to other surrounding developments.
         a.   Pedestrian pathways internal to the development and across
parking areas and drive aisles shall be constructed with contrasting color,
paving material or pavement patterns to the adjoining paving in order to
provide a definable and highly visible crosswalk. Simply striping pedestrian
crosswalks shall not meet the intent of this section.
   K.   Lighting:
      1.   Fixtures used within off street parking areas shall be consistent
with those illustrated in the exhibits packet (on file in the city). Although
deviations from the illustrations are permissible, the fixtures are intended to
serve as a unifying element between parcels within the development.
      2.   Said fixtures shall not exceed twenty five feet (25') in height as
measured from the ground to the top of the light structure.
      3.   Canopy lighting used for drive-ups or gas pumps, must use a recessed
or flush lighting fixture so that no part of the fixture is visible from the
street and spill over and glare is mitigated.
      4.   No wall packs without shields to direct the light to a defined
target are allowed. No floodlighting is allowed. In addition to cutoff
fixtures, particular attention shall be given to eliminate hot spots and light
glare. To achieve this, additional measures may include, but are not limited
to, lowering parking lot light levels after business hours, turning off lights
not necessary for security purposes, and use of landscaping for light
screening/blockage.
      5.   As a part of the review of each site plan, a photometric plan must
be submitted. During the review, the applicant must demonstrate how lighting
will not adversely affect properties outside of the development.
   L.   Cart Corrals: If implemented, cart corrals shall be permanent fixtures
and constructed with masonry, stone, or block. No tenant or product
identification signage for advertising purposes may be located on the cart
corrals. Storage of carts shall be interior to a building or immediately
adjacent to the building with a masonry screen wall of the same materials as
the store face implemented to minimize its presence and completely conceal the
carts. (Ord. 2060, 11-3-2014)
055-06: ARCHITECTURE:
The intent is to create building facades throughout this development that are
varied and articulated to provide visual interest to pedestrians and to
establish a unique identity for the development. The architectural design of
any building within this development shall be acceptable to the city. The
architecture shall attempt to express a creative presentation by careful
attention to exterior building materials and details, use of fenestration, and
change in building mass within the plane and roof design to lessen the
plainness of appearance which can be characteristic of large commercial
buildings. Building design, materials, trim, detailing, and colors shall
provide continuity amongst buildings to unite all structures within the
development into one project concept. All sides to each building shall receive
high quality materials, finishes, and details (360° architectural treatment).
There are no "backs" to a building. Materials should be durable, economically
maintained and of a quality that will maintain their appearance over a
prolonged time.
On file with the city are conceptual architectural illustrations of the general
building style and material options. Once city approval is gained on a
particular building design, any alteration in design before or during
construction must be reviewed and approved by the city's development services
department.
   A.   All buildings within this development shall accommodate or incorporate
the following in building design and materials:
      1.   Corporate architecture shall be prohibited. Limited use of
architectural elements characteristic of prototypical architecture may be
allowed at the discretion of the director of development services or the
appropriate reviewing and approval body. Implementation of these architectural
elements shall be minimized and whenever possible modified to give a unique
image to the establishment. No standard corporate building design without
modifications shall be implemented.
      2.   Buildings shall be organized to create a logical and identifiable
relationship with the site and other buildings, open spaces, and pedestrian
circulation paths.
      3.   The use of building articulation and materials which break up the
building mass into modules that respect a pedestrian scale and reflects
proportions similar to other buildings within the development.
      4.   The building's design should meet context and site objectives such
as providing gateways, creating visual and physical linkages and framing or
terminating views.
      5.   Variation in building height, mass and roof forms shall be provided
to create interest while still maintaining an overall building continuity.
Roofs should not be designed as attention getting devices related to the
reinforcement of signage or as an identifiable corporate image.
      6.   Entrances into buildings should be easily identified through the use
of building design and detailing. Projected or recessed entryways, change in
rooflines, addition of awnings or changes in building material are examples
that can create this effect.
      7.   Shifts in building planes/facades and variation in exterior
materials shall be incorporated to minimize long expanses of wall. Long blank
walls shall be prohibited.
      8.   Variation in materials, material modules, expressed joints,
textures, colors and details should be used to break up the mass of the
buildings. Materials should change with the change in building planes.
      9.   Trim and structural elements such as posts or columns shall be sized
to the scale of the building.
      10.   Whenever possible, ground floor tenant areas should provide the
maximum possible glazing toward sidewalks to provide pedestrians with visual
interest. Use of reflective glass or mirrored glass is discouraged. Efforts
should be made to use clear glass on storefronts, windows and doors to promote
the linkage of the interior and exterior of buildings.
      11.   Natural materials such as brick and stone shall be used as the
major elements of the facade. Architectural concrete or metal acceptable to the
city may be incorporated in the design. CMU shall have integrated color rather
than surface applied paint/staining and should generally have texture for
interest; smooth CMU may be used in conjunction with texture for accent
purposes. The use of EIFS or synthetic stucco shall be used in moderation and
primarily used as an accent or trim material; on the upper portions of the
facades EIFS or synthetic stucco may not be the predominate building material.
Use of vinyl materials is prohibited. (Ord. 2060, 11-3-2014)
055-07: SIGNAGE:
All proposed ground and exterior wall signage requires a sign permit issued by
the city of West Des Moines through normal sign review procedures. Unless
otherwise prescribed herein, signage shall abide by the standards and
regulations as set forth in title 9, chapter 18: Signs, for the support
commercial (SC) district.
   A.   Ground Signs:
      1.   Development Signage:
         a.   A maximum of two (2) development signs which identify the name of
the development and a maximum of two (2) tenants within the development shall
be allowed.
         b.   The sign structure shall not exceed seven feet (7') in height and
one hundred (100) square feet in overall size.
         c.   The name of the development shall be the predominant copy on the
sign with the tenant copy smaller and secondary to the development
identification copy. The tenant identification copy area shall not exceed fifty
percent (50%) of the total sign structure area. The tenant copy area shall be
comprised of individually attached and illuminated letters or a panel sign
sized and treated (opaque vinyl or router face) to minimize the amount of the
sign area that illuminates and integrates into the sign structure so that the
panel sign face is flush with the face of the sign structure.
         d.   Said signs shall be set back a minimum of twenty feet (20') from
ultimate public street right of way lines and out of vision triangles at
intersections.
         e.   Said signs shall be landscaped at the base of the sign. No
additional mounding of soil or berming shall be allowed to elevate the sign
except as required as part of a site plan for screening purposes.
      2.   Business Identification Signs:
         a.   A maximum of three (3) access business identification signs shall
be allowed, one per public street frontage, which may list the development name
and multiple tenants located within the development.
         b.   The sign structure shall not exceed eleven feet (11') in height
and eighty (80) square feet in overall size. The tenant copy area shall not
exceed sixty four (64) square feet. The tenant copy area shall be comprised of
a router face panel to minimize the amount of the sign area that illuminates
and gives the appearance of individual letters.
         c.   Said signs shall be set back a minimum of twenty feet (20') from
ultimate public street right of way lines and out of vision triangles at
intersections.
         d.   Said signs shall be landscaped at the base of the sign. No
additional mounding of soil or berming shall be allowed to elevate the sign
except as required as part of a site plan for screening purposes.
      3.   Directional Signs:
         a.   Directional signs may be allowed interior to the development to
assist in directing patrons through the site. The intent of directional signage
is not to draw people off of the public street, so letter size and sign
location shall be designed to minimize visibility and readability from the
exterior of the property.
         b.   Said signs shall be a maximum height of four feet (4') and
maximum square footage of eight (8) square feet and may include tenant names or
logos.
   B.   Wall Signage:
      1.   All wall signage shall consist of individual three-dimensional
letters attached directly to the building. No cabinet or panel signs shall be
allowed except for contoured cabinet signs necessary to display logos. In the
event cabinet signs are necessary to accommodate a logo, the logo sign shall be
in scale with the copy (text) of any associated channel letters so that it may
be considered as an individual channel letter. If a logo is used as a stand
alone wall sign or is larger than the letters in the copy, the logo will need
to be designed to minimize the illumination of the background with individual
channel elements mounted against a noninternally illuminated backer panel.
Raceways shall be prohibited but a contoured backer panel/wireway may be
allowed to minimize wall penetrations.
      2.   Wall signage location:
         a.   Single tenant buildings: Wall signage may be located on any
facade; however no sign on one facade may be greater in square footage than
that facade is long (i.e., a 50 foot wall plane may place up to 50 square feet
on said plane).
         b.   Multi-tenant buildings: Wall signage shall only be located on a
wall plane associated with and contiguous to the tenant's leased space.
         c.   Wall signage located above a roof element shall be allowed at the
discretion of the director of development services provided that the signage is
located on a flat wall. Any illumination of the sign shall be by reverse
lighting to project the light back toward the wall to create a "halo" effect;
no front illumination is allowed. The individual letters shall have returns to
screen the lighting source and shall be placed so the space between the wall
plane and back of the letter is no greater than two inches (2").
      3.   Wall signage allowed per building or tenant shall be allowed as
follows:
         a.   Single tenant building: Allowed one square foot per one linear
foot based on the longest side.
         b.   Multi-tenant building: Allowed one square foot per one linear
foot of facade which contains the main public entry into the tenant lease area.
In addition, one-half (1/2) square foot per one linear foot of facade which
contains a secondary public entry into the tenant lease area shall be allowed.
The signage may be divided between allowable per city code wall planes;
however, no sign on one facade may be greater in square footage than that
facade is long (i.e., for a 20 foot tenant bay; up to 20 square feet may be
placed on each side of the building).
         c.   Additional sign allowance for setbacks greater than two hundred
fifty feet (250') from the public right of way shall be allowed in accordance
with the city code. (Ord. 2060, 11-3-2014)
055-08: VEHICLE TRIP ALLOCATION:
A traffic impact study (study) dated September 25, 2014, has been prepared for
the Mills Crossing development. Per the study, the Mills Crossing development
has been allocated nine hundred thirty nine (939) P.M. peak hour trips; five
hundred twenty one (521) A.M. peak hour trips; and eight thousand seven hundred
thirty two (8,732) ADT trips. As development proposals are approved the number
of vehicle trips generated by the proposed development (based upon the number
of square feet of a proposed specific use in conjunction with any parameters
established in the study) will be subtracted from the total trips allocated to
the development. Approval of this proposed specific plan does not constitute a
guarantee that the proposed plan can be implemented. Development of all parcels
and implementation of desired land uses, including specific high traffic
generating tenants, will be limited by the available number of trips.
Should anticipated traffic exceed the total trips allocated for the Mills
Crossing development prior to full build out, further development of parcels
may be limited or prohibited. Alternate uses to those planned within the study
and approved as part of this Mills Crossing specific plan ordinance may be
allowed, following completion of an amended traffic study analyzing the
proposed alternative and appropriate city approval of an amendment to the
respective specific plan ordinance and/or map, if necessary, if the existing
uses and the proposed change(s) collectively do not exceed the total trips
allocated to the development. (Ord. 2060, 11-3-2014)
055-09: STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN:
A master stormwater management plan for the entire development which governs
the overall stormwater management of the development shall be submitted to and
approved by the city of West Des Moines. Specific stormwater management plans
demonstrating compliance with the approved Mills Crossing master stormwater
management plan, on file in the city will be required with the development of
each site plan. The specific stormwater plans shall be prepared at the
developer's expense, by a professional engineer licensed in the state of Iowa.
All specific stormwater management plans shall comply with the city's
applicable design standards for stormwater management existing at the time each
site plan is approved. (Ord. 2060, 11-3-2014)
055-10: UTILITIES:
The developer, its successors or assigns, if any, shall construct at its cost,
and if for general public use, dedicate to the city all sanitary sewer mains,
water mains, and storm sewers associated with the Mills Crossing development as
required by the city of West Des Moines' subdivision ordinance in accordance
with applicable city design standards. All necessary easements to allow city
access to public utilities for maintenance and repair purposes shall be
executed prior to approval of an overlay district site plan for each PUD
parcel, shall be executed as a blanket access agreement prior to the approval
of the first overlay district site plan, or prior to the approval and
recordation of the first final plat. Unless otherwise specified within a
specific easement document, the city shall not be responsible for
reimbursement, restoration and/or replacement of any improvements located
within the public easements should the city be required to excavate the public
utilities for normal city operations. No occupancy permits, either temporary or
permanent, shall be issued until all necessary improvements applicable to the
area/lot or structure requesting occupancy are installed and accepted by the
city of West Des Moines. Nothing in this ordinance shall be construed to
prevent the developer, its successors and/or assigns, if any, from entering
into private agreement(s) as it/they may desire to share the cost of
improvements.
The placement of public utility easements within buffer parks and landscape
islands within parking areas is discouraged due to the potential conflict
between trees and the need to access the lines for repair. Overstory and
understory trees should be placed off utility lines a minimum distance equal to
the one to one (1:1) excavation trench necessary for the deepest utility.
Adequate access for maintenance vehicles shall be provided into and through the
easement areas. (Ord. 2060, 11-3-2014)
055-11: FIRE ACCESS:
   A.   All internal drive aisles and parking lots shall permit the travel of
the fire department's largest vehicle, including adequate accommodation of the
vehicle's turning needs. Approval of unique design solutions to accommodate
fire access may be granted by the city council if the solutions proposed are
recommended by the West Des Moines fire department.
   B.   At the discretion of the city's fire marshal, "No Parking Fire Lane"
areas may be established as necessary to ensure efficient movement and access
of the firetrucks. Unless otherwise privately agreed upon, the developer of the
Mills Crossing development shall be responsible for the procurement and
erection of approved fire lane signage.
   C.   All access drives and drive aisles shall maintain a minimum of twenty
feet (20') of clear pavement.
   D.   A minimum of fourteen feet (14') of vertical clearance over the travel
portion shall be maintained at all times over all vehicle travelways.
   E.   The developer or its designee shall be responsible for enforcement of
no parking lanes and maintaining adequate clearance of structures and
vegetation along and above all vehicle travelways regardless if public or
private.
   F.   Adequate fire accesses as determined by the city's fire marshal shall
be provided at all times to those areas under construction. (Ord. 2060, 11-3-
2014)
055-12: PUBLIC STREETLIGHTS:
At the time of final platting, the developer shall enter into an agreement with
MidAmerican Energy for the installation of public streetlights along all public
streets within and abutting the specific plan area. Payment to MidAmerican
Energy or provision of surety to ensure installation of all public streetlights
shall be provided prior to approval of the first overlay district site plan or
the approval and recordation of the first final plat. (Ord. 2060, 11-3-2014)
055-13: INGRESS/EGRESS AGREEMENT:
A public access easement or easements in favor of the City of West Des Moines
allowing unrestricted public access over and through the land within the
specific plan area shall be executed prior to the approval of the first overlay
district site plan or the recordation of the first final plat and in
conjunction with the approval and recordation of any future plat(s). (Ord.
2060, 11-3-2014)
055-14: PUBLIC STREET IMPROVEMENTS:
Improvements and modifications to adjoining public roads as identified within
the traffic study shall be constructed and accepted by the City Council or the
developer may petition the City Council to provide surety in lieu of public
improvement acceptance prior to approval and recordation of the first final
plat or the first overlay district site plan. Dedication of permanent right-of-
way to accommodate public road improvements shall be provided as necessary upon
request. Temporary right-of- way required during the construction/installation
shall be provided as necessary.
A temporary left-in access may be constructed on South 60th Street at the cost
of the developer, as long as minimum spacing and storage requirements given in
the traffic study dated September 25, 2014, are satisfied. The access would
need to be modified to a right in/right out, at the cost of the developer, once
one of the following occurs:
• The intersection of South 60th Street and Stagecoach Drive is signalized.
• If northbound drivers are observed using the slip-left and traveling the
wrong way to access Holiday Inn.
• If crashes become an issue in the future that are of a type correctable by
modifying to a right in/right out.
• The City Engineer dictates the need.
A full access may be constructed on South Prairie View Drive at the existing
right in/right out location at the cost of the developer, as long as northbound
and southbound left turn lanes are constructed in accordance with
recommendations from the traffic study dated September 25, 2014. The access may
ultimately need to be modified back to its current right in/right out
configuration and the left turn lanes removed on South Prairie View Drive, at
the cost of the developer, if crashes or side street delay becomes an issue in
the future or the City Engineer dictates the need. (Ord. 2060, 11-3-2014)
055-15: VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES:
Any person who violates the provisions of this ordinance upon conviction shall
be punished as set forth in section 1-4-1 of the City Code of the City of West
Des Moines, Iowa. (Ord. 2060, 11-3-2014)
055-99: LEGISLATIVE HISTORY:
Ord. 1417, 8-7-2000; Ord. 1510, 3-17-2003; Ord. 2060, 11-3-2014; Ord. 2190, 12-
27-2016; Ord. 2368, 6-17-2019.
PUD #56
RESERVED
(Reserved by Ord. 2508, 4-18-2022)
PUD #57
ASHWORTH CROSSING
SECTION:
057-01: Legal Description
057-02: Sketch Plan
057-03: General Conditions
057-04: Building Restrictions, Easements And Covenants
057-05: All Areas To Be Platted
057-06: Storm Water Management
057-07: Infrastructure
057-08: Buffers
057-09: Signage Regulation
057-10: Definition
057-99: Legislative History
057-01: LEGAL DESCRIPTION:
Outlot "Z", Ashworth Crossing, an official plat, City of West Des Moines,
Dallas County, Iowa.
(Ord. 1434, 2-5-2001)
057-02: SKETCH PLAN:
On file with the community development department of the city and made a part
of this document, for concept description and delineation is the sketch plan
document for the Ashworth Crossing PUD. It is recognized that minor shifts or
realignments of roadways may be necessary and compatible with the need to
acquire workable street patterns, grades and usable building sites, but the
general plan layout, including the relationship of uses to each other and the
relationship of dwelling unit types to the general plan framework, traffic
layout, and development requirements shall be used as the implementation guide.
Wherever conflict occurs between the written text in this document and the
notations on the sketch plan, the written text shall prevail. The sketch plan
is a graphic representation of the property included in the PUD delineating the
approximate location and configuration of the parcels for the purpose of easier
reference for the applicable regulations of this ordinance. (Ord. 1434, 2-5-
2001)
057-03: GENERAL CONDITIONS:
Whereas, title 9 of the West Des Moines city code includes chapter 9, planned
unit development district (PUD), and establishes certain regulations and
guidelines pertaining to accompanying information required on a plat, site plan
and permitted conditional use document.
   A.   General Conditions: Now, therefore, the following conditions,
restrictions, and regulations are adopted as part of this approval and the
following general site plan criteria shall be integrated into and made a part
of the development criteria for the Ashworth Crossing PUD, to wit:
      1.   All subdivisions, public streets, public street rights-of-way and
general development shall adhere to the standards and design criteria set forth
in the West Des Moines subdivision ordinance and the Des Moines metropolitan
design standards as adopted by the city of West Des Moines pertaining thereto,
unless otherwise stated within this ordinance.
      2.   Any regulation, standard, provision or requirement that is not
specifically addressed within this document that is regulated elsewhere in the
city code of West Des Moines, the requirements of the city code shall still be
enforced.
      3.   In all areas within a 100-year frequency flood hazard zone, or
adjoining drainageways or detention areas involving potential flood hazards, no
building shall be erected which has a lowest floor, including basements, less
than one foot (1') above the determined level of the 100-year frequency flood
event or floodproofed to the same elevation in accordance with the West Des
Moines flood plain ordinance, and no building shall be erected within twenty
five feet (25') of any major drainage, storm water detention basin or pond.
      4.   The developer, their successors and assigns, if any, shall pay all
construction and engineering costs for the interior development of the planned
unit development, in accordance with the current city policies at the time of
development, as required by this ordinance, the subdivision ordinance of the
city of West Des Moines, and the Des Moines metropolitan design standards as
adopted by the city of West Des Moines, for all streets, storm sewers, sanitary
sewers, drainage improvements, detention basins, water mains, buffers and other
improvements within the PUD as may be required.
   B.   Land Use Design Criteria: In addition to the general conditions
requirement stated within this document, the following land use design criteria
shall apply to the development areas designated by parcel on the sketch plan.
The sketch plan document, which is made a part of this document by reference
elsewhere in this ordinance, delineates three (3) parcels within the PUD, each
denoted with a specific parcel label, for application of specific standards of
land use and development regulations. The following development standards and
use regulations shall apply to development within each of the individual
parcels, or portion of said parcel, as applicable:
      1.   Parcel A: All general use regulations and provisions set forth in
title 9, zoning, of the West Des Moines city code for the single-family
residential district (R-1) shall apply to any development proposal for all
property within parcel A as shown on the sketch plan of the Ashworth Crossing
PUD, unless noted otherwise in this ordinance. Parcel A shall incorporate a
maximum net developable area of 2.88 acres. A thirty foot (30') buffer park
shall be established along the east boundary of parcel A that is adjacent to
60th Street.
      2.   Parcel B: All general use regulations and provisions set forth in
title 9, zoning, of the West Des Moines city code for the residential medium-
density district (RM-8) shall apply to any development proposal for all
property within parcel B as shown on the sketch plan of the Ashworth Crossing
PUD, unless noted otherwise in this ordinance. Parcel B shall incorporate a
maximum net developable area of 2.05 acres with a maximum of eight (8) dwelling
units per net acreage.
         a.   Development Standards: Allowed uses within this parcel shall be
limited to duplexes and townhomes no greater than four (4) dwelling units per
building.
         b.   Setbacks: All building heights and setbacks within parcel B shall
be in accordance with the setback and bulk density regulations of the West Des
Moines zoning ordinance for the residential medium-density district (RM-8-CP)
unless otherwise herein modified. Single-family attached dwelling units may be
constructed on platted postage stamp type lots with a minimum five foot (5')
building setback requirement within said postage stamp type lots for any
dwelling units, porches, decks, and other structures except for fences. No
building setback is required for fences within postage stamp type lots, and no
building setback is required between adjacent, attached units. In no case shall
any dwelling unit, porch, deck, fence, or other structure encroach into any
required buffer park.
A minimum thirty foot (30') building setback shall be provided from the
ultimate right-of-way line of any adjacent public or private street easement
line. A minimum thirty five foot (35') building setback shall be provided along
the southern boundary line of parcel B. A minimum fifty foot (50') building
setback line shall be provided along the western boundary line of parcel B, and
a minimum thirty foot (30') building setback line shall be provided along the
northern and eastern boundary line of parcel B.
         c.   Architecture: Architecture for residential development in parcel
B shall be acceptable to the city and accomplished in a manner compatible with
the adjoining residential uses in the neighborhood. Architectural design for
multi-family buildings shall attempt to express a creative presentation of
exterior building materials, exterior details and texture, treatment of windows
and doors, and use of angles and multiplicity of planes within the wall and
roof design to lessen the plainness of appearance which can be characteristic
of large residential buildings. The use of brick elements shall be incorporated
into the building architecture, unless the city council, after recommendation
by the planning and zoning commission, shall determine that the use of
alternate building materials enhances the physical appearance. (Ord. 1434, 2-5-
2001)
      3.   Parcel C: All general use regulations and provisions set forth in
title 9, zoning, of the West Des Moines city code for the office district (OF)
shall apply to any development proposal for all property within parcel C as
shown on the sketch plan of the Ashworth Crossing PUD, unless noted otherwise
in this ordinance. Parcel C shall incorporate a maximum net developable area of
2.657 acres.
         a.   Development Standards: Allowed uses within this parcel shall be
limited to those uses listed as permitted (P) and permitted conditional (Pc)
uses for the office district (OF) as outlined in the commercial use matrix in
the West Des Moines city code except as modified herein this ordinance.
The following uses listed in the commercial use matrix as permitted (P) or
permitted conditional (Pc) uses for the office district (OF) shall be
prohibited in this parcel:
Eating places (SIC 5812)
Hotels and motels (SIC 701)
Physical fitness facilities (SIC 7991)
Membership sports and recreation clubs (SIC 7997)
Membership organizations (SIC 86)
Parcel C shall be permitted one drugstore/pharmacy (SIC 591) with no more than
sixteen thousand (16,000) square feet of gross floor area, subject to approval
of a preliminary site plan as outlined in the West Des Moines city code. Said
drugstore/pharmacy use shall abide by the following restrictions:
No twenty four (24) hour operation. The hours of operation shall be no greater
than from seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. to ten o'clock (10:00) P.M.
No outside sales or display of products or merchandise or any outdoor storage
of products or merchandise or shopping carts, etc., shall be permitted. (Ord.
1457, 10-15-2001)
         b.   Setbacks: All building heights and setbacks within parcel C shall
be in accordance with the setback and bulk density regulations of the West Des
Moines zoning ordinance for the neighborhood commercial district (NC) unless
otherwise herein modified. No building shall be greater than two (2) stories in
height.
         c.   Architecture: Architecture for any development in parcel C shall
be acceptable to the city and shall be residential in appearance and be and
accomplished in a manner compatible with the adjoining residential uses in the
neighborhood. Architectural design for office and commercial type buildings
shall attempt to express a creative presentation of exterior building
materials, exterior details and texture, treatment of windows and doors, and
use of angles and multiplicity of planes within the wall and roof design to
lessen the plainness of appearance which can be characteristic of office and
commercial buildings. Generally, franchise style architecture, including
trademark building colors and lighting, shall be prohibited.
Brick and stone shall be the primary element on all sides of any buildings. The
use of EFIS, dryvit, precast materials, vinyl or metal siding or paneling,
shall be prohibited except as accent or trim material that constitutes less
than ten percent (10%) of the building surface area. A significant quantity of
window openings shall be incorporated into the buildings' surfaces that face
and public street rights-of-way. All roofs shall be pitched and surfaced with
shingles or standing seam metal roofing material.
         d.   Signage: All signage shall comply with the West Des Moines sign
ordinance requirements for office district (OF) uses, except that no temporary
window signage shall be permitted and all signage shall be limited to the name
and logo of the user. Typical drive through directional signage shall be
allowed in accordance with the sign ordinance.
         e.   Pedestrian Access: Pedestrian access shall be provided within and
through parcel C. With the development of this parcel, a pedestrian walkway
with contrasting paving or brick pavers and pedestrian features shall be
provided at the corner of 60th Street and Ashworth Road.
         f.   Screening: Less desirable elements, including drive through
windows and lanes, automated teller machines, garbage enclosures, and loading
docks, shall be screened from view of any public streets or adjoining
residential properties with a combination of landscaping, five foot (5') tall
landscaped berming, and masonry screen walls. (Ord. 1434, 2-5-2001)
057-04: BUILDING RESTRICTIONS, EASEMENTS AND COVENANTS:
The developer shall, with the approval of the city council, adopt building
restrictions, easements and covenants pertaining to the property as determined
necessary through the development entitlement process. (Ord. 1434, 2-5-2001)
057-05: ALL AREAS TO BE PLATTED:
Prior to, or in conjunction with development or transfer of ownership of any
portion of the PUD, said area shall be platted in accordance with the city's
subdivision ordinance to delineate within a plat, the lots to be developed or
sold separately or any portion thereof. (Ord. 1434, 2-5-2001)
057-06: STORM WATER MANAGEMENT:
There shall be submitted to, and approved by the West Des Moines public works,
a complete storm water management plan for the PUD to be prepared by the
developer prior to any development within the PUD and for all storm sewer,
drainage systems and detention areas within the PUD. (Ord. 1434, 2-5-2001)
057-07: INFRASTRUCTURE:
   A.   Public Improvements: The developer of the property within the PUD is
responsible for the public improvements that are necessary to serve the
property. Those improvements include, but are not limited to, the paving of
public streets, sanitary sewer extension, water main extension, and storm sewer
improvements. In conjunction with or prior to development within any parcel of
the PUD, public water and sanitary sewer service shall be brought to the site
and extended through the area being developed to adjoining undeveloped
properties in a manner acceptable to the city and properly designed with sizes
and materials compatible with the city's plans for areawide water and sanitary
sewer service.
   B.   Left Turn Lane Improvements: The developer shall also be responsible
for the construction of a one hundred foot (100') eastbound left turn lane at
the Ashworth Road and 62nd Street intersection and a one hundred foot (100')
northbound left turn lane at the 60th Street and north entrance intersection,
as described in the Snyder & Associate traffic impact study dated November 3,
2000, at such time as requested by the city with the proposed reconstruction of
this intersection. (Ord. 1434, 2-5-2001)
057-08: BUFFERS:
All development within the Ashworth Crossing PUD shall comply with the
buffering provisions of the buffer ordinance of the West Des Moines city code.
In situations where the PUD specifies the provision of a buffer park easement,
the required setbacks shall be measured from the easement line. In situations
where this PUD specifies the provision of a buffer park, the buffer park and
the required setback may be overlapped and whichever is more restrictive shall
be adhered to. (Ord. 1434, 2-5-2001)
057-09: SIGNAGE REGULATION:
All signage shall comply with the West Des Moines sign ordinance, except as
herein modified. (Ord. 1434, 2-5-2001)
057-10: DEFINITION:
The term "Developer", for the purpose of this ordinance, shall mean any person,
individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation, estate, trust, entity,
or agent of same acting or proposing to subdivide land or develop a parcel of
land for the construction of a building or buildings. (Ord. 1434, 2-5-2001)
057-99: LEGISLATIVE HISTORY:
Ord. 1434, 2-5-2001; Ord. 1457, 10-15-2001.
PUD #58
BATY FARM
SECTION:
058-01: Legal Description
058-02: Sketch Plan
058-03: General Conditions
058-04: Building Restrictions, Easements And Covenants
058-05: All Areas To Be Platted
058-06: Storm Water Management
058-07: Infrastructure
058-08: Buffers
058-09: Signage Regulation
058-10: Definition
058-99: Legislative History
058-01: LEGAL DESCRIPTION:
A PARCEL OF LAND IN THE EAST 1/2 OF SECTION 19, TOWNSHIP 78 NORTH, RANGE 25
WEST OF THE P.M., IN THE CITY OF WEST DES MOINES, POLK COUNTY, IOWA, AND MORE
PARTICULARLY DESCRIBED AS FOLLOWS:
BEGINNING AT THE SOUTHWEST CORNER OF LOT 22, QUAIL VISTA, AN OFFICIAL PLAT;
THENCE S00°02'46"E, 979.24 FEET ALONG THE WEST BOUNDARY OF SAID PLAT TO A
POINT; THENCE S89°57'14"W, 154.00 FEET TO A POINT OF CURVATURE; THENCE WESTERLY
ALONG A CURVE TO THE LEFT HAVING A RADIUS OF 25 FEET AND A CHORD BEARING OF
S64°06'48"W, AN ARC LENGTH OF 22.55 FEET TO A POINT; THENCE S89°57'14"W 328.30
FEET TO A POINT; THENCE N03°38'11"W, 990.55 FEET TO A POINT; THENCE
N89°56'25"E, 563.94 FEET TO THE POINT OF BEGINNING AND CONTAINING 12.06 ACRES
MORE OR LESS.
(Ord. 1407, 5-30-2000)
058-02: SKETCH PLAN:
On file with the community development department of the city and made a part
of this document, for concept description and delineation is the sketch plan
document for the Baty Farm PUD. It is recognized that minor shifts or
realignments of roadways may be necessary and compatible with the need to
acquire workable street patterns, grades and usable building sites, but the
general plan layout, including the relationship of uses to each other and the
relationship of dwelling unit types to the general plan framework, traffic
layout, and development requirements shall be used as the implementation guide.
Wherever conflict occurs between the written text in this document and the
notations on the sketch plan, the written text shall prevail. The sketch plan
is a graphic representation of the property included in the PUD delineating the
approximate location and configuration of the parcels for the purpose of easier
reference for the applicable regulations of this ordinance. (Ord. 1407, 5-30-
2000)
058-03: GENERAL CONDITIONS:
Whereas, title 9 of the West Des Moines city code includes chapter 9, planned
unit development district (PUD), and establishes certain regulations and
guidelines pertaining to accompanying information required on a plat, site plan
and permitted conditional use document.
   A.   General Conditions: Now, therefore, the following conditions,
restrictions, and regulations are adopted as part of this approval and the
following general site plan criteria shall be integrated into and made a part
of the development criteria for the Baty Farm PUD, to wit:
      1.   All subdivisions, public streets, public street rights-of-way and
general development shall adhere to the standards and design criteria set forth
in the West Des Moines subdivision ordinance and the Des Moines metropolitan
design standards as adopted by the city of West Des Moines pertaining thereto,
unless otherwise stated within this ordinance.
      2.   Any regulation, standard, provision or requirement that is not
specifically addressed within this document that is regulated elsewhere in the
city code of West Des Moines, the requirements of the city code shall still be
enforced.
      3.   In all areas within a 100-year frequency flood hazard zone, or
adjoining drainageways or detention areas involving potential flood hazards, no
building shall be erected which has a lowest floor, including basements, less
than one foot (1') above the determined level of the 100-year frequency flood
event or floodproofed to the same elevation in accordance with the West Des
Moines flood plain ordinance, and no building shall be erected within twenty
five feet (25') of any major drainage, storm water detention basin or pond.
      4.   The developer, their successors and assigns, if any, shall pay all
construction and engineering costs for the interior development of the planned
unit development, in accordance with the current city policies at the time of
development, as required by this ordinance, the subdivision ordinance of the
city of West Des Moines, and the Des Moines metropolitan design standards as
adopted by the city of West Des Moines, for all streets, storm sewers, sanitary
sewers, drainage improvements, detention basins, water mains, buffers and other
improvements within the PUD as may be required.
   B.   Land Use Design Criteria: In addition to the general conditions
requirement stated within this document, the following land use design criteria
shall apply to the development areas designated by parcel on the sketch plan.
The sketch plan document, which is made a part of this document by reference
elsewhere in this ordinance, delineates one parcel within the PUD, denoted as
parcel A, for application of specific standards of land use and development
regulations. The following development standards and use regulations shall
apply to development within said parcel A, or portion of said parcel, as
applicable:
      1.   Parcel A: All general use regulations and provisions set forth in
title 9, zoning, of the West Des Moines city code for the residential medium-
density district (RM-8-CP) shall apply to any development proposal for all
property within parcel A as shown on the sketch plan of the Baty Farm PUD,
unless noted otherwise in this ordinance. Parcel A shall incorporate a maximum
net developable of thirteen (13) acres with a density no greater than eight (8)
dwelling units per acre.
         a.   Development Standards: Allowed uses within this parcel shall be
limited to those uses listed for the residential medium- density district (RM-
8-CP) as outlined in the residential use matrix in the West Des Moines city
code unless otherwise modified herein.
         b.   Setbacks: All building heights and setbacks within parcel A shall
be in accordance with the setback and bulk density regulations of the West Des
Moines zoning ordinance for the residential medium-density district (RM-8-CP)
unless otherwise herein modified. Single-family attached dwelling units may be
constructed on platted postage stamp type lots with no required setbacks within
said postage stamp type lots. In no case shall any dwelling unit, porch, deck,
fence, or other structure encroach into any required buffer park.
A minimum thirty foot (30') building setback shall be provided from the
ultimate right-of-way line of the public street through parcel A as shown on
the sketch plan, provided that no unit shall have direct access to the public
street. Any units with direct access to the public street shall comply with the
residential medium-density district (RM-8) setback requirements. A minimum
fifty foot (50') building setback shall be required along the eastern boundary
line of parcel A, and a minimum thirty five foot (35') building setback shall
be required along the northern, southern, and western boundary lines of parcel
A.
         c.   Architecture: Architecture for residential development in parcel
2 shall be acceptable to the city and accomplished in a manner compatible with
the adjoining residential uses in the neighborhood. Architectural design for
multi-family buildings shall attempt to express a creative presentation of
exterior building materials, exterior details and texture, treatment of windows
and doors, and use of angles and multiplicity of planes within the wall and
roof design to lessen the plainness of appearance which can be characteristic
of large residential buildings. The use of brick elements shall be incorporated
into the building architecture, unless the city council, after recommendation
by the planning and zoning commission, shall determine that the use of
alternate building materials enhances the physical appearance. (Ord. 1407, 5-
30-2000)
058-04: BUILDING RESTRICTIONS, EASEMENTS AND COVENANTS:
The developer shall, with the approval of the city council, adopt building
restrictions, easements and covenants pertaining to the property as determined
necessary through the development entitlement process. (Ord. 1407, 5-30-2000)
058-05: ALL AREAS TO BE PLATTED:
Prior to, or in conjunction with development or transfer of ownership of any
portion of the PUD, said area shall be platted in accordance with the city's
subdivision ordinance to delineate within a plat, the lots to be developed or
sold separately or any portion thereof. (Ord. 1407, 5-30-2000)
058-06: STORM WATER MANAGEMENT:
There shall be submitted to, and approved by the West Des Moines public works,
a complete storm water management plan for the PUD to be prepared by the
developer prior to any development within the PUD and for all storm sewer,
drainage systems and detention areas within the PUD. (Ord. 1407, 5-30-2000)
058-07: INFRASTRUCTURE:
The developer of the property within the PUD is responsible for the public
improvements that are necessary to serve the property. Those improvements
include, but are not limited to, the paving of public streets, sanitary sewer
extension, water main extension, and storm sewer improvements. In conjunction
with or prior to development within any parcel of the PUD, public water and
sanitary sewer service shall be brought to the site and extended through the
area being developed to adjoining undeveloped properties in a manner acceptable
to the city and properly designed with sizes and materials compatible with the
city's plans for areawide water and sanitary sewer service. (Ord. 1407, 5-30-
2000)
058-08: BUFFERS:
All development within the Baty Farm PUD shall comply with the buffering
provisions of the buffer ordinance of the West Des Moines city code. In
situations where the PUD specifies the provision of a buffer park easement, the
required setbacks shall be measured from the easement line. In situations where
this PUD specifies the provision of a buffer park, the buffer park and the
required setback may be overlapped and whichever is more restrictive shall be
adhered to. (Ord. 1407, 5-30-2000)
058-09: SIGNAGE REGULATION:
All signage shall comply with the West Des Moines sign ordinance regulations
for the residential medium-density district. (Ord. 1407, 5-30-2000)
058-10: DEFINITION:
The term "Developer", for the purpose of this ordinance, shall mean any person,
individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation, estate, trust, entity,
or agent of same acting or proposing to subdivide land or develop a parcel of
land for the construction of a building or buildings. (Ord. 1407, 5-30-2000)
058-99: LEGISLATIVE HISTORY:
Ord. 1407, 5-30-2000.
PUD #59
DEPOT AT ASHWORTH
SECTION:
059-01: Legal Description
059-02: Sketch Plan
059-03: General Conditions
059-04: Building Restrictions, Easements And Covenants
059-05: All Areas To Be Platted
059-06: Stormwater Management
059-07: Infrastructure
059-08: Traffic Study
059-09: Buffers
059-10: Signage Regulation
059-11: Definition
059-12: Violations And Penalties
059-99: Legislative History
059-01: LEGAL DESCRIPTION:
The part of the southeast 1/4 of the southeast 1/4 of Section 2, Township 78
North, Range 26 west of the 5th PM, West Des Moines, Dallas County, Iowa being
more particularly described as follows:
Commencing at the southeast corner of said Section 2; thence North 00°00'00"
east along the east line of the southeast 1/4 of said Section 2 a distance of
60.44 feet; thence South 83°06'49" west parallel with and 60.00 feet northerly
of the south line of the southeast 1/4 of the southeast 1/4 of said Section 2 a
distance of 60.44 feet to the point of beginning; thence south 83°06'49" west
along the northerly right of way line of Ashworth Road, as it is presently
established, a distance of 648.81 feet; thence south 00°00'00" east a distance
of 15.11 feet; thence south 83°06'49" west along the northerly right of way of
said Ashworth Road a distance of 149.41 feet; thence north 00°12'17" west a
distance of 681.18 feet to the south right of way line of the Union Pacific
Railroad, as it is presently established; thence south 63°40'47" west along the
said south right of way line of the Union Pacific Railroad a distance of 886.84
feet to the west right of way line of Jordan Creek Parkway, as it is presently
established; thence south 00°00'00" east along said west right of way line a
distance of 177.14 feet to the point of beginning. Said tract of land contains
7.7295 acres more or less. Said tract of land being subject to and together
with any and all easements of record.
(Ord. 1468, 2-19-2002)
059-02: SKETCH PLAN:
On file with the community development department of the city and made a part
of this document, for concept description and delineation is the sketch plan
document for the Depot At Ashworth PUD. It should be noted that this conceptual
layout of the property should not be misconstrued to indicate approval of
specific site design or layout. Specifics, such as, but not limited to, traffic
circulation patterns, building orientation, parking, and screening, will be
reviewed at the time of preliminary platting, site plan, permitted conditional
use permit, or any other time that the city deems it necessary during the
review process. It is recognized that shifts or realignments of roadways and
drives shown on the sketch plan may be necessary to establish workable and safe
street and driveway layouts, grades and usable building sites, but the general
plan layout, including the relationship of uses to each other, the general plan
framework, and the development requirements shall be used as the implementation
guide. Wherever conflict occurs between the written text in this document and
the notations on the sketch plan, the written text shall prevail. The sketch
plan is a graphic representation of the property included in the PUD
delineating the approximate location and configuration of the parcels for the
purpose of easier reference for the applicable regulations of this ordinance.
(Ord. 1468, 2-19-2002)
059-03: GENERAL CONDITIONS:
Whereas, title 9 of the West Des Moines city code includes chapter 9, planned
unit development district (PUD) and establishes certain regulations and
guidelines pertaining to accompanying information required on a plat, site plan
and permitted conditional use documents.
   A.   General Conditions: Now, therefore, the following conditions,
restrictions, and regulations are adopted as part of this approval and the
following general site plan criteria shall be integrated into and made a part
of the development criteria for the Depot At Ashworth PUD, to wit:
      1.   All subdivisions, public streets, public street rights of way and
general development shall adhere to the standards and design criteria set forth
in the West Des Moines subdivision ordinance and the Des Moines metropolitan
design standards as adopted by the city of West Des Moines pertaining thereto,
unless otherwise stated within this ordinance.
      2.   Any regulation, standard, provision or requirement that is not
specifically addressed within this document that is regulated elsewhere in the
city code of West Des Moines, the requirements of the city code shall still be
enforced.
      3.   In all areas within a 100-year frequency flood hazard zone, or
adjoining drainageways or detention areas involving potential flood hazards, no
building shall be erected which has a lowest floor, including basements, less
than two feet (2') above the determined level of the 100-year frequency flood
event or floodproofed to the same elevation in accordance with the West Des
Moines flood plain ordinance, and no building shall be erected within twenty
five feet (25') of any major drainage, storm water detention basin or pond,
unless the building and site can be adequately designed to protect structures
from flooding, to the satisfaction of the city's public works department and
building division.
      4.   The developer, their successors and assigns, if any, shall pay all
construction and engineering costs for the interior development of the planned
unit development, in accordance with the current city policies at the time of
development, as required by this ordinance, the subdivision ordinance of the
city of West Des Moines, and the Des Moines metropolitan design standards as
adopted by the city of West Des Moines, for all streets, storm sewers, sanitary
sewers, drainage improvements, detention basins, water mains, buffers and other
improvements within the PUD as may be required.
   B.   Land Use Design Criteria: In addition to the general conditions
requirement stated within this document, the following land use design criteria
shall apply to the development within the PUD. The following development
standards and use regulations shall apply to development within each of the
individual parcels, or portion of said parcel, as applicable:
      1.   All Parcels: All general use regulations, provisions, setback and
bulk density regulations set forth in title 9, zoning, of the West Des Moines
city code for the professional commerce park (PCP) district shall apply to any
development proposal for all property within the Depot at Ashworth PUD, unless
otherwise modified herein. Within the planned unit development (PUD), there
shall be a maximum of five (5) principal buildings allowed and a minimum lot
size of one acre for any parcel.
Within the PUD, a maximum of two (2) sit down restaurants (no drive through)
shall be allowed as a permitted use. One pharmacy shall be allowed as a
permitted use if in conjunction with a planned development. Building permits
shall not be issued for the pharmacy until building permits for at least two
(2) other buildings have been issued. All three (3) structures must be built
within twelve (12) months of the completion and acceptance by the West Des
Moines city council of 74th Street improvements between the I-80 interchange
and Ashworth Road. The other two (2) buildings on the remaining two (2) lots
within the PUD need to be built within twenty four (24) months of the
completion and acceptance by the West Des Moines city council. Failure to
comply with these regulations in the established time frame will result in the
city initiating rezoning action to amend the Depot at Ashworth PUD to disallow
pharmacy uses.
Unless used as a pharmacy, use of the building for retail purposes shall be
prohibited. Upon termination of use as a pharmacy, the building may only be
used for office purposes. If a drive up lane is built in conjunction with the
pharmacy, but use of the building as a pharmacy is discontinued, any associated
drive up lane(s) must be eliminated and the building architecturally modified
to remove the drive up window. The proposed changes must be aesthetically
pleasing and approved by the city prior to the building being occupied by
another use or within twelve (12) months of cessation of the pharmacy use,
whichever is sooner.
Any pharmacy within the PUD shall abide by the following restrictions:
-   No twenty four (24) hour operation. The hours of operation shall be no
greater than from seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. to ten o'clock (10:00) P.M.
   -   No outside sales or display of products or merchandise or any outdoor
storage of products or merchandise or shopping carts, etc., shall be permitted.
   -   No alcohol sales will be allowed.
         a.   Setbacks: All building setbacks from public streets and adjacent
property must comply with building setback requirements for the professional
commerce park (PCP) district, unless otherwise provided herein. A minimum
twenty foot (20') building setback shall be required from all interior property
lines within the Depot at Ashworth PUD. A minimum twenty foot (20') building
setback shall be required along the property line adjacent to the railroad
right of way. No building shall be located closer than fifteen feet (15') from
a drive or private street within the PUD that is designed to provide for
through traffic from another building or parcel within the development. (Ord.
1468, 2-19-2002)
         b.   Architecture: The architectural design of buildings in the Depot
At Ashworth PUD shall be cohesive and complementary to each other through the
use of common design elements, materials, and/or colors. Brick and stone shall
be the primary element on all sides of any buildings. No wood, masonite,
visible asphaltic exterior wall material, vinyl or aluminum siding,
nonarchitectural sheet metal, concrete block, or other similar materials shall
constitute a portion of any building except as a trim material, unless the
city's appropriate governing body shall determine that the use of alternate
building materials enhances the physical appearance. Architectural grade
asphaltic shingles shall be allowed.
The architecture shall attempt to express a creative presentation of exterior
building materials, exterior details and texture, treatment of windows and
doors, and use of angles and multiplicity of planes within the wall and roof
design to increase architectural interest. (Ord. 2043, 6-16-2014)
         c.   Lighting: Any lighting on the exterior of a building shall be
downcast lighting. Any canopy lighting associated with the pharmacy and the
bank shall be recessed into the canopy to prevent glare.
         d.   Screening: Less desirable elements, including, but not limited
to, drive through windows and lanes, automated teller machines, garbage
enclosures, and parking lots, shall be screened from view from any public
streets or adjoining residential properties with a combination of landscaping
of year round color, three foot (3') tall berming, and masonry screen walls.
All heating, ventilation, and air conditioning mechanical units and facilities
shall be screened from public view. All walls, including screening walls, of
any building within the property shall be compatible in design and use of
materials of the principal buildings within the PUD. Any storage or loading
area and loading docks shall be sufficiently buffered from adjoining
properties, public streets and general public view.
         e.   Access: In the sketch plan, it should be noted that there are
parcels shown which have no public street frontage. In order to comply with the
intent of the city code requirements for public street frontage for all lots,
at the time of platting there shall be cross access easements established
throughout the PUD which shall ensure perpetual access to those properties
without public street frontage. There shall also be an ongoing agreement
established, such as an owners' association, which provides for the long term
maintenance and reconstruction of the internal drives and private streets
utilized by multiple parcels. It shall be the responsibility of the property
owners within the PUD to maintain access via the private streets and drives
within the development to those parcels without public street frontage and the
city shall have no responsibility in providing for public street access for any
of these parcels. (Ord. 1468, 2-19-2002)
059-04: BUILDING RESTRICTIONS, EASEMENTS AND COVENANTS:
The developer shall, with the approval of the city council, adopt building
restrictions, easements and covenants pertaining to the property as determined
necessary through the development entitlement process. In particular, private
agreements between the property owner for the internal private streets and
parking lots shall be established. (Ord. 1468, 2-19-2002)
059-05: ALL AREAS TO BE PLATTED:
Prior to, or in conjunction with development or transfer of ownership of any
portion of the PUD, said area shall be platted in accordance with the city's
subdivision ordinance to delineate within a plat, the lots to be developed or
sold separately or any portion thereof. This does not preclude the sale of the
whole PUD as a unit. (Ord. 1468, 2-19-2002)
059-06: STORMWATER MANAGEMENT:
There shall be submitted to, and approved by the West Des Moines public works,
a complete stormwater management plan for the "PUD" to be prepared by the
developer prior to any development within the "PUD" and for all storm sewer,
drainage systems and detention areas within the "PUD". (Ord. 1468, 2-19-2002)
059-07: INFRASTRUCTURE:
The developer of the property within the PUD is responsible for the public
improvements that are necessary to serve the property. Those improvements
include, but are not limited to, the paving of public streets, sanitary sewer
extension, water main extension, and storm sewer improvements. In conjunction
with or prior to development within any parcel of the PUD, public water and
sanitary sewer service shall be brought to the site and extended through the
area being developed to adjoining undeveloped properties in a manner acceptable
to the city and properly designed with sizes and materials compatible with the
city's plans for areawide water and sanitary sewer service. The developer/owner
of this property shall also be responsible for one-fourth (1/4) of the cost of
the traffic signals at the intersections of 76th Street and Ashworth Road.
(Ord. 1468, 2-19-2002)
059-08: TRAFFIC STUDY:
In conjunction with this PUD, a traffic study was prepared, which was based on
certain assumptions for the future development of the property. If the public
works director determines that a proposed development of any site within the
PUD does not comply with the provisions and assumptions of the original traffic
report, the developer shall have the traffic report reviewed by a traffic
consultant acceptable to the city of West Des Moines to identify the impact and
any necessary mitigation measures. A written evaluation shall be submitted to
the city of West Des Moines that shall identify what impacts the development of
that site will have on the existing street system and what improvements are
necessary for the safe and orderly movement of traffic in and around the area.
The developer shall be responsible for the full cost associated with the
improvements necessary to mitigate additional traffic generated as a result of
the development as stated in the approved traffic report or any subsequent
addenda to the traffic report. (Ord. 1468, 2-19-2002)
059-09: BUFFERS:
All development within the Depot At Ashworth PUD shall comply with the
buffering provisions of the buffer ordinance of the West Des Moines city code.
(Ord. 1468, 2-19-2002)
059-10: SIGNAGE REGULATION:
All signage shall comply with the West Des Moines sign ordinance. The use of
neon signage shall be prohibited. (Ord. 1468, 2-19-2002)
059-11: DEFINITION:
The term "developer", for the purpose of this ordinance, shall mean any person,
individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation, estate, trust, entity,
or agent of same acting or proposing to subdivide land or develop a parcel of
land for the construction of a building or buildings. (Ord. 1468, 2-19-2002)
059-12: VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES:
Any person who violates the provisions of this ordinance upon conviction shall
be punished as set forth in section 1-4-1 of the city code. (Ord. 2043, 6-16-
2014)
059-99: LEGISLATIVE HISTORY:
Ord. 1468, 2-19-2002; Ord. 2043, 6-16-2014.
PUD #60
LAKE VIEW
SECTION:
060-01: Legal Description
060-02: Sketch Plan
060-03: General Conditions
060-04: Parking Lot Interconnections
060-05: All Areas To Be Platted
060-06: Storm Water Management
060-07: Infrastructure
060-08: Buffers
060-09: Signage Regulation
060-10: Definition
060-99: Legislative History
060-01: LEGAL DESCRIPTION:
Lots 9 and 10, West Lakes Office Park Plat One, an official plat, City of West
Des Moines, Dallas County, Iowa.
(Ord. 1488, 9-3-2002)
060-02: SKETCH PLAN:
On file with the community development department of the city and made a part
of this document, for concept description and delineation is the sketch plan
document for the Lake View PUD. It is recognized that minor shifts or
realignments of roadways may be necessary and compatible with the need to
acquire workable street patterns, grades and usable building sites, but the
general plan layout, including the relationship of uses to each other and the
relationship of dwelling unit types to the general plan framework, traffic
layout, and development requirements shall be used as the implementation guide.
Wherever conflict occurs between the written text in this document and the
notations on the sketch plan, the written text shall prevail. The sketch plan
is a graphic representation of the property included in the PUD delineating the
approximate location and configuration of the parcels for the purpose of easier
reference for the applicable regulations of this ordinance. (Ord. 1488, 9-3-
2002)
060-03: GENERAL CONDITIONS:
Whereas, title 9 of the West Des Moines city code includes chapter 9, planned
unit development district (PUD) and establishes certain regulations and
guidelines pertaining to accompanying information required on a plat, site plan
and permitted conditional use documents.
   A.   General Conditions: Now, therefore, the following conditions,
restrictions, and regulations are adopted as part of this approval and the
following general site plan criteria shall be integrated into and made a part
of the development criteria for the Lake View PUD, to wit:
      1.   All subdivisions, public streets, public street rights of way and
general development shall adhere to the standards and design criteria set forth
in the West Des Moines subdivision ordinance and the Des Moines metropolitan
design standards as adopted by the city of West Des Moines pertaining thereto,
unless otherwise stated within this ordinance.
      2.   Any regulation, standard, provision or requirement that is not
specifically addressed within this document that is regulated elsewhere in the
city code of West Des Moines, the requirements of the city code shall still be
enforced.
      3.   In all areas within a 100-year frequency flood hazard zone, or
adjoining drainageways or detention areas involving potential flood hazards, no
building shall be erected which has a lowest floor, including basements, less
than one foot (1') above the determined level of the 100-year frequency flood
event or floodproofed to the same elevation in accordance with the West Des
Moines floodplain ordinance, and no building shall be erected within twenty
five feet (25') of any major drainage, storm water detention basin or pond.
      4.   The developer, their successors and assigns, if any, shall pay all
construction and engineering costs for the interior development of the planned
unit development, in accordance with the current city policies at the time of
development, as required by this ordinance, the subdivision ordinance of the
city of West Des Moines, and the Des Moines metropolitan design standards as
adopted by the city of West Des Moines, for all streets, storm sewers, sanitary
sewers, drainage improvements, detention basins, water mains, buffers and other
improvements within the PUD as may be required.
   B.   Land Use Design Criteria: In addition to the general conditions
requirement stated within this document, the following land use design criteria
shall apply to the development areas designated by parcel on the sketch plan.
The sketch plan document, which is made a part of this document by reference
elsewhere in this ordinance, delineates three (3) parcels within the PUD, each
denoted with a specific parcel label, for application of specific standards of
land use and development regulations. The following development standards and
use regulations shall apply to development within each of the individual
parcels, or portion of said parcel, as applicable.
      1.   Parcels A And B: All general use regulations and provisions set
forth in title 9, zoning of the West Des Moines city code for the professional
commerce park district (PCP) shall apply to any development proposal for all
property within parcels A and B as shown on the sketch plan of the Lake View
PUD, unless noted otherwise in this ordinance. Parcels A and B shall have a
minimum lot size of three (3) acres.
         a.   Setbacks: All building heights and setbacks within parcels A and
B shall be in accordance with the setback and bulk density regulations of the
West Des Moines zoning ordinance for the professional commerce park district
(PCP) unless otherwise herein modified. The minimum lot width for parcels A and
B shall be two hundred feet (200'). The side yard building setback between
parcels A and B shall be thirty feet (30'). No side yard parking lot setback is
required between lots that have parking lot interconnections and between
parcels A and B, which share a common access drive. The parking lot setback
from the interstate right of way line shall be five feet (5').
         b.   Pedestrian Trail: Parcel A shall incorporate a pedestrian trail
into its design that interacts with the existing pond and this trail shall
connect to the public trail along Westown Parkway.
         c.   Common Access Drive: In order to maintain safe and efficient
traffic flow, parcels A and B shall share one common access drive off of
Westown Parkway. The location of this drive should be coordinated with the
property to the north. No additional drives off of Westown Parkway shall be
permitted for parcels A and B.
         d.   Street Right Of Way: Prior to any development occurring on parcel
A or B, the property shall deed to the city their full half of any additional
street right of way required for Westown Parkway, as identified by the city of
West Des Moines adopted comprehensive plan.
      2.   Parcel C: All general use regulations and provisions set forth in
title 9, zoning of the West Des Moines city code for the professional commerce
park district (PCP) shall apply to any development proposal for all property
within parcel C as shown on the sketch plan of the Lake View PUD, unless noted
otherwise in this ordinance. Parcel C shall incorporate a maximum net
developable area of 9.2 acres. (Ord. 1488, 9-3-2002)
060-04: PARKING LOT INTERCONNECTIONS:
In order to sustain safe and efficient traffic movement throughout the PUD,
parking lot interconnections shall be provided between parcels A and B. (Ord.
1488, 9-3-2002)
060-05: ALL AREAS TO BE PLATTED:
Prior to, or in conjunction with development or transfer of ownership of any
portion of the PUD, said area shall be platted in accordance with the city's
subdivision ordinance to delineate within a plat, the lots to be developed or
sold separately or any portion thereof. (Ord. 1488, 9-3-2002)
060-06: STORM WATER MANAGEMENT:
There shall be submitted to, and approved by the West Des Moines public works,
a complete storm water management plan for the PUD to be prepared by the
developer prior to any development within the PUD and for all storm sewer,
drainage systems and detention areas within the PUD. (Ord. 1488, 9-3-2002)
060-07: INFRASTRUCTURE:
The developer of the property within the PUD is responsible for the public
improvements that are necessary to serve the property. Those improvements
include, but are not limited to, the paving of public streets, sanitary sewer
extension, water main extension, and storm sewer improvements. In conjunction
with or prior to development within any parcel of the PUD, public water and
sanitary sewer service shall be brought to the site and extended through the
area being developed to adjoining undeveloped properties in a manner acceptable
to the city and properly designed with sizes and materials compatible with the
city's plans for area wide water and sanitary sewer service. (Ord. 1488, 9-3-
2002)
060-08: BUFFERS:
All development within the Lake View PUD shall comply with the buffering
provisions of the buffer ordinance of the West Des Moines city code. In
situations where the PUD specifies the provision of a buffer park easement, the
required setbacks shall be measured from the easement line. In situations where
this PUD specifies the provision of a buffer park, the buffer park and the
required setback may be overlapped and whichever is more restrictive shall be
adhered to. (Ord. 1488, 9-3-2002)
060-09: SIGNAGE REGULATION:
All signage shall comply with the West Des Moines sign ordinance, except as
herein modified. Only one interstate monument sign shall be allowed on parcels
A and B; which may be shared between the parcels. (Ord. 1488, 9-3-2002)
060-10: DEFINITION:
The term "developer", for the purpose of this ordinance, shall mean any person,
individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation, estate, trust, entity,
or agent of same acting or proposing to subdivide land or develop a parcel of
land for the construction of a building or buildings. (Ord. 1488, 9-3-2002)
060-99: LEGISLATIVE HISTORY:
Ord. 1488, 9-3-2002.
PUD #61
BENNETT
SECTION:
061-01: Legal Description
061-02: Sketch Plan
061-03: General Conditions
061-04: Signage
061-05: Storm Water Management
061-06: Traffic Study
061-99: Legislative History
061-01: LEGAL DESCRIPTION:
That part of lots 11, 12, 13, 14, and 15, Bennett Acres and official plat now
included in and forming part of the City of West Des Moines, Polk County, Iowa
and a portion of the vacated public street right-of-way of Bennett Drive more
particularly described as follows:
Said lots 11, 12, 13, and 14 of Bennett Acres, except the north five (5) feet,
and; beginning at the southwest corner of said lot 15 of Bennett Acres; thence
N 00°05'05" E, along the west line of said lot 15, a distance of 324.84 feet to
a point on the south right-of-way line of Bennett Drive; thence S 89°23'06" E,
along said right-of-way line, a distance of 76.93 feet; thence southeasterly,
along said right-of-way line 41.26 feet along a 60.00 foot radius curve concave
southwesterly having a long chord of 40.45 feet bearing S 69°41'05" E; thence
northeasterly, along said right-of-way line, 112.92 feet along a 50.00 foot
radius curve concave northwesterly having a long chord of 90.41 feet bearing N
65°18'55" E to a point on the centerline of said abandoned Bennett Drive;
thence S 89°23'06" E, along the centerline of said abandoned Bennett Drive, a
distance of 333.03 feet to a point on the northwesterly right-of-way line of
Fuller Road; thence S 45°10'12" W, along said northwesterly right-of-way line,
a distance of 490.50 feet to the southeast corner of said lot 15; thence N
89°28'45" W, along the south line of said lot 15, a distance of 182.64 feet to
the point of beginning.
all containing 276,519 square feet (6.348 acres±), subject to any and all
easements and restriction of record.
(Ord. 1511, 3-3-2003)
061-02: SKETCH PLAN:
On file with the community development department of the city and made a part
of this document for concept description and delineation is the sketch plan for
the Bennett PUD. It is recognized that minor shifts or realignments of roadways
may be necessary and compatible with the need to acquire workable street
patterns, grades and usable building sites, but the general plan layout,
including the relationship of uses to each other and the relationship of land
use to the general plan framework, traffic layout, and development requirements
shall be used as the implementation guide. The sketch plan is a graphic
representation of the property included in the PUD delineating the approximate
location and configuration of the uses for the purpose of easier reference for
the applicable regulations of this ordinance. (Ord. 1511, 3-3-2003)
061-03: GENERAL CONDITIONS:
Whereas, title 9 of the West Des Moines city code includes chapter 9, planned
unit development district (PUD) and establishes certain regulations and
guidelines pertaining to accompanying information required on site plan
documents.
   A.   General Conditions: Now, therefore, the following conditions,
restrictions, and regulations are adopted as part of this approval and the
following general site plan criteria shall be integrated into and made a part
of the development criteria for the Bennett PUD, to wit:
      1.   All subdivisions, public streets, public street rights of way and
general development shall adhere to the standards and design criteria set forth
in the West Des Moines subdivision ordinance, the Des Moines metropolitan
design standards as adopted by the city of West Des Moines, and the
comprehensive plan, unless stated otherwise within this ordinance.
      2.   Any regulation, standard, provision or requirement that is not
specifically addressed within this document that is regulated elsewhere in the
city code of West Des Moines, the requirements of the city code are applicable
and shall be enforced.
      3.   In all areas within a 100-year frequency flood hazard zone, or
adjoining drainageways or detention areas involving potential flood hazards, no
building shall be erected which has a lowest floor, including basements, less
than two feet (2') above the determined level of the 100-year frequency flood
event or floodproofed to the same elevation in accordance with the West Des
Moines floodplain ordinance, and no building shall be erected within twenty
five feet (25') of any major drainage, storm water detention basin or pond.
      4.   The developer, their successors and assigns, if any, shall pay all
construction and engineering costs for the interior development of the planned
unit development, in accordance with the current city policies at the time of
development, as required by this ordinance, the subdivision ordinance of the
city of West Des Moines, the West Des Moines comprehensive plan, and the Des
Moines metropolitan design standards as adopted by the city of West Des Moines,
for all streets, storm sewers, sanitary sewers, drainage improvements,
detention basins, water mains, buffers and other improvements within the PUD as
may be required.
   B.   Land Use Design Criteria: In addition to the general conditions as
stated in subsection A above, the following land use design criteria shall
apply to the development areas designated by parcel on the sketch plan.
The Bennett PUD shall incorporate approximately 6.348 acres with a maximum
overall density that shall not exceed eighteen (18) dwelling units per acre or
a maximum of one hundred fourteen (114) dwelling units. The shifting of
densities between parcels within the PUD shall be permitted provided that the
overall density of any parcel within the PUD shall not exceed a maximum density
of twenty two (22.0) dwelling units per acre. The following development
standards and use regulations shall apply to any development within the PUD as
applicable.
      1.   Parcel A: All general use regulations, performance standards and
provisions set forth in title 9, chapter 5 of the city code for the RH-18
residential high-density district shall apply to all existing property within
parcel A as shown on the sketch plan, unless noted otherwise in this ordinance.
         a.   Setbacks: All building heights and setbacks within parcel A shall
be in accordance with the setback and bulk density regulations of the West Des
Moines zoning ordinance for the residential high-density (RH-18) district
unless otherwise herein modified. The front yard setback shall be a minimum of
twenty five feet (25').
      2.   Parcel B: All general use regulations, performance standards and
provisions set forth in title 9, chapter 5 of the city code for the RH-18
residential high-density district shall apply to any development proposal for
all property within parcel B shown on the sketch plan, unless noted otherwise
in this ordinance.
         a.   Setbacks: All building heights and setbacks within parcel B shall
be in accordance with the setback and bulk density regulations of the West Des
Moines zoning ordinance for the residential high-density (RH-18) district
unless otherwise herein modified. The side yard building setback abutting an
adjacent property for the principal residential building shall be a minimum of
fifteen feet (15'). The minimum parking lot setback along the Bennett Drive
right of way shall be ten feet (10').
         b.   Architecture: The architectural design of any building in the
Bennett PUD shall be acceptable to the city, provided acceptance shall not be
unreasonably withheld. All buildings within the PUD shall have wood, fascia
glass, face brick or stone as a primary element of the exterior, with all sides
of any building built within the PUD consistent in design and use of materials.
No masonite, aluminum siding, nonarchitectural sheet metal, nondecorative
concrete block or other similar materials shall constitute a portion of any
building exterior, except as a trim material, unless the city determines that
said material when used as a primary element, enhances the physical appearance.
         c.   Parking Requirements: Based upon the land uses shown on the
sketch plan, the minimum number of parking stalls required on the entire site
shall be determined based upon the parking requirements set forth by the zoning
ordinance for multi-family dwellings.
         d.   Lighting: All lighting shall be downcast lighting and shall
comply with the lighting standards of the West Des Moines city code. Wall pack
lighting shall be prohibited.
         e.   Internal Circulation And Cross Access Easements: All roads within
the Bennett PUD must meet city code requirements applicable at the time of the
development or redevelopment of the property. The layout and design of the
internal drives and roads within this parcel shall generally comply with the
attached sketch plan. At the time of the development of parcel B, the site plan
shall be reviewed for compliance with the turning movements necessary for
emergency vehicle access and modified as needed. An interconnection must be
made between the parcel A parking lot to that of parcel B and a cross access
easement shall be executed by the property owner to assure perpetual access in
and through the development as shown on the sketch plan.
         f.   Landscaping Requirements: A minimum fifteen foot (15') wide
landscaped buffer park shall be established along the right of way of Fuller
Road for the purpose of screening and buffering the residential units within
parcel B from the negative impacts of the road and nearby industrial zoned
properties. Landscaping requirements shall be equal to one-half (1/2) what is
required for a thirty foot (30') landscaped buffer park. In addition, the
community development director or his designee may require additional
buffering, berming, and landscaping as determined during the site plan review
in order to buffer noise, unsightly views, and or other undesirable elements.
The landscaped buffer parks shall incorporate berming (where practical) and
vegetative plantings to effectively screen and buffer said units from the
adjacent street. No fences or structures shall be permitted within the buffer
parks, however retaining walls may be acceptable with the approval of the city
council. Prior to development within any part of parcel B, a buffer plan shall
be reviewed and approved by the city which illustrates the use of berms and
tree plantings in accordance with the provisions of the city code, as amended
by ordinance 1073.
         g.   Street Right Of Way: Prior to, or in conjunction with, any
development occurring on parcel B, the property owner shall deed to the city
their full half of any additional street right of way required for Bennett
Drive and Fuller Road, as identified by the city of West Des Moines adopted
comprehensive plan. (Ord. 1511, 3-3-2003)
061-04: SIGNAGE:
All signage shall comply with the West Des Moines sign ordinance regulations
for the residential high-density district. (Ord. 1511, 3-3-2003)
061-05: STORM WATER MANAGEMENT:
There shall be submitted to and reviewed by the West Des Moines city engineer,
a storm water management plan for the PUD to be prepared by the developer prior
to any development within the PUD and for all storm sewer, drainage systems and
detention areas within the PUD. (Ord. 1511, 3-3-2003)
061-06: TRAFFIC STUDY:
At the time of inception of this PUD a traffic report was not required,
however, at the time of development the city engineer reserves the right to
request a traffic study if it is deemed necessary. (Ord. 1511, 3-3-2003)
061-99: LEGISLATIVE HISTORY:
Ord. 1511, 3-3-2003.
PUD #62
WEST GLEN TOWN CENTER
SECTION:
062-01: Legal Description
062-02: Required Plans
062-03: Conditions
062-04: Land Use Design Criteria
062-05: Signage
062-06: Pedestrian Orientation
062-07: All Areas To Be Platted
062-08: Stormwater Management
062-09: Street Right Of Way
062-10: Traffic Signals
062-11: Sanitary Sewer Service And Water Main Extensions
062-12: Public Access Between Mills Civic Parkway And South Prairie View Drive
062-13: Right Of Way Easements
062-14: Architectural Requirements
062-15: Traffic Report
062-16: Special Events
062-17: Violations And Penalties
062-99: Legislative History
062-01: LEGAL DESCRIPTION:
See exhibit A attached to ordinance 1514 on file in the city and made a part
hereof. (Ord. 1514, 3-31-2003)
062-02: REQUIRED PLANS:
The following plans shall be required as a part of the processing of any
development application for any property within the West Glen Town Center PUD:
   A.   Area Development Plan: An area development plan must be approved by the
city council prior to, or in conjunction with, the review of the specific plan
for any property within said PUD. No change to the area development plan shall
be made without approval from the appropriate reviewing bodies. An area
development plan is a plan that identifies infrastructure, planning units,
major street patterns, drainage and detention, utilities, shared public spaces,
vehicular traffic impacts, proposed densities, and land use assumptions. It is
intended to promote the communication and cooperation between adjacent property
owners and developers to encourage cohesive, unified development, and identify
the anticipated phasing of construction, and parties involved.
On file in the city (see exhibit B) is the city council approved area
development plan for this property which is labeled area 1 on the map
identifying the area development plans within the "Town Center Overlay District
Guidelines" as adopted by the West Des Moines city council.
   B.   Specific Plan: A specific plan identifies detailed development criteria
for each planning unit as identified in the area development plan. The specific
plan needs to be in conformance with the general intent of the area development
plan and "Town Center Overlay District Guidelines" and shall be adopted by the
city council by ordinance. This ordinance shall constitute the specific plan
for the West Glen Town Center PUD. On file in the city and made a part of this
rezoning is a specific plan map and illustrations for the West Glen Town Center
PUD, marked exhibit C. It is recognized that slight modifications and changes
to the map may be necessary due to changes in building footprints or details;
however, the intent is that the major element of the specific plan may not be
altered without the approval of the city council. The building square footages
and uses identified on the specific plan for each parcel shall not be exceeded.
   C.   Development Applications: Site plans for parcels within the West Glen
Town Center must meet the intent of the approved specific plan and shall be
submitted to the city of West Des Moines for review and approval prior to the
development of any portion of the property within the PUD. Site plans, which
meet the intent of the specific plan, as determined by the city staff will be
subject to administrative review and approval by the director of community
development. If the site is deemed not to be in compliance with the specific
plan, the site plan will be subject to review by the appropriate viewing body.
(Ord. 1514, 3-31-2003; Ord. 1687, 5-22-2006; amd. Ord. 1724, 1-29-2007; Ord.
1792, 12-3-2007; Ord. 2470, 5-3-2021)
062-03: CONDITIONS:
Whereas, title 9, chapter 9, "Planned Unit Development District", of the city
code establishes certain regulations and guidelines pertaining to accompanying
information required on plat and site plan documents. Now, therefore, the
following conditions, restrictions, and regulations are adopted as part of this
approval, to wit:
   A.   General Conditions: In addition to the specific plan map, the following
general development criteria shall be integrated into and made a part of this
planned unit development:
      1.   General Conformance To Subdivision Ordinance: All subdivisions,
public and private streets, public or private street rights of way and general
development shall adhere to the standards and design criteria set forth in the
West Des Moines subdivision ordinance and/or established city policies
pertaining thereto, unless otherwise stated within this ordinance.
      2.   General Conformance To Zoning Ordinance: Unless otherwise specified
herein, the development of the West Glen Town Center PUD shall comply with the
provisions of the West Des Moines zoning ordinance. For the purposes of section
9-9-6 of the city code, planned unit development district, final plan
submittal, the submittal of plat, site plan, permitted conditional use permit,
or master plan documents for any parcel, or part of any parcel of the West Glen
Town Center PUD within two (2) years after approval and publication of this
ordinance, shall be considered to satisfy the terms and requirements of said
section.
      3.   Flood Hazard: In all areas within a 100-year frequency flood hazard
zone, or adjoining drainageways, and detention ponding areas involving
potential flood hazards, no building shall be erected which has a lowest level
floor, including basements, less than two feet (2') above the determined level
of the 100-year frequency flood event. Buildings shall only be permitted within
twenty five feet (25') of any easement or property boundary of a major
drainageway, storm water detention basin or pond if such locations will not
cause potential flooding from extraordinary flood events as determined during
the development review process and approval by the city council.
      4.   Developer Responsibilities: The developer, their successors and/or
assigns, if any, shall pay all planning, engineering, and construction costs
for the development of the planned unit development, as required by this
ordinance and approved site plans and the cost of all streets, storm sewers,
sanitary sewers, drainageway improvements, detention basins, water mains,
buffers and other improvements as required for rights of way or public
easements within the West Glen Town Center PUD, unless otherwise approved by
the city council.
      5.   Internal Circulation: All streets and internal traffic flows,
including parking lots, shall permit the travel of the fire department's
largest vehicle's turning radius (the turning radius template may be obtained
from the fire marshal). Unique design solutions to accommodate turning
movements, such as rolled curbs, shall be allowed if, during the development
application review, it is determined the standard design impairs pedestrian
movement. Traffic islands in 58th Street and South Prairie View Drive shall be
permitted subject to plat approval and the requirement that adjoining property
owners or an owners' association maintain such islands and indemnify the city
for maintenance liabilities. The traffic report completed for the West Glen
Town Center PUD sets forth the criteria for traffic circulation, on street
parking, and intersection controls throughout the project.
   B.   Special Conditions: Specific conditions relating to the development of
the West Glen Town Center PUD relate to developing parcels H, K, J, and I as
"town center" development parcels.
      1.   The West Glen Town Center specific plan map, exhibit C, on file with
the city, incorporates a development of mixed residential, office and retail
uses within a main street atmosphere. The intent of this specific plan shall be
to permit the development of a mixed use planned community featuring a
"neotraditional" town center plaza and neighboring mixed use buildings
characteristic of traditional commercial centers with buildings sited on the
street and a network of pedestrian pathways to encourage pedestrian commercial
activity. Residential units are proposed on upper levels of commercial or
office buildings and in stand alone multi-family buildings. Additional
residential units shall be in adjoining neighborhood to the west that follows
the same planning principles of buildings on the street and pedestrian oriented
streetscape plans.
      2.   Prior to or in conjunction with site plan, plat, or permitted
conditional use permit review of any development within parcels I, H, K, and J
the developer shall amend the West Glen Town Center specific plan submitted to
the city for details in addition to the following:
         a.   Development within these parcels shall be arranged as a mixed use
main street development with several areas for pedestrian plazas, walkways and
promenade.
         b.   Architecture shall be of a pedestrian scale with an eclectic
mixture of materials, rooflines and windows.
         c.   These parcels shall include a significant amount of residential
units within the development to ensure a live, work and play environment.
         d.   Street furniture as illustrated in exhibit D on file in the city
and other place making elements shall be incorporated into the design of these
parcels.
      3.   Construction of the Town Center Plaza and Promenade shall be
initiated with development of either of the parcels H or K. Development may
occur in multiple phases, but development of any phase shall include
construction of the Town Center Plaza and Promenade.
   C.   Specific Conditions: Requirements relating to all parcels within the
West Glen Town Center PUD.
      1.   Parking Requirements: All retail and office parcels must comply with
a minimum requirement of one space per three hundred (300) of gross square feet
per building. The specific juxtaposition of the properties will maximize the
benefit of shared parking between properties because of their daily use and
time of day characteristics. Developers of parcels must provide a cross access
parking agreement. A less stringent parking calculation may be used provided
the applicant can show a parking rate less than the above mentioned, due to
shared parking of off peak uses, as determined by the community development
director, during the review of a parcel's development application. On street
parking may be provided on all internal private streets. All on street parking
shall be illustrated on all development applications for all parcels. On street
parking shall be prohibited on Prairie View Drive. On street parking may be
counted toward the parking requirement.
      2.   Buffers And Screening: The "landscaped buffer area" requirements
shall be as follows:
         a.   A sixty foot (60') "buffer park" shall be provided along the
north side of Mills Civic Parkway except for parcels G and L which are allowed
no more than a ten foot (10') buffer park encroachment if the layout of the
site provided no other option and the development meets the intent of the "Town
Center Overlay District Guidelines". A thirty foot (30') "buffer park" shall be
located around the exterior perimeter of parcels A, B, C as illustrated on
"specific plan map", exhibit C on file in the city. The sixty foot (60') buffer
park along Mills Civic Parkway may include a twenty foot (20') public pathway
easement, located adjacent to the public right of way for a mandatory public
sidewalk. Landscape plantings within the buffer parks shall be in accordance
with city code requirements for thirty foot (30') buffer parks.
         b.   Pond, lake, wetlands or other water features may be placed within
the buffer park given that a water feature, such as a fountain and/or
significant wetland plantings and edge treatments are provided. Dry detention
areas are not allowed in buffer parks.
         c.   All parking areas shall be landscaped to screen their visibility
from the public rights of way or from any adjoining property outside the West
Glen Town Center PUD with the use of predominately evergreen plant materials
and berming and shall be addressed at the time of review of the site plan for
the development of the parcel.
         d.   Buffer screening between districts or parcels and uses shall not
be required as set forth in section 9-3-10 of the city code, except as noted
otherwise in this ordinance.
         e.   All equipment visible from and adjacent to public rights of way
shall be screened as required in subsection 9-3-10J of the city code.
      3.   Open Space Requirements: All parcels within the West Glen Town
Center shall provide usable open space, or activity spaces, through the
creative design of plazas, green spaces, promenades and focal elements. Usable
area shall provide ample opportunities for pedestrian interaction though
activities areas, sidewalk cafes, and seating. All usable areas, buffer parks,
promenades, the Town Center Plaza, storm water detention areas and other areas
shall be "designated open space areas" set forth on the specific plan map. In
lieu of percentage open space requirements applying to the West Glen Town
Center PUD parcels, this ordinance shall require designated open space areas
and open space within parking lots.
         a.   Including those areas noted as Town Center Plaza and Promenade on
the specific plan, each building within parcels A, B, C, G, I, J, L, M and N
shall include at least one plaza, courtyard, or patio space, to be located near
the building's entry, which may consist of landscaping, seating, alternative
paving, water features and outdoor art. The size of the outdoor space shall be
proportional, as determined by the director of community development to the
size of the building or residential units. If, during the review of the
development application, it is determined that several buildings could share in
the creation of a plaza space, a detailed agreement as to the responsibilities
of the applicants must be submitted. At the review of the site plan, the
applicant must demonstrate how the plaza designs meet the following intents:
            (1)   Creates spaces that allow for the day and evening interaction
among pedestrians.
            (2)   Provides as many seating opportunities as possible through
the placement of movable chairs, sidewalk cafes and planter walls.
            (3)   When possible, the integration of storm drainage and
detention should be designed to enhance the public space, which would include
the creation of ponds, waterfalls or landscaped waterways.
            (4)   Creates an outdoor room, by limiting the interaction with
moving vehicles and partially surrounding the space by buildings, landscaping
elements and architectural features.
            (5)   Provides elements that enrich the space. Elements shall
include, but are not limited to, artwork, fountains, flowers, banners, and
children's play environment.
         b.   As a condition of the first development application for any
parcel within the West Glen Town Center, the installation of the open spaces
identified on the specific plan as park and promenade shall be installed. In
addition, at the time of the first development application, the developer shall
establish a consistent grade and ground cover for all parcels along Mills Civic
Parkway. The installation of the buffer park landscaping shall be required for
only parcels C, G and L at the time of first development application in the
West Glen Town Center. If, after two (2) years of the first development
application, the remaining parcels (parcels F, N and M) are not constructed,
the developer shall install buffer parks for those parcels. In order to provide
a more uniform appearance to the buffer, the developer is then required to
install trees of a caliper comparable to the existing planting established with
the existing buffer parks.
         c.   As a condition of any development application, parcel A's buffer
park, along Prairie View Drive shall be installed.
         d.   A gateway feature, or feature that signifies the entrance into a
unique district, such as, but not limited to, a West Des Moines city sign,
enhanced landscaping elements or other hardscape feature shall be located in
parcel C along Mills Civic Parkway. Additional tenant signage is prohibited.
      4.   Street Furniture: On file in the city are representations of the
street furniture that shall be installed throughout the West Glen Town Center
development. Although slight deviations from the illustrations are permissible,
the street furniture shall distinguish districts as well as primary and
secondary vehicle and pedestrian travel ways.
      5.   Outdoor Patio: Establishments that have an outdoor patio that serves
an alcoholic beverage are required to provide a barrier to public access which
consists of a visual barrier from the private establishments to public spaces.
The barrier specifications shall be determined at the review of the development
application and may include, but is not limited to, fencing, landscaping and
signage.
      6.   Parking Lot/Vehicle Use Area Landscaping: The intent of this section
is to encourage extensive landscaping in parking lot areas which tend to have
the greatest negative impact on developments and that will provide breaks in
what could be viewed as a sea of asphalt parking. All parking areas shall be
designed to create small, shared, aesthetically landscaped and screened parking
lots that are designed to function not only in the interest of accommodating
automobiles, but also in the interest of the pedestrian. The following
standards are in addition to the required buffer park and plaza landscaping
requirements:
         a.   For every ten (10) parking stalls, one tree and two (2) shrubs,
to be located in the parking lot shall be required.
         b.   No parking space, within a single row of parking, shall be
greater than six (6) stalls from a landscape island or pod.
         c.   Landscape islands shall be located at the terminus end of parking
rows. Islands shall be at least ten feet (10') in width by thirty eight feet
(38') in length for dual parking rows and ten feet (10') in width by nineteen
feet (19') in length for single rows.
         d.   A landscape pod, located within the parking rows shall be at
least six feet (6') from the back of curb to the back of curb.
         e.   Landscaped medians in Prairie View Drive shall be maintained by
the developer and/or his successors.
         f.   Areas where parking lots or drive lanes are visible from the
public street shall provide a significant level of screening through the use of
any of the following:
            (1)   Earthen Berms:
   (A) Three feet (3') or higher in conjunction with vegetation.
            (2)   Landscape Walls:
   (A) Walls constructed for the retainment of soil which are greater than four
feet (4') in height must be designed by an individual knowledgable and
certified in structural engineering.
   (B) Walls over four feet (4') shall have one and one-half feet (11/2') of
horizontal terraces for every two feet (2') of exposed vertical wall face.
Exceptions to this requirement may be granted by the director of community
development for unusual situations and to preserve existing vegetation or
landscape features.
   (C) Walls may be brick, individual decorative modular wall stone, or natural
stacked wall or fieldstone. Walls composed of landscape timbers or other wood
products are not desired due to the deterioration potential of the material.
Wood walls may be used, with approval by the community development director, in
areas where views of the wall will be minimal.
   (D) Vegetation shall be planted along all types of walls to soften the
visual impact, visually break up long expanses of the wall and to visually
anchor it to the site.
            (3)   Evergreen Materials: Vegetation screening of evergreen
materials. (Ord. 1514, 3-31-2003)
062-04: LAND USE DESIGN CRITERIA:
   A.   Development Standards And Use Regulations: In addition to the general
conditions as stated in sections above, the following land use design criteria
shall apply to the areas designated on the specific plan map. The specific plan
map document which is made a part of this rezoning action per subsection
herein, delineates sixteen (16) parcels of the PUD as parcels A, B, C, D, E, F,
G, H, I, J, K, L, M, N, O and P for application of specific development
standards. The following development standards and use regulations shall apply
to each of the following development parcels:
      1.   Parcels H, I, J, And K: It is the intention that parcels H, I, J,
and K will be developed as a neotraditional "town center" development, as
illustrated in the specific plan map, exhibit C on file in the city.
Neotraditional development is based on a return to the traditional town designs
of before World War II. It incorporates convenience, walkability, aesthetics,
livability, and ecological integrity in one development plan. In addition to
meeting the "town center overlay district guidelines", developments within
these parcels must specifically show characteristics of a neotraditional
development.
      2.   Town Center: The town center shall contain several green/park areas,
promenade and plaza as illustrated in the specific plan map, exhibit C, on file
in the city, denoted elsewhere in this document as the "town center plaza" and
"promenade". The intent of these areas is to be a focal point of the
development, which could be used for outdoor concerts, farmers' markets, art in
the park, etc. The town center plaza may include green space, landscaping,
pavement treatment, gazebos, band shells, fountains, permanent art, reflecting
pools, benches, seating areas, bicycle parking areas, etc. The town center
plaza and promenade shall be constructed at such time that any development
within parcels H and K is initiated.
         a.   All buildings shall generally be constructed up to the sidewalk,
reminiscent of older "traditional" main street shopping areas.
         b.   Sidewalks shall be wide enough to accommodate outdoor seating
areas for cafes, pedestrian street furniture, walkways and street trees, etc.,
in designated areas.
         c.   All off street parking and loading shall be located to the side
or rear of buildings. Pedestrian access from the off street parking areas to
the front sidewalks shall be provided between buildings where appropriate.
         d.   An architectural theme shall be established to promote the
unification of the development while encouraging articulation of facades and
the creation of pedestrian spaces. (Ord. 1514, 3-31-2003)
   B.   Parcel A: the use regulations and provisions set forth in Title 9 of
the city code for Residential Medium Density (RM-12) shall apply to development
proposals in Parcel A as shown on the specific plan unless otherwise noted in
this ordinance.
      1.   Buffer: A thirty-foot (30') buffer with buffer landscaping shall be
located between Parcel A and Parcel C. No building, parking, or storm water
facility shall be constructed within the buffer. A thirty-foot (30') buffer
with buffer landscaping shall be located along S. Prairie View Drive where the
single family development across the street is located. No building, parking,
or storm water facility shall be constructed within the buffer.
      2.   Architecture: design elements for the architecture of multi-family
buildings shall be in general keeping with the design elements in Section 14 of
this ordinance. Additional guidance is provided as follows:
         a.   Architectural design for multi-family buildings shall express a
creative presentation of exterior building materials, details and treatment of
windows and doors. All facades of the building in public view or which are
visible from parcels surrounding the development.
         b.   shall be treated with the same level of architectural style and
detail. The following design strategies to lessen the plainness of appearance
which can be characteristic of large residential buildings shall be
incorporated in the building design.
         c.   Building design shall provide unique treatment of the individual
units, but still maintain the cohesive design of the development. Building form
shall incorporate changes in building footprint, wall heights and roof forms
that break up the building into modules which reflect the individual dwelling
units within the building. Easily identifiable entrances can be provided
through changes in building form, materials, and details. Unit design should
incorporate elements such as balconies and roof decks to reinforce the
connection between the residents and the activities within the development. A
minimum of eighty percent (80%) of the multi-family units within the
development must provide a deck, porch, or covered stoop to provide a usable
outdoor space of at least five feet (5') deep and a minimum forty square feet
(40 sf) in size.
         d.   Door and window openings shall be incorporated on all sides of
the building.
         e.   Material choices shall be high quality and durable, combining a
variety of colors and textures along with trim and details to provide visual
interest within the development.
         f.   Substantial materials such as brick and stone, shall be
implemented on all sides of the building primarily on the base (lowest) story
of the building and vertical elements that reinforce the façade modulation.
         g.   Vertical or lap siding, shakes, stucco finish and architectural
panel cladding can encompass the remaining area. Natural materials are
encouraged, composite materials such as fiber cement and wood composites are
appropriate substitutions.
         h.   Concealed fasteners and finished panel edges are required
application details for panel cladding systems.
         i.   Vinyl siding may be used only with appropriately scaled trim and
not as the majority cladding material.
         j.   Materials should change with the change in building plane and be
arranged to have the appearance of three-dimensional elements. Trim and
structural elements such as posts or columns shall be sized to the scale of the
building.
         k.   Building design should minimize the dominance of garage doors on
the facade. The following strategies to mitigate the appearance of garages
shall be incorporated on facades where garage doors are the majority feature at
ground level:
            (1)   Enhanced facade design such as the addition of engaged
columns, secondary roof forms and decorative garage doors.
            (2)   For garages included in the primary building, varying the
front façade depth of a minimum of twelve inches (12"), so that no more than
two adjacent garage modules are on the same façade plane.
            (3)   The architectural details of detached garages should
incorporate the materials and treatments of the dwelling unit, such as windows,
doors, trim and materials and the architectural style of the dwelling unit.
   C.   Parcel B: (Rep. by Ord. 1687, 5-22-2006)
   D.   Parcels C, D, E, F, G, L, M, And N: The use regulations and provisions
set forth in title 9 of the city code for community commercial district (CMC)
shall apply to any development proposal for all property within parcel C as
shown on the specific plan unless otherwise noted in this ordinance.
      1.   Allowed Uses: Uses allowed within parcels C, D, E, F, G, L, M, and N
are those set forth in title 9 of the city code for community commercial
district (CMC) except the following:
 
SIC  Use
076  Farm labor and management services
75   Automotive repair, service, and parking
753  Automotive repair shops
7539 Automotive services, not elsewhere classified
754  Automotive service - except repair
 
The intent of this ordinance is not to encourage convenience stores and drive-
up uses; however, the location of the site, Mills Civic Parkway and Interstate
35 interchange, may necessitate the inclusion of such uses. If, through the
design review process, it can be demonstrated that such uses do not cause
traffic congestion, do not interfere with pedestrian movement, and can be
designed so that they are screened appropriately through the use of
landscaping, berming, and/or architectural features from Mills Civic Parkway,
Prairie View Drive, I-35, and the major north-south private drive, the board of
adjustment may allow these uses on parcels D, L and M with the approval of a
permitted conditional use permit (PC) for any considered uses except banks (SIC
60), which are a permitted use with a drive- through. Drive-up facilities shall
be considered for drugstore, bank, dry cleaner, ATM, grocery store and
restaurant facilities, however no more than two (2) drive- through restaurants,
two (2) drive-through banks shall be permitted. No more than two (2) total
drive-throughs within these parcels shall be permitted. Walk-up or pedestrian
ATMs, with no vehicle access shall be a permitted use. (Ord. 1593, 8-16-2004)
      2.   Setbacks: Primary and accessory building setbacks from West Glen
Town Center's exterior property line shall be thirty feet (30'). Buildings
shall be set back zero feet (0') from an internal parcel or property line and
zero feet (0') from any building. No building shall be constructed in the
buffer park.
      3.   Buffers: The buffering of any negative element, such as parking and
drop off drives, trash enclosure, heating, ventilation, and air conditioning
equipment, utility meters shall be screened from view through architectural
mechanisms or landscaping. The buffering of any negative elements shall be
screened from the public view through the use of berming, landscaping and/or
architectural mechanisms. See subsection
062-03C, buffers, of this ordinance for additional requirements.
      4.   Open Space Requirements: Parcels D, E, F and G shall provide an open
space promenade which shall include landscaping, benches, trails or sidewalks
and other landscape features. See subsection
062-03C of this ordinance for additional requirements.
      5.   Outdoor Use Areas: Outdoor use areas, such as dining areas,
gathering and sitting areas, etc., shall be encouraged. Light standards shall
be limited to a maximum of twenty five feet (25') in height. Bicycle parking,
as determined by the director of community development, shall be provided.
      6.   Architecture: See section
062-14 of this ordinance. (Ord. 1514, 3-31-2003)
   E.   Parcels H, I, J And K:
      1.   Allowed Uses: Uses allowed within parcels H, I, J and K are those
set forth in title 9 of the city code for the community commercial zoning
district (CMC). In addition to the uses of CMC, residential high-density
district uses will also be required in parcels H, J, and I with at least sixty
four (64) residential units to be located on floors above office, retail, and
structured parking garage uses, not to exceed an overall density among parcels
H, J, and I of eighteen (18) dwelling units per acre. Residential uses may be
located on the first floor if the director of community development determines
that the residential uses are in character with the intent of this PUD. The
following uses listed in the zoning ordinance as allowed uses in the CMC shall
be prohibited in parcels H, I, J and K:
         a.   Two (2) drive-up uses shall be allowed permitted conditionally
(PC) within parcel K if the following criteria are met:
            (1)   Speaker boxes may only be located next to teller/pick up
windows and the noise admitted should be at a level that does not disrupt the
street level pedestrian.
            (2)   Drive-throughs shall be placed at the rear or side of the
building and should be designed to avoid pedestrian conflicts.
            (3)   Drive-through design shall work to integrate the drive-
through bay with the main building design.
            (4)   If the drive-through is accessed by a vehicle on the parking
lot side of the building, it may have no more than two (2) drive- through bays.
If the drive-through is accessed by the pedestrian on main street, no more than
one drive-through bay.
         b.   Any use involving the sale of gasoline products - SIC 554 and
part of SIC 541.
         c.   Any automotive or vehicular repair, services and parking - SIC
75.
      2.   Setbacks: Primary and accessory building setbacks from West Glen
Town Center's exterior property line shall be set back thirty feet (30').
Buildings shall be set back zero feet (0') from any internal parcel or property
line and zero feet (0') from any building within these parcels.
      3.   Open Space: See section
062-03 of this ordinance.
      4.   Architecture: See section
062-14 of this ordinance.
      5.   Outdoor Use Areas: Outdoor use areas, such as dining areas,
gathering and sitting areas, etc., shall be encouraged. Light standards shall
be limited to a maximum of twenty five feet (25') in height. Bicycle parking,
as determined by the director of community development shall be provided.
      6.   Structured Parking Garages: Structured parking garages are allowed
in parcels H, I, and J. Residential units may be located on the floors above
the structured parking. Retail and office uses may be incorporated as part of
the first/ground floor of the structure.
In the event the residential units in any building are to be owner occupied,
parking spaces in the nearest structured parking garage will be required to be
reserved for each unit to meet covered parking requirements for owner occupied
units.
         a.   One space will be reserved for each residential unit. Said space
shall count one hundred percent (100%) toward the total number of parking
spaces required.
         b.   The parking garage must be designed such that parking spaces
reserved for residential units can be segregated from other parking spaces.
Reserved spaces must not be accessible by the general public.
         c.   Reservation of spaces for residential units may not cause the
commercial portions of West Glen Town Center to fall below the one space per
three hundred (300) square feet of gross floor area requirement stated in
section
 062-03 of this ordinance.
         d.   Reserved parking spaces for the residential units must be covered
stalls located on the first floor/ground level or the second floor if the first
floor/ground level is filled with reserved spaces.
   F.   Parcel P: Parcel P shall be dedicated for Prairie View Drive.
   G.   Parcel O: Parcel O shall be reserved for an entry drive to the West
Glen Town Center. (Ord. 1514, 3-31-2003; amd. Ord. 2152, 6-13-2016; Ord. 1687,
5-22-2006)
062-05: SIGNAGE:
Illustrative signage concepts are on file in the city. While some variation may
occur between the actual built sign and the illustration, the nature and intent
of the signs should be consistent with the attached illustration. Signage
elements indicated in the following text as to be "at the discretion of the
city" shall generally be interpreted to mean the sign administrator; however,
the sign administrator shall have the authority to require a request to be
reviewed and decision made by an alternate individual or approval body within
the city.
All signage, including temporary signage shall require the appropriate city
permits and shall adhere to the regulations established in this ordinance and/
or applicable city code regarding location, duration and size.
   A.   Ground Signs:
      1.   Freestanding, Metal Framed Signs: Freestanding, metal framed signs
may be allowed within the West Glen Town Center PUD, at the discretion of the
city. Ground sign standards shall be used for the construction of freestanding
signage as set forth within the city sign code for permitted districts, unless
identified within this ordinance.
      2.   Temporary Freestanding Metal Framed Signs: With the exception of
temporary freestanding metal frame signs, no permanent ground sign shall be
located within a public utility easement. Indication of the sign locations
within the associated PUD concept packet does not constitute permission to
locate the sign in the indicated location if said sign conflicts with a utility
easement. Existing signs in place prior to October 2010, shall be exempt from
this requirement; however, in the event the sign is rebuilt, the sign shall be
located in conformance to this standard. It is the developer's responsibility
to verify sign locations do not conflict with public utility easements.
      3.   Sign Placement: Sign placement shall be such so as to not hinder
site visibility of both cars and pedestrians at intersections.
      4.   Anchoring: All signs shall incorporate landscaping of shrubs and
perennials at the base of the sign to help anchor the sign to the site and
soften its presence.
      5.   Elevation: No berming or mounding of soil may be implemented to
raise the elevation of a sign in attempt to increase its visibility. As
necessary, with proper approval, retaining walls may be implemented to level
ground and make a suitable sign base.
      6.   Directional Or Wayfinding Signs: Shall be located at least one
hundred feet (100') from any entrance to the development. Signs shall generally
be located at the major internal private street intersections and as identified
in the specific plan. A maximum of five (5) internal directional signs for the
entire PUD/specific plan shall be allowed. These signs are not intended to
attract people off public streets, but to provide direction once within the
site. Directional signage shall not display any corporate or trademark logos,
however, the West Glen Town Center logo is allowed. The sign panel shall be no
larger than forty (40) square feet total. Said signs, including the decorative
elements, shall not exceed twelve feet (12') in height and five feet (5') in
width.
      7.   Interstate Sign: One interstate sign shall be permitted for the
entire West Glen Town Center PUD. The following standards shall apply to the
design and location of the sign:
         a.   Signs shall be set back a minimum of twenty feet (20') from the
interstate right of way but located within the first one hundred feet (100')
parallel and adjacent to the interstate frontage. Sign shall be set back a
minimum of two hundred feet (200') from the north and south perimeter PUD
boundary.
         b.   The maximum width of any sign face shall be twelve feet (12').
         c.   The maximum height of sign and structure as measured to highest
element shall be thirty feet (30') except in those situations in which it can
be proven through an engineer's survey that the elevation at the base of the
intended sign as measured at the closest edge of the travel portion of the
interstate, not the elevation of on and off ramps, is lower than the roadway
surface of the interstate. In this situation the height of the sign may be
increased in order to achieve a maximum of thirty feet (30') of visible sign;
however, in no case shall the highest element of the sign, including the
structure exceed sixty feet (60') in height. The base portion of the sign used
to provide elevation shall be monolithic in nature; however, up to one-third
(1/3) of the base area may be open to decrease the visual mass and that surface
area affected by wind loads while maintaining structural integrity. In no
situation, shall the base of the sign appear as a "pole sign". Appropriate type
and size of landscape vegetation shall be incorporated adjacent to the base
portion of any sign which exceeds thirty feet (30') in height in order to
mitigate and minimize the mass of the sign.
         d.   The total area of a sign shall be actual square footage of one
sign face. Double faced signs may be permitted with the maximum square footage
permitted each side. Multifaced signs shall not exceed two (2) times the area
of a single faced sign. The maximum copy area of a sign face shall not exceed
two hundred (200) square feet.
         e.   The name of the complex or development shall be indicated within
the top portion of the sign copy area. The maximum letter height for tenant
identification copy on the sign shall be eighteen inches (18"). Tenant
identification shall not occupy more than fifty percent (50%) of the sign and
in general shall be less in copy area than the copy identifying the development
name.
         f.   Any tenant in a building located within the West Glen Town Center
PUD boundaries in which West Glen Town Center, LLC, or one of an affiliated
companies (an affiliate shall be an entity which is controlled by, controlling,
or under common control with West Glen Town Center, LLC) has ownership interest
may be identified on an interstate sign, including tenants of buildings which
do not have interstate frontage.
         g.   The tenant copy area shall be comprised of individually attached
and illuminated letters or a panel sign sized and treated (opaque vinyl or
router face) to minimize the amount of sign area that illuminates thus giving
the appearance of individual letters or elements.
      8.   Mills Civic Parkway: No more than four (4) signs shall be located
along Mills Civic Parkway. Allowed signs shall include one gateway feature or
landmark sign, one development sign, one entrance sign, and one landscape
monument sign. All signs shall be set back from Mills Civic Parkway right of
way no less than twenty feet (20').
         a.   Gateway feature or landmark sign is a permanent structure or
feature that creatively draws attention to or announces the development. A
gateway feature or landmark may be located in the buffer park of parcel C along
Mills Civic Parkway. A city of West Des Moines sign shall also be located in
the buffer park of parcel C. Gateway feature or landmark signs, including the
decorative elements shall not exceed twenty five feet (25') in height and ten
feet (10') in width. The sign may incorporate one panel on each side of the
sign to announce upcoming West Glen Town Center events, not individual tenant
events. The panel shall not exceed thirty two (32) square feet and shall not be
electronic in nature, although ground lighting to illuminate the panel shall be
allowed. Care should be taken in placement of any ground lights to ensure that
the light is directed only to its intended target and does not spill over and
affect or impede driver's visibility. The sign shall display the development
name and address, but may not include any tenant identification except when
appropriate as part of an event announcement.
         b.   Entrance sign, including the decorative elements, shall not
exceed a height of eleven feet (11') with the overall sign structure not
exceeding seventy two (72) square feet. Said sign may display the development
name, address and no more than one tenant. The development name shall be the
predominate copy on the sign.
         c.   Development sign may be located at the intersection of Mills
Civic Parkway and South Prairie View Drive. Said sign including the decorative
elements shall not exceed a height of eleven feet (11'), with the overall sign
structure not exceeding seventy two (72) square feet. Said sign shall display
the development name and address, but shall not contain any tenant
identification signage. This sign shall be set back from the ultimate right of
way of both streets no less than twenty feet (20').
         d.   Landscape monument sign, including decorative elements, shall not
exceed ten feet (10') in height with the overall sign structure not exceeding
forty five (45) square feet. The copy area of the sign shall not exceed thirty
five (35) square feet and shall include the development name and may include
identification of up to four (4) tenants.
      9.   South Prairie View Drive: A maximum of three (3) signs may be
located along South Prairie View Drive. Allowed signs shall include one
entrance sign and up to two (2) landscape monument signs. All signs shall be
set back from the South Prairie View ultimate right of way no less than twenty
feet (20').
         a.   An entrance sign may be located at the intersection of South
Prairie View Drive and Wild Rose Lane. Sign, including the decorative elements,
shall not exceed eleven feet (11') with the overall sign structure not
exceeding seventy two (72) square feet. Said sign may display the development
name, address and no more than one tenant. Sign shall be set back from the
Prairie View Drive right of way no less than twenty feet (20'). Sign setback
from Wild Rose Lane shall be such so as to not hinder site visibility of both
cars and pedestrians at the intersection.
         b.   No more than two (2) additional landscape monument signs shall be
located along Prairie View Drive. Signs, including decorative elements shall
not exceed ten feet (10') in height with overall sign structure not exceeding
forty five (45) square feet. The copy area of the sign shall not exceed thirty
five (35) square feet and shall include the development name and may include
identification of areas or districts in the development and/or up to four (4)
tenants.
   B.   Building Signage:
      1.   All buildings within all parcels of the West Glen Town Center,
except parcels C and J, shall be allowed building wall signage which shall be
calculated as follows:
         a.   Ground floor or single-story tenants shall be allowed one square
foot of signage for every one linear foot of the tenant's longest exterior
lease frontage (1:1 ratio).
         b.   Those tenants located on the second or higher floors shall use a
ratio of one-half to one (1/2:1) square footage to linear footage.
         c.   Those tenants with multiple frontages shall be allowed in
addition to the primary leased frontage calculation, to use one other leased
exterior frontage for additional sign square footage using a ratio of one-half
to one (1/2:1).
         d.   The total square footage shall be divided, at the tenant's
discretion between the type and/or location of building signage allowed by the
city code or this ordinance. Unless otherwise modified within this ordinance,
signage shall conform to the sign code.
         e.   Any single occupancy building greater than five (5) stories in
height located on parcel G shall be allowed two (2) signs with a maximum letter
height of sixty inches (60") and a maximum total square footage calculated as
one square foot per linear foot measured along the longest exterior side plus
0.75 square foot for each linear foot along a second frontage with a public
entrance. Said signs are required to be located on the highest floor. Said
signs shall not be allowed on the south elevation.
      2.   Building signage for parcels C and J shall be calculated at a one
and one-half to one ratio (11/2:1) of the tenant's exterior leasable linear
frontage. Wall signage letters shall adhere to the city code.
      3.   All building signage shall respect the residential tenants of West
Glen Town Center by minimizing light pollution into the residential spaces.
      4.   Signage which displays the West Glen Town Center development's logo,
initials or name may be integrated into the architecture to further enhance the
character of the development, may be considered for approval as part of the
site plan review. If allowed, this signage will not count toward the allowable
building signage.
      5.   Wall signage located above a roof element may be allowed at the
discretion of the city provided that the signage is located on a flat wall. For
example, signage may be located on and as part of an architectural feature such
as a tower. Opaque, reverse channel letters shall be used to achieve a low
level halo lighting effect against the building wall. The letters shall have
returns that screen the light source and shall be placed so the opening is no
greater than two inches (2") between the returns and the wall.
      6.   Tenant signage shall be located on the exterior of the leased space.
However, at the discretion of the city, signage for a tenant may be relocated
to another space on the same building which reasonably neighbors the tenant
space if the signage does not impede the signing ability of another tenant.
      7.   All wall signage shall incorporate aesthetic features compatible
with the overall character of the development. All wall signs will be composed
of either solid individual letters of anodized aluminum or galvanized metal or
plastic attached to the building fascia, illuminated self-contained individual
letters with translucent plastic faces set in anodized aluminum returns and
trim or solid metal panels with routered letters illuminated by recessed
cabinets. To the greatest extent possible, signs shall be contoured to minimize
the excess unused area of a sign and to minimize the amount of glow.
      8.   "Projection signs" shall be defined as signs attached to and
projecting out from a building face or wall, generally at right angles to the
building. Signs may not project above the building's roofline and may not
project more than four feet (4') from the building. Additional sign square
footage may be allowed for projection signs at the discretion of the city;
however, signs shall be proportionately sized to the building and/or tenant
space. Pedestrian signs for tenant identification shall generally be eight (8)
square feet in size and shall have a maximum letter size of five inches (5").
The bottom of a projecting sign located over a pedestrian pathway shall be no
less than eight feet (8') from the ground. Projection signs shall be permitted
within parcels H, I, J and K and shall adhere to applicable sign code
standards.
      9.   Exposed neon, LED or fiber optic signs may be permitted within
parcels H, I, J and K at the discretion of the city. These signs shall have a
low light intensity with no moving or blinking lights. In general, the use of
these types of lighting measures shall be limited to use as a decorative
element to outline a sign or sign lettering unless otherwise approved as a
primary element to a building facade.
   C.   Other Signage:
      1.   Suspended decorative banners or signs which attach to interior
private light poles consisting of colors, greetings, development name,
identification of development districts or areas within the development, or
individual tenants may be allowed at the discretion of the city. Decorative
banners must be located on a light post which is designed consistent with the
structural requirements of the building code. Banners with tenant
identification shall be allowed on the interior private light poles within the
parking field associated only with the western side of the H-1 building (Town
Center East building) and the south side of the K-1, K-2 and K-3 buildings and
the north side of the K-4 and K-5 buildings within the Avenue Of The Arts.
These banners shall only be for the identification of commercial tenants within
these designated buildings. The tenant identification banners shall not exceed
ten (10) square feet in size and shall not include more than three (3) tenant
names per banner. The tenant identification banners shall be consistent in
color, font type and size. Banners over vehicle pathways shall provide a
minimum clearance of fifteen feet (15') from the travel surface. Banners over
pedestrian pathways should be located no higher than fifteen feet (15') in
height to the top of the banner and no less than eight feet (8') to the bottom
of the banner. (Ord. 1887, 11-15-2010)
062-06: PEDESTRIAN ORIENTATION:
Pedestrian access shall be provided between all parcels within the West Glen
Town Center PUD to permit and encourage pedestrian movement between parcels
versus utilizing motorized vehicles for access. Pedestrian travelways should be
separated from vehicular traffic with landscaping, on street parking, bollards,
special paving, or any other feature which identifies the pedestrian space. To
further promote a higher level of pedestrian awareness, the use of alternate
paving materials to designate pedestrian traffic areas from vehicular use areas
and travel lanes shall be required. The development shall provide bicycle
pathway connections to Prairie View Drive and Mills Civic Parkway and bicycle
parking shall be provided within the development. (Ord. 1514, 3-31-2003)
062-07: ALL AREAS TO BE PLATTED:
Prior to, or in conjunction with development or transfer of ownership of any
portion of the PUD, said area shall be platted in accordance with the city's
subdivision ordinance to delineate within a plat the parcel to be developed or
sold separately or any portion thereof. Minimum street frontage requirements
may be waived, provided each parcel has a minimum of fifty feet (50') of
frontage onto a private drive with a minimum fifty foot (50') access easement
of record. Any such private street shall be constructed in accordance with
public street pavement standards per the city requirements. (Ord. 1514, 3-31-
2003)
062-08: STORMWATER MANAGEMENT:
There shall be submitted to and approved by the West Des Moines public works
department, a master stormwater management plan for the entire development
which shall govern the overall stormwater management of the development. More
specific stormwater management proposals may be required with the development
of each parcel, which shall be prepared by the developer prior to development
within the parcel. The method of stormwater management and the conveyance
system shall be determined and approved prior to the development of any portion
of the property within the PUD. (Ord. 1514, 3-31-2003)
062-09: STREET RIGHT OF WAY:
Adequate street rights of way, as determined by the department of public works
and the approved traffic report, for Mills Civic Parkway and Prairie View Drive
shall be provided for the construction, reconstruction and widening of
adjoining streets adjacent to, or within the PUD. (Ord. 1514, 3-31-2003)
062-10: TRAFFIC SIGNALS:
The cost of installing traffic signals as may be required pursuant to the
policies of the city shall be divided equally between the owners of the
property located immediately adjoining the four (4) corners (quadrants) of the
intersections at which the traffic signals are installed. If traffic signals
are needed at the intersections of South 60th Street and Mills Civic Parkway,
Prairie View Drive and Mills Civic Parkway, and West Glen Avenue and Mills
Civic Parkway, one quadrant of the cost of installation of Prairie View Drive
and Mills Civic Parkway, and two (2) quadrants of the cost of installation of
West Glen Avenue and Mills Civic Parkway, or based upon an agreement acceptable
to all parties. (Ord. 1514, 3-31-2003)
062-11: SANITARY SEWER SERVICE AND WATER MAIN EXTENSIONS:
The developer, their successors and assigns, if any, shall pay for sanitary
sewer service to the West Glen Town Center PUD as determined by the city
through standard assessment procedures or as otherwise required by the city.
The developer, their successors or assigns, if any, shall construct, at their
cost, all water mains for water service to the West Glen Town Center PUD (PUD)
as required by West Des Moines waterworks (waterworks) during the time the PUD
is being developed. This requirement includes water mains in the PUD and in
street right of way adjacent to the PUD. The sizes of all water mains shall be
determined by the waterworks. Water mains shall be constructed along the entire
street frontages of the PUD.
Nothing in this ordinance shall be construed to prevent the developer, their
successors or assigns, if any, from entering into private agreement(s) as they
may desire to share the cost of the water mains. (Ord. 1514, 3-31-2003)
062-12: PUBLIC ACCESS BETWEEN MILLS CIVIC PARKWAY AND SOUTH PRAIRIE VIEW DRIVE:
Prior to approval of any plat within the West Glen Town Center PUD, the
location of a secondary access either from Mills Civic Parkway or South Prairie
View Drive shall be established. Prior to the approval of a plat for all or
part of parcel G shall necessitate the connection of the development to South
Prairie View Drive and Mills Civic Parkway. Such accesses shall be constructed
prior to the issuance of any certificates of occupancy. (Ord. 1514, 3-31-2003)
062-13: RIGHT OF WAY EASEMENTS:
Appropriate right of way easements for accommodating public utilities shall be
established with the platting of any and all parcels within West Glen Town
Center PUD. Maintenance responsibilities and city ingress/egress rights to said
utilities shall be granted with any and all plats submitted. (Ord. 1514, 3-31-
2003)
062-14: ARCHITECTURAL REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   All Parcels: Architectural design for buildings within West Glen Town
Center shall attempt to express a creative presentation of exterior building
materials, exterior details and texture, treatment of windows and doors, and
use of angles and multiplicity of planes within the wall and roof design to
lessen the plainness of appearance which can be characteristic of large retail
buildings. The use of building articulation that breaks up the building mass
into modules, which reflect proportions similar to other parcels within the
development, shall be required. Methods shall be used to create intervals,
which reflect and promote compatibility including:
      1.   Facade modulation - stepping back or extending forward a portion of
the facade,
      2.   Repeating the window patterns at intervals equal to articulated
intervals,
      3.   Providing a covered entry or awning to the articulation interval,
      4.   Changing the rooflines by alternating dormers, stepped roofs,
gables, or other roof elements to reinforce the modulation or articulation
interval,
      5.   Changing materials with the change in building plane,
      6.   Providing a lighting feature, trellis, tree, or other landscape
feature with each interval,
      7.   Using colors, materials and details that blend with the other
buildings within the area and to reinforce the modulation or articulate
interval.
      8.   Building facades that organize at the terminus of a development road
or major pedestrian pathway shall provide architectural or landscaping features
that anchor or provide focus to the end of the route.
   B.   Use Of Brick, Stone, Concrete Or Masonry: The use of brick, or
acceptable stone, architectural concrete or masonry shall be incorporated into
the building architecture on all sides of the structure, unless the director of
community development shall determine that the use of alternate building
materials enhances the physical appearance and accomplishes a compatible
structure with the overall development.
   C.   Parcels H, I, J And K: Development of parcels H, I, J and K as
"neotraditional" town center projects shall also conform to town center design
regulations as set forth in subsection
062-03B of this ordinance. (Ord. 1514, 3-31-2003)
062-15: TRAFFIC REPORT:
A traffic report has been prepared for this development that outlines the
street improvements that will be necessary for roadways in the vicinity of the
West Glen Town Center development. Prior to, or in conjunction with the
development of any parcel, or portion of a parcel, that includes changes in
land use that would change trip generation that was used in the original
traffic analysis, the developer shall have the traffic report reviewed by the
city's traffic consultant to ensure that the provisions and assumptions of the
original traffic report are not negatively impacted or changed by the proposed
development. A written statement shall be submitted to the city that shall
identify what impacts proposed changes that the parcel will have on the
existing street system and what improvements are necessary for the safe and
orderly movement of traffic in and around the area. The initial traffic report
for this development identified conceptual locations of access drives along
Prairie View Drive. It should be noted that the specific plan outlines
conceptual locations only. Prior to construction of any parcel that abuts
Prairie View Drive, or the pavement of Prairie View Drive, the final locations
of access points shall be established in accordance with the standards outlined
in the metro design standards. (Ord. 1514, 3-31-2003)
062-16: SPECIAL EVENTS:
All special events on property within the West Glen Town Center development
shall abide by all requirements and provisions as specified in title 9, chapter
16, "Temporary Use Permits", of the city code with the exception that the
owners or managing company of West Glen may, with city council approval, exceed
the maximum number of events within a twelve (12) month period allowed by code.
This allowance shall only apply to West Glen sponsored events; individual
business conducting events shall be limited in the number of events within a
twelve (12) month period per city code.
West Glen shall provide for review and approval by the city council a calendar
identifying the desired events and a general description of the event. Prior to
presentation of the calendar to the city council, West Glen shall provide to
the development services department a complete temporary use permit application
for each type of event which includes detailed information, as required by the
city of West Des Moines temporary use permit process. The development services
department, along with any other concerned or affected city departments shall
review the proposed events for compatibility with the adjacent uses and
neighborhoods, adequate provision of parking, provision of appropriate sanitary
facilities, potential pedestrian and vehicular traffic issues, needs of the
various emergency services departments, potential site issues, and compliance
to all applicable municipal codes and city and state regulations.
The West Glen events approved as part of the "calendar" shall be in addition to
the number of events as otherwise allowed within title 9, chapter 16,
"Temporary Use Permits", of the city code. These additional events beyond the
approved calendar events shall submit and receive approval of a temporary use
permit prior to each event. (Ord. 1887, 11-15-2010)
062-17: VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES:
Any person who violates the provisions of this ordinance upon conviction shall
be punished as set forth in section 1-4-1 of the city code. (Ord. 2152, 6-13-
2016)
062-99: LEGISLATIVE HISTORY:
Ord. 1514, 3-31-2003; Ord. 1593, 8-16-2004; Ord. 1632, 5-23-2005; Ord. 1687, 5-
22-2006; Ord. 1724, 1-29-2007; Ord. 1780, 9-24-2007; Ord. 1792, 12-3-2007; Ord.
1806, 6-16-2008; Ord. 1887, 11-15-2010; Ord. 2152, 6-13-2016; Ord. 2470, 5-3-
2021.
PUD #63
LINCOLN STREET PARK
SECTION:
063-01: Legal Description
063-02: Sketch Plan
063-03: Conditions
063-04: Signage Regulation
063-05: Infrastructure
063-06: Vehicular Access
063-07: Street Improvements
063-08: Traffic Signals
063-09: Stormwater Management
063-10: Definition
063-11: Violations And Penalties
063-99: Legislative History
063-01: LEGAL DESCRIPTION:
A parcel of land being part of block 3, Bennett's Addition, an official plat
now included in and forming a part of the city of West Des Moines, Polk County,
Iowa, being more particularly described as follows:
Beginning at the southeast corner of said block 3; thence N89°24'33"W, along
the south line of said block 3, a distance of 108.77 feet, to a point on the
westerly right of way line of primary road no. IA 28, said point also being the
point of beginning; thence N89°24'33"W, along the south line of said block 3, a
distance of 586.41 feet; thence N00°07'48"E, a distance of 295.16 feet;
Thence N89°24'33"W a distance of 368.95 feet, to a point on the west line of
said block 3; thence N00°07'48"E, along the west line of said block 3, a
distance of 675.96 feet, to the northwest corner of said block 3; thence
S87°46'46"E, along the north line of said block 3, a distance of 1049.20 feet,
to a point of the westerly right of way line of primary road no. IA 28; thence
S00°29'00"W, along the westerly right of way line of primary road no. IA 28, a
distance of 50.93 feet; thence S06°05'43"W, along the westerly right of way
line of primary road no. IA 28, a distance of 893.44 feet, to the point of
beginning, containing 19.5364 acres more or less, subject to all easements and
restrictions of record.
(Ord. 1521, 3-31-2003)
063-02: SKETCH PLAN:
On file with the community development department of the city and made a part
of this rezoning approval, for concept description and delineation is the
sketch plan document for the Lincoln Street Park PUD. It is recognized that
minor shifts or realignments of roadways may be necessary and compatible with
the need to acquire workable street patterns, grades and usable building sites,
but the general plan layout, including the relationship of uses to each other
and the relationship of dwelling unit types to the general plan framework,
traffic layout, and development requirements shall be used as the
implementation guide. Wherever conflict occurs between the written text in this
document and the notations on the sketch plan, the written text shall prevail.
The sketch plan is a graphic representation of the property included in the PUD
delineating the approximate location and configuration of the parcels for the
purpose of easier reference for the applicable regulations of this ordinance.
(Ord. 1521, 3-31-2003)
063-03: CONDITIONS:
Whereas, title 9 of the West Des Moines city code includes chapter 9, "Planned
Unit Development District" and establishes certain regulations and guidelines
pertaining to accompanying information required on a plat, site plan, and
permitted conditional use permit documents.
Now, therefore, the following conditions, restrictions, and regulations are
adopted as part of this approval, to wit:
   A.   General Conditions: The following general site plan criteria shall be
integrated into and made a part of the Lincoln Street Park PUD:
      1.   All subdivisions, public streets, public street rights of way and
general development shall adhere to the standards and design criteria set forth
in the West Des Moines subdivision ordinance and the Des Moines metropolitan
design standards as adopted by the city of West Des Moines pertaining thereto
unless otherwise stated within this ordinance.
      2.   Any regulation, standard, provision or requirement that is not
specifically addressed within this document that is regulated elsewhere in the
city code, the requirements of the city code shall still be enforced.
      3.   In all areas within a 100-year frequency flood hazard zone, or
adjoining drainageways or detention areas involving potential flood hazards, no
building shall be erected which has a lowest floor, including basements, less
than two feet (2') above the determined level of the 100-year frequency flood
event, and no building shall be erected within twenty five feet (25') of any
major drainageway, stormwater detention basin or pond.
      4.   The developer, their successors and assigns, if any, shall pay all
construction and engineering costs for the interior development of the planned
unit development, as required by this ordinance, or the subdivision ordinance
of the city of West Des Moines, Iowa, for all streets, storm sewers, sanitary
sewers, drainageway improvements, detention basins, water mains, buffers and
other improvements within the PUD as may be required by the city code or this
ordinance. (Ord. 1521, 3-31-2003)
   B.   Land Use Design Criteria: In addition to the general conditions as
stated in subsection A of this section, the following land use design criteria
shall apply to the four (4) development parcels designated on the sketch plan.
      1.   Parcel 1: All general use regulations, performance standards and
provisions set forth in title 9, "Zoning", of the city code, for the general
industrial district (GI) shall apply to any development proposal within parcel
1 of the PUD except as modified herein. The following development standards and
use regulations shall apply to any development within the PUD as applicable:
         a.   Allowed Uses: Allowed uses within parcel 1 of the PUD shall
include all permitted uses including driving ranges (SIC 7999) and permitted
conditional uses within the light industrial district (LI), are permitted uses,
except for the following uses which will not be permitted:
Agricultural production and services (SIC 01 and 07).
Fabricated metal products (SIC 34).
Industrial and commercial machinery and computer equipment (SIC 35).
Primary metal industries (SIC 33).
Rubber and miscellaneous plastics products (SIC 30).
Stone, clay and glass products (SIC 32).
Tobacco products (SIC 21).
Transportation equipment (SIC 37).
         b.   Parking, Loading And Internal Drive Setbacks: Off street parking
lots, loading areas and internal drives shall be sufficiently set back a
minimum of fifteen feet (15') from ultimate right of way lines and property
lines. In the event the parking lots for parcels 1 and 2 adjoin, with cross
parking and access agreements, the setback shall be zero. Parking, loading and
internal drive setbacks shall be designed to be effectively screened from
public view with the use of landscaping, earth berming and/or wall structures
to present a more appealing visual of the site from the public view. Landscape
buffering shall be reviewed and approved as part of any site plan submittal or
entitlement request.
         c.   Setbacks And Height Restrictions: All buildings will be set back
a minimum of twenty five feet (25') from the right of way for Lincoln Street
and the other boundaries of parcel 1. Buildings and other structures shall not
exceed sixty feet (60') in height with the exception of poles and netting
associated with a driving range, which may not exceed one hundred twenty feet
(120') in height. Said driving range structures may be set back a minimum of
ten feet (10') from Lincoln Street and the north and west boundary of parcel 1.
         d.   Open Space Required: On any lot in parcel 1, there shall be
provided an open space equal to at least twenty percent (20%) of the total lot
area; said space shall be unencumbered with any structure or off street parking
and shall be landscaped in accordance with title 9, chapter 19 of the city
code.
         e.   Parking Lot: Parking lot landscaping shall be provided in
accordance with title 9, chapter 19 of the city code. Parking lot areas shall
be screened from public streets. Such landscaping shall be in addition to that
required for open space, screening, or buffers.
         f.   Architecture: The architecture shall attempt to provide a
creative presentation of exterior building materials, exterior details and
texture, treatment of windows and doors, in keeping with other existing
buildings and approved site plans on properties adjacent to the south side of
Railroad Avenue and the close proximity to historic Valley Junction.
The architectural design of any building shall be acceptable to the city and
shall incorporate a late 1800s railroad motif as a common theme. Brick and
stone shall be the primary element on all sides of any buildings. No masonite,
visible asphalt exterior wall material, vinyl or aluminum siding,
nonarchitectural sheet metal, concrete block or other similar materials shall
constitute a portion of any building except as a trim material.
The city council of West Des Moines, after having received a recommendation
from the plan and zoning commission of West Des Moines shall determine if said
material when used as a primary element, enhances the physical appearance,
provides continuity desired to unite all structures within the PUD together
into a single project concept and reinforces the architectural theme.
Architectural grade asphaltic shingles or composite siding products such as
cement fiber shall be allowed.
Buildings shall not be located and designed to expose loading docks or doors,
loading areas or the rear of buildings to public streets. All rooftop
mechanical units shall be screened from views from the adjacent public streets
with the use of architecturally designed screen walls, parapet walls,
penthouse, or other opaque material, and shall be identified as part of the
site plan submittal or entitlement request.
         g.   Buffering: A buffer will be required on parcel 1 where it abuts
parcel 3 if said parcel 3 is developed with a use meeting the definition of SIC
805 nursing and personal care facilities discussed below.
A buffer will be required between parcel 1 and parcel 4 where they share a
common property line. Said buffers shall be landscaped as required by the city
landscaping ordinance. Such landscaping shall be in addition to that required
for open space, screening, or parking lot landscaping. The buffer may be
allowed to straddle the property lines, with the consent of both property
owners, and with the approval of the city council. If approved, the
responsibilities for installation and maintenance for that portion of the
buffer on each property will be the responsibility of that respective property
owner.
Landscaping requirements for the buffer may be reduced based upon the proposed
building configuration with the approval of the city council.
Adequate buffering of negative aspects of commercial and industrial buildings
(loading docks, garbage dumpsters and HVAC mechanical units) from any public
street and adjoining properties shall be required. Such buffering, if
accommodated by landscaping, shall be in addition to that landscaping required
for open space, buffering as noted above, other screening, and parking lot
landscaping.
         h.   Lighting: All lighting shall be downcast, full cutoff in nature
and no horizontally projecting wall pack lighting shall be allowed. Wall
mounted lighting will be permitted provided such lights are downcast full
cutoff variety. A photometric plan shall be required during the review of any
development application.
      2.   Parcel 2: All general use regulations, performance standards and
provisions set forth in title 9, "Zoning", of the city code, for the support
commercial district (SC) shall apply to any development proposal within parcel
2 of the PUD except as modified herein. The following development standards and
use regulations shall apply to any development within the PUD as applicable:
         a.   Allowed Uses: Allowed uses within parcel 2 of the PUD shall
include all permitted uses and permitted conditional uses within the support
commercial district (SC), except for the following uses which will not be
permitted:
Automobile repair services (SIC 75) except car wash (SIC 7542).
Automobile dealers and service stations (SIC 55).
Food stores, except convenience store (SIC 54), over ten thousand (10,000)
square feet.
Miscellaneous repair services (SIC 76).
         b.   Parking, Loading And Internal Drive Setbacks: Off street parking
lots, loading areas and internal drives shall be sufficiently set back a
minimum of fifteen feet (15') from ultimate right of way lines and property
lines. In the event the parking lots for parcels 1 and 2 adjoin, the setback
shall be zero. Parking, loading and internal drive setbacks shall be designed
to be effectively screened from public view with the use of landscaping, earth
berming and/or wall structures and presenting an attractive view or element to
the area. Landscape buffering shall be reviewed and approved as part of any
site plan submittal or entitlement request.
         c.   Drive-Throughs: One drive-through shall be allowed within parcel
2 of the PUD.
As a part of the review of a site plan or permitted conditional use permit
submitted for any allowed drive- through facility, the property owner/developer
must demonstrate through design and screening that the proposed drive-through
facility will not negatively impact the surrounding properties or create
traffic congestion in the area. All allowed drive-through facilities shall be
designed to be screened from the public right of way through the use of
architectural features, earth berming and landscaping, to minimize the visual
impact of the drive-through.
         d.   Building Setbacks: All buildings shall be set back a minimum of
twenty five feet (25') from all property lines. It is encouraged that buildings
are pushed up to the setback with the parking lots located internally to
present more of a Valley Junction streetscape appearance.
         e.   Open Space Required: On each lot there shall be provided an open
space equal to at least twenty five percent (25%) of the total lot area; said
space shall be unencumbered with any structure or off street parking and shall
be landscaped in accordance with title 9, chapter 19 of the city code.
         f.   Parking Lot Landscaping: Parking lot landscaping shall be
provided in accordance with title 9, chapter 19 of the city code. Parking lot
areas shall be screened from public streets. Such landscaping shall be in
addition to that required for open space, screening, or buffers.
         g.   Architecture: The architecture shall attempt to provide a
creative presentation of exterior building materials, exterior details and
texture, treatment of windows and doors, in keeping with other existing
buildings and approved site plans on properties adjacent to the south side of
Railroad Avenue and the close proximity to historic Valley Junction.
The architectural design of any building shall be acceptable to the city and
shall incorporate a late 1800s railroad motif as a common theme. Brick and
stone shall be the primary element on all sides of any buildings. No masonite,
visible asphalt exterior wall material, vinyl or aluminum siding,
nonarchitectural sheet metal, concrete block or other similar materials shall
constitute a portion of any building except as a trim material.
The city council of West Des Moines, after having received a recommendation
from the plan and zoning commission of West Des Moines shall determine if said
material when used as a primary element, enhances the physical appearance,
provides continuity desired to unite all structures within the PUD together
into a single project concept and reinforces the architectural theme.
Architectural grade asphaltic shingles or composite siding products such as
cement fiber shall be allowed.
Buildings shall not be located and designed to expose loading docks or doors,
loading areas or the rear of buildings to public streets. All rooftop
mechanical units shall be screened from views from the adjacent public streets
with the use of architecturally designed screen walls, parapet walls,
penthouse, or other opaque material, and shall be identified as part of the
site plan submittal or entitlement request.
A significant architectural feature which helps to define the entrance to the
city of West Des Moines should be incorporated into the facade of any building
located at the corner of 1st Street and Railroad Avenue.
         h.   Buffering: A buffer will be required between parcel 2 and parcel
4 where they share a common property line. Said buffer shall be landscaped as
required by the city landscaping ordinance. Such landscaping shall be in
addition to that required for open space, screening, or parking lot
landscaping. The buffer may be allowed to straddle the property lines, with the
consent of both property owners and with the approval of the city council. If
approved, the responsibilities for installation and maintenance for that
portion of the buffer on each property will be the responsibility of that
respective property owner.
Landscaping requirements for the buffer may be reduced based upon the proposed
building configuration with the approval of the city council.
Adequate buffering of negative aspects of commercial buildings (i.e., loading
docks, garbage dumpsters and HVAC mechanical units) from any public street and
adjoining properties shall be required. Such buffering, if accommodated by
landscaping, shall be in addition to that landscaping required for open space,
buffering as noted above, other screening, and parking lot landscaping.
         i.   Lighting: All lighting shall be downcast, full cutoff in nature
and no horizontally projecting wall pack lighting shall be allowed. Wall
mounted lighting will be permitted provided such lights are downcast full
cutoff variety. A photometric plan shall be required during the review of any
development application. (Ord. 1976, 3-4-2013)
      3.   Parcel 3: All general use regulations, performance standards and
provisions set forth in title 9, "Zoning", of the city code for the general
industrial district (GI) shall apply to any development proposal within parcel
3 of the PUD except as modified herein. The following development standards and
use regulations shall apply to any development within the PUD as applicable:
In the event parcel 3 develops as SIC 805 nursing and personal care facilities
as described below, then all general use regulations, performance standards and
provisions set forth in title 9, "Zoning", of the city code, for the
residential single-family (RS-5) district shall apply except as modified
herein.
         a.   Allowed Uses: Allowed uses on parcel 3 shall be all uses
permitted in parcel 1 and also all uses categorized by SIC 805 nursing and
personal care facilities and shall include:
Convalescent homes with continuous nursing care.
Convalescent homes with healthcare.
Extended care facilities.
Homes for the mentally retarded with healthcare, except skilled.
Intermediate care facilities.
Mental retardation hospitals.
Nursing homes, intermediate care.
Nursing homes, skilled.
Personal care facilities with healthcare.
         b.   Parking: Off street parking shall be provided in accordance with
the city code and shall be set back a minimum of fifteen feet (15') from the
Lincoln Street right of way and a minimum of five feet (5') from side and rear
property lines.
         c.   Building Setbacks: Buildings shall be set back a minimum of
twenty five feet (25') from the Lincoln Street right of way and a minimum of
seven feet (7') from all other property lines if parcel 3 develops as SIC 805.
If parcel 3 develops with uses as per parcel 1, then the required setbacks
shall be as described above for parcel 1.
         d.   Open Space: A minimum of twenty percent (20%) open space shall be
required which shall be unencumbered with buildings, drives, and parking areas.
In addition, all parking areas shall include landscape areas, islands, screens,
etc., in accordance with title 9, chapter 19 of the city code.
         e.   Landscaping: Open space landscaping at a rate of a minimum of two
(2) trees and three (3) shrubs shall be provided per three thousand (3,000)
square feet of required open space. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the minimum
landscaping provided shall be two (2) trees and six (6) shrubs.
Each parking lot island or pod shall be landscaped with turf and at least one
tree. Inorganic mulches shall not be considered acceptable. Parking lot areas
shall be screened from the Lincoln Street right of way as required by title 9,
chapter 19 of the city code.
         f.   Architecture: Architectural styles and materials of a residential
nature shall be permitted; however, any architecture on parcel 3 must be
compatible with architecture that could be built on parcel 1 so as to
effectively blend into the Lincoln Street Park PUD development. (Ord. 1876, 7-
12-2010)
      4.   Parcel 4: All general use regulations, performance standards and
provisions set forth in title 9, of the city code, zoning for the residential
high density (HD) district shall apply to any development proposal within
parcel 4 of the PUD except as modified herein. The following development
standards and use regulations shall apply to any development within the PUD as
applicable:
         a.   Land Use: Land use within parcel 4 shall be limited to multiple
single-family attached dwellings (multi-family) within one or more buildings. A
maximum density of fifteen (15) dwelling units per gross acre shall be allowed.
Further subdivision of parcel 4, according to the city subdivision ordinance,
will be permitted with the waiver of the two (2) acres minimum lot size for
high density zoning districts.
         b.   Setbacks And Height Restrictions: All buildings up to three (3)
stories in height shall be set back a minimum of twenty five feet (25') from
the parcel's perimeter boundary. Buildings exceeding three (3) stories must be
set back an additional ten feet (10') for each story above three (3) stories.
Detached accessory structures shall be set back a minimum of twenty five feet
(25') from perimeter boundaries adjacent to a public street; and shall be set
back a minimum of ten feet (10') from perimeter boundaries and internal lot
lines not adjacent to a public street unless required to be set back farther
due to the presence of a required buffer.
Principal structures shall be separated by a minimum of thirty feet (30') or as
otherwise required by building and fire codes, whichever is more restrictive. A
minimum twenty feet (20') of separation shall be maintained between primary and
detached accessory structures and between detached accessory structures.
Principal structures may be set back a minimum of fifteen feet (15') from the
lot line between lots 2 and 3, Lincoln Street Park plat 3 and shall maintain at
least thirty feet (30') between structures. (Ord. 1997, 8-5-2013)
         c.   Parking, Loading And Internal Drive Setbacks: Off street parking
lots, loading areas and internal drives shall be set back a minimum of fifteen
feet (15') from ultimate right of way lines and property lines. In the event
that two (2) lots are created within parcel 4, with cross parking and access
agreements, the setback at the adjoining lot line shall be zero. Parking,
loading and internal drive setbacks shall be designed to be effectively
screened from public view with the use of landscaping, earth berming and/or
wall structures to present a more appealing visual of the site from the public
view. Landscape buffering shall be reviewed and approved as part of any site
plan submittal or entitlement request.
         d.   Open Space Required: On each lot there shall be provided an open
space equal to at least twenty five percent (25%) of the total lot area; said
space shall be unencumbered with any structure or off street parking and shall
be landscaped in accordance with title 9, chapter 19 of the city code.
         e.   Parking Lot Landscaping: Parking lot landscaping shall be
provided in accordance with title 9, chapter 19 of the city code. Parking lot
areas shall be screened from public streets. Such landscaping shall be in
addition to that required for open space, parking lot landscaping, or buffers.
         f.   Architecture: The architecture shall attempt to provide a
creative presentation of exterior building materials, exterior details and
texture, treatment of windows and doors, in keeping with other existing
buildings and approved site plans on properties adjacent to the south side of
Railroad Avenue, the close proximity to historic Valley Junction, and in
keeping with previously approved site plans in the PUD.
The architectural design of principal buildings shall be acceptable to the city
and shall incorporate a late 1800s railroad motif as a common theme. Brick and
stone shall be the primary element on all sides of the principal buildings. No
masonite, visible asphalt exterior wall material, vinyl or aluminum siding,
nonarchitectural sheet metal, concrete block or other similar materials shall
constitute a portion of the principal buildings except as a trim material.
Garages shall be constructed of materials that are complementary to and
consistent with the principal buildings.
The city council of West Des Moines, after having received a recommendation
from the plan and zoning commission of West Des Moines shall determine if said
material when used as a primary element, enhances the physical appearance,
provides continuity desired to unite all structures within the parcel PUD
together into a single project concept and reinforces the architectural theme.
Architectural grade asphaltic shingles or composite siding products such as
cement fiber shall be allowed.
         g.   Screening:
            (1)   Rooftop Mechanical Units: All rooftop mechanical units shall
be screened from views from the adjacent public streets with the use of
architecturally designed screen walls, parapet walls, penthouse, or other
opaque material, and shall be identified as part of the site plan submittal or
entitlement request.
            (2)   Trash Enclosures: Trash receptacles and dumpsters shall be
screened by the use of a permanent enclosure. Enclosures shall be constructed
of materials consistent with or complementary to the primary structure.
Additionally, the enclosure should be landscaped to minimize the visual
presence and impact of the structure on surrounding properties, businesses, and
public streets.
            (3)   Heating, Ventilation, Or Air Conditioning Units: Ground level
views from public streets and adjoining properties of the negative aspects of
development and land uses such as heating, ventilation, or air conditioning
(HVAC) units or similar electrical or mechanical appurtenances shall be
adequately screened. Said screening shall be achieved through the use of
architectural enclosures and/or earth berming and landscaping consisting of
predominately evergreen material for year round screening.
            (4)   Utility Meters And Equipment: Utility meters and equipment
shall be visually screened to minimize their presence through the use of
berming, vegetation, fencing or building "wing walls". The use of building wing
walls or other architecturally integrated building extensions is encouraged to
screen utility meters and equipment visible from views from the perimeter
streets and adjacent properties.
         h.   Lighting: All lighting shall be downcast, full cutoff in nature
and no horizontally projecting wall pack lighting shall be allowed. Wall
mounted lighting will be permitted provided such lights are downcast full
cutoff variety. (Ord. 1976, 3-4-2013)
063-04: SIGNAGE REGULATION:
All signage within the PUD shall comply with the provisions of the West Des
Moines sign code for the individual zoning designations of the parcels, unless
noted otherwise herein. No pole sign as defined by the West Des Moines city
sign code shall be incorporated into any development within the PUD. All
signage shall work to present the railroad theme as established by the
development's architecture.
Monument or landscape sign standards shall be used for the construction of
freestanding signage as set forth within the West Des Moines city sign code for
the zoning district of the parcel, unless noted otherwise herein. Freestanding
signage shall be limited to one sign per street frontage and no more than four
(4) signs along Lincoln Street, equaling one sign per PUD parcel. The frontage
requirement for parcel 1, to allow a monument or landscape sign, will be
reduced to approximately seventy feet (70').
All signage constructed as wall signs on building fascia within the PUD shall
incorporate aesthetic features compatible with the overall character of the
development. All wall signs will be composed of solid individual letters
attached to the building fascia, or individual letters of anodized aluminum,
galvanized metal, illuminated self-contained with translucent plastic faces set
in anodized aluminum returns and trim; panel signs with letters incorporated or
painted upon a panel or wall area shall be prohibited. Temporary advertising or
promotional signage attached to exterior windows or walls shall be allowed only
with an approved temporary signage permit issued through the building
department under the provisions for temporary signage in the city code. Signs
with exposed neon lights, moving lights or flashing lights visible from the
exterior of the building shall be prohibited. (Ord. 1976, 3-4-2013)
063-05: INFRASTRUCTURE:
The developer of the property within the PUD is responsible for the public
improvements that are necessary to serve the property. Those improvements
include, but are not limited to, the paving of public streets, sanitary sewer
extension, water main extension, and storm sewer improvements. In conjunction
with or prior to development within any parcel of the PUD, public water and
sanitary sewer service shall be brought to the site and extended through the
area being developed to adjoining undeveloped properties in a manner acceptable
to the city and properly designed with sizes and materials compatible with the
city's plans for area wide water and sanitary sewer service. (Ord. 1521, 3-31-
2003)
063-06: VEHICULAR ACCESS:
Vehicular access to parcels in the Lincoln Street Park PUD shall be limited to
three (3) access points from Lincoln Street. Access points will be reviewed and
approved at the time of site plan or permitted conditional use permit review
for each parcel. Cross access and ingress/egress easements shall be put in
place for all parcels and lots for common use of entrances and to provide two
(2) access points to each development parcel. (Ord. 1976, 3-4-2013)
063-07: STREET IMPROVEMENTS:
The developer, on behalf of itself, its successors and assigns, shall be
responsible for:
Grading Lincoln Street from the east boundary to the west property line.
Construction of all proposed Lincoln Street storm sewer improvements from the
east boundary to west boundary of the property.
One-half (1/2) the cost of paving Lincoln Street, from South 1st Street to the
west property line. Lincoln Street shall be thirty one feet (31') wide, as
measured from back of curb to back of curb. Construction of the full width of
Lincoln Street beginning at South 1st Street and proceed westerly until the
equivalent surface area of pavement as indicated above equals one-half (1/2)
the cost of the paving of Lincoln Street.
One-half (1/2) the cost of the granular surfacing of the remaining section of
Lincoln Street abutting the development which will not be paved as part of this
development.
Construction of the two hundred foot (200') left turn lane, eastbound to
northbound, on Lincoln Street.
At the time of construction of Lincoln Street, the petitioner shall construct
and be responsible for one-half (1/2) the cost for the southbound deceleration
lane on 1st Street.
When the city deems appropriate, the applicant will pay twenty five percent
(25%) of the cost to construct the 1st Street northbound, left hand turn lane.
(Ord. 1521, 3-31-2003)
063-08: TRAFFIC SIGNALS:
The owner, on behalf of itself, its successors and assigns, commits to one-
fourth (1/4) of the cost of signalization of the intersection of 1st Street and
Lincoln Street. Said traffic signals shall be installed at such time that the
city of West Des Moines deems that signalization is necessary. (Ord. 1521, 3-
31-2003)
063-09: STORMWATER MANAGEMENT:
There shall be submitted to, and approved by the West Des Moines city engineer,
a stormwater management plan for each parcel, prior to its development. (Ord.
1521, 3-31-2003)
063-10: DEFINITION:
The term "developer", for the purpose of this ordinance, shall mean any person,
individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation, estate, trust, entity,
or agent of same acting or proposing to subdivide land or develop a parcel of
land for the construction of a building or buildings. (Ord. 1521, 3-31-2003)
063-11: VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES:
Any person who violates the provisions of this ordinance upon conviction shall
be punished as set forth in section 1-4-1 of the city code. (Ord. 1976, 3-4-
2013)
063-99: LEGISLATIVE HISTORY:
Ord. 1521, 3-31-2003; Ord. 1876, 7-12-2010; Ord. 1976, 3-4-2013; Ord. 1997, 8-
5-2013.
PUD #64
KING'S VALLEY
SECTION:
064-01: Legal Description
064-02: Required Plans
064-03: Conditions
064-04: Master Property Owners' Association
064-05: Landscaping
064-06: Neighborhood Amenities
064-07: Architecture
064-08: Land Use Design Criteria
064-09: Street Improvements
064-10: Signage Regulation
064-11: Storm Water Management
064-12: Traffic Reports
064-99: Legislative History
064-01: LEGAL DESCRIPTION:
That part of the southeast quarter (SE 1/4) of the southeast quarter (SE 1/4)
of section 12, and the east half (E 1/2) of the northeast quarter (NE 1/4) of
section 13, both in township 78 north, range 26 west of the 5th principal
meridian, Dallas County, Iowa, more particularly described as follows:
     
Beginning at a found cut "X" at the SE corner of said section 17-78-26; thence
N 00°31'43" E 618.99 feet along the east line of said section 12-78-26; thence
S 83°38'11" W 233.20 feet; thence N 00°20'11" E 126.05 feet; thence S 83°37'49"
W 56.31 feet; thence N 00°31'21" E 73.69 feet; thence N 00°31'21" E 250.24
feet; thence N 00°31'21" E 250.24 feet to north line of the SE 1/4 of the SE 1/
4 of said section 12-78-26; thence S 83°37'42" W 585.00 feet; thence S
00°31'43" W 250.73 feet; thence S 00°31'43" W 250.72 feet; thence S 00°31'43" W
817.54 feet to the north line of said section 13-78-26; thence S 00°42'38" W
1577.69 feet; thence N 84°07'43" E 874.09 feet to the east line of said section
13-78-26; thence N 00°42'38" E 1585.07 feet along said east line to the point
of beginning, containing 53.36 acres of land.
(Ord. 1541, 8-4-2003)
064-02: REQUIRED PLANS:
The following plans shall be required as a part of the processing of any
development application for any property within the King's Valley specific
plan.
   A.   Area Development Plan: An area development plan must be approved by the
city council prior to, or in conjunction with, the review of the specific plan
for any property within Davis Estates area development plan. No change to the
area development plan shall be made without approval from the appropriate
reviewing bodies. An area development plan is a plan that identifies
infrastructure, planning units, major street patterns, drainage and detention,
utilities, shared public spaces, vehicular traffic impacts, proposed densities,
and land use assumptions. It is intended to promote the communication and
cooperation between adjacent property owners and developers to encourage
cohesive, unified development, and identify the anticipated phasing of
construction, and parties involved.
On file in the city (see exhibit A) is the city council approved area
development plan for this property which is labeled area 9 on the map
identifying the area development plans within the town center overlay district
guidelines as adopted by the West Des Moines city council.
   B.   Specific Plan: A specific plan identifies detailed development criteria
for each planning unit as identified in the area development plan. The specific
plan needs to be in conformance with the general intent of the area development
plan and town center overlay district guidelines and shall be adopted by the
city council by ordinance.
This ordinance shall constitute the specific plan for the King's Valley
specific plan. On file in the city and made a part of this rezoning is a
specific plan map for the King's Valley specific plan, marked exhibit C. It is
recognized that slight modifications and changes to the map may be necessary
due to changes in building footprints or details; however, the intent is that
the major elements of the specific plan should be adhered to and may not be
altered without the approval of the city council.
   C.   Development Applications: Site plans for parcels within the King's
Valley must meet the intent of the approved specific plan and shall be
submitted to the city of West Des Moines for review and approval prior to the
development of any portion of the property within the specific plan. Site
plans, which meet the intent of the specific plan, as determined by the city
staff, will be subject to administrative review and approval by the director of
community development. If the site is deemed not to be in compliance with the
specific plan, the site plan will be subject to review by the appropriate
viewing body (i.e., city council, plan and zoning commission or board of
adjustment).
   D.   Preliminary Plat/Final Plat: Prior to or in conjunction with
development or transfer of ownership of any portion of the PUD, said area shall
be platted in accordance with the city's subdivision ordinance to delineate
within a plat, the parcel to be developed or sold separately or any portion
thereof. (Ord. 1541, 8-4-2003)
064-03: CONDITIONS:
Whereas, subsection 9-4-3A24, "PUD-Planned Unit Development District", of the
city code, establishes certain regulations and guidelines pertaining to
accompanying information required on plat and site plan documents. Now,
therefore, the following conditions, restrictions, and regulations are adopted
as part of this approval, to wit:
   A.   General Conditions: In addition to the specific plan map, the following
general development criteria shall be integrated into and made a part of this
planned unit development.
      1.   General Conformance To Subdivision Ordinance: All subdivisions,
public and private streets, public or private street rights of way and general
development shall adhere to the standards and design criteria set forth in the
West Des Moines subdivision ordinance and/or established city policies
pertaining thereto, unless otherwise stated within this ordinance.
      2.   General Conformance To Zoning Ordinance: Unless otherwise specified
herein, the development of the King's Valley specific plan shall comply with
the provisions of the West Des Moines zoning ordinance. For the purposes of
section 9-9-4 of the city code, planned unit development district, final plan
submittal, the submittal of plat, site plan, permitted conditional use permit,
or master plan documents for any parcel, or part of any parcel of the King's
Valley specific plan within two (2) years after approval and publication of
this ordinance, shall be considered to satisfy the terms and requirements of
such section.
      3.   Flood Hazard: In all areas within a 100-year frequency flood hazard
zone, or adjoining drainageways, and detention ponding areas involving
potential flood hazards, no building shall be erected which has a lowest level
floor, including basements, less than two feet (2') above the determined level
of the 100-year frequency flood event. Buildings shall only be permitted within
twenty five feet (25') of any easement or property boundary of a major
drainageway, storm water detention basin or pond if the applicant can
demonstrate during the development review process that potential flooding from
extraordinary flood events have been mitigated through site design or building
design and approval is granted by the city council.
      4.   Developer Responsibilities: The developer, their successors and/or
assigns, if any, shall pay all planning, engineering, and construction costs
for the development of the planned unit development, as required by this
ordinance and approved site plans and the cost of all streets, storm sewers,
sanitary sewers, drainageway improvements, detention basins, water mains,
buffers and other improvements as required for rights of way or public
easements within the King's Valley specific plan, unless otherwise approved by
the city council.
      5.   Internal Circulation: All streets and internal traffic flows,
including parking lots, shall permit the travel of the fire department's
largest vehicle's turning radius (the turning radius template may be obtained
from the fire marshal). Unique design solutions to accommodate turning
movements, such as rolled curbs, shall be granted by the city council if,
during the development application review, it is determined the standard design
impairs pedestrian movement. At that time, the traffic report completed for the
King's Valley specific plan may need to be revised to set forth the criteria
for alternative design solutions to traffic circulation and intersection
controls throughout the project. (Ord. 1541, 8-4-2003)
064-04: MASTER PROPERTY OWNERS' ASSOCIATION:
With the first development proposal for the rezoned property as acted upon
herein and legally described in section
064-01 of this ordinance, proper action shall be taken to establish a master
property owners' association with said property into the King's Valley property
owners' association and all building restrictions, covenants, and other
associated conditions attached to the King's Valley PUD shall be made to also
apply to said property. The King's Valley property owners' association shall be
responsible for the ongoing upkeep and maintenance of any privately owned
common grounds, structures, signs, etc., as outlined in the association
documents and any other specific development improvements noted as their
responsibility in this ordinance. (Ord. 1541, 8-4-2003)
064-05: LANDSCAPING:
Buffer screening between districts or parcels and uses shall not be required as
set forth in section 9-3-10, "Buffers", of the city code, except as noted
otherwise in this ordinance.
   A.   Buffer Park Easements: A thirty foot (30') "buffer park easement" shall
be provided along 60th Street. Landscape plantings within the buffer parks
easement shall be in accordance with city code requirements for thirty foot
(30') buffer parks.
   B.   Street Trees: One overstory tree per lot is required, by the home
builder, along all streets within this specific plan to provide for the visual
softening, shading, and enhancement of streets. Street trees shall be installed
prior to the initial occupancy of the structure on the property. If the street
tree cannot be accommodated in the area between the street and the public
sidewalk, the tree shall be placed in the front yard setback of the property.
Street tree maintenance shall be the responsibility of the individual homeowner
or the homeowners' association. The use of any planting materials within the
public street right of way shall be in accordance with the provisions of the
comprehensive urban forestry program of the city of West Des Moines, unless
noted otherwise in this ordinance:
      1.   Street tree permits shall be obtained from the city prior to
installation.
      2.   Trees that will encroach into any vehicle or pedestrian use area or
travel lane shall be of a variety that will accommodate pruning to allow for
the minimum clearance height (14 feet over vehicle travel lanes; 8 feet over
pedestrian travel lanes) without adversely affecting the overall natural shape
of the variety. Maintaining trees to these clearance levels is the
responsibility of the property owner or abutting property owner in situations
in which the trees are on public property.
      3.   Trees shall not be planted closer than five feet (5') to a curb, to
a sidewalk as measured from the center of the tree or shrub trunk. The planting
of trees on corner lots within the area bounded by the street or alley lines of
such lots and a line adjoining points along said street or alley lines twenty
five feet (25') from the point of intersection of the public right of way lines
shall be prohibited. This area is defined as the site triangle. No tree shall
be permitted within the sight triangle of a public street intersection. (Ord.
1541, 8-4-2003)
064-06: NEIGHBORHOOD AMENITIES:
The town center overlay district guidelines aim to reduce the dependence upon
and dominance of the automobile through street design, shared parking,
pedestrian scaled buildings and pedestrian pathways and spaces. To meet this
intent, King's Valley specific plan has placed an emphasis on the pedestrian
through trails, parks and pedestrian friendly design. The single-family
residential development within the King's Valley PUD and their relationship
with adjoining multi-family residential and commercial/office uses will be
organized so as to promote pedestrian travel between various uses in the King's
Valley development and surrounding activity centers. Such promotion will
include care with respect to how the uses relate to one another, and the use of
pedestrian walkways, greenbelt and open space areas. Particular emphasis shall
be placed upon providing safe and convenient pedestrian access to the office
and commercial areas adjoining the property to encourage the residents of the
development to utilize alternative modes of transportation other than
automobile. Bikeways shall be provided, where possible, to link the internal
open space areas with the peripheral open space areas and activity centers,
including, but not limited to, the Jordan Creek Mall, any future park/school
site and the overall town center area.
   A.   Private Beltway Park: Neighborhood amenities including the trail and
play structures, as identified on the specific plan, shall be installed at the
time forty (40) homes are constructed or two (2) years from the recordation of
the final plat, whichever comes first. At the time of platting, the developer
shall provide the city with sureties for installation. Landscaping and
additional neighborhood amenities are strongly encouraged.
   B.   Pedestrian Connection To Davis Estates Trail: At the time of platting,
a minimum ten foot (10') wide pedestrian access corridor shall be established
to provide for pedestrian access into the Davis Trust area development plan
trail system from the internal open space within parcel C as noted in the
specific plan. The location of the access and the specifications for the
pathway shall be determined at the time of platting and shall be installed as
part of the public improvements for the plat. The maintenance of the accessway,
including snow removal shall be the responsibility of the master property
owners' association. The pedestrian walkway and bike trails within the PUD
shall form an on site circulation system that minimizes the conflict between
pedestrians/bikes and vehicular traffic. (Ord. 1541, 8-4-2003)
064-07: ARCHITECTURE:
Architectural design for single-family units shall attempt to express a
creative presentation of exterior building materials, exterior details and
texture, treatment of windows and doors, and use of angles and multiplicity of
planes within the wall and roof design. Homes should have materials such as
brick, natural stone, wood shakes, decorative molding and cornice treatments,
or similar combination of material which represents a variation of
architectural styles or elements. Garages or accessory structures should
incorporate architectural details with the use of windows, doors and other
facade detailing.
   A.   Garage doors shall not be the dominant feature of the home. Garage
doors facing the public street shall be set back so as to minimize the
dominance of their appearance and provide adequate space between the garage and
the street or sidewalk to accommodate additional parking. Front loaded garages
shall be set back a minimum of twenty five feet (25') from the front property
line. Side loaded garages shall be set back in accordance with the principal
structure. It is encouraged that garages be set back at least five feet (5')
from the front facade of the house.
   B.   Four (4) out of five (5) single-family homes within the development
shall provide a front open porch, covered stoop or balcony. The area must
provide a significant usable outdoor space no less than five feet (5') in
depth, which may extend into the setback, yet may be no closer than fifteen
feet (15') to the front property line. (Ord. 1541, 8-4-2003)
064-08: LAND USE DESIGN CRITERIA:
In addition to the general criteria as stated above, the following land use
design criteria shall apply to the development areas designated on the sketch
plan. The specific plan document which is made a part of this rezoning action
and on file in the city, delineates four (4) parcels of the PUD as parcels A,
A-1, B and C for application of specific development standards. The maximum
number of dwelling units specified for each parcel may be increased with
revisions to the specific plan, provided that the total number of dwelling
units does not exceed one hundred twenty (120). The following development
standards and use regulations shall apply to each of the following development
parcels:
   A.   Parcel A: All general use regulations and provisions set forth in title
9, "Zoning", of the city code for RS-10 single-family residential district
unless noted in this ordinance.
      1.   Density And Land Use: Parcel A shall incorporate a maximum of seven
(7) acres for detached single-family residential.
      2.   Setbacks: All setbacks shall adhere to the RS-10 district
regulations with the exception of front porches, which may extend beyond the
front yard setback yet may be no closer than twenty five feet (25') to the
front property line.
      3.   Driveway Access: No driveway access from an individual dwelling unit
shall be permitted directly onto 60th Street.
   B.   Parcel A-1: Parcel A-1, as shown on the sketch plan, shall include a
maximum of six thousand five hundred (6,500) square feet to be developed as
common open space and used for an entrance sign and landscaping. At the time of
platting, there shall be covenants or other acceptable legally binding measures
for the long term ownership and maintenance. (Ord. 1541, 8-4-2003)
   C.   Parcel B: All general use regulations and provisions set forth in title
9, "Zoning", of the city code for RS-8 single-family residential district
unless otherwise noted in this ordinance.
      1.   Land Use And Density: Parcel B shall incorporate a maximum of forty
(40) acres of single-family development.
      2.   Setbacks: Setbacks single-family residential:
         a.   Primary structures:
 
Front            Rear                 Side
25 foot minimum  35 foot minimum 5 foot minimum1
35 foot maximum2
 
   Notes:
   1.    No portion of the building, including building projections may be
closer than 5 feet to the side yard property line.
      2.    Except for lots 94, 102, and 103 which shall have no maximum
setback.
            (1)   Porches, stoops and balconies may extend into the setback,
yet may be no closer than fifteen feet (15') to the front property line. Porch
or balcony stairs may be no closer than ten feet (10') to the property line.
(Ord. 1706, 9-11-2006)
         b.   Detached accessory structure:
 
Street Name Front                                                Rear    Side
All streets No closer to the street than the principal structure 5 feet1 5 feet
 
   Note:
      1.    No detached garages are allowed in the rear yard of those
properties located along the greenbelt.
(Ord. 1541, 8-4-2003)
      3.   Fencing Requirements: All fencing along the greenbelt shall be no
more than four feet (4') in height except for any lot where the homeowner
constructs an inground pool. All fences shall be constructed of wood or
decorative metals with no chainlink materials. All other fence provisions shall
adhere to that found in the city code. (Ord. 1680, 3-27-2006)
      4.   Driveway Access: No driveway access from an individual dwelling unit
shall be permitted directly onto 60th Street. No driveway access from an
individual dwelling unit shall be permitted directly on Wistful Vista Drive or
Coachlight Drive.
   D.   Parcel C: All general use regulations and provisions set forth in title
9, "Zoning", of the city code for open space/park. This parcel has been shown
as a greenbelt corridor which is intended to provide for pedestrian movement
through the development and into the Davis Estates trail system. It is also
intended to be used by the adjacent residents for play and other open space
uses. This parcel shall be privately owned and maintained by the owner or
developer or by the master property owners' association. Parcel C shall be
platted at the time that any portions of parcel B are platted that abut said
parcel C. At that time, consideration will be given to establishing covenants,
easements or other restrictions to ensure the long term preservation of the
area as open space. Landscaping and neighborhood amenities are to be located
within the park which the developer must provide sureties to the city for their
installation. (Ord. 1541, 8-4-2003)
064-09: STREET IMPROVEMENTS:
   A.   Beechtree Drive, Wistful Vista Drive And Coachlight Drive: The minimum
right of way width as required by the comprehensive plan for a minor collector
shall be dedicated to the city for that portion of streets located wholly
within the boundaries of the PUD. Additional right of way width may be required
to be dedicated to the city if landscaped boulevards are considered. The width
of the right of way for any boulevard streets shall be determined at the time
of platting. The developer shall plat the right of way and convey it to the
city as a part of the plat for any parcel abutting the right of way of
Beechtree, Wistful Vista and Coachlight Drives. The developer shall be
responsible for the paving of the equivalent of a thirty one foot (31') b/
b street, including intersection improvements as required by the traffic report
for the safe movement of traffic, which shall be installed as a part of the
public improvements of the plat.
   B.   60th Street: The developer of the abutting parcels shall be required to
dedicate to the city the equivalent of one-half (1/2) of the minimum right of
way width as required by the comprehensive plan for a minor arterial for that
portion of 60th Street which abuts the boundaries of the PUD. The developer
shall plat the right of way and convey it to the city as a part of the plat for
any parcel abutting the right of way of 60th Street.
   C.   Northern And Southern Collectors: These streets are shown on the sketch
plan and will function as local roads. The minimum right of way width as
required by the comprehensive plan for a minor collector shall be dedicated to
the city at the time that these streets are platted, which shall occur at the
time that any adjoining property is platted. Additional right of way width may
be required to be dedicated to the city if landscaped boulevards are
considered. The width of the right of way for any boulevard streets shall be
determined at the time of platting. The developer shall be responsible for the
paving of the equivalent of a twenty six foot (26') b/b street and associated
improvements, including intersection improvements and traffic signals, as
required by the traffic report for the safe movement of traffic, which shall be
installed as a part of the public improvements of the plat.
   D.   Other Internal Public Streets: All other internal public streets shall
be required to have a minimum of sixty feet (60') of right of way and with a
minimum of twenty six feet (26') of paving width. The location of the
intersections onto the major arterial streets abutting the PUD shall be
coordinated with the alignment of streets and drives on the adjoining
properties to the west of the PUD. (Ord. 1541, 8-4-2003)
064-10: SIGNAGE REGULATION:
Signage restrictions shall be imposed to limit and reduce the negative impacts
of sign clutter. Signage within the residential areas of the PUD shall comply
with the sign standards of the applicable residential district. All signs shall
comply with all provisions of the city sign code. (Ord. 1541, 8-4-2003)
064-11: STORM WATER MANAGEMENT:
There has been submitted, as part of the area development plan for this area,
to the West Des Moines public works department, a master storm water management
plan for the entire development which shall govern the overall storm water
management of the development. More specific storm water management proposals
may be required with the development of each parcel, which shall be prepared by
the developer prior to development within the parcel. The method of storm water
management and the conveyance system shall be determined and approved prior to
the development of any portion of the property within the PUD. (Ord. 1541, 8-4-
2003)
064-12: TRAFFIC REPORTS:
A traffic report has been prepared by the city for this area that outlines what
the ultimate paving requirements will be for the major roadways in the vicinity
of the King's Valley development. Prior to, or in conjunction with the
development of any parcel, or portion of a parcel, the developer shall have the
traffic report reviewed by the city's traffic consultant to ensure that the
provisions and assumptions of the original traffic report are still valid and
applicable. (Ord. 1541, 8-4-2003)
064-99: LEGISLATIVE HISTORY:
Ord. 1541, 8-4-2003; Ord. 1680, 3-27-2006; Ord. 1706, 9-11-2006.
PUD #65
CLEVEN
SECTION:
065-01: Legal Description
065-02: Sketch Plan
065-03: General Conditions
065-04: Architecture
065-05: Landscaping And Screening
065-06: Parking Lot Interconnections
065-07: All Areas To Be Platted
065-08: Storm Water Management
065-09: Sidewalks
065-10: Infrastructure
065-11: Signage Regulation
065-12: Definition
065-99: Legislative History
065-01: LEGAL DESCRIPTION:
Lot 1, except West 80 feet, Christ's Church Subdivision, an official plat, City
of West Des Moines, Dallas County, Iowa. (Ord. 1543, 9-2-2003)
065-02: SKETCH PLAN:
On file with the city and made a part of this rezoning approval, for concept
description and delineation is the sketch plan document for the Cleven PUD
marked exhibit A. It is recognized that minor shifts or realignments of
roadways may be necessary and compatible with the need to acquire workable
street patterns, grades and usable building sites, but the general plan layout,
including the relationship of uses to each other and the relationship of
dwelling unit types to the general plan framework, traffic layout, and
development requirements shall be used as the implementation guide. Wherever
conflict occurs between the written text in this document and the notations on
the sketch plan, the written text shall prevail. The sketch plan is a graphic
representation of the property included in the PUD delineating the approximate
location and configuration of the parcels for the purpose of easier reference
for the applicable regulations of this ordinance. (Ord. 1543, 9-2-2003)
065-03: GENERAL CONDITIONS:
Whereas, title 9 of the city code includes chapter 9, planned unit development
district (PUD) and establishes certain regulations and guidelines pertaining to
accompanying information required on a plat, site plan and permitted
conditional use documents.
   A.   General Conditions: Now, therefore, the following conditions,
restrictions, and regulations are adopted as part of this approval and the
following general site plan criteria shall be integrated into and made a part
of the development criteria for the PUD, to wit:
      1.   All subdivisions, public streets, public street rights of way and
general development shall adhere to the standards and design criteria set forth
in the West Des Moines subdivision ordinance and the Des Moines metropolitan
design standards as adopted by the city of West Des Moines pertaining thereto,
unless otherwise stated within this ordinance.
      2.   Any regulation, standard, provision or requirement that is not
specifically addressed within this document that is regulated elsewhere in the
city code of West Des Moines, the requirements of the city code shall still be
enforced.
      3.   In all areas within a 100-year frequency flood hazard zone, or
adjoining drainageways or detention areas involving potential flood hazards, no
building shall be erected which has a lowest floor, including basements, less
than two feet (2') above the determined level of the 100-year frequency flood
event or flood proofed to the same elevation in accordance with the West Des
Moines floodplain ordinance, and no building shall be erected within twenty
five feet (25') of any major drainage, storm water detention basin or pond.
      4.   The developer, their successors and assigns, if any, shall pay all
construction and engineering costs for the interior development of the planned
unit development, in accordance with the current city policies at the time of
development, as required by this ordinance, the subdivision ordinance of the
city of West Des Moines, and the Des Moines metropolitan design standards as
adopted by the city of West Des Moines, for all streets, storm sewers, sanitary
sewers, drainage improvements, detention basins, water mains, streetlights,
buffers and other improvements within the PUD as may be required.
   B.   Land Use Design Criteria: In addition to the general conditions
requirement stated within this document, the following land use design criteria
shall apply to the development areas designated by parcel on the sketch plan.
The sketch plan document, which is made a part of this document by reference
elsewhere in this ordinance, delineates two (2) parcels within the PUD, each
denoted with a specific parcel label, for application of specific standards of
land use and development regulations. The following development standards and
use regulations shall apply to development within each of the individual
parcels, or portion of said parcel, as applicable.
      1.   Parcels A And B: All general use regulations and provisions set
forth in title 9, "Zoning", of the city code for the support commercial
district (SC) shall apply to any development proposal for all property within
parcels A and B as shown on the sketch plan of the PUD, unless noted otherwise
in this ordinance.
Allowed uses shall include all permitted (P) uses and permitted conditional
uses (Pc) allowed within the support commercial district except travel trailer
parks, landscape-garden plant stores. Any use which has outside display areas
for retail sales will be considered a permitted conditional use and must
indicate on the proposed site plan the location, size, proposed operation, and
any other information necessary for the review of the plan. A limit of one use
with drive-through will be allowed each for parcel A and parcel B, not to
exceed two (2) for the PUD. A limit of one depository institution will be
allowed.
         a.   Uses: Other uses permitted (P) in parcels A and B:
Apparel and accessory store (56).
Bookstore (5942).
Candy, nut, and confectionery stores (544).
Cellular telephone sales (5999) (no towers, antennas, or satellite dishes).
Dairy store (5451).
Dance studios, schools, and halls (791).
Florist (5992).
Furniture stores (5712).
Garment making, alteration, and repair (7219.01).
Gift, novelty and souvenir shops (5947).
Hobby, toy and game shop (5945).
Household appliance stores (5722).
Jewelry stores (5944).
Luggage and leather goods (5948).
Meat and fish market (542).
Musical instrument stores (5736).
Radio, television, and consumer electronics stores (5731).
Record and prerecorded tape stores (5735).
Sporting goods stores and bicycle shops (5941).
Stationery stores (5943).
Used merchandise stores – antique shops (5932.02).
         b.   Permitted Conditional Uses: Other permitted conditional (Pc) uses
in parcels A and B:
Coin operated laundries and dry cleaning (7215).
Motion picture theaters (7832).
         c.   Prohibited Uses: The following support commercial district uses
shall not be permitted within the PUD, except under noted restrictions:
Auto repair shops (exception: 1 allowed with additional screening, increased
lighting requirements, and increased architectural standards).
Auto supply stores (exception: 1 allowed with additional screening, increased
lighting requirements, and increased architectural standards).
Gasoline service station - with repair.
Gasoline service station - without repair (exception: 1 will be allowed with
possible additional screening, increased lighting requirements, and increased
architectural standards).
Grocery stores (except 1 convenience store).
New and used automobile dealers.
      2.   Unified Master Plan: Parcels within this PUD shall have a minimum
lot size of one acre. A unified master plan shall be developed which
illustrates the relationships between parking, buildings, circulation,
landscaping, and open space. Multiple use of the parcels by more than one
building shall comply with minimum lot area standards, be consistent in
architectural design and use of materials and organized to serve and maintain a
unified master plan concept.
      3.   Setbacks: All building heights and setbacks within parcels A and B
shall be in accordance with the setback and bulk density regulations of the
West Des Moines zoning ordinance for the support commercial district (SC)
unless otherwise herein modified. The front yard setback along 74th Street
shall be fifty feet (50'). The front yard setback along Office Plaza Drive
shall be fifty feet (50'). The side yard building setback between parcels of a
similar zoning district shall be ten feet (10'); otherwise the side yard
setback will comply with the support commercial standard. No side yard parking
lot setback is required between lots that have parking lot interconnections and
between parcels A and B, which share a common access drive. All yards abutting
a public thoroughfare shall be considered front yards and shall comply with the
requirements for a front yard, except as modified herein.
      4.   Land Use Density And Traffic Study Reports: Parcels in the PUD
together have a certain density of development under strict application of the
support commercial zoning district setback and bulk density regulations (no
change to zoning ordinance such as is contemplated through this PUD). Increases
in building unit density may not be increased through a PUD ordinance. Further,
that density of land use generates a planned for amount of vehicular traffic.
Any potential change in land use density contemplated for parcels in the PUD
together must be explored through a traffic study for potential impacts to the
traffic circulation system.
The parcels within the PUD could be developed as proposed, under strict
application of the support commercial zoning district setback and bulk density
regulations (no changes to zoning regulations), up to the following levels
(trip generation rates where obtained from the Institute of Transportation
Engineers (ITE), trip generation, 6th edition):
   TABLE 1
 
ITE Code                                Daily Trips P.M. Peak (Vehicle/Hour)
         Land Use    Units        Building             Total Enter Exit
814      Specialty   Square feet  9,750    397         25    11    14
         retail
832      Fast food   Square feet  4,871    2,416       163   85    78
         restaurant
         Quick lube/
837/840  auto care   Service bays 4        160         21    11    10
         center
912      Drive-in    Square feet  4,750    1,260       260   127   133
         bank
                     Total                 4,233       469   234   235
 
To allow for more flexibility, yet maintain the level of development which
could occur under a strict application of the zoning regulations, alternate
land uses which are allowed in support commercial zoning districts were
explored for their trip generation potential:
   TABLE 2
 
ITE Code                              Daily Trips P.M. Peak (Vehicle/Hour)
         Land Use   Units       Building             Total Enter Exit
814      Specialty  Square feet 19,000   772         49    21    28
         retail
832      Fast food  Square feet 4,871    2,416       163   85    78
         restaurant
912      Drive-in   Square feet 6,000    1,591       328   161   167
         bank
                    Total                4,779       540   267   273
 
All uses proposed for development under this PUD together must demonstrate that
the proposed development falls at or below the traffic levels identified in
table 2 of this section.
      5.   Common Access Drives: In order to maintain safe and efficient
traffic flow, parcels A and B shall share one common access drive off of Office
Plaza Drive. The location of this drive is established by prior agreement and
will not be changed. An access drive has been established on 74th Street for
the PUD. A joint ingress/egress easement will be required to allow cross access
between parcels within the PUD for use of the two (2) common access drives. No
additional drives off of Office Plaza Drive or 74th Street shall be permitted
for parcels A and B. (Ord. 1543, 9-2-2003)
065-04: ARCHITECTURE:
Architectural design and use of materials for the construction of any building
within the parcel shall be accomplished in a manner compatible with PCP
professional commerce park zone district building standards. The architectural
design of any building shall be acceptable to the city and all buildings within
the parcel shall have as a primary element of the exterior being fascia glass,
face brick, architectural steel or stone panels, with all sides of any building
built on the parcel consistent in design and use of materials. No wood,
Masonite, visible asphaltic exterior wall or roof material, aluminum siding,
nonarchitectural sheet metal, concrete block, EIFS, stucco, or other similar
materials shall constitute a portion of any building except as a trim material,
unless the city council of West Des Moines, after having received a
recommendation from the planning and zoning commission of West Des Moines,
shall determine said material when used as a primary element, enhances the
physical appearance, or provides continuity desired to unite all structures
within the parcel together into one project concept. (Ord. 1543, 9-2-2003)
065-05: LANDSCAPING AND SCREENING:
A landscaped buffer park of not less than thirty feet (30') in width shall be
required along the public street right of way along 74th Street. The intent of
this buffer park is to enhance the visual character of the site, buffer and
visually screen views of off street parking, vehicle use areas, and visually
obtrusive or undesirable elements. A landscaped area of not less than five feet
(5') shall be provided along all other lot lines, except that no landscaped
area is required between adjoining parcels within this PUD where parking is
interconnected.
A two foot (2') to three foot (3') berm shall be provided along the public
streets. Earth berming and landscaped plantings shall be required to provide a
landscaped open space area to enhance the proposed uses within this area from
adjacent property roadways and for occupants on site. Landscaped areas shall be
designed by a registered landscape architect, architect or engineer and shall
be reviewed and approved during the site planning process.
Parking lot setbacks for each lot shall be fifteen feet (15') from any
established public street right of way and five feet (5') from all other lot
lines. Parking lots located adjacent to any private street or drive shall have
a minimum five foot (5') parking lot setback measured from the back of curb of
said private street or drive. No parking lot setback is required between
adjoining lots located within this PUD when said adjoining lots are located in
the same zoning district and have shared parking lots joined by at least one or
more access drives.
No building, accessory structure, drive or parking area shall be located or
encroached into the landscape buffer setback. Signage may be allowed to
encroach into the buffer park, but will meet current standards for setback.
Buffers and screening of items, such as, but not limited to, rooftop mechanical
units and trash receptacles, shall meet the requirements as outlined in
ordinance 1073, and as modified, herein. The proposed method for minimizing the
visual impacts of mechanical units/elements shall be reviewed and approved by
the city during the site plan review process. (Ord. 1543, 9-2-2003)
065-06: PARKING LOT INTERCONNECTIONS:
In order to sustain safe and efficient traffic movement throughout the PUD,
parking lot interconnections shall be provided between parcels A and B.
Provision will be made for future parking lot connections from parcels A and B
with the property(ies) to the south of this PUD. Provisions may include, but
not be limited to, ingress/egress easements and parking lot stubs. (Ord. 1543,
9-2-2003)
065-07: ALL AREAS TO BE PLATTED:
Prior to, or in conjunction with, transfer of ownership of any portion of the
PUD, said area shall be platted in accordance with the city's subdivision
ordinance to delineate within a plat the lots to be sold separately or any
portion thereof. (Ord. 1543, 9-2-2003)
065-08: STORM WATER MANAGEMENT:
There shall be submitted to, and approved by the West Des Moines public works,
a complete storm water management plan for the PUD to be prepared by the
developer prior to any development within the PUD and for all storm sewer,
drainage systems and detention areas within the PUD. (Ord. 1543, 9-2-2003)
065-09: SIDEWALKS:
Any private sidewalk located within a public right of way will be the sole
responsibility of the developer. This responsibility shall include the
maintenance and upkeep of the sidewalk. The city shall have the right to remove
the sidewalk, if deemed necessary and for a purpose, with no compensation due
to the developer. (Ord. 1543, 9-2-2003)
065-10: INFRASTRUCTURE:
The location of future 72nd Street will be determined as a result of
coordination with the owner of parcel B and the owner of the adjacent property
to the east and as a result of engineering design to determine a logical
location. The final location of the 72nd Street alignment may necessitate that
a portion of parcel B be reserved for street right of way.
If it is determined in the future that 72nd Street will be constructed between
Woodland Avenue and Office Plaza Drive along the east property line of parcel B
or it is determined that access from the parcels within this PUD desire access
to 72nd Street, development within this PUD will participate appropriately in
the cost of the construction of 72nd Street. Future access to 72nd Street is
recommended to be provided along the common property line between parcel B and
the adjoining property to the south and will be reviewed at the time the
adjoining property develops, 72nd Street is constructed, or access to 72nd
Street is contemplated. (Ord. 1543, 9-2-2003)
065-11: SIGNAGE REGULATION:
All signage shall comply with the West Des Moines sign ordinance, except as
herein modified. Allowable signage shall include, but not be limited to, a
monument sign along the 74th Street frontage of parcel A, a monument sign along
the Office Plaza Drive frontage of parcel A, and a monument sign along the
Office Plaza Drive frontage of parcel B. At such time in the future that parcel
B has frontage along 72nd Street, a monument sign along that frontage will be
allowed, subject to current sign ordinance provisions. (Ord. 1543, 9-2-2003)
065-12: DEFINITION:
The term "developer", for the purpose of this ordinance, shall mean any person,
individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation, estate, trust, entity,
or agent of same acting or proposing to subdivide land or develop a parcel of
land for the construction of a building or buildings. (Ord. 1543, 9-2-2003)
065-99: LEGISLATIVE HISTORY:
Ord. 1543, 9-2-2003.
PUD #66
KING'S RIDGE
SECTION:
066-01: Legal Description
066-02: Intent Of Development
066-03: Required Plans
066-04: Conditions
066-05: Master Property Owners' Association
066-06: Buffering And Landscaping
066-07: Usable Open Space
066-08: Daycare
066-09: Architecture
066-10: Land Use Design Criteria
066-11: Street Improvements
066-12: Signage Regulation
066-13: Storm Water Management
066-14: Traffic Reports
066-99: Legislative History
066-01: LEGAL DESCRIPTION:
That part of the southeast quarter (SE 1/4) of section 12, township 78 north,
range 26 west of the 5th P.M., Dallas County, Iowa, more particularly described
as follows: commencing at a found cut "X" at the SE corner of said section 12-
78-26; thence N0037'49"W 56.31 feet along the east line of said section 12-78-
26; thence S8338'11"W 233.20 feet; thence N0020'11E 126.05 feet; thence
S8337'49"W 56.31 feet; thence N0031'21"E 574.14 feet to the north line of the
SE 1/4 of the SE 1/4 of said section 12-78-26; thence S8337'42"W 585.00 feet to
the point of beginning; thence S0031'43"W 530.17'; thence N8928'17W 918.70
feet; thence N8344'55"E 178.36 feet; thence N8338'26"E 419.00 feet to the point
of beginning, containing 10.02 acres of land.
(Ord. 1545, 9-29-2003)
066-02: INTENT OF DEVELOPMENT:
To provide a unique multi-family residential development to meet the growing
demands of the population by providing by greater variety in type, design, and
layout of buildings and by the conservation and more efficient use of open and
activity space. (Ord. 1545, 9-29-2003)
066-03: REQUIRED PLANS:
The following plans shall be required as a part of the processing of any
development application for any property within the King's Ridge specific plan.
   A.   Area Development Plan: An area development plan must be approved by the
city council prior to, or in conjunction with, the review of the specific plan
for any property within Davis Estates area development plan. No change to the
area development plan shall be made without approval from the appropriate
reviewing bodies. An "area development plan" is a plan that identifies
infrastructure, planning units, major street patterns, drainage and detention,
utilities, shared public spaces, vehicular traffic impacts, proposed densities,
and land use assumptions. It is intended to promote the communication and
cooperation between adjacent property owners and developers to encourage
cohesive, unified development, and identify the anticipated phasing of
construction, and parties involved.
On file with the city (see exhibit A) is the city council approved area
development plan for this property which is labeled area 9 on the map
identifying the area development plans within the town center overlay district
guidelines as adopted by the West Des Moines city council.
   B.   Specific Plan: A specific plan identifies detailed development criteria
for each planning unit as identified in the area development plan. The specific
plan needs to be in conformance with the general intent of the area development
plan and town center overlay district guidelines and shall be adopted by the
city council by ordinance.
This ordinance shall constitute the specific plan for the King's Ridge specific
plan. On file with the city and made a part of this rezoning is a specific plan
map for the King's Ridge specific plan, marked exhibit B. It is recognized that
slight modifications and changes to the map may be necessary due to changes in
building footprints or details; however, the intent is that the major elements
of the specific plan should be adhered to and may not be altered without the
approval of the city council.
   C.   Development Applications: Site plans for parcels within the King's
Ridge must meet the intent of the approved specific plan and shall be submitted
to the city of West Des Moines for review and approval prior to the development
of any portion of the property within the specific plan. Site plans, which meet
the intent of the specific plan, as determined by the city staff, will be
subject to administrative review and approval by the director of community
development. If the site is deemed not to be in compliance with the specific
plan, the site plan will be subject to review by the appropriate viewing body
(i.e., city council, plan and zoning commission or board of adjustment).
   D.   Preliminary Plat/Final Plat: Prior to or in conjunction with
development or transfer of ownership of any portion of the PUD, said area shall
be platted in accordance with the city's subdivision ordinance to delineate
within a plat, the parcel to be developed or sold separately or any portion
thereof. (Ord. 1545, 9-29-2003)
066-04: CONDITIONS:
Whereas, subsection 9-4-3A24, "PUD-Planned Unit Development District", of the
city code, establishes certain regulations and guidelines pertaining to
accompanying information required on plat and site plan documents. Now,
therefore, the following conditions, restrictions, and regulations are adopted
as part of this approval, to wit:
   A.   General Conditions: In addition to the specific plan map, the following
general development criteria shall be integrated into and made a part of this
planned unit development.
      1.   General Conformance To Subdivision Ordinance: All subdivisions,
public and private streets, public or private street rights of way and general
development shall adhere to the standards and design criteria set forth in the
West Des Moines subdivision ordinance and/or established city policies
pertaining thereto, unless otherwise stated within this ordinance.
      2.   General Conformance To Zoning Ordinance: Unless otherwise specified
herein, the development of the King's Ridge specific plan shall comply with the
provisions of the West Des Moines zoning ordinance. For the purposes of section
9-9-4 of the city code, planned unit development district, final plan
submittal, the submittal of plat, site plan, permitted conditional use permit,
or master plan documents for any parcel, or part of any parcel of the King's
Ridge specific plan within two (2) years after approval and publication of this
ordinance, shall be considered to satisfy the terms and requirements of such
section.
      3.   Flood Hazard: In all areas within a 100-year frequency flood hazard
zone, or adjoining drainageways, and detention ponding areas involving
potential flood hazards, no building shall be erected which has a lowest level
floor, including basements, less than two feet (2') above the determined level
of the 100-year frequency flood event. Buildings shall only be permitted within
twenty five feet (25') of any easement or property boundary of a major
drainageway, storm water detention basin or pond if the applicant can
demonstrate during the development review process that potential flooding from
extraordinary flood events have been mitigated through site design or building
design and approval is granted by the city council.
      4.   Developer Responsibilities: The developer, their successors and/or
assigns, if any, shall pay all planning, engineering, and construction costs
for the development of the planned unit development, as required by this
ordinance and approved site plans and the cost of all streets, storm sewers,
sanitary sewers, drainageway improvements, detention basins, water mains,
buffers and other improvements as required for rights of way or public
easements within the King's Ridge specific plan, unless otherwise approved by
the city council.
      5.   Internal Circulation: All streets and internal traffic flows,
including parking lots, shall permit the travel of the fire department's
largest vehicle's turning radius (the turning radius template may be obtained
from the fire marshal). Unique design solutions to accommodate turning
movements, such as rolled curbs, shall be granted by the city council if,
during the development application review, it is determined the standard design
impairs pedestrian movement. At that time, the traffic report completed for the
King's Ridge specific plan may need to be revised to set forth the criteria for
alternative design solutions to traffic circulation and intersection controls
throughout the project. (Ord. 1545, 9-29-2003)
066-05: MASTER PROPERTY OWNERS' ASSOCIATION:
With the first development proposal for the rezoned property as acted upon
herein and legally described in section
066-01 of this ordinance, proper action shall be taken to establish a master
property owners' association with said property into the King's Ridge property
owners' association and all building restrictions, covenants, and other
associated conditions attached to the King's Ridge PUD shall be made to also
apply to said property. The King's Ridge property owners' association shall be
responsible for the ongoing upkeep and maintenance of any privately owned
common grounds, structures, signs, etc., as outlined in the association
documents and any other specific development improvements noted as their
responsibility in this ordinance. It is strongly encouraged that a reciprocal
agreement be entered between King's Valley association and King's Ridge for the
joint use of the swimming pool, clubhouse and park to maximize the recreation
amenities that would be available within the entire Davis Estates development.
(Ord. 1545, 9-29-2003)
066-06: BUFFERING AND LANDSCAPING:
   A.   Buffer screening between districts or parcels and uses shall not be
required as set forth in section 9-3-10, "Buffers", of the city code, except as
noted otherwise in this ordinance. The topography provides a natural buffer
between the high density to the west and a significant amount of landscaping is
required to be utilized along the eastern property line to provide a screening
from the adjoining single-family lots to the east.
   B.   The development shall design buildings that work with the natural
topography of the site to avoid the destruction of the slope.
   C.   The landscaping requirements specified herein are intended to foster
aesthetically pleasing development which will enhance, protect and preserve the
appearance, character, general health, safety and welfare of the city of West
Des Moines.
      1.   Two (2) trees per three thousand (3,000) square feet of required
green area.
      2.   Enhancements such as water features, benches, lighting and
perennials shall be required within the activity/plaza areas. The exact number
to be determined, by the community development director, during the review of
the site plan.
      3.   No parking space, within a single row of parking, shall be greater
than six (6) stalls from a landscape island or pod.
      4.   Landscape islands shall be located at the terminus end of parking
rows. Islands shall be at least ten feet (10') in width by thirty eight feet
(38') in length for dual parking rows and ten feet (10') in width by nineteen
(19) in length for single rows.
      5.   A landscape pod, located within the parking rows shall be at least
six feet (6') from the back of curb to the back of curb. (Ord. 1545, 9-29-2003)
066-07: USABLE OPEN SPACE:
   A.   The town center overlay district guidelines aim to create interactive
spaces for pedestrians through the design of plaza areas and pedestrian
pathways. Bikeways shall be provided, where possible, to link the internal open
space areas with the peripheral open space areas and activity centers,
including, but not limited to, the Jordan Creek Mall, any future park/school
site and the overall town center area. The size of the outdoor space shall be
proportional, as determined by the director of community development to the
size of the building or residential units. If, during the review of the
development application, it is determined that several buildings could share in
the creation of a plaza space, a detailed agreement as to the responsibilities
of the applicants must be submitted. At the review of the site plan, the
applicant must demonstrate how the plaza designs meet the following intents:
      1.   Creates spaces that allow for the day and evening interaction among
pedestrians.
      2.   Provides as many seating opportunities as possible through the
placement of moveable chairs, sidewalk cafes and planter walls.
      3.   When possible, the integration of storm drainage and detention
should be designed to enhance the public space, which would include the
creation of ponds, waterfalls or landscaped waterways.
      4.   Creates an outdoor room, by limiting the interaction with moving
vehicles and partially surrounding the space by buildings, landscaping elements
and architectural features.
      5.   Provides elements that enrich the space. Elements shall include, but
are not limited to, artwork, fountains, flowers, banners, and children's play
environment. (Ord. 1545, 9-29-2003)
066-08: DAYCARE:
A daycare shall be located within the development. The daycare should provide a
convenient service to the residents of King's Ridge and the surrounding
neighborhood. The daycare should be incorporated into the development to
encourage shared facilities with the King's Ridge condos. (Ord. 1545, 9-29-
2003)
066-09: ARCHITECTURE:
Architectural design for multi-family buildings, daycare, and clubhouse shall
attempt to express a creative presentation of exterior building materials,
exterior details and texture, treatment of windows and doors, and use of angles
and multiplicity of planes within the wall and roof design. All buildings
should provide a unifying theme while maintaining each building's individual
character. Buildings should have materials such as brick, natural stone, wood
shakes, decorative molding and cornice treatments, or similar combination of
material which represents a variation of architectural styles or elements.
Garages or accessory structures should incorporate architectural details with
the use of windows, doors and other facade detailing. Eighty percent (80%) of
units within a development must provide a balcony of at least five feet (5')
deep, which may extend into the setback, yet may be no closer than fifteen feet
(15') to the property line. (Ord. 1545, 9-29-2003)
066-10: LAND USE DESIGN CRITERIA:
In addition to the general criteria as stated above, the following land use
design criteria shall apply to the development areas designated on the sketch
plan. The specific plan document which is made a part of this rezoning action
and on file with the city delineates one parcel of the PUD as parcel A for
application of specific development standards. The maximum number of dwelling
units specified for each parcel may be increased with revisions to the specific
plan, provided that the total number of dwelling units does not exceed one
hundred twenty (120). The following development standards and use regulations
shall apply to each of the following development parcels:
   A.   Parcel A: All general use regulations and provisions set forth in title
9, "Zoning", of the city code for medium density residential district (RM-12)
unless noted in this ordinance.
      1.   Density And Land Use: Parcel A shall incorporate a maximum of 10.02
acres for medium density residential. A daycare shall be a permitted use within
the development.
      2.   Setbacks: Internal property line setbacks for all structures shall
be ten feet (10'). Setbacks from the external property line shall adhere to the
following:
         a.   Principal structure:
 
Front yard         25 feet
Side and rear yard 20 feet
 
         b.   Accessory structure:
 
Front yard         25 feet
Side and rear yard 10 feet
 
         c.   Balconies are required for at least eighty percent (80%) of the
units of at least five feet (5') deep, which may extend beyond the front
setback, yet may be no closer than fifteen feet (15') to the front property
line. (Ord. 1545, 9-29-2003)
066-11: STREET IMPROVEMENTS:
   A.   Beechtree Drive: The minimum right of way width as required by the
comprehensive plan for a minor collector shall be dedicated to the city for
that portion of streets located wholly within the boundaries of the PUD.
Additional right of way width may be required to be dedicated to the city if
landscaped boulevards or traffic calming devices are considered. The width of
the right of way, for any boulevard streets shall be determined at the time of
platting. The developer shall plat the right of way and convey it to the city
as a part of the plat for any parcel abutting the right of way of Coachlight
Drive. The developer shall be responsible for the paving of the equivalent of a
thirty one foot (31') b/b street, including intersection improvements as
required by the traffic report for the safe movement of traffic, which shall be
installed as a part of the public improvements of the plat. (Ord. 1545, 9-29-
2003)
066-12: SIGNAGE REGULATION:
Signage restrictions shall be imposed to limit and reduce the negative impacts
of sign clutter. Signage within the residential areas of the PUD shall comply
with the sign standards of the applicable residential district. All signs shall
comply with all provisions of the city sign code. (Ord. 1545, 9-29-2003)
066-13: STORM WATER MANAGEMENT:
There has been submitted, as part of the area development plan for this area,
to the West Des Moines public works department, a master storm water management
plan for the entire development which shall govern the overall storm water
management of the development. More specific storm water management proposals
may be required with the development of each parcel, which shall be prepared by
the developer prior to development within the parcel. The method of storm water
management and the conveyance system shall be determined and approved prior to
the development of any portion of the property within the PUD. (Ord. 1545, 9-
29-2003)
066-14: TRAFFIC REPORTS:
A traffic report has been prepared by the city for this area that outlines what
the ultimate paving requirements will be for the major roadways in the vicinity
of the King's Ridge development. Prior to, or in conjunction with the
development of any parcel, or portion of a parcel, the developer shall have the
traffic report reviewed by the city's traffic consultant to ensure that the
provisions and assumptions of the original traffic report are still valid and
applicable. (Ord. 1545, 9-29-2003)
066-99: LEGISLATIVE HISTORY:
Ord. 1545, 9-29-2003.
PUD #67
RESERVED
SECTION:
067-99: Legislative History
067-99: LEGISLATIVE HISTORY:
Nazarene Church Campground: Ord. 1557, 11-10-2003; Ord. 2019, 1-27-2014; Ord.
2296, 4-30-2018.
PUD #68
GALLERIA
SECTION:
068-01: Legal Description
068-02: Definitions
068-03: Required Plans
068-04: Requirements
068-05: Landscaping
068-06: Open Space And Plaza Areas
068-07: Architecture
068-08: Signage
068-09: Pedestrian Orientation And Connection
068-10: Land Use Design Criteria
068-11: All Areas To Be Platted
068-12: Stormwater Management
068-13: Sanitary Sewer Service And Water Main Extensions
068-14: Vehicle Trip Allocations
068-15: Street Right Of Way
068-16: Traffic Signals
068-17: Construction Of Streets
068-18: Private Street
068-19: Access Drives
068-20: Streetlights
068-21: Public Access Easements
068-22: Violations And Penalties
068-99: Legislative History
068-01: LEGAL DESCRIPTION:
A parcel of land in section 13, township 78 north, range 26 west of the 5th
P.M., city of West Des Moines, Dallas County, Iowa, that is more particularly
described as follows:
Beginning at the center of said section 13; thence N83°23'55"E, 654.37 feet
along the north line of the southeast 1/4 of section 13 to a point; thence
easterly along a curve to the right having a radius of 1292.50 feet and a chord
bearing of S69°00'58"E, an arc length of 315.97 feet to a point; thence
N27°59'15"E, 341.62 feet to a point; thence S71°20'30"E, 317.03 feet to a point
on the north line of the southeast 1/4 of section 13; thence N83°23'55"E,
837.30 feet along said north line to a point; thence S00°16'26"W, 408.00 feet
to a point; thence N83°23'55"E, 333.00 feet to a point on the east line of
section 13; thence S00°16'26"W, 1242.99 feet along the east line of section 13
to a point; thence S83°33'41"W, 1328.07 feet to a point; thence S00°13'05"E,
988.52 feet to the northeast corner of Lakeview Heights plat 2, an official
plat; thence S83°41'31"W, 1268.31 feet to the northwest corner of Lakeview
Heights plat 2; thence S83°45'21"W, 237.63 feet to a point; thence northerly
along a curve to the left having a radius of 850.00 feet and a chord bearing of
N20°23'33"E, an arc length of 81.08 feet to a point of reverse curvature;
thence northerly along a curve to the right having a radius of 850.00 feet and
a chord bearing of N33°55'51"E, an arc length of 482.77 feet to a point of
tangency; thence N50°12'07"E, 190.31 feet to a point; thence northerly along a
curve to the right having a radius of 850.00 feet and a chord bearing of
N19°42'53"W, an arc length of 595.88 feet to a point of tangency; thence
N00°22'07"E, 1513.98 feet to the point of beginning, except that portion of the
above described property deeded to the city for street purposes.
(Ord. 1920, 5-31-2011)
068-02: DEFINITIONS:
LANDSCAPE ISLAND: A raised, unpaved area located within or protruding into a
parking lot or the center unpaved area of a traffic circle used to guide
traffic, separate lanes, limit paving, increase aesthetic quality and mitigate
environmental consequences of paved areas. The area of a landscape island is
measured from back of inside curb to back of inside curb.
LANDSCAPE POD: Small, individual, unpaved areas within a parking lot
incorporated to provide locations for vegetation thus increasing the aesthetic
quality and microclimate of the parking area.
LINEAR ISLAND: Island located perpendicular to and dividing two (2) back to
back linear rows of parking.
STALL ISLAND: Island which takes the place of a parking stall within a single
linear row of parking.
TENANT FRONTAGE: For purposes of signage within this development, "tenant
frontage" shall mean that linear footage of a leased/owned space within a
building which faces toward a public or private street. A maximum of two (2)
frontages may be allowed to be counted toward the maximum allowable sign area.
TERMINAL ISLAND: Island located at the terminus end of all linear rows of
parking. (Ord. 1920, 5-31-2011)
068-03: REQUIRED PLANS:
The following plans shall be required as a part of the processing of any
development application for any property within the Galleria specific plan.
   A.   Area Development Plan: An area development plan must be approved by the
city council prior to, or in conjunction with, the review of the specific plan
for any property within said specific plan. No change to the area development
plan shall be made without approval from the appropriate reviewing bodies. An
area development plan is a plan that identifies infrastructure, planning units,
major street patterns, drainage and detention, utilities, shared public spaces,
vehicular traffic impacts, proposed densities, and land use assumptions. It is
intended to promote the communication and cooperation between adjacent property
owners and developers to encourage cohesive, unified development, and identify
the anticipated phasing of construction, and parties involved.
On file in the city (exhibit 1) is the city council approved area development
plan for this property which is labeled area 3 on the map identifying the area
development plans within the town center overlay district guidelines as adopted
by the West Des Moines city council.
   B.   Specific Plan: A specific plan identifies detailed development criteria
for each planning unit identified in the area development plan. The specific
plan will conform to the general intent of the area development plan and the
town center overlay district guidelines and shall be adopted by the city
council by ordinance. This ordinance shall constitute the specific plan for the
Galleria Development. On file in the city and made a part of this rezoning is a
specific plan map for Galleria (exhibit 2). It is recognized that modifications
and changes to the map may be necessary due to changes in building footprints
or details; however, the intent is that the major elements of the specific plan
should be adhered to and may not be altered without the approval of the city
council. Where the specific plan map and specific plan language conflict, the
specific plan language shall prevail.
   C.   Development Applications: Overlay district site plans (OSP) for parcels
within the Galleria specific plan must meet the intent of the approved specific
plan and shall be submitted to the city of West Des Moines for review and
approval prior to the development of any portion of the property. Site plans,
which meet the intent of the specific plan as determined by development
planning and inspection manager, will be subject to administrative review and
approval by the development planning and inspection manager. Site plans for
permitted uses which comply (as determined by the development planning and
inspection manager) with the design intent as set forth in this specific plan
will be subject to administrative review and approval by the development
planning and inspection manager. A one week review and comment period by each
and all available members of the plan and zoning commission and city council
shall precede the administrative approval. If upon review, two (2) or more
members of the city council, plan and zoning commission, or a combination
thereof request such; or if the development planning and inspection manager
deems the proposed site plan is not in compliance with the approved specific
plan or is potentially controversial, the site plan will be processed through
the traditional full site plan review and approval process. Site plans for
permitted conditional uses (Pc) as defined in the city code, unless otherwise
amended within this ordinance, shall be approved by the appropriate review
body. At the discretion of the development and planning inspection manager, an
amendment to the Galleria specific plan ordinance may be required to bring
consistency between the ordinance and site plan development proposed. (Ord.
1920, 5-31-2011)
068-04: REQUIREMENTS:
Requirements for all parcels within the Galleria specific plan:
   A.   Walkways: Private walkways adjacent to buildings or plaza areas shall
be designed to be wide enough to accommodate outdoor seating areas for
pedestrian street furniture, amenities such as planter pots and trash
receptacles and trees and other landscaping.
   B.   Outdoor Patios: Establishments that have an outdoor patio for the
consumption of an alcoholic beverage are required to provide a definable
boundary for the "private" portion of the patio in which consumption is
allowed. In addition, each establishment is required to implement a means to
control access to the patio from the exterior or "public" areas. The barrier
specifications shall be determined at the review of the development application
and may include, but is not limited to, fencing, landscaping and signage.
   C.   Special Activities, Jordan Creek Town Center Overlay District: All
establishments within the Galleria Development shall abide by subsection 9-10-
4M, "Regulation Of Specific Activities, Jordan Creek Town Center Overlay
District", of the city code.
   D.   Screening: Loading areas, undesirable building elements, transformers,
HVAC and trash enclosures shall be screened in accordance with city code.
Screening materials shall be consistent with that used on the primary
structure. Roof mounted HVAC screening shall be incorporated into the design of
the building through the use of raised parapets, screening walls or other
acceptable solutions as identified during the review of the site plan.
   E.   Cart Corrals: Shall be permanent fixtures and constructed with masonry,
stone or block. No signage identifying a tenant or products shall be located on
the cart corrals. Cart corrals shall be anchored to the ground to prevent
movement and misalignment due to vehicle and maintenance equipment hitting the
corral.
   F.   Street Furniture: On file in the city are representations of the street
furniture that when required shall be installed in the pedestrian use areas
throughout the Galleria Development. Although deviations from the illustrations
are permissible, the street furniture is intended to distinguish the Galleria
Development from surrounding developments and to act as a unifying element
within the overall Galleria Development.
   G.   Lot Size: Multiple buildings on one lot and lots less than the minimum
square footage per acre required by code for the designated zoning parcel shall
be considered acceptable if supported by appropriate easements or a reciprocal
easement agreement; and if approved by the appropriate approval body as part of
an overlay district site plan, permitted conditional use permit or plat.
   H.   Buffer Parks: Buffer screening between districts or parcels and uses
shall not be required, except as noted otherwise in this ordinance.
      1.   A one hundred foot (100') buffer park shall be required along the
southern boundary of parcel G. Landscaping requirements shall be in accordance
with the requirements of a thirty foot (30') buffer park and shall include
significant earth berming of articulated heights no less than five feet (5') to
help screen the uses and road from the adjoining residential properties.
Additional need for berming and the location of landscaping and berming shall
be determined at site plan development for parcel G to provide for adequate
screening and buffering of the Pheasant Ridge neighborhood. Berming and
landscaping shall be installed with platting or development, whichever comes
first. Due to drive spacing requirements from the intersection of Stagecoach
Drive and South 68th Street, an access drive from South 68th Street into parcel
G may be allowed to encroach into the one hundred foot (100') buffer; however,
said drive encroachment should be limited to the minimal amount of encroachment
necessary. Adequate buffering and screening for the residents of Pheasant Ridge
must still be provided. Off street parking and the placement of primary or
detached structures shall not be allowed within the buffer.
      2.   A sixty foot (60') buffer park shall be located along both the north
and south sides of Mills Civic Parkway. Landscaping requirements shall be in
accordance with city code. The buffer park may be reduced to thirty feet (30')
along the south side of Mills Civic Parkway from South 60th Street westerly to
the first driveway entrance, if it is determined by the development planning
and inspection manager that the layout of the site provides no reasonable
option and the development meets the intent of the town center overlay district
guidelines. Landscaping and berming to provide additional buffering above and
beyond what would typically be found in a thirty foot (30') buffer park should
be considered at the time of site plan development.
      3.   If at the time of platting, a single-family home(s) still exists on
an adjacent parcel, a thirty foot (30') buffer park shall be required along the
south boundary of parcels E and D and/or eastern boundary of parcels F and G.
The buffer park will not be required in the event the abutting property owner
(s) to the south of parcels E and D or east of parcels F and G provide a
written covenant to waive the requirement.
      4.   Ponds, lakes, wetlands or other water features may be placed within
a buffer park given that a water feature, such as a fountain and/or significant
wetland plantings and edge treatments are provided. Dry detention areas are not
generally allowed in buffer parks, however if it is determined by the
development planning and inspection manager that the intent of the buffer park
is met, a portion of the dry detention may encroach into the buffer.
   I.   Height Restrictions: Unless otherwise noted in this ordinance, the
height of a building will conform to the standard zoning provisions for that
district, with the exception of building elements such as bell towers, clock
towers or other vertical architectural elements. These elements may exceed
height restrictions, as determined by the development planning and inspection
manager.
   J.   Lighting Standards: It is intended that lighting for each development
within the Galleria specific plan area shall be designed to provide a safe
environment, yet mitigate light pollution onto adjoining properties. During the
design review of each building, the applicant must demonstrate how lighting
will not adversely affect the adjoining properties.
      1.   Light fixtures shall be limited to a maximum of twenty five feet
(25') in height as measured from the grade to the top of the fixture.
      2.   All lights shall be cutoff fixtures, no wall pack or floodlighting
is allowed. The style of fixtures shall be a unifying element within the
Galleria Development and therefore should be of a consistent and complementary
design.
      3.   As part of the review of each site plan, a photometric plan must be
submitted. At the time of application, the plan shall demonstrate that light
levels fall at or below one foot-candle at the perimeter of the development
and, the interior property line of adjoining parcels unless shared parking
fields or another component of development common to the parcels justifies
otherwise.
      4.   Canopy lighting used for drive-ups or gas pumps, must use a recessed
or flush lighting fixture so that no part of the fixture is visible from the
street.
      5.   In addition to cutoff fixtures, particular attention shall be given
to eliminate hot spots or light glare. To achieve this additional measures may
include, but are not limited to, lowering parking lot light levels after
business hours, turning off lights not necessary for security purposes and use
of landscaping for light screening.
   K.   Parking Requirements: All parking areas shall be landscaped to screen
visibility thereof from public rights of way or from any adjoining property
outside the Galleria Development through the use of predominantly evergreen
plant materials and/or berming and shall be reviewed at the time of review of
the site plan for the development of the parcel.
      1.   Parking Lots At Major Street Intersections: The location of parking
lots at major street intersections shall be discouraged unless adequate visual
screening is provided to mitigate views thereof.
      2.   Parking Lot Setbacks: Parking lots shall be set back a minimum of
twenty five feet (25') from property line, with the exception of a small
section along South 64th Street as noted on the specific plan map (exhibit 2).
Only here may the parking lot setback be ten feet (10') from the street,
provided that the site layout meets the intent of the specific plan and town
center overlay district, as determined by the development planning and
inspection manager. No off street parking area shall encroach into a buffer
park.
      3.   Number Of Stalls: All retail and office parcels must comply with a
minimum requirement of one space per three hundred (300) gross square feet of
building. Residential uses shall provide at a minimum 1.5 spaces for each unit.
At the discretion of the development planning and inspection manager a less
stringent parking calculation may be used provided the applicant can
demonstrate a need for a parking rate less than the above, due to shared
parking or off peak uses.
      4.   Residential Dwellings: For any residential dwelling intended as
owner occupied and/or for which a condominium regime is established, a minimum
of one of the required spaces for each unit shall be as an enclosed parking
space. This parking space shall be a minimum of nineteen feet by nine feet (19'
x 9') and may be designed as a freestanding garage, attached garage or multiple
garage spaces within an enclosure. A specific covered parking space shall be
designated for and legally tied to each dwelling unit. The covered space must
be for the exclusive use of the occupant of the dwelling unit and cannot be
rented or purchased by a third party, even if the dwelling unit is rented.
      5.   Shared Parking: Developers of parcels within the Galleria must
provide a cross access/parking agreement at the time of platting to utilize
shared parking.
      6.   On Street Parking: On street parking shall not be allowed along any
public street or private street intended to function as a public street within
the development. (Ord. 1920, 5-31-2011)
068-05: LANDSCAPING:
   A.   Streetscaping: Along all public streets or travelways, streetscape
landscaping shall be provided within the first twenty five feet (25') parallel
to the roadways/travelways which are not required to provide a buffer. Along
all private streets or travelways, streetscape landscaping shall be provided
within the first fifteen feet (15') parallel to the roadways/travelways that
are not required to provide a buffer. Along that portion of parcel J as noted
on the specific plan map (exhibit 2), a deviation from the twenty five foot
(25') streetscape landscaping shall be allowed. Only here may the streetscape
landscaping width be ten feet (10'), provided that the site layout meets the
intent of the specific plan and town center overlay district, as determined by
the development planning and inspection manager.
This streetscape landscaping is intended to provide a consistent design
treatment that enhances the travelways. Buildings may intermittently encroach
into the landscaped area; however parking lots or accessory structures may not.
The plantings shall be installed with the development of each site plan.
Landscaping standards are as follows:
      1.   To calculate the number of required plants, divide the total linear
feet of street frontage by thirty (30). For every thirty feet (30'), one tree
and two (2) shrubs shall be required. The landscaping may be arranged in
massing or in a linear streetscape or a combination thereof.
      2.   No substitutions for trees may be allowed; however, perennials may
be substituted for shrubs. Twenty (20) square feet of solid perennial plantings
shall be considered the equivalent to two (2) shrubs.
      3.   Alternative concepts that meet the intent of streetscape landscaping
may be allowed at the discretion of the development planning and inspection
manager.
   B.   Parking Lot/Vehicle Use Area Landscaping: The intent of this section is
to encourage extensive landscaping within parking lot areas, which tend to have
the greatest negative impact on developments, and to provide breaks in what
could be viewed as a "sea of parking". Whenever possible, a series of smaller
parking lots/areas separated by visible green areas shall be implemented in
lieu of one large parking expanse. Each area shall be landscaped and screened
from views from the public streets and adjacent properties which are not part
of the Galleria Development. Parking lots shall be designed to function not
only in the interest of accommodating automobiles, but also in the interest of
promoting safe pedestrian movement. The following parking lot landscaping
standards are in addition to the required buffer park, streetscape or plaza
landscaping requirements:
      1.   To calculate the number of required plants, divide the site's total
number of proposed parking stalls by twelve (12). For every twelve (12) parking
stalls, one tree and two (2) shrubs shall be required. Plants shall be located
in the parking lot within the terminal islands, stall islands, landscape pods
or linear islands. No substitutions are allowed for trees; however, twenty (20)
square feet of solid perennial plantings shall be considered the equivalent to
two (2) shrubs.
      2.   No parking space, within a single row of parking, shall be further
than six (6) stalls from a landscape island or pod.
      3.   Landscape islands shall be located at the terminus end of parking
rows. Islands shall be at least ten feet (10') in width by thirty eight feet
(38') in length for ninety degree (90°) dual parking rows and ten feet (10') in
width by seventeen feet (17') in length for single rows. A landscape pod,
located within the parking rows shall be at least six feet (6') from the back
of curb to the back of curb.
      4.   Parking lots, drive lanes and loading areas visible from the public
street and adjacent properties outside of the Galleria Development shall
provide appropriate screening through the use of any of the following:
         a.   Earthen berms which are generally three feet (3') or higher in
conjunction with implementation of vegetation, except where visibility at
intersections may be impacted.
         b.   Landscape walls:
            (1)   Freestanding walls implemented for screening measures shall
be treated to a finished side on both sides of the wall.
            (2)   Walls constructed for the retainment of soil which are
greater than four feet (4') in height must be designed by an individual
knowledgeable and certified in structural engineering. Walls over four feet
(4') shall have one and one-half feet (11/2') of horizontal terraces for every
two feet (2') of exposed vertical wall face. Exceptions to this requirement may
be granted by the development planning and inspection manager for unusual
situations and to preserve existing vegetation or landscape features.
            (3)   Walls may be brick, individual decorative modular wall stone,
or natural stacked wall or fieldstone. Walls composed of landscape timbers or
other wood products are not desired due to the deterioration potential of the
material. With approval by the development planning and inspection manager,
wood walls or other material may be used in areas where views of the wall will
be minimal.
            (4)   Vegetation shall be planted along all types of walls to
soften the visual impact, visually break up long expanses of the wall and to
visually anchor it to the site.
         c.   Screening through the implementation of predominantly evergreen
materials which reach a minimum of three feet (3') in height. Vegetation
implemented for screening purposes shall be implemented at a size that is
larger than normal in order to accomplish immediate screening. (Ord. 1920, 5-
31-2011)
068-06: OPEN SPACE AND PLAZA AREAS:
The incorporation of open space/plaza areas is intended to provide a variety of
large and small rest areas for the casual shopper, patrons waiting for
services, break areas for employees and activity or gathering spaces for
planned development events.
   A.   Open Space Requirements: Each site plan shall include at least one
plaza, courtyard, or patio space which provides opportunities for pedestrians
through activity areas, sidewalk cafes, and/or seating. The size of the outdoor
space shall be proportional, as determined by the development planning and
inspection manager, to the size of the building and the intended use. If,
during the review of the development application, it is determined that several
buildings could share in the creation of a plaza space, a detailed agreement as
to the responsibilities of the applicants must be submitted. At the review of
the site plan, the applicant must demonstrate how the open space/plaza area
design meets the following intents:
      1.   Creates spaces that allow for day, and if appropriate, evening
utilization by patrons and pedestrians;
      2.   Provides as many seating opportunities as possible through the
placement of seats or integration of raised planters (seat walls);
      3.   Implements the appropriate measures to optimize pedestrian comfort
(awnings, canopy trees, shade structures, location along building facades,
etc.);
      4.   Is a definable and inviting space;
      5.   Is separated from interaction with moving vehicles; and
      6.   Is visually pleasing and provides elements that enrich the space.
Elements shall include, but are not limited to, landscaping, alternate paving
materials and colors, artwork, fountains, flowers, banners, and children's play
environment.
When possible, the integration of storm drainage and detention should be
designed to enhance the public space, which may include the creation of ponds,
waterfalls or landscaped waterways. (Ord. 1920, 5-31-2011)
068-07: ARCHITECTURE:
The intent is to create building facades that are varied and articulated to
provide visual interest to pedestrians. On file in the city are illustrative
examples of the architectural concepts for most buildings within the Galleria
specific plan area. A "quasi-Mediterranean" architectural design style has been
specified for this development. All buildings, including those that may not be
specifically represented within the illustrations, shall execute the quasi-
Mediterranean style through building design, types of materials, colors
implemented and other measures which are consistent and complementary to other
existing buildings within the development. Buildings should provide a unifying
theme while maintaining each building's individual character.
   A.   Design: The following should be considered in the design of each
building within the Galleria Development:
      1.   Buildings should be proportioned and defined by clear facade
elements such as a base, middle, and top.
      2.   Buildings shall implement variation in the building planes and
footprints in order to break up otherwise long expanses and to provide visual
interest. Materials should change with the change in building planes and a
variety of complementary building materials should be implemented; however, all
material should keep within the chosen theme.
      3.   There are no "backs" of buildings; all buildings shall have three
hundred sixty degree (360°) architecture. All sides of all buildings should be
treated with the same level of architectural style and detail. Particular
attention shall be paid to transitioning between the residential and commercial
uses.
      4.   The appropriate measure to fully screen undesirable building
elements, mechanical (both ground and rooftop mounted) and electrical
equipment, including electrical transformers and meters shall be implemented.
When feasible, screening measures shall be incorporated into the building
architecture through the use of wing walls, raised parapets, etc.
      5.   Fenestration (door and window openings) shall be sized to the scale
of the building and detailed appropriately to the pedestrian theme. Use of
repeating window patterns and details are encouraged to unify the design.
      6.   Trim and structural elements such as posts or columns shall be sized
to the scale of the building and detailed appropriately to the theme. Parapets
and other building elements which extend above rooflines shall be of adequate
depth to provide visual structural integrity. The backs of any visible
architectural element shall be treated to a finished state rather than left in
a structural state.
      7.   Entrances into buildings should be easily identified through the use
of building design and detailing. Projected or recessed entryways, higher
rooflines, awnings or changes in building material are examples that can create
this effect.
      8.   Reflective glass or mirrored glass is discouraged. Efforts should be
made to use clear glass on storefronts, windows and doors to promote the
linkage of the interior and exterior of buildings.
      9.   Corporate franchise design, where the building functions as a
trademark is strongly discouraged. Elements of the corporate prototype shall be
permissible only if the building design also incorporates significant
architectural elements which are compatible with and carry the overall theme
and uniqueness of the Galleria Development.
   B.   Materials: The use of brick, acceptable stone or masonry shall be
incorporated into the building architecture on all sides of the structure,
unless the development planning and inspection manager determines that the use
of alternate building materials enhances the physical appearance and
accomplishes a compatible structure with the overall development. Masonry
materials shall be implemented in such a manner as to give the appearance of
three-dimensional elements and to provide authenticity to the materials. Smooth
faced concrete block, tilt-up concrete panels, or prefabricated steel panels
are prohibited as the predominant exterior building materials unless it is
determined by the development planning and inspection manager that the overall
building design meets the intent of the specific plan.
   C.   Residential: In addition to the above stated design criteria, the
following shall apply specifically to residential developments:
      1.   Garages or accessory structures should incorporate architecture
details through the use of windows, doors and other facade detailing. Garages
visible from public streets or properties outside of but adjacent to the
Galleria Development shall be architecturally enhanced to break up the mass and
disguise their purpose through the use of materials, additional roof peaks,
incorporation of windows, etc.
      2.   Four (4) out of five (5) medium density homes within a development
must provide a front porch, covered stoop or balcony. The area must provide a
significant usable outdoor area no less than five feet (5') in depth.
      3.   Eighty percent (80%) of multi-family units within a development must
provide a balcony or patio at least five feet (5') deep, which may extend into
the setback, yet may be no closer than five feet (5') to the property line.
      4.   Fenestration (door and window openings) shall be sized to the scale
of the building and detailed appropriately to the pedestrian theme. Use of
repeating window patterns and details are encouraged to unify the design.
      5.   Trim details shall be accentuated through the use of appropriate and
noticeable widths and details.
      6.   Entrances into buildings should be easily identified through the use
of building design and detailing. Projected or recessed entryways, higher
rooflines, awnings or changes in building material are examples that can create
this effect.
   D.   Canopies, Including Gas: Pump stations and other drive-through canopies
must be designed to incorporate the building's architecture through the use of
similar building materials, roof design and color, including the application of
brick or stone to canopy support columns. When possible, canopies should be
designed as an extension of the building rather than an added on element. (Ord.
1920, 5-31-2011)
068-08: SIGNAGE:
Illustrative signage concepts and anticipated locations of signs are on file in
the city (see specific plan map and concepts packet). While some variation may
occur between the actual built sign and the illustration on file, the nature
and intent of the signs should be consistent with the illustration. Locations
of ground signs within the development shall be generally consistent with that
indicated in the concepts packet. At the discretion of the sign administrator,
the locations of the signs may be modified without approval of a revised
conceptual layout, but in no case shall the number of signs exceed the maximum
indicated. If not specifically addressed within this ordinance, the regulations
and provisions set forth in title 9, chapter 18, "Signs", of the city code for
the regional commercial (RC), medium-density residential (RM) and high-density
residential (RH) districts, as specified for the parcel shall govern sign
design and placement.
   A.   Vegetated Landscape Beds: Vegetated landscape beds shall be
incorporated around the base of all freestanding signs in a size proportionate
to the overall size of the sign, as determined by the sign administrator. No
additional mounding of soil or berming shall be allowed to elevate the sign
except as required as part of a site plan for screening purposes (berms). In
situations in which the base of the sign would be at an elevation lower than
the adjoining street, soil may be added to raise the sign base elevation to
that equal to, but no higher than, the adjoining street pavement.
   B.   Visibility At Intersections: Signs shall not block pedestrian and
vehicular visibility at intersections.
   C.   Public Utility Easement: It is recognized that locations of signs are
limited due to the presence of public utility easements; however, under no
circumstance should a sign structure be located within the one to one (1:1)
trench area of any public utility easement. Although a sign structure may be
located within the balance area of an easement, placement of a sign within any
portion of an easement shall be avoided whenever possible. The developer of the
overall Galleria Development shall execute an indemnification-hold harmless
agreement releasing the city of any responsibility for damages, repairs,
removal or reinstallation of any sign(s) located within a public utility
easement.
   D.   Ground Signs: Ground signs shall have a noticeable base and/or column
element comprised of brick or stone. Ground signs throughout the Galleria
Development shall be a unifying element, consistent in design and materials.
(Ord. 1920, 5-31-2011)
   E.   Development/Tenant Identification Signs (Office/Commercial Parcels): A
maximum of thirteen (13) development/tenant identification signs which identify
the name of the development and/or the names of businesses within the
development shall be allowed within the Galleria Development boundaries in
accordance with the following:
      1.   When located a minimum of twenty feet (20') from the ultimate public
street right of way line or thirty feet (30') from the curb of a private street
(Stagecoach Drive north of Mills Civic Parkway) the sign structure shall be a
maximum of seven and one- half feet (71/2') in height and no greater than sixty
five (65) square feet in overall size. When located between ten (10) and
nineteen feet (19') from the ultimate right of way line or fifteen (15) to
twenty nine feet (29') from the curb of a private street, the sign structure
shall be a maximum of six and one-half feet (61/2') in height and no greater
than fifty five (55) square feet in overall size.
An exception shall be granted for the sign located on the northwest corner of
the intersection of Mills Civic Parkway and the northern extension of
Stagecoach Drive. The sign at that location shall meet a minimum ten foot (10')
setback from the right of way line of Mills Civic Parkway and a minimum thirty
foot (30') setback from the back of curb of the private street (Stagecoach
Drive north of Mills Civic Parkway). The sign structure shall be a maximum
eight and one-half feet (81/2') in height and no greater than seventy four (74)
square feet in overall size.
      2.   There shall be no limit to the number of tenants identified on such
signs; however no additional sign structure square footage shall be granted for
signs which contain both development and tenant identification.
      3.   The tenant copy area shall be comprised of individually attached
letters or a panel sign sized and treated (opaque vinyl or router face) to
minimize the amount of sign area that illuminates and to present the appearance
of individual letters. (Ord. 2167, 8-22-2016)
   F.   Directional Signage: To help facilitate vehicular movement and provide
direction to patrons to various public streets and private internal access
drives, directional signage may be permitted within the Galleria Development.
The primary intent of directional signage is not to draw people off of the
public streets but rather direct them back to the streets serving the
development and the overall Jordan Creek area. Sign locations are generally
intended to be at interior locations within the development, thus letter size
is intended to be only large enough for a vehicle in close proximity to read it
and not such that it is legible from the exterior of the property and/or public
streets. Said signs shall abide by city code size and design limitations for
"directional signage" within a regional commercial (RC) district with the
exception that said signs may be allowed identification of tenants, both
internal and external to the development (for example, Jordan Creek Town Center
may be indicated) if it is determined by the sign administrator that
identification of a tenant is necessary and beneficial for orientation
purposes. Tenant identification is not intended as a marketing tool as part of
lease agreements. Said signs may only be located on private property within the
Galleria Development; shall not be located within public utility easements and
shall be located outside of both pedestrian and vehicle vision triangles at
intersections. A sign permit shall be issued by the city prior to installation
of any direction signs.
   G.   Residential Identification Signs (Parcels F, G And H): One ground
monument sign identifying the name of the residential development shall be
allowed at each vehicle access drive into each development in accordance with
code standards for the designated zoning for the respective parcel.
   H.   Wall Signage: The regulations and provisions set forth in title 9,
chapter 18, "Signs", of the city code for the designated zoning classification
for the respective parcel shall govern sign design and placement with the
exception of the following:
      1.   Parcel A, buildings A-2 and A-3: Sign square footage allowances
shall be calculated based on one and one-half (11/2) square feet of signage per
one linear foot of tenant frontage which contains a public entrance(s)
(generally the south facing facade). Signage shall be prohibited to be located
on the rear facade of any building within this parcel.
      2.   Parcel K, buildings K-1, K-2 and K-3: Buildings within parcel K
shall be allowed two (2) square feet of wall signage per one linear foot of
tenant frontage which contains the building's primary public entrance
(generally, the western facing facade) as long as parcel K maintains public
street frontage onto Mills Civic Parkway through the legal tying or platting of
lot L-2 of parcel L with parcel K to create one lot ("record of lot tie"
agreement dated July 22, 2009; Dallas County recorders book 2009, page 12827).
If parcel K and lot L-2 of parcel L are platted or otherwise become independent
parcels, the tenants in lot K will be limited to one and one-half (11/2) square
feet of wall signage per one linear foot of tenant frontage which contains the
building's primary public entrance. A portion of a tenant's allowable wall
signage may be located on a secondary wall facade regardless if said facade
contains a public access door.
      3.   All PUD Parcels: For buildings which are less than one thousand
(1,000) square feet in size, the longest wall of such a building may be used
for the purpose of calculating total allowable wall signage regardless of which
building wall faces a public street. (Ord. 1920, 5-31-2011; amd. Ord. 2547, 12-
5-2022)
068-09: PEDESTRIAN ORIENTATION AND CONNECTION:
Pedestrian access shall be provided between all parcels within the Galleria
specific plan to permit and encourage pedestrian movement between parcels and
to and from the development versus utilizing motorized vehicles for access.
Whenever possible, pedestrian travelways should be separated from vehicular
traffic with landscaping, bollards, special paving, or any other feature which
identifies the pedestrian space. To further promote a higher level of
pedestrian awareness, the use of alternate paving materials to designate
pedestrian traffic areas from vehicular use areas and travel lanes shall be
required. The development shall provide bicycle pathway connections to South
60th Street, South 68th Street, and Mills Civic Parkway and bicycle parking
shall be provided within the development. (Ord. 1920, 5-31-2011)
068-10: LAND USE DESIGN CRITERIA:
In addition to the general conditions as stated herein, and subject to the
limitations imposed by the vehicle trip allocation table in section
068-14 of this ordinance, the following land use design criteria shall apply to
the areas as designated on the specific plan map on file in the city. The
specific plan map, on file in the city delineates parcels of the specific plan
as A through M. The following development standards and use regulations shall
apply to the respective development parcels:
   A.   Parcels A, C, E, I, J, K, L, M: The use regulations and provisions set
forth in title 9 of the city code for regional commercial (RC) district as
permitted (P) and permitted conditional (Pc) shall apply to any development
proposal for all property within these parcels unless otherwise noted in this
ordinance.
      1.   Land Uses: Uses within these parcels are those set forth in title 9
of the city code for regional commercial (RC) district as permitted or
permitted conditionally except as modified below:
         a.   The following permitted (P) uses shall have the following
restrictions:
            (1)   SIC 553 Automotive dealers and service stations - auto and
home supply stores (specifically, automotive tire dealers) - maximum of one
freestanding establishment which is not ancillary to a larger retail
establishment within the overall Galleria Development. No outside display or
storage of any kind shall be allowed.
            (2)   SIC 5999 Miscellaneous retail stores, not elsewhere
classified - no outside display or storage of any kind shall be allowed.
         b.   The following permitted conditional (Pc) uses shall be permitted
(P) with the following restrictions:
            (1)   SIC 554 Gasoline service stations, without repair and SIC 541
Convenience stores - a total of two (2) such establishments shall be allowed;
however, locations of such shall be limited to one on the north side of Mills
Civic Parkway and one on the south side of Mills Civic Parkway.
            (2)   SIC 526 Retail nurseries and garden stores - shall be limited
to one freestanding establishment which is not ancillary to a larger retail
establishment within the overall Galleria Development.
            (3)   SIC 0742 Veterinary services for animal specialties, no
outdoor runs - shall be limited to as an ancillary use as part of a larger
retail establishment.
            (4)   SIC 5999 Miscellaneous retail stores, not elsewhere
classified - pet and pet supply shops - shall be limited to one freestanding
establishment which is not ancillary to a larger retail establishment within
the overall Galleria Development.
            (5)   SIC 7542 Car washes - maximum of one freestanding
establishment which is not ancillary to a larger retail establishment within
the overall Galleria Development, shall be allowed, including within Parcel B.
            (6)   SIC 5999 Miscellaneous retail stores, not elsewhere
classified - no outside display or storage of any kind shall be allowed.
            (7)   SIC 60 Depository institutions - banks (specifically
freestanding ATM) - maximum two (2) freestanding machines that are not located
on the same parcel as a bank. ATM structure shall be complementary and
consistent with the overall Galleria architectural theme, materials and colors.
            (8)   Additional locations of the above listed uses may be allowed
with the approval of a permitted conditional (Pc) use permit by the appropriate
approval body.
         c.   The following permitted conditional (Pc) use shall be limited to
a maximum of two (2) within the overall Galleria Development:
            (1)   SIC 5813 Drinking places.
         d.   A maximum of two (2) of any of the following permitted
conditional (Pc) uses that are not ancillary to a larger retail establishment
shall be permitted (P):
            (1)   SIC 7538 General automotive repair shops.
            (2)   SIC 7534 Tire retreading and repair shops.
            (3)   SIC 7536 Automotive glass replacement shops.
            (4)   SIC 7537 Automotive transmission repair shops.
            (5)   SIC 7539 Automotive services not elsewhere classified
(specifically brake services).
            (6)   SIC 7549 Automotive maintenance services.
         e.   The following permitted conditional (Pc) uses shall be
prohibited:
            (1)   SIC 0752 Boarding services - kennels with outside runs.
            (2)   SIC 4522 Heliport/helistop.
            (3)   SIC 554 Gasoline service stations with repair.
            (4)   SIC 5999 Adult entertainment establishments.
            (5)   SIC 60 Depository institutions - banks (specifically check
and cash agency).
            (6)   SIC 6141 Personal credit institutions (a.k.a., delayed
deposit lenders).
            (7)   SIC 726 Funeral service including crematories.
            (8)   SIC 751 Automotive rental and leasing, without drivers.
            (9)   SIC 7533 Automotive exhaust system repair shop.
            (10)   SIC 7539 Automotive services not elsewhere classified,
except brake services.
            (11)   SIC 7699 Repair shops and related services, not elsewhere
classified - recreational vehicle repair services.
            (12)   SIC 7699 Repair shops and related services, not elsewhere
classified - miscellaneous automotive repair shops.
         f.   The following permitted (P) uses shall be prohibited:
            (1)   SIC 4783 Packing and crating - except when establishment is
of a scale and operation similar to a local post office and intended to provide
both mail and package drop off services to the general public and businesses on
a small scale; such small scale operations shall be considered a permitted (P)
use.
            (2)   SIC 01 Agriculture production - crops.
         g.   The following permitted (P) uses shall be considered permitted
conditional (Pc) uses with the following restrictions:
            (1)   SIC 5812 - Eating places with drive-thru - shall require the
approval of a permitted conditional (Pc) use permit when the number of such
uses within the parcels indicated above exceeds three (3) such establishments.
         h.   All permitted conditional (Pc) uses allowed per zoning or as
otherwise modified within this ordinance may be allowed with the approval of
the appropriate review body.
      2.   Setbacks: Unless otherwise required to be larger due to buffering
requirements, primary and accessory building setbacks from the exterior
property lines of the overall Galleria specific plan area shall be twenty five
feet (25'). If site layout is designed to meet the intent of the overlay
district through the creation of a street presence, primary buildings may
intermittently encroach into this setback; however, in no case shall any part
of the building be located less than fifteen feet (15') from the property line.
No minimum building setbacks from internal property lines or building
separation distances are required except as otherwise required by building and
fire code. No building shall be constructed in a buffer park.
      3.   Buffering And Landscaping: Buffering and landscaping requirements
shall be as noted in sections
 068-04 and
068-05 of this ordinance.
   B.   Parcels B and D:
      1.   Building B-1 Land Uses: The use regulations and provisions set forth
in title 9 of the city code for regional commercial (RC) and professional
commerce park (PCP) as permitted (P) or permitted conditionally (Pc) shall
apply unless otherwise noted in this ordinance.
         a.   All permitted (P) and permitted conditional (Pc) uses allowed
within the regional commercial (RC) and professional commerce park (PCP) zoning
districts may be allowed with the approval of the appropriate review body
unless otherwise noted in this ordinance.
         b.   The following permitted (P) uses shall have the following
restrictions:
            (1)   SIC 7542 Car washes - maximum of one freestanding
establishment which is not ancillary to a larger retail establishment within
the overall Galleria Development also including within parcels A, C, E, I, J,
K, L, M.
         c.   The following permitted (P) and permitted conditional uses (Pc)
shall be prohibited within the northern portion of Parcel B (building B-1):
            (1)   SIC 4522 Heliport/helistop.
            (2)   SIC 541 Convenience stores
            (3)   SIC 554 Gasoline service stations
            (4)   SIC 592 Liquor stores
            (5)   SIC 5932 Pawn shops
            (6)   SIC 5962 Vending Machines
               -    Unattended fuel pumps
            (7)   SIC 5999 Adult entertainment
            (8)   SIC 726 Funeral services - crematories
            (9)   SIC 7299-02 Massage therapy and bath houses
               (10)   SIC 7299-03 Dating and escort services
            (11)   SIC 7539 Automotive services, not elsewhere classified
            (12)   SIC 7699 Repair shops and related services, not elsewhere
classified
      2.   Building B-2 and Parcel D Land Uses: The use regulations and
provisions set forth in title 9 of the city code for professional commerce park
(PCP) district as permitted (P) or permitted conditionally (Pc) shall apply to
any development proposal for all property within these parcels as shown on the
specific plan map unless otherwise noted in this ordinance.
         a.   All permitted conditional (Pc) uses allowed per zoning or as
otherwise modified within this ordinance may be allowed with the approval of
the appropriate review body.
         b.   The following permitted conditional uses (Pc) shall be
prohibited:
            (1)   SIC 4522 Heliport/helistop.
         c.   The following permitted conditional uses (Pc) shall be permitted
(P) with the following restrictions (southern portion of Parcel B (building B-
2) and Parcel D):
            (1)   SIC 5812 Eating places, sit down and eating places with
takeout only, no drive-through - maximum one freestanding establishment that is
not ancillary to a larger use located on either of the above indicated parcels.
The establishment will need to abide by the traffic limitation established for
the specific parcel.
            (2)   SIC 7997 Membership sports and recreation clubs - use will
need to abide by the traffic limitation established for the specific parcel.
      3.   Parcels B and D Setbacks: Primary and accessory building setbacks
from the exterior property line of the Galleria specific plan area shall be
twenty five feet (25'). If site layout is designed to meet the intent of the
overlay district through the creation of a street presence, primary buildings
may intermittently encroach into this setback; however, in no case shall any
part of the building be located less than fifteen feet (15') from the property
line. No minimum building setbacks from internal property lines or building
separation distances are required except as otherwise required by building and
fire code. No building shall be constructed in the buffer park.
   C.   Parcels F and G: The use regulations and provisions set forth in title
9 of the city code for medium-density residential district (RM-12) as permitted
(P) or permitted conditionally (Pc) shall apply to any development proposal for
all property within these parcels as shown on the specific plan map unless
otherwise noted in this ordinance.
      1.   Land Uses: All permitted conditional (Pc) uses allowed per zoning or
as otherwise modified within this ordinance may be allowed with the approval of
the appropriate review body.
      2.   Density:
         a.   Parcels F and G collectively shall not exceed one hundred ninety
two (192) dwelling units with no more than eighty two (82) dwelling units being
constructed within parcel G (area south of future South 68th Street).
         b.   The street right of way acreage necessary for the extension of
South 68th Street through these parcels shall be included in the total acreage
when calculating density for the parcels. The street right of way ground is
estimated to be 3.5 acres.
      3.   Setbacks And Height Requirements:
         a.   Parcel F: Shall be in accordance with setback and bulk
regulations for the residential medium-density (RM) district as per title 9,
"Zoning", of the city code.
         b.   Parcel G: Shall be in accordance with setback and bulk
regulations for the residential medium-density (RM) district as per title 9,
"Zoning", of the city code except, the maximum building height shall be two (2)
stories. Setbacks for all structures shall be a minimum of twenty five feet
(25'); however, no building shall be located within the required one hundred
foot (100') buffer along the south and thirty foot (30') buffer along the east
without a written covenant from the adjoining property specifically reducing
the setback distance. The setback distance may be reduced to an agreed upon
distance that is no less than twenty five feet (25').
         c.   If site layout is designed to meet the intent of the overlay
district through the creation of a street presence, primary buildings may
intermittently encroach five feet (5') into the setback. No minimum building
setbacks from internal property lines are required except as otherwise required
by building and fire code. No building shall be constructed in the buffer park.
      4.   Buffering:
         a.   Parcel F And G: If at the time of platting, a single-family home
(s) still exists on an adjacent parcel a thirty foot (30') buffer park shall be
required along the eastern boundary of parcel(s) F and/or G. The buffer park
will not be required in the event the abutting property owner to the east of
the respective parcel provides a written covenant to waive the requirement.
         b.   Parcel G: A one hundred foot (100') buffer park shall be required
along the southern boundary of parcel G. Landscaping requirements shall be in
accordance with the requirements of a thirty foot (30') buffer park and shall
include significant earth berming of articulated heights no less than five feet
(5') to help screen the uses and road from the adjoining residential
properties. Additional requirements for berming and location of landscaping and
berming shall be determined at site plan development for parcel G to provide
for adequate screening and buffering of the Pheasant Ridge neighborhood.
Berming and landscaping shall be installed with platting or development,
whichever comes first. Due to drive spacing requirements from the intersection
of Stagecoach Drive and South 68th Street, an access drive from South 68th
Street into parcel G may be allowed to encroach into the one hundred foot
(100') buffer; however, said drive encroachment should be limited to the
minimal amount necessary. Adequate buffering and screening for the residents of
Pheasant Ridge must still be provided. Off street parking and the placement of
primary or detached structures shall not be allowed within the buffer.
         c.   Consideration Of Suggestions: At the time of development of
either/both parcels F and G, the suggestions contained within the petition
provided by the adjoining Pheasant Ridge Development as received by the city
council at their June 13, 2011, meeting, will be considered for application to
the proposed development.
   D.   Parcel H: The use regulations and provisions set forth in title 9 of
the city code for the districts indicated below shall apply to any development
proposal for all property within this parcel as shown on the specific plan map
unless otherwise noted in this ordinance. This parcel shall be no more than
eight (8) acres.
      1.   Land Uses: Uses allowed within this parcel are those set forth in
title 9 of the city code for the residential high-density (RH) district and for
the office (OF) district as permitted (P) or permitted conditionally (Pc) shall
be allowed except as modified below:
         a.   The following permitted (P) uses shall be prohibited:
            (1)   SIC 60 Depository institutions (banks).
            (2)   SIC 347 Coating, engraving and allied services.
            (3)   SIC 701 Hotels and motels.
            (4)   SIC 8069 Specialty hospitals.
         b.   The following permitted conditional (Pc) uses shall be
prohibited:
            (1)   SIC 58 Eating and drinking places.
            (2)   SIC 4522 Heliport/helistop.
            (3)   SIC 726 Funeral service, including crematories.
            (4)   SIC 8063 Psychiatric hospitals.
            (5)   SIC 8069 Specialty hospitals.
         c.   The following permitted conditional (Pc) use shall be permitted
(P) with the restrictions stated below:
            (1)   SIC 8351 Child and daycare services - maximum one such
establishment which is wholly located within a larger general office use and
limited to children of the office employees. The combined office use with
daycare will need to abide by the traffic limitations established for this
parcel.
         d.   All permitted conditional (Pc) uses allowed per zoning or as
otherwise modified within this ordinance may be allowed with the approval of
the appropriate review body.
      2.   Density:
         a.   Residential Use: A maximum of one hundred seventy four (174)
dwelling units shall be allowed within this parcel;
         b.   Office Use: In general, approximately forty thousand (40,000)
square feet of office use may be implemented in lieu of residential; however,
the site shall not exceed the traffic limitations established for this parcel;
         c.   Combination Of Uses: A combination of residential and office uses
may be implemented in this parcel; however, the combination of uses within the
site shall not exceed the traffic limitations established for this parcel.
      3.   Setbacks:
         a.   Buildings three (3) stories (40 feet) or less shall be set back a
minimum of twenty five feet (25'). For every additional story (12 feet of
height), the building shall be set back an additional ten feet (10').
         b.   If site layout is designed to meet the intent of the overlay
district through the creation of a street presence, primary buildings may
intermittently encroach into this setback; however, in no case shall any part
of the building be located less than twenty feet (20') from the property line.
Minimum building setback shall be as necessary so as to not impact vision
triangles and impede visibility of vehicle and pedestrian at intersections.
         c.   No minimum building setbacks from internal property lines or
building separation distances are required except as otherwise required by
building and fire code.
         d.   No building shall be constructed in the buffer park. (Ord. 1920,
5-31-2011; amd. Ord. 2482, 7-19-2021)
068-11: ALL AREAS TO BE PLATTED:
Prior to, or in conjunction with development or transfer of ownership of any
portion of the specific plan, said area shall be platted in accordance with the
city's subdivision ordinance to delineate within a plat the parcel to be
developed or sold separately or any portion thereof. Minimum street frontage
requirements may be waived by the city council provided each parcel has a
minimum of fifty feet (50') of frontage onto a public or private drive with a
minimum fifty foot (50') access easement of record. Lots without public street
frontage in accordance with city code requirements may be allowed provided the
frontage requirements of the code have been met by an abutting or surrounding
lot which is under common ownership, under an owner's association with all
properties within the master development plan being part of the association, or
there have been cross access easements executed which provide for the
unrestricted use and access of the drives for all owners within the
association.
Private streets shall be constructed in accordance with public street pavement
standards per the city requirements. (Ord. 1920, 5-31-2011)
068-12: STORMWATER MANAGEMENT:
A master stormwater management plan for the entire development which governs
the overall stormwater management of the development shall be submitted to and
approved by the city of West Des Moines. Specific stormwater management plans
demonstrating compliance with the approved master stormwater management plan,
on file with the city, will be required with the development of each portion of
the site and/or site plan. The specific stormwater plans shall be prepared at
the developer's expense, by a professional engineer licensed in the state of
Iowa. All specific stormwater management plans shall comply with the city's
applicable design standards for stormwater management existing at the time each
site plan is approved.
In addition, adherence must be given to title 7, chapter 8, article G,
"Postconstruction Stormwater Management", of the city code. The following is a
summary of the requirements of said ordinance; however the summary is not all
inclusive. Refer directly to the ordinance for more details.
At the time of site plan approval, the developer of the site planned property
shall execute a stormwater management facility maintenance covenant and
permanent easement agreement. The agreement shall provide for access to the
facility at reasonable times for periodic inspection by the city to ensure that
the facility is maintained in proper working condition and meets design
standards. In addition, the agreement shall identify the parties responsible
for maintenance of any stormwater facilities as well as plans for periodic
inspection and maintenance of said facilities to ensure proper performance. The
agreement shall be binding on all subsequent owners of land served by the
facility and subject to review by the city. The agreement shall be recorded in
the land record of the county at the time of site plan approval. (Ord. 1920, 5-
31-2011)
068-13: SANITARY SEWER SERVICE AND WATER MAIN EXTENSIONS:
The developer, their successors or assigns, if any, shall construct, at their
cost, all sanitary sewer service for service to the Galleria specific plan area
during the time the Galleria Development is being developed as required by city
of West Des Moines subdivision ordinance and the Des Moines metro standards.
The developer, their successors or assigns, if any, shall construct, at their
cost, all water mains for water service to the Galleria specific plan area as
required by West Des Moines waterworks during the time the Galleria Development
is being developed. This requirement includes water mains in the Galleria
specific plan area and in street right of way adjacent to the Galleria specific
plan. The size of all water mains shall be determined by waterworks. Water
mains shall be constructed along the entire street frontages of the Galleria
specific plan.
Nothing in this ordinance shall be construed to prevent the developer, their
successors or assigns, if any, from entering into private agreement(s) as they
may desire to share the cost of the water mains. (Ord. 1920, 5-31-2011)
068-14: VEHICLE TRIP ALLOCATIONS:
A traffic analysis was completed in November 2008, and updated in April 2022,
which evaluated existing land uses on developed parcels within the Galleria
Development and which evaluated the developer designated anticipated future
land uses for undeveloped parcels within the Galleria Development. The analysis
indicates that the Galleria Development as a whole is anticipated to generate
five thousand seven (5,007) P.M. peak hour trips. Based upon the traffic
analysis, the traffic allocation table specifies the allowable traffic
generation for each developed and undeveloped parcel in the Galleria
Development.
Development and redevelopment of each parcel and implementation of desired land
uses in the Galleria Development will be limited by the available number of
trips designated for each parcel as shown on the traffic allocation table, as
well as compliance with all applicable regulations within this ordinance or
city code. The traffic to be generated by each parcel within the Galleria
Development must be less than or equal to the traffic allocation shown on the
traffic allocation table for that parcel. The maximum traffic allocation shown
on the traffic allocation table shall be an entitlement to each parcel within
the Galleria Development. Traffic generation due to subsequent redevelopment,
expansion or change of use for any parcel within the Galleria Development shall
not exceed the maximum traffic allocation entitlement shown on the traffic
allocation table. Unless otherwise specified, the traffic allocation for each
parcel shown on the traffic allocation table shall not change. Parcels E-2, E-
3, E-4 and E-5 collectively may not exceed the number of vehicle trips shown in
the traffic allocation table for these parcels. The trips may be distributed as
necessary to each of these parcels at the time of initial site development;
however, the four (4) parcels together may not exceed three hundred eighty
three (383) trips.
TRAFFIC ALLOCATION TABLE
Specific Plan Parcel Plat #, Lot # Traffic Allocation
                                   (P.M. Peak)
Specific Plan Parcel         Plat #, Lot #               Traffic Allocation
                                                         (P.M. Peak)
A-1                          Plat 8, lot 3               100
A-2 and A-3                  Plat 8, lot 1               485
A-4                          Plat 4, lot 1               131
A-5                          Plat 8, lot 2               32
B-1                          Plat 9, lot 1               332
B-2                          Plat 9, lot 2               118
C-1                          Plat 3, lot 1               384
C-2 and C-3                  Plat 13, lots 1 and 2       112
D-1                          Plat 6, lot 1               86
E-1                          Plat 6, lot 5               62
E-2, E-3, E-4 and E-5        Plat 12, lots 1 through 8   383
F-1 through F-6, G-1 and G-2 Plat 1, outlot H            122
H-1                          Plat 5, lot 7               108
I-1                          Plat 5, lots 8 and 9        330
J-1                          Plat 5, lots 1 and 2        1,024
K-1, K-2 and K-3             Plat 7, lots 1 and 2        325
L-1                          Plat 11, lot 1              45
L-2                          Plat 7, outlot X            71
L-3                          Plat 10, lot 1              230
M-1                          Plat 5, lot 3               137
M-2                          Plat 5, lot 4               56
M-3                          Plat 5, lot 5               263
M-4                          Plat 5, lot 6               71
                            Total trips for development 5,007
 
(Ord. 1920, 5-31-2011; amd. Ord. 1925, 6-27-2011; Ord. 2515, 5-2-2022)
068-15: STREET RIGHT OF WAY:
All street rights of way required for Mills Civic Parkway, South 68th Street
west of Stagecoach Drive, South 60th Street, South 64th Street and Stagecoach
Drive have been conveyed by the applicant for the construction, reconstruction
and widening of adjoining streets adjacent to, or within the PUD. Right of way
for South 68th Street east of Stagecoach Drive to the eastern boundary of
parcels F and G will be required to be conveyed prior to or in conjunction with
the final platting of parcels F and G and prior to approval of an overlay
district site plan for either parcel F or G. Right of way requirements for this
portion of South 68th Street is anticipated to be one hundred twenty feet
(120') plus right of way necessary for turn lanes required to accommodate the
proposed development. (Ord. 1920, 5-31-2011)
068-16: TRAFFIC SIGNALS:
The cost of installing traffic signals as required pursuant to the policies of
the city shall be divided into the prorated requirements as follows:
Signal # Intersection Of Funding Source(s) Construction Timing
Signal # Intersection Of          Funding Source(s)    Construction Timing
1        South 68th Street and    50% applicant by     When traffic warrants
         South 64th Street        agreement and waiver
         South 68th Street and
2        private access drive     50% applicant by     When traffic warrants
         (western access into     agreement and waiver
         parcel H)
3        South 68th Street and    100% by adjacent     When traffic warrants
         Stagecoach Drive         property owner(s)
         Stagecoach Drive and
4        private access drive     100% by adjacent     When traffic warrants
         (WalMart and parcel H    property owner(s)
         drive)
         South 64th Street and
5        private access drive     100% by adjacent     When traffic warrants
         (WalMart and parcel E    property owner(s)
         southern access)
6        Stagecoach Drive and     City determination   Traffic signal installed
         Mills Civic Parkway
7        South 64th Street and    100% by adjacent     Traffic signal installed
         Mills Civic Parkway      property owner(s)
8        South 60th Street and    100% by adjacent     When traffic warrants
         Stagecoach Drive         property owner(s)
9        Stagecoach Drive and     100% by adjacent     When traffic warrants
         access into parcel G     property owner(s)
         Future South 68th Street 100% by adjacent
10       west of Stagecoach Drive property owner(s) of When traffic warrants
         and access into parcels  parcels F and G
         F and G
 
(Ord. 1920, 5-31-2011)
068-17: CONSTRUCTION OF STREETS:
With the exception of South 68th Street east of Stagecoach Drive, future
widening of South 64th Street between Mills Civic Parkway and South 68th Street
and future medians to close temporary full accesses, all streets within the
Galleria boundaries have been constructed. South 68th Street extension east of
Stagecoach Drive shall be constructed by the developer in conjunction with the
development of either parcel F or G, or when otherwise directed by the city to
install. Design of South 68th Street extension shall be determined upon
completion of a traffic analysis. (Ord. 1920, 5-31-2011)
068-18: PRIVATE STREET:
Stagecoach Drive, north of Mills Civic Drive to South 60th Street shall be a
private street. It is the intent of the developer and the city that this
portion of road shall not subsequently be conveyed to the city as a public
street but shall remain private in perpetuity. This roadway section shall be
maintained and function (including timely snow removal) in a timely fashion
similar to the public expectations of a public street. No road closure shall be
allowed without the permission of the city. Signage associated with this street
shall be procured and installed consistent with the "Manual Of Uniform Traffic
Control Devices" (MUTCD) and the signing/pavement marking conventions of the
city. Maintenance and replacement of private street signage shall be the
responsibility of the developer. (Ord. 1920, 5-31-2011)
068-19: ACCESS DRIVES:
The general location and type of access drives to parcels within the Galleria
Development are indicated on the specific plan map. Final locations and drive
configurations shall be reviewed and approved as part of a site specific
traffic analysis in conjunction with the site plan review for each lot.
The specific plan map indicates the ultimate intended types of accesses.
Temporary full access locations are currently allowed at the following
locations:
   A.   South 64th Street south of Mills Civic Parkway at the northernmost
drive (immediately south of lot 1, plat 10 and lot 3, plat 5);
   B.   South 64th Street south of Mills Civic Parkway at the southernmost
drive (access into parcels I and K);
   C.   Stagecoach Drive south of Mills Civic Parkway at the northernmost drive
(immediately south of lot 5, plat 6 and lot 6, plat 5);
   D.   South 68th Street south of Mills Civic Parkway at the midpoint of plat
7 (into parcel K); and
   E.   South 60th Street south of Mills Civic Parkway at the south boundary of
lot 1, plat 6.
All of these access locations are temporary and will be closed in the future
thus restricting turn movements to right in/right out movements only. Timing of
median closures shall be at such time as the city determines the level of
service requires closure of a specific temporary full access location.
Permanent medians will be installed or extended by the applicant to limit these
locations to a right in/right out turn movement only. Construction of the
closure measures shall be by and at the financial cost of the developer(s) of
the Galleria Development or as otherwise privately assigned. The design of the
medians and subsequent modifications to lane markings shall be approved by the
city prior to construction. Completion of the closure is to occur no later than
three (3) months from notice from the city, subject to weather conditions.
Signage associated with access drives shall be procured and installed
consistent with the "Manual Of Uniform Traffic Control Devices" (MUTCD) and the
signing/pavement marking conventions of the city. Maintenance and replacement
of private street signage shall be the responsibility of the developer. (Ord.
1920, 5-31-2011)
068-20: STREETLIGHTS:
The developer of the Galleria Development has entered into an agreement with
MidAmerican Energy for the installation of all streetlights abutting the
Galleria specific plan area with the exception of those streetlights along
public streets adjacent to parcels F and G. The developer will be required at
the time of platting of parcels F and G to provide the necessary agreement with
MidAmerican Energy, and payment for lights, if required, for the installation
of streetlights adjacent to these parcels. Installation of the streetlights
shall occur in conjunction with development of each respective parcel or sooner
if so desired by the applicant. Any additional lights adjacent to any road
within the Galleria Development deemed necessary to achieve the street lighting
standards set by the city shall be the responsibility of the developer. (Ord.
1920, 5-31-2011)
068-21: PUBLIC ACCESS EASEMENTS:
If not already provided, the applicant shall grant a public access easement to
the city allowing unrestricted public access onto the private portion of
Stagecoach Drive north of Mills Civic Parkway. (Ord. 1920, 5-31-2011)
068-22: VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES:
Any person who violates the provisions of this ordinance upon conviction shall
be punished as set forth in section 1-4-1 of the city code of the city of West
Des Moines, Iowa. (Ord. 1920, 5-31-2011)
068-99: LEGISLATIVE HISTORY:
Ord. 1567, 1-5-2004; Ord. 1920, 5-31-2011; Ord. 1925, 6-27-2011; Ord. 2167, 8-
22-2016; Ord. 2482, 7-19-2021; Ord. 2515, 5-2-2022.
PUD #69
ROBEL FARM
SECTION:
069-01: Legal Description
069-02: Sketch Plan
069-03: Conditions
069-04: Architecture
069-05: Open Space
069-06: Parking
069-07: Buffering
069-08: Pedestrian Circulation
069-09: Signage Regulation
069-10: Building Restrictions, Easements, And Covenants
069-11: Storm Water Management
069-12: Sanitary Sewer
069-13: North/South Public Street Connection
069-14: Traffic Reports
069-15: Special Assessments
069-16: Master Property Owners' Association
069-17: Lighting
069-18: Violations And Penalties
069-99: Legislative History
069-01: LEGAL DESCRIPTION:
A part of the north half of the southwest quarter of section 11, township 78
north, range 26 west of the 5th P.M., city of West Des Moines, Dallas County,
Iowa that is more particularly described as follows:
Beginning at the west 1/4 corner of said section 11; thence N83°06'20"E,
2428.62 feet along the north line of the north half of the southwest quarter of
said section 11 to a point; thence S06°53'40"E, 119.98 feet to a point on the
south right-of-way line of E.P. True Parkway; thence N83°08'32"E, 94.20 feet
along said south right-of-way line to a point; thence southeasterly along a
curve concave southwesterly having a radius of 25.00 feet and a chord bearing
of S48°30'39"E, an arc length of 42.19 feet along said south right-of-way line
to a point on the west right-of-way line of 81st Street; thence S00°09'50"E,
1169.34 feet along said west right of way line of a point on the south line of
the north half of the southwest quarter of said section 11; thence S83°04'21"W,
2569.50 feet along said south line to the southwest corner of the north half of
the southwest quarter of said section 11; thence N00°00'21"E, 1320.31 feet
along the west line of the north half of the southwest quarter of said section
11 to the point of beginning and containing 76.848 acres more or less,
including 1,000 acres of road right-of-way.
(Ord. 1573, 3-15-2004)
069-02: SKETCH PLAN:
The sketch plan document for the Robel PUD planned unit development is on file
in the city and included as a part of this document, identified as exhibit A,
for purposes of concept description and delineation. It is recognized that
minor shifts or modifications to the general plan layout may be necessary and
compatible with the need to accomplish workable street patterns, grades, and
usable building sites. However, the general layout as depicted by the sketch
plan, including the interrelationship of land uses to each other and associated
development requirements, shall be used as the implementation guide. Wherever a
conflict occurs between the written text contained in this document and any
notations depicted on the sketch plan, the written text shall prevail. The
sketch plan is a graphic representation of the property included in this
planned unit development identifying the approximate location and size of all
parcels for reference purposes for the ready identification of the applicable
regulations of this ordinance. As a note, the sketch plan is meant to serve as
a concept plan and is not meant to convey the approval for the location or size
of any buildings, designated parking areas, required number of parking spaces,
etc., or any other development specifications. These types of development
aspects are reviewed at the time that a site plan or permitted conditional use
permit application is submitted. (Ord. 1573, 3-15-2004)
069-03: CONDITIONS:
Whereas, title 9, "Zoning", chapter 9 of the city code, establishes certain
regulations and guidelines pertaining to the planned unit development district
and accompanying information required on plat and site plan documents.
Now, therefore, the following conditions, restrictions, and regulations are
adopted as part of this approval, to wit:
   A.   General Conditions: The sketch plan incorporates single-family
residential, medium density residential, high density residential, and
commercial/office/retail land uses which shall be distributed by area, types
and location according to the sketch plan and this ordinance.
In addition, the following general development criteria shall be integrated
into and made a part of this planned unit development district ordinance and
sketch plan approval:
      1.   All subdivisions, public streets, public streets rights of way and
general development shall adhere to the standards and design criteria set forth
in the West Des Moines subdivision ordinance and the Des Moines metropolitan
design standards as adopted by the city of West Des Moines, pertaining thereto,
unless otherwise stated within this ordinance.
      2.   Any regulation, standard, provision or requirement that is not
specifically addressed within this document that is regulated elsewhere in the
city code of West Des Moines, the requirements of the city code shall be
enforced.
      3.   In all areas within a 100-year frequency flood hazard zone or
adjoining drainageways or detention areas involving potential flood hazards, no
building shall be erected which has a lowest floor, including basements, less
than two feet (2') above the determined level of the 100-year frequency flood
event or floodproofed to the same elevation in accordance with the West Des
Moines floodplain ordinance, and no building shall be erected within twenty
five feet (25') of any major drainage, stormwater detention basin or pond.
      4.   The developer, their successors, and assigns, if any, shall pay all
construction and engineering costs for the interior development of the planned
unit development, in accordance with the current city's policies at the time of
development, as required by this ordinance, the subdivision ordinance of the
city of West Des Moines, and the Des Moines metropolitan design standards as
adopted by the city of West Des Moines, for all streets, storm sewers, sanitary
sewers, drainage improvements, detention basins, water mains, buffers and other
improvements within the PUD as may be required by the provisions of the city
code.
   B.   Land Use Design Criteria: In addition to the general conditions
requirement stated within this document, the following land use design criteria
shall apply to the development within the PUD. The following development
standards and use regulations shall apply to development within each of the
individual parcels, or portions of said parcel, as applicable:
      1.   Parcel A: All general use regulations and provisions set forth in
title 9, "Zoning", of the city code for residential medium-density district
(RM-11 and RM-12) shall apply to any development proposal for property within
parcel A, unless noted otherwise in this ordinance. The western 4.025 acres of
parcel A shall be designated as residential medium-density (RM-11) and limited
to a maximum of forty three (43) dwelling units. The remainder of parcel A
shall abide by residential medium-density (RM-12) regulations.
         a.   Setbacks: All residential structures and garages shall comply
with all general use regulations and provisions set forth in title 9, "Zoning",
of the city code for residential medium-density district (RM-12), unless noted
otherwise within this section.
      Unless otherwise required per city code to provide a larger front yard
setback, all buildings shall be set back a minimum of fifty feet (50') from
E.P. True Parkway and Century Drive and thirty five feet (35') from the
perimeter boundary of parcel A. Interior setbacks between lots within parcel A
shall be set back in accordance with title 9, chapter 7, table 7.3 of the city
code. If the property abuts a private street, any residential structure shall
be allowed to be located no closer than fifteen feet (15') from the back of a
curb or back of a sidewalk. Garages shall comply with a front yard setback of
twenty five feet (25'), to be measured from the garage opening to the back of a
curb or sidewalk whichever is more restrictive.
         b.   Buffers: A minimum thirty foot (30') buffer park shall be
required between parcel A and parcel D.
      2.   Parcel B: Land uses allowed within parcel B shall be permitted in
accordance with all general use regulations and provisions set forth in title
9, "Zoning", of the city code for the Residential High Density District (RH-
14), unless noted otherwise elsewhere herein this ordinance.
         a.   Setbacks: The building setback along 88th Street shall be reduced
by forty feet (40'). All other setback requirements for Parcel B shall comply
with the provisions set forth in title 9, "Zoning", of the city code.
         b.   Buffers: A minimum thirty foot (30') buffer park shall be
required along E.P. True Parkway, Century Drive, and 88th Street along with a
thirty foot (30') buffer park between parcel B and parcel A. All buffer parks
shall be planted in accordance with at least the minimum city code requirements
for a thirty foot (30') buffer. The provision, design, and location of a six
foot (6') fence shall be considered at the time of site plan development of
this parcel to determine if it is needed to provide adequate screening from
adjoining residential uses. Said fence shall be in lieu of minimum required
buffer plantings; however, vegetation may still be required to soften the
visual presence of the fence. Said fence shall be constructed with decorative
columns of brick or stone twenty four inches (24") or greater in width and
depth and located no greater than sixty feet (60') on center. Typical fence
post of the same material as the fence may be utilized as necessary in between
the support columns.
         c.   Outdoor Use Areas: Outdoor use areas, i.e., sitting and gathering
areas shall be encouraged. Light standards shall be limited to a maximum of
twenty five feet (25') and the use of any wall pack lighting without shields on
buildings shall be strictly prohibited. The provision of bicycle parking should
be considered to be provided.
      3.   Parcel C: All general use regulations and provisions set forth in
title 9, "Zoning", of the city code for residential high-density district (RH-
18) shall apply to any development proposal for property within parcel C as
shown on the sketch plan of the Robel Farm PUD, unless noted otherwise in this
ordinance.
         a.   Setbacks: All residential structures and garages shall comply
with a required front yard building setback of thirty five feet (35') along
Century Drive and a fifty foot (50') front yard building setback along 88th
Street. A thirty five foot (35') building setback will be required to be
maintained along the south and east boundaries of the parcel. The required
thirty five foot (35') building setback on the east side of the parcel shall be
measured from the easement line of the thirty foot (30') trail and sanitary
sewer easement.
         b.   Buffers: A minimum thirty foot (30') buffer park shall be
required along 88th Street. A thirty foot (30') buffer park shall be required
to be provided between parcel C and parcels A and B. The location and
installation of the required thirty foot (30') buffer park between parcel C and
parcels A and B shall be determined at the time a development plan is submitted
for either of these parcels. A twenty foot (20') buffer park shall be required
to be provided between parcel C and parcel D. The twenty foot (20') buffer park
will be required to be planted at two-thirds (2/3) of the planting requirements
of a thirty foot (30') buffer park. The twenty foot (20') buffer park will not
be allowed to overlap the thirty foot (30') pedestrian easement granted to the
city for purposes of the location of a public trail.
      The use of retaining walls will be permitted within the thirty foot (30')
buffer parks along Century Drive and 88th Street. However, any retaining wall
shall be constructed out of a decorative block, brick or stone material which
design visual interest and enhances the aesthetics of the site. Adequate
landscaping and screening materials will need to be provided to comply with the
intent of the buffer ordinance where the required berming cannot be provided
for any area of a required buffer park that is used for purposes of stormwater
detention and will be reviewed at the time that a development site plan is
submitted. Screening materials will also need to be provided in those areas
deficient of the required berming to screen any negative elements, i.e.,
parking, mechanical units, etc.
         c.   Park Pedestrian Access Easement: At the time of platting, a
thirty foot (30') pedestrian access easement shall be provided along the east
boundary of parcel C and dedicated to the city for purposes of providing a
public access from the public park located to the south of parcel C. The
maintenance of the accessway shall be the responsibility of the property
owners' association or acceptable alternative to the city. The required pathway
will not be allowed to be located within the required twenty foot (20') buffer
park located on the east boundary of parcel C.
      4.   Parcel D: All general use regulations and provisions set forth in
title 9, "Zoning", of the city code for residential single-family district (RS-
8) shall apply to any development of parcel D.
         a.   Setbacks: All residential structures and garages shall comply
with all general use regulations and provisions set forth in title 9, "Zoning",
of the city code for residential single-family district (RS-8). A perimeter
building setback of thirty five feet (35') shall apply to any structure within
parcel D. If the property abuts a private street, the front setbacks shall be
thirty five feet (35') measured from the back of the curb.
         b.   Park Pedestrian Access Easement: At the time of platting, a
thirty foot (30') pedestrian access easement shall be provided at the south
boundary of parcel D, as depicted on the sketch plan and dedicated to the city
for purposes of providing a public access from the public park located to the
south of parcel D. The maintenance of the accessway shall be the responsibility
of the property owners' association or acceptable alternative to the city.
         c.   Other Special Provisions: No driveway access from an individual
dwelling unit shall be permitted directly on 81st Street. The layout of streets
within this parcel shall be established with the platting of the property prior
to any development.
      5.   Parcel E: All general use regulations and provisions set forth in
title 9, "Zoning", of the city code for single-family residential district (R-
1) shall apply to any development proposal for all property within parcel E,
unless noted otherwise herein.
         a.   Setbacks: Building setbacks for primary and detached structures
as required by city code for the R-1 single-family residential district shall
be provided. Required front, rear and side yard setbacks for all lots shall be
measured from the interior or private side of a buffer park easement boundary
with the exception of lots 1 and 18. Because no driveway access is allowed from
81st Street, for these lots only, the setback required along 81st Street shall
be allowed to overlap the thirty foot (30') buffer park easement provided.
            (1)   Lot 1: The rear building setback line shall be located one
hundred thirty feet (130') south of the northern property line. The distance
between the front thirty foot (30') setback and this rear building line shall
make up the building envelope in which the dwelling structure and any attached
accessory structures shall be located.
         b.   Buffers:
            (1)   Double Frontage Lots And Adjacent Corner Lots: A minimum
thirty foot (30') buffer park easement shall be provided along the rear lot
line of lots 12-15, the northern lot line of lot 11, and along the east lot
line of lots 1 and 18. The buffer located along lot 1 shall terminate at a
point one hundred thirty feet (130') south of the northern property line of lot
1. Earthen berms in combination with the minimum landscape vegetation
requirements as specified in title 9, chapter 19, "Landscaping", of the city
code for the designated width of the buffer shall be implemented with the
exception of the buffer located along lot 1. Due to the overlap with a public
utility easement, this buffer shall not implement the overstory and evergreen
trees otherwise required. Understory trees and shrubs shall be implemented in a
quantity as required otherwise within city code. No structures, sheds, gazebos,
play structures, fences, etc., shall be located within any buffer park easement
area.
            (2)   Western Boundary Parcel E: No buffer shall be required along
the western boundary of parcel E including the west property line of lot 11.
      6.   Parcel F: All general use regulations and provisions set forth in
title 9, "Zoning", of the city code for residential medium-density district
(RM-12) shall apply to any development proposal for all property within parcel
F, unless noted otherwise herein.
         a.   Setbacks: All residential structures and garages shall comply
with all general use regulations and provisions set forth in title 9, "Zoning",
of the city code for residential medium-density district (RM-12), unless noted
otherwise within this section.
      A perimeter building setback of thirty five feet (35') shall apply to any
structure within parcel F. If the property abuts a private street, any
residential structure shall be allowed to be located no closer than fifteen
feet (15') from the back of a curb or back of a sidewalk. Garages shall comply
with a front yard setback of twenty five feet (25'), to be measured from the
garage opening to the back of a curb or sidewalk, whichever is more
restrictive.
      In the event that parcel F is developed for single-family detached
townhomes, a side yard setback of seven feet (7') will be allowed, with the
qualification that no part of any structure is closer than five feet (5') to a
property line.
         b.   Buffers: A minimum thirty foot (30') buffer park shall be
required along 81st Street, and a thirty foot (30') buffer park shall be
required between parcel F and parcel D. The location and installation of the
thirty foot (30') buffer park required between parcel F and parcel D, shall be
determined at the time a development plan is submitted for any of these
parcels. (Ord. 1573, 3-15-2004; Ord. 1671, 1-3-2006; Ord. 1953, 7-9-2012; Ord.
2036, 5-19-2014; Ord. 2408, 3-16-2020)
069-04: ARCHITECTURE:
   A.   Multi-Family Buildings: Architectural design for multi-family buildings
shall attempt to express a creative presentation of exterior building
materials, exterior details and texture, treatment of windows and doors, and
use of angles and multiplicity of planes within the wall and roof design to
lessen the plainness of appearance which can be characteristic of large
residential buildings. The use of building articulation that breaks up the
building mass into modules which reflect proportions similar to the single-
family residential dwellings on the adjacent parcels shall be required. Methods
used to create intervals which reflect and promote compatibility and which
respect the scale of the single-family detached residential dwellings include:
      1.   Facade modulation - stepping back or extending forward a portion of
the facade,
      2.   Repeating the window patterns at intervals equal to articulated
intervals,
      3.   Providing the porch, patio, deck, or covered entry to the
articulation interval,
      4.   Changing the rooflines by alternating dormers, stepped roofs,
gables, or other roof elements to reinforce the modulation or articulation
interval,
      5.   Changing materials with the change in building plane,
      6.   Providing a lighting feature, trellis, tree, or other landscape
feature with each interval,
      7.   Using paint and materials that blend with the single-family
residential areas and to reinforce the modulation or articulated intervals.
Asphaltic shingles shall be allowed provided the shingle materials are of a
heavier grade that produces a shake or shadowing effect and is consistent with
the color and materials used for the multi-family residential developments on
parcels A, C, and E. (Ord. 1573, 3-15-2004; Ord. 2408, 3-16-2020)
069-05: OPEN SPACE:
The minimum open space required to be provided for any parcel shall include
twenty five percent (25%) of the total area of the property, with an additional
ten percent (10%) of the total paved area for the site. Features such as, but
not limited to, pedestrian plazas, sidewalk connections, public gathering areas
with benches, landscape features, i.e., fountains, flower gardens, should be
considered to provide and promote a pedestrian orientation between adjoining
residential uses within the entire PUD. (Ord. 1573, 3-15-2004; Ord. 2408, 3-16-
2020)
069-06: PARKING:
Parking shall be provided for any development within any parcel shall comply
with the provisions of the city code, unless noted elsewhere in this section.
Additional guest parking shall be considered at the ratio of one space for
every fifteen (15) residential units and approved at the time of site plan
review for any development proposal for any parcel within the PUD, unless
specified elsewhere herein this ordinance. (Ord. 1573, 3-15-2004)
069-07: BUFFERING:
   A.   All development within the Robel PUD shall comply with the buffering
provisions of the buffer ordinance of the city code. In situations where this
PUD specifies the provision of a buffer park, the buffer may be included within
the setback.
   B.   The buffering of any negative elements, such as parking, drop off
drives, trash enclosures, utility or gas meter ventilation, heating, and air
conditioning equipment shall be required to be provided and reviewed with the
site plan for the project shall apply to any residential or nonresidential
development. These types of elements shall also be screened from the public
view and from adjacent residential properties through the use of landscaping,
berming and architectural features, or other measures determined to be
necessary to mitigate their effects. (Ord. 1573, 3-15-2004; Ord. 2408, 3-16-
2020)
069-08: PEDESTRIAN CIRCULATION:
A master pedestrian circulation plan shall be prepared and submitted with any
development proposal for any parcel within the PUD providing internal access
connections to minimize pedestrian conflicts with traffic movements to areas
within the PUD as well as providing access to public facilities, i.e., parks,
schools, etc. Pedestrian walkways and bike trails within the PUD shall form an
on site circulation system that minimizes the conflict between pedestrians/
bikes and vehicular traffic. The relationship between the proposed single-
family residential, the multi-family residential, the church site, if
developed, and the commercial uses within the PUD will be organized so as to
promote pedestrian travel and access within the various land uses within the
PUD and to the adjoining public facilities within the public park to the south
and the elementary school to the east of the PUD. (Ord. 1573, 3-15-2004)
069-09: SIGNAGE REGULATION:
Signage restrictions shall be imposed to limit and reduce the negative impacts
of sign clutter. Signage within the residential areas of the PUD shall comply
with the sign standards of the applicable residential district. All signs shall
comply with all provisions of the city sign code. All signage constructed as
wall signs on building fascias within the PUD shall incorporate aesthetic
features compatible with the overall character of the development. All wall
signs will be composed of solid individual letters attached to the building
fascia, or individual letters of anodized aluminum, galvanized metal
illuminated self-contained with translucent plastic faces set in anodized
aluminum returns and trim; panel signs with letters incorporated or painted
upon a wall or panel shall be prohibited. Exposed neon signage shall also be
prohibited. Temporary advertising or promotional signage attached to exterior
windows or walls shall be allowed only with an approved temporary signage
permit issued by the city under the provisions for temporary signage in the
city code. (Ord. 1573, 3-15-2004)
069-10: BUILDING RESTRICTIONS, EASEMENTS, AND COVENANTS:
The developer shall, with the approval of the city council, adopt building
restrictions, easements, and covenants pertaining to the property where the
developer and the city deem appropriate. (Ord. 1573, 3-15-2004)
069-11: STORM WATER MANAGEMENT:
Specific storm water management plans will be required with the development of
each parcel, demonstrating compliance with the approved Robel Farm PUD master
storm water management plan, on file with the city's public works department.
The developer will have said specific storm water management plans prepared by
a professional engineer licensed in the state of Iowa, prior to the submittal
of any specific development proposals within the PUD. All specific storm water
management plans shall comply with the city's current design standards for
storm water management. The method of storm water management and the storm
water conveyance system shall be determined and approved prior to the
development of any portion of the property within the PUD. (Ord. 1573, 3-15-
2004)
069-12: SANITARY SEWER:
Any proposed sanitary sewer main designed for the development of any parcel
within the PUD shall be required to connect to the existing sanitary sewer
manhole at 81st Street. (Ord. 1573, 3-15-2004)
069-13: NORTH/SOUTH PUBLIC STREET CONNECTION:
A north/south public street shall be provided with the development of either
parcel A or parcel F to provide a connection from E.P. True Parkway to an
interior public street within parcel D. The layout of the proposed public
streets within parcels A, F, and D shall be established with the platting of
the property prior to any development. (Ord. 1573, 3-15-2004)
069-14: TRAFFIC REPORTS:
A traffic report has been prepared for this development that outlines what the
ultimate paving requirements will be for the major roadways in the vicinity of
the Robel Farm development. Prior to, or in conjunction with the development of
any parcel, or portion of a parcel, the developer shall have the traffic report
reviewed by the city's traffic consultant to ensure that the provisions and
assumptions of the original traffic report are not negatively impacted or
changed by the proposed development. A written evaluation shall be submitted to
the city that shall identify what the impacts of the development of that parcel
will have on the existing street system and what improvements are necessary for
the safe and orderly movement of traffic in and around the area. (Ord. 1573, 3-
15-2004)
069-15: SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS:
The developer of the property within the PUD is responsible for the public
improvements that are necessary to serve the property. Those improvements
include the paving of public streets, sanitary sewer extension, water main
extension, storm sewer improvements and traffic signals. In the event that the
city deems that certain public improvements are necessary for the public
health, safety and welfare, prior to the developer's schedule of installation
of certain public improvements, the property may be subject to future areawide
assessments, including, but not limited to, the reconstruction, construction,
widening, and/or improvements to E.P. True Parkway, 81st Street, and 88th
Street, as shall be permitted and limited by the laws of the state of Iowa to
be observed by municipalities. (Ord. 1573, 3-15-2004)
069-16: MASTER PROPERTY OWNERS' ASSOCIATION:
With the first development proposal for the rezoned property as acted upon
herein and legally described in section 069-01 of this ordinance, proper action
shall be taken to establish a master property owners' association with said
property into the Robel property owners' association and all building
restrictions, covenants, and other associated conditions attached to the Robel
PUD shall be made to also apply to said property. The Robel property owners'
association shall be responsible for the ongoing upkeep and maintenance of any
privately owned common grounds, structures, signs, etc., as outlined in the
association documents and any other specific development improvements noted as
their responsibility in this ordinance. (Ord. 1573, 3-15-2004)
069-17: LIGHTING:
Wall pack lighting shall be prohibited. All lighting shall be of a cutoff type
to eliminate glare and spillover lighting beyond a property line.
Any lighting used to illuminate any off street parking or loading area shall be
so arranged as to divert the light away from adjoining residential uses or
premises in any residential district and away from the traveled roadway of
public streets; lighting levels shall be one foot-candle level at the property
lines and a photometric plan may be required by the city at the time of site
plan or permitted conditional use permit review. (Ord. 1573, 3-15-2004)
069-18: VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES:
Any person who violates the provisions of this ordinance upon conviction shall
be punished as set forth in section 1-4-1 of the city code. (Ord. 1573, 3-15-
2004)
069-99: LEGISLATIVE HISTORY:
Ord. 1573, 3-15-2004; Ord. 1671, 1-3-2006; Ord. 1953, 7-9-2012; Ord. 2036, 5-
19-2014; Ord. 2408, 3-16-2020.
PUD #70
WELLS FARGO WEST DES MOINES CAMPUS
SECTION:
070-01: Legal Description Of Property
070-02: Definitions
070-03: Required Plans
070-04: General Requirements
070-05: Land Use Design Criteria
070-06: Landscaping
070-07: Architecture
070-08: Signage
070-09: Stormwater Management
070-10: Street Right Of Way
070-11: Public Streetlights
070-12: Violations And Penalties
070-99: Legislative History
070-01: LEGAL DESCRIPTION OF PROPERTY:
The northwest 1/4 of the southwest 1/4 of section 13, township 78 north, range
26 west of the 5th P.M., city of West Des Moines, Dallas County, Iowa except
land deeded to the city of West Des Moines for street purposes by quit claim
deed recorded in book 2002, page 15031.
And
A parcel of land in section 13 and section 24, township 78 north, range 26 west
of the 5th P.M., city of West Des Moines, Dallas County, Iowa, that is more
particularly described as follows:
Beginning at the southwest corner of said section 13; thence N00°39'49"E,
1,310.44 feet along the west line of section 13 to the northwest corner of the
southwest 1/4 of the southwest fractional 1/4 of section 13; thence
N83°49'52"E, 1,301.94 feet along the north line of the southwest 1/4 of the
southwest fractional 1/4 of section 13 to the northeast corner of the southwest
1/4 of the southwest fractional 1/4 of section 13; thence N00°19'14"E, 1,237.75
feet along the west line of the northeast 1/4 of the southwest fractional 1/
4 of section 13 to a point on the south right-of-way line of Mills Civic
Parkway; thence N83°40'36"E, 1,309.77 feet along said right-of-way line to a
point on the east line of the southwest fractional 1/4 of section 13; thence
S00°22'07"W, 1430.91 feet along the east line of the southwest fractional 1/
4 of section 13 to a point of curvature; thence southerly along a curve to the
left having a radius of 850.00 feet, an arc length of 595.88 feet to a point;
thence S50°12'07"W, 190.31 feet to a point of curvature; thence southwesterly
along a curve to the left having a radius of 850.00 feet, an arc length 482.77
feet to a point of reverse curvature; thence southwesterly along a curve to the
right having a radius of 850.00 feet, an arc length of 980.55 feet to a point
of tangency; thence S83°45'21"W, 1262.85 feet to a point of curvature; thence
westerly along a curve to the right having a radius of 850.00 feet, an arc
length of 432.92 feet to a point on the west line of section 24; thence
N00°27'36"E, 327.48 feet along said west line to the point of beginning and
containing 136.3014 acres more or less.
(Ord. 1589, 8-2-2004)
070-02: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of clarification within this ordinance, the following
definitions shall apply:
BIOSWALE: A long, shallow, completely vegetated swale designed to retain and
slowly filter, absorb, and evaporate, as well as convey, stormwater through
dense vegetation comprised of wetland type grasses and other water tolerant
plants, shrubs, and ornamental trees.
CENTRAL PARK: The area generally at the center of the site inside the loop road
that is central focus of the campus with special landscaping, hardscape
elements, wet ponds, trails, an outdoor patio, an amphitheater, and other
outdoor site furnishings and amenities to serve the employees.
DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENT: The written agreement between Wells Fargo Home Mortgage
and the city of West Des Moines, dated October 29, 2003, which identifies the
obligations of each party and the general design regulations and guidelines of
the proposed Wells Fargo West Des Moines Campus.
DINING COURT/TERRACE: The secured, outdoor seating area located within the
central park space near the center of the campus.
HARDSCAPE: Nonliving materials used to augment the beauty or naturalness of a
landscaped area. Hardscape may include, but is not limited to: brick, stone,
rock walls, fountains, ponds, pools, planters or retaining walls, but it
excludes all forms of artificial and live vegetation.
LOOP ROAD: The main central private road ringing the central campus to which
all of the parking areas, driveways, and building drives are connected.
LOW MAINTENANCE TURF: A mixture of grass species reaching eighteen (18) to
twenty four inches (24") in height which are adapted to the climate in which
they are planted to reduce water and other natural resources consumption. Low
maintenance turf is controlled by periodic mowing, minimally twice each year,
and can be controlled for noxious weeds through chemical and mechanical means.
SPEED TABLE: A pedestrian crossing identified by a raised area of paving with
special paving treatments that is located within the roadway and specifically
designed to identify it as a pedestrian crossing and slow down vehicular
traffic. (Ord. 1589, 8-2-2004)
070-03: REQUIRED PLANS:
The following plans shall be required as a part of the processing of any
development application for any property within the Wells Fargo West Des Moines
Campus specific plan.
   A.   Area Development Plan: An area development plan must be approved by the
city council prior to, or in conjunction with, the review of the specific plan
for any property within said specific plan. No change to the area development
plan shall be made without approval from the appropriate reviewing bodies. An
area development plan is a plan that identifies infrastructure, planning units,
major street patterns, drainage and detention, utilities, shared public spaces,
vehicular traffic impacts, proposed densities, and land use assumptions. It is
intended to promote the communication and cooperation between adjacent property
owners and developers to encourage cohesive, unified development, and to
identify the anticipated phasing of construction, and parties involved.
On file in the city as exhibit A is the city council approved area development
plan for this property which is labeled as the west half of area 3 on the map
identifying the area development plans within the town center overlay district
guidelines as adopted by the West Des Moines city council. (Ord. 1589, 8-2-
2004)
   B.   Specific Plan: A specific plan identifies detailed development criteria
for each planning unit identified in the area development plan. The specific
plan will conform to the general intent of the area development plan and the
town center overlay district guidelines and shall be adopted by the city
council by ordinance. The ordinance shall constitute the specific plan for the
Wells Fargo West Des Moines Campus specific plan. On file in the city and made
a part of this rezoning as exhibit B is a specific plan map for the Wells Fargo
West Des Moines Campus. It is recognized that slight modifications and changes
to the map may be necessary due to changes in building footprints or details;
however, the intent is that the major elements of the specific plan shall be
adhered to and may not be altered without the approval of the city council.
Where the specific plan map and specific plan language conflict, the specific
plan language shall prevail. (Ord. 1589, 8-2-2004; amd. Ord. 1611, 10-25-2004;
Ord. 1663, 11-7-2005)
   C.   Preliminary Plat/Final Plat: Prior to or in conjunction with
development or transfer of ownership of any portion of the property within the
specific plan, said area shall be platted in accordance with the city's
subdivision ordinance to delineate within a plat the parcel to be developed or
sold separately or any portion thereof. A final plat for this property must be
recorded with the county prior to issuance of building permits for this site.
   D.   Development Applications: Site plans for parcels within the Wells Fargo
West Des Moines Campus specific plan must meet the intent of the approved
specific plan and shall be submitted to the city of West Des Moines for review
and approval prior to the development of any portion of the property within the
specific plan. Site plans, which meet the intent of the specific plan as
determined by the city staff, will be subject to administrative review and
approval by the director of community development. If the site is deemed not to
be in compliance with the specific plan, or if two (2) or more city council or
plan and zoning commission members request, the site plan will be subject to
review by the appropriate reviewing body. (Ord. 1589, 8-2-2004)
070-04: GENERAL REQUIREMENTS:
Requirements for all parcels within the Wells Fargo West Des Moines Campus:
   A.   Development Agreement: In addition to the requirements and guidelines
found within this ordinance, the development of this site must also comply with
the requirements and guidelines found within the development agreement. Should
a conflict arise between the development agreement and this specific plan
ordinance, the requirements or guidelines found within the development
agreement shall prevail.
   B.   Pedestrian Connections: Pedestrians on the Wells Fargo Campus will have
various opportunities to explore the site or find access off site. Within the
adjacent street right of way, the site will be completely ringed by a ten foot
(10') wide public pedestrian trail. Private sidewalk connections to this trail
shall be provided periodically along S. Jordan Creek Parkway, Mills Civic
Parkway, S. 68th Street, and Stagecoach Drive. Internal to the site, a five
foot (5') wide path will parallel the loop road, which will connect to the
central park path system. The pathways shall meander throughout the landscape
and topography, providing ADA compliant access to the various areas of the
campus. See exhibit B on file in the city for sketches and images of the
intended flavor.
   C.   Plaza Area: An outdoor dining area, called the dinning court/terrace,
will be located within the central park space near the center of the campus.
The dinning court/terrace will include a secured space made up of a water
feature, outdoor seating, pavement treatment, pedestrian lighting, and other
features that may be determined to be in concert with the intent of the area
during site plan review. See exhibit B on file in the city for sketches and
images of the intended flavor.
   D.   Screening: Loading docks, trash containers, storage areas, and other
service areas shall be integrated into the overall architecture of the site and
be fully enclosed or effectively screened from view through a combination of
walls, landscaping, and berming. All mechanical and electrical equipment,
transformers, HVAC equipment, satellite dishes, and antennas shall be
incorporated into the design of the building through the use of parapets,
screening walls, or other acceptable solutions as identified during the review
of the site plan. Screening materials shall be consistent with that used on the
primary structure.
   E.   Site Furniture And Hardscape Elements: On file in the city are
representations of the site furniture, as well as hardscape elements, that
shall be installed throughout the Wells Fargo West Des Moines Campus in the
central park, dining court/terrace, and other pedestrian areas. Slight deviates
of the site furniture are permissible; however, the intent is to provide
opportunities for pedestrian intermingling, rest areas, and outdoor dining
areas, etc. See exhibit B on file in the city for sketches and images of the
intended flavor.
   F.   Buffer Parks: Buffer parks shall be provided as required by city code
to buffer any adjoining dissimilar land use and shall be designed in accordance
with the minimum berming and planting requirements of the city code. The
landscaping required within the buffer parks shall be in addition to the open
space landscaping required for the site. No parking lots, fences, or structures
are permitted within the buffer parks. Sidewalks, trails, landscape features,
pedestrian furniture, and permitted signage may be located within the buffer
parks. A thirty foot (30') wide buffer park is required along the Stagecoach
Drive frontage to buffer the adjacent residential land uses to the south. A
minimum thirty foot (30') wide buffer park along the S. Jordan Creek Parkway
frontage from Stagecoach Drive north to the first full access drive will be
required at the time of any future development at the southwest corner of this
site to buffer the adjacent residential land use to the west, if so designated
at that time.
   G.   Lighting Standards: It is intended that lighting for each development
within the Wells Fargo West Des Moines Campus specific plan shall be designed
to provide a safe environment, yet mitigate light pollution onto adjoining
properties. The Wells Fargo West Des Moines Campus will have a family of light
fixtures ranging from parking lot lights and roadway fixtures to pathway
lights. See exhibit B of file in the city for sketches and images of the
intended flavor.
      1.   All lights shall be cut-off fixtures; no wall pack or flood lighting
is allowed. As part of the review of each site plan, a photometric plan must be
submitted. At the time of application, the plan shall demonstrate that light
levels fall at or below one foot-candle at each development's property line and
shall indicate the light levels at least twenty feet (20') outside the property
to confirm compliance.
      2.   In addition to cut-off fixtures, particular attention shall be given
to eliminate hot spots or light glare. To achieve this, additional measures may
include, but are not limited to, lowering parking lot light levels after
business hours, turning off lights not necessary for security purposes, and use
of landscaping for light screening.
      3.   The parking light fixtures shall be a maximum twenty five feet (25')
in height, the roadway lights will be a maximum of eighteen feet (18') in
height, and the pathway lights will be a maximum fourteen feet (14') in height.
Bollard lighting will also be utilized for pedestrian level lighting.
   H.   Private Internal Roads: The design of the private internal roads and
drives may include speed tables at pedestrian crossings and roundabouts to help
reduce speeds on the loop road and provide safe pedestrian connections from the
parking lots to the building entrances. See exhibit B on file in the city for
sketches and images of the intended flavor. These speed tables and roundabouts
shall be designed to fully accommodate emergency vehicle access through and
around the site. All internal roads and drives shall also accommodate the
turning radius needs of all fire apparatus and must be reviewed and approved by
the fire department prior to installation. (Ord. 1589, 8-2-2004)
070-05: LAND USE DESIGN CRITERIA:
In addition to the general requirements as stated herein this ordinance, the
following land use design criteria shall apply to the areas designated on the
area development plan on file in the city. The area development plan document
which is made a part of this rezoning action delineates parcels of the specific
plan as A and B (see exhibit A on file in the city). The following development
standards and use regulations shall apply to each of the following development
parcels:
   A.   Parcel A: The use regulations and provisions set forth in title 9 of
the city code for regional commercial (RC) district shall apply to any
development proposal for all property within this parcel as shown on the
specific plan unless otherwise noted in this ordinance. This parcel shall
contain no more than thirty six (36) acres.
      1.   Land Uses: Allowable land uses within this parcel are generally
those set forth in title 9 of the city code for the regional commercial (RC)
district. No commercial development for parcel A is proposed with this specific
plan at this time. Any future development of parcel A will require an amendment
of this specific plan ordinance. The specific allowed permitted (P) and
permitted conditional (Pc) uses will be established at that time.
      2.   Setback, Open Space, Parking, Landscaping, Etc.: No commercial
development for parcel A is proposed with this specific plan at this time. Any
future development of parcel A will require an amendment of this specific plan
ordinance. The specific requirements for commercial or office development on
parcel A will be established at that time.
      3.   Parking For Parcel B: Some parking for the office development
proposed on parcel B can be provided on parcel A, as shown on the specific plan
map (see exhibit B on file in the city), subject to the parking and landscaping
requirements of parcel B as stated in this ordinance. As a part of the
development of parcel B, parcel A shall be landscaped to the minimum open space
landscaping requirements of parcel B. The open areas may be planted with an
aesthetically pleasing, low maintenance turf.
   B.   Parcel B: The use regulations and provisions set forth in title 9 of
the city code for professional commerce park (PCP) district shall apply to any
development proposal for all property within this parcel as shown on the
specific plan unless otherwise noted in this ordinance. This parcel shall
encompass approximately one hundred twelve (112) acres.
      1.   Land Uses: Allowable land uses within this parcel are all those set
forth in title 9 of the city code for professional commerce park (PCP) district
as permitted (P) or permitted conditionally (Pc) except for the following
provisions:
         a.   The following nonoffice, commercial type uses listed as permitted
or permitted conditionally within the professional commerce park (PCP) district
shall not be allowed within this parcel, except as ancillary uses as provided
in subsection B1b of this section:
Childcare services (SIC 835).
Funeral service, except crematories (SIC 726).
Hotels and motels (SIC 701).
News dealers and newsstands (SIC 5994).
Physical fitness facilities (SIC 7991).
Shoe repair (SIC 725).
Sit down restaurants (SIC 5812).
         b.   Certain internal commercial uses that are ancillary to an office
park development and are intended to only serve the employees within this
parcel, including a bank, company store, coffee shop, salon, dry cleaner,
physical fitness facilities, cafeteria, and childcare services, shall be
allowed. These uses shall not be advertised or available to the outside public.
(Ord. 1589, 8-2-2004)
         c.   Certain external ancillary uses that are intended only to serve
the employees within this parcel and shall not be advertised to the public or
be available to the public except to the extent that they may be visible from
the public right of way to include a noncommercial garden and one migratory
bird nesting pole shall be allowed. The migratory bird nesting pole shall not
exceed fifty five feet (55') in height, will be similar in color to other poles
on site, will not be used to collocate any commercial or noncommercial antenna
or light fixture, will not include signage or advertising, and will be removed
if no migratory bird has nested on the pole during two (2) consecutive nesting
seasons. The pole may be reinstalled in later seasons with the same stipulation
that it be removed if not used as a nest during the following two (2) nesting
seasons. The setback for the pole will be equal to the pole height from any
property line. (Ord. 2071, 12-1-2014)
      2.   Setbacks: All building heights and setbacks shall be in accordance
with the setback and bulk density regulations of the West Des Moines zoning
ordinance for the professional commerce park (PCP) district unless otherwise
herein modified.
      3.   Open Space: The minimum open space requirement for this parcel shall
be thirty five percent (35%) of the total site area. The land area encompassed
by the internal private roads, as shown on the area development plan (see
exhibit A on file in the city), shall not be included in the total site area
for the calculation of the open space requirement.
      4.   Landscaping: The minimum required landscaping within this parcel
shall be based upon the amount of required open space. A minimum two (2) trees
and three (3) shrubs shall be required for every three thousand (3,000) square
feet of required open space with the following plant material size
requirements:
         a.   Trees:
 
10 percent 3 inch to 3.5 inch caliper
30 percent 2 inch to 2.5 inch caliper
Balance    1.5 inch caliper
Minimum height for evergreens shall be 6 feet and may be counted as a 2 inch
to 2.5 inch caliper tree
 
         b.   Shrubs:
      18 inches to 24 inches tall or 5 gallon size
      5.   Parking Lot Open Space: The open space requirement within the
surface parking areas within this parcel shall be a minimum of ten percent
(10%) of the parking lot area. This ten percent (10%) is not required to be in
addition to the thirty five percent (35%) of open space required for the total
site area of this parcel.
      6.   Parking Lot Landscaping And Screening: All parking areas shall be
landscaped to screen their visibility from public rights of way or from any
adjoining property outside the Wells Fargo West Des Moines Campus with the use
of evergreen plant materials and/or berming and shall be reviewed at the time
of review of the site plan for the development of the parcel. No parking space
shall be farther than seventy five feet (75') from a bioswale, landscaped
island, or landscaped open space area. Parking lot islands shall be a minimum
eight feet (8') wide and landscaped with an organic ground cover or plant
material - no rock or paving. Parking lot islands shall be installed on all
parking lot end rows and located periodically throughout the parking lots to
break up large expanses of paving and provide locations for landscaping and
shade trees.
      7.   Parking Lot Setbacks: The parking lot setback shall be a minimum
twenty feet (20') from any public street right of way. A zero foot (0') setback
shall be permitted from any internal adjoining lots within this parcel provided
those lots have interconnected parking lots. (Ord. 1589, 8-2-2004)
      8.   Parking Standards: The minimum parking space requirement for this
parcel shall be 4.5 stalls per one thousand (1,000) square feet of building
gross floor area. Parking stall and drive dimensions shall comply with city
code. All parking lots and drives, including private roads, shall be
constructed to city code including integrally attached PCC curbing a minimum
four inches (4") tall. Curbing is not required adjacent to the parking lot
bioswales. Instead, the bioswales will be edged with a six foot (6') wide
sidewalk and a definitive border of boulders in order to permit the
infiltration of parking lot surface water as desired. Angled parking located
within parking structures (parking ramps) may have parking stall dimension of
no less than eight feet nine inches (8'9") wide by seventeen feet one inch
(17'1") deep with a minimum eighteen foot (18') wide one-way drive aisle. (Ord.
1611, 10-25-2004)
070-06: LANDSCAPING:
The overall landscape of the Wells Fargo West Des Moines Campus will consist of
native and nonnative overstory, understory, shrub, and perennial plantings
forming a parklike setting. Grasses and flowers, including a low maintenance
turf, will be utilized to reflect Iowa's landscape heritage as well as reduce
the amount of turf maintenance on site. Rock or similar inorganic type mulch
shall not be considered an acceptable ground cover. Landscape standards will
comply with the West Des Moines zoning ordinance for the professional commerce
park (PCP) district unless otherwise herein modified. See exhibit B on file in
the city for sketches and images of the intended flavor.
   A.   Central Park Space: This central open space will be made up of large
brush strokes of plant material massing, providing vistas to the south view of
the Raccoon River Valley. Walking trails will connect pedestrians within the
space. Plantings will generally be informal in nature and of varying sizes.
   B.   Loop Road: The landscape that abuts the loop road will be informal in
nature, consisting of a variety of overstory and understory plantings with the
objective of creating a parkway feel.
   C.   Parking Lots: The parking lot plantings are designed to break up the
size of the parking lots and to provide reduced maintenance. Large bioswales
will be utilized to carry stormwater runoff from the parking lots and will
contain plant material that will provide color and shade. The smaller parking
lot islands will also support overstory trees and shrubs with little to no turf
grass.
   D.   Edge Of Campus: As the Wells Fargo West Des Moines Campus abuts
adjacent public streets, the landscape will buffer views to the parking lots in
an informal, parklike manner. The only formal aspect of the edge landscape will
occur at the main entrance to the campus. (Ord. 1589, 8-2-2004)
070-07: ARCHITECTURE:
The intent is to create a campus environment that engages exterior and interior
spaces to create a comfortable sense of community for its employees. The campus
includes three (3) 4-story office buildings, a commons building, a cafeteria
and training building, and a central plant building, which are all
interconnected with a two-story lobby/bridge. The campus will also include a
four (4) level, approximately one thousand seven hundred (1,700) stall parking
structure and a five (5) level, approximately one thousand nine hundred (1,900)
stall parking structure, and a small irrigation pump house (see exhibit B on
file in the city). The building facades will be similar in appearance and
materiality; however, they will vary enough to be discernible from each other.
It is important to provide the ability to experience the outdoor spaces without
compromising security of the facility. See exhibit B on file in the city for
sketches and images of the intended flavor. (Ord. 1991, 6-24-2013)
The architecture for all office development within this specific plan must also
comply with the "Architectural Guidelines For Office Development" as found in
exhibit B of the development agreement.
   A.   Image:
      1.   The architecture will complement the environment and express its
purpose.
      2.   Exterior materials will convey a sense of permanence consistent with
timeless quality.
      3.   The exterior and interior of the facility will be unified.
      4.   The environment of the facility will provide visual and physical
comfort.
   B.   Concepts: On file in the city are illustrative examples of the
architectural concepts for the various buildings within the Wells Fargo West
Des Moines Campus. All sides of the buildings viewable to the public street
right of way will be treated with the same level of architectural style and
detail.
      1.   Fenestration: The windows and door openings will form repeated
patterns and the details will unify the design.
      2.   Entrances: The main entrance and vendor entrance are easily
identified through the use of a two-story curved limestone wall. The employee
entrances will utilize canopies for shelter and identification.
      3.   Theme: Each building will have individual character while
maintaining a unifying theme.
      4.   Materials: The building materials are limestone; architectural
precast concrete with varying finishes and colors; architectural metal panels;
energy efficient windows, storefronts, and curtain wall; and metal sun screens.
      5.   Glass: The glass for the windows, storefronts, and curtain wall will
be selected to promote the linkage of the exterior and interior, while being
energy efficient.
      6.   Screening: The loading dock and HVAC equipment will be appropriately
screened.
      7.   Scale: Provide human scale architecture in scale with the main
building elevation at all exterior pedestrian access and use areas.
   C.   Appearance: The use of limestone, architectural precast concrete,
architectural metal panels, glass, and sun screens will be incorporated where
appropriate into the building design of the structure to enhance the physical
appearance and compatibility of the campus development. (Ord. 1611, 10-25-2004)
070-08: SIGNAGE:
All signage shall comply with the West Des Moines sign code regulations for the
professional commerce park (PCP) district, as set forth in title 9 of the city
code, except as herein modified.
   A.   Per section 9 of exhibit C of the development agreement of October 29,
2003, in addition to the one monument sign permitted per street frontage by the
aforementioned sign code, two (2) monument signs shall be allowed per full
access point off of all perimeter public streets. The size, setback and design
of these signs shall otherwise comply with the sign code regulations for the
professional commerce park (PCP) district.
   B.   In lieu of the conditions of section 9 of exhibit C of the development
agreement, and at the option of the developer, during the time the entire
property is maintained as a corporate campus for one tenant, under one
ownership, on a single platted lot of at least one hundred fifty six (156)
acres in size, the developer shall be permitted the following described
monument signage. Each monument sign shall be constructed of materials matching
and complementing the building surface and architecture as well as the
hardscape elements on the site. At such time that the property no longer meets
any of the conditions set forth above, the following described monument signage
shall not be permitted and the conditions set forth in section 9, exhibit C of
the development agreement shall be in effect.
      1.   Main Entrance Sign: One main entrance monument sign shall be
permitted at the main entrance drive off South Jordan Creek Parkway. This
monument sign shall be incorporated into a landscaped entry sequence and
feature for the site. The monument sign shall be maximum 26.25 feet in total
height and 15.5 feet in total width with a maximum sign face of nine feet (9')
tall by nine feet (9') wide. The monument sign shall have a minimum setback of
one hundred ten feet (110') from the public street right of way line with the
exception that where the right of way jogs into the property at the driveway
intersection, said setback may be measured as if there were no jog in the right
of way. (See exhibit B on file in the city for sign location, elevation, and
details.)
      2.   Mills Civic Parkway Entrance Sign: One Mills Civic Parkway entrance
monument sign shall be permitted at the main entrance drive off Mills Civic
Parkway. This monument sign shall be incorporated into the site's landscaping.
The monument sign shall be maximum 20.5 feet in total height and twelve feet
(12') in total width with a maximum sign face of 7.5 feet tall by 7.5 feet
wide. The monument sign shall have a minimum setback of fifty five feet (55')
from the public street right of way line with the exception that where the
right of way jogs into the property at the driveway intersection, said setback
may be measured as if there were no jog in the right of way. (See exhibit B on
file in the city for sign location, elevation, and details.)
      3.   Secondary Entrance Signs: One secondary entrance monument sign shall
be permitted at each of the six (6) remaining designated full access points off
the perimeter public streets. These monument signs shall be incorporated into
the site's landscaping. Each monument sign shall be a maximum fourteen feet
(14') in total height and fourteen feet (14') in total width with a maximum
sign face of nine feet (9') tall by nine feet (9') wide. Each monument sign
shall also be incorporated into landscaped earth berming to reduce the sign's
rear height to a maximum of ten feet (10') above grade. The monument signs
shall have a minimum setback of fifty five feet (55') from the public street
right of way line with the exception that where the right of way jogs into the
property at the driveway intersection, said setback may be measured as if there
were no jog in the right of way. (See exhibit B on file in the city for sign
locations, elevation, and details.)
   C.   The vehicular directional signs, parking lot banners, building monument
signs, parking garage entrance signs, and pedestrian directional signs as
detailed in exhibit B on file in the city shall be permitted. (Ord. 1663, 11-7-
2005)
070-09: STORMWATER MANAGEMENT:
The site is divided into six (6) drainage areas, with most of the stormwater
directed to the south, shifting the drainage of several acres of the site from
one drainage basin to a different drainage basin. The stormwater system is made
up of wet and dry detention basins. The site must comply with all city, state,
and federal regulations related to stormwater management.
   A.   There shall be submitted to and approved by the West Des Moines public
works department a master stormwater management plan for the entire development
which shall govern the overall stormwater management of the development.
   B.   A more specific, detailed stormwater management plan shall be submitted
to and approved by the city prior to any development on the site. The detailed
stormwater management plan shall be in accordance with the Des Moines metro
design standards and provide detailed information regarding stormwater overflow
if basin overtopping was to occur. A provision to route overflow water in a
manner that will not adversely affect and/or damage adjacent/downstream private
properties, create life/safety issues for the public, flood public streets and/
or damage public infrastructure shall also be detailed and provided. Said
details shall also include a summary that describes how the water will be
routed and a detail that includes swales, arrows indicating direction of flow,
etc.
   C.   A letter from the Iowa department of natural resources (IDNR) which
verifies that a dam permit is not required for the grading and development of
this site as proposed shall be provided. (Ord. 1589, 8-2-2004)
070-10: STREET RIGHT OF WAY:
Adequate street rights of way for the site's half of the adjacent public
streets, as determined by the city, shall be dedicated to the city. Any
necessary public utility easements and temporary construction easements shall
also be dedicated. (Ord. 1589, 8-2-2004)
070-11: PUBLIC STREETLIGHTS:
The developer of this site will be responsible for the costs of the necessary
streetlights along the adjacent public streets where not covered by the
development agreement. At the time of platting and development of the property,
the applicant is required to install streetlights where their developed
property adjoins a public street and where not covered by the development
agreement. Surety for any streetlights not installed will need to be provided
prior to the recordation of the final plat for this property. (Ord. 1589, 8-2-
2004)
070-12: VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES:
Any person who violates the provisions of this ordinance upon conviction shall
be punished as set forth in section 1-4-1 of the city code. (Ord. 1972, 1-7-
2013)
070-99: LEGISLATIVE HISTORY:
Ord. 1589, 8-2-2004; Ord. 1611, 10-25-2004; Ord. 1663, 11-7-2005; Ord. 1972, 1-
7-2013; Ord. 1991, 6-24-2013; Ord. 2071, 12-1-2014.
PUD #71
JORDAN CREEK CROSSING I
SECTION:
071-01: Legal Description
071-02: Definitions
071-03: Required Plans
071-04: Intent Of The Jordan Creek Crossing Specific Plan
071-05: Requirements
071-06: Landscaping And Buffering
071-07: Open Space, Plaza Areas And Streetscape Requirements
071-08: Architecture
071-09: Signage
071-10: Pedestrian Orientation And Connection
071-11: Land Use Design Criteria
071-12: All Areas To Be Platted
071-13: Storm Water Management
071-14: Street Right Of Way
071-15: Traffic Signals
071-16: Sanitary Sewer Service And Water Main Extensions
071-17: Construction Of Streets
071-18: Streetlights
071-19: Public Access Easements
071-20: Traffic Study
071-21: Violations And Penalties
071-99: Legislative History
071-01: LEGAL DESCRIPTION:
A parcel of land in outlots Q, R, S, T, U and W, Davis Estates plat 1, an
official plat, city of West Des Moines, Dallas County, Iowa, that is more
particularly described as follows:
Beginning at the SW corner of said outlot 'S', said point also lying on the
east right-of-way line of S. 68th Street; thence N00°42'04"E, 70.00 feet along
said east right-of-way line to a point; thence N44°17'56"W, 14.14 feet along
said east right-of-way line to a point; thence N00°42'04"E, 1016.48 feet along
said east right-of-way line to a point; thence N45°42'04"E, 14.14 feet along
said east right-of-way line to a point; thence N00°42'04"E, 160.00 feet along
said east right-of-way line to a point; thence N44°17'56"W, 14.14 feet along
said east right-of-way line to a point; thence N00°42'04"E, 20.49 feet to a
point on said east right-of-way line; thence southerly along a curve to the
left having a radius of 50.50 feet, an arc length of 79.31 feet and a chord
bearing of S44°17'31"E to a point of tangency; thence S89°17'07"E, 219.80 feet
to a point of curvature; thence easterly along a curve to the left having a
radius of 640.00 feet, an arc length of 187.57 feet and a chord bearing of
N82°19'07"E to a point of tangency; thence N73°55'22"E, 321.53 feet to a point
of curvature; thence northerly along a curve to the left having a radius of
35.00 feet, an arc length of 54.98 feet and a chord bearing of N28°55'22"E to a
point; thence N73°55'22"E, 70.00 feet to a point; thence S16°04'38"E, 15.00
feet to a point of curvature; thence easterly along a curve to the left having
a radius of 35.00 feet, an arc length of 54.98 feet and a chord bearing of
S61°04'38"E to a point of tangency; thence N73°55'22"E, 14.60 feet to a point;
thence S16°04'38"E, 70.00 feet to a point; thence southerly along a curve to
the left having a radius of 35.00 feet, an arc length of 53.71 feet and a chord
bearing of S29°57'46"W to a point of reverse curvature; thence southerly along
a curve to the right having a radius of 565.00 feet, an arc length of 144.69
feet and a chord bearing of S06°39'39"E to a point of tangency; thence
S00°40'31"W, 493.80 feet to a point of curvature; thence southerly along a
curve to the left having a radius of 685.00 feet, an arc length of 285.49 feet
and a chord bearing of S11°15'51"E to a point of compound curvature; thence
easterly along a curve to the left having a radius of 35.00 feet, an arc length
of 56.86 feet and a chord bearing of S69°44'33"E to a point; thence
S26°16'52"E, 70.00 feet to a point; thence southerly along a curve to the left
having a radius of 35.00 feet, an arc length of 55.92 feet and a chord bearing
of S19°29'10"W to a point of tangency; thence S26°16'52"E, 15.00 feet to a
point; thence S63°43'08"W, 100.00 feet to a point; thence westerly along a
curve to the left having a radius of 35.00 feet, an arc length of 54.98 feet
and a chord bearing of N71°16'52"W to a point of tangency; thence S63°43'08"W,
397.01 feet to a point of curvature; thence westerly along a curve to the right
having a radius of 760.00 feet, an arc length of 357.91 feet and a chord
bearing of S77°12'36"W to a point of tangency; thence N89°17'56"W, 170.32 feet
to a point of curvature; thence westerly along a curve to the left having a
radius of 35.00 feet, an arc length of 27.49 feet and a chord bearing of
S68°12'04"W to a point; thence N45°42'04"E, 0.36 feet to a point; thence
N89°17'56"W, 20.00 feet to a point; thence N00°42'04"E, 70.00 feet to the point
of beginning and containing 27.884 acres more or less.
(Ord. 1738, 3-26-2007)
071-02: DEFINITIONS:
COMPLEX SIGN: A monument sign which contains a recognized name for a
multibuilding development or area which is controlled or maintained by a
property owners' association. Complex signs shall not include individual tenant
identification.
HARDSCAPE: Nonliving materials used to augment the beauty or naturalness of a
landscaped area. Hardscape may include, but is not limited to: brick, stone,
rock walls, fountains, ponds, pools, planters or retaining walls, but it
excludes all forms of artificial and live vegetation.
LANDSCAPE ISLAND: A raised, unpaved area located within or protruding into a
parking lot or the center unpaved area of a traffic circle used to guide
traffic, separate lanes, limit paving, increase aesthetic quality and mitigate
environmental consequences of paved areas. The area of a landscape island is
measured from the back of inside curb to the back of inside curb.
LANDSCAPE POD: Small, individual, unpaved areas within a parking lot
incorporated to provide locations for vegetation thus increasing the aesthetic
quality and microclimate of the parking area.
LINEAR ISLAND: Island located perpendicular to and dividing two (2) back to
back linear rows of parking.
PROJECTION SIGNS: A sign attached to and projecting out from a building face or
wall, generally at right angles to the building. Signs may not project above
the building's roofline and may not project more than four feet (4') from the
building.
STALL ISLAND: Island which takes the place of a parking stall within a single
linear row of parking.
TERMINAL ISLAND: Island located at the terminus end of all linear rows of
parking. (Ord. 1738, 3-26-2007)
071-03: REQUIRED PLANS:
The following plans shall be required as a part of the processing of any
development application for any property within the Jordan Creek Crossing
specific plan:
   A.   Area Development Plan: An area development plan must be approved by the
city council prior to, or in conjunction with, the review of the specific plan
for any property within said specific plan. No change to the area development
plan shall be made without approval from the appropriate reviewing bodies. An
area development plan is a plan that identifies infrastructure, planning units,
major street patterns, drainage and detention, utilities, shared public spaces,
vehicular traffic impacts, proposed densities, and land use assumptions. It is
intended to promote the communication and cooperation between adjacent property
owners and developers to encourage cohesive, unified development, and identify
the anticipated phasing of construction, and parties involved.
      1.   On file in the city (exhibit I) is the city council approved area
development plan for this property which is labeled area 3 on the map
identifying the area development plans within the "Town Center Overlay District
Guidelines" as adopted by the West Des Moines city council. (Ord. 1738, 3-26-
2007)
   B.   Specific Plan: A specific plan, including exhibits A and B on file in
the city, identifies detailed development criteria for each planning unit
identified in the area development plan. The specific plan will conform to the
general intent of the area development plan and the "Town Center Overlay
District Guidelines" and shall be adopted by the city council by ordinance. The
ordinance shall constitute the specific plan for the Jordan Creek Crossing
specific plan. On file in the city and made a part of this rezoning is a
specific plan map for the Jordan Creek Crossing (exhibit II). It is recognized
that slight modifications and changes to the map may be necessary due to
changes in building footprints or details; however, the intent is that the
major elements of the specific plan should be adhered to and may not be altered
without the approval of the city council. Where the specific plan map and
specific plan language conflict, the specific plan language shall prevail.
(Ord. 1738, 3-26-2007; amd. Ord. 1965, 11-12-2012)
   C.   Development Applications: Site plans for parcels within the Jordan
Creek Crossing specific plan must meet the intent of the approved specific plan
and shall be submitted to the City of West Des Moines for review and approval
prior to the development of any portion of the property within the specific
plan. Site plans, which meet the intent of the specific plan as determined by
the City staff, will be subject to administrative review and approval by the
Director of Development Services. If the site is deemed not to be in compliance
with the specific plan, the site plan will be subject to review by the
appropriate reviewing body. (Ord. 1738, 3-26-2007)
071-04: INTENT OF THE JORDAN CREEK CROSSING SPECIFIC PLAN:
To create a vibrant, pedestrian oriented development that offers a mix of uses
focused on a central roundabout. The crossing and its mixture of uses creates a
live, work and play environment. (Ord. 1738, 3-26-2007)
071-05: REQUIREMENTS:
Requirements for all parcels within the Jordan Creek Crossing.
   A.   Walkways: Private walkways adjacent to buildings or plaza areas shall
be reviewed with the site plan and shall be designed to be wide enough to
accommodate outdoor seating areas for pedestrian street furniture, walkways and
street trees.
   B.   Outdoor Patios: Establishments that have an outdoor patio and that
serve alcoholic beverages are required to provide a barrier to public access
which consists of a visual barrier from the private establishments to public
spaces. The barrier specifications shall be determined at the review of the
development application and may include, but are not limited to, fencing,
landscaping and signage.
   C.   Screening: Loading areas, transformers, HVAC, and trash enclosures
shall be screened in accordance with City Code. Screening materials shall be
consistent with that used on the primary structure. Roof mounted HVAC screening
shall be incorporated into the design of the building through the use of
parapets, screening walls, or other acceptable solutions as identified during
the review of the site plan.
   D.   Street Furniture: On file in the City are representations of the street
furniture that shall be installed throughout the Jordan Creek Crossing
development. Although slight deviations from the illustrations are permissible,
the street furniture shall distinguish districts as well as primary and
secondary vehicle and pedestrian travelways.
   E.   Height Restrictions: Unless otherwise noted in this ordinance, the
height of a building will conform to the standard zoning provisions for the
Professional Commerce Park (PCP) District, with the exception of building
elements such as bell towers, clock towers or other vertical architectural
elements. These elements may exceed height restrictions to a maximum height of
seventy five feet (75') or as otherwise determined by the Director of
Development Services.
   F.   Lighting Standards: It is intended that lighting for each development
within the Jordan Creek Crossing specific plan shall be designed to provide a
safe environment, yet mitigate light pollution onto adjoining properties.
During the design review of each building, the applicant must demonstrate how
lighting will not adversely affect the adjoining properties.
      1.   Light fixtures shall be limited to a maximum of twenty five feet
(25') in height as measured from the grade to the top of the fixture.
      2.   All lights shall be cutoff fixtures, no wall pack or flood lighting
is allowed. As part of the review of each site plan, a photometric plan must be
submitted. At the time of application, the plan shall demonstrate that light
levels fall at or below one foot-candle at each development's property line.
      3.   In addition to cutoff fixtures, particular attention shall be given
to eliminate hot spots or light glare. To achieve this additional measures may
include, but are not limited to, lowering parking lot light levels after
business hours, turning off lights not necessary for security purposes and use
of landscaping for light screening. (Ord. 1738, 3-26-2007)
   G.   Parking Requirements: All parking areas shall be landscaped to screen
their visibility from public rights-of-way or from any adjoining property
outside the Jordan Creek Crossing with the use of predominately evergreen plant
materials and/or berming and shall be reviewed at the time of review of the
site plan for the development of the parcel.
      1.   Parking Lots: Parking lots shall be set back a minimum of thirty
feet (30') from property line.
      2.   Number Of Stalls:
         a.   Unless otherwise specified below, all office and commercial
parcels shall provide a minimum of one space per three hundred (300) square
feet of gross leasable area (gla) of building.
         b.   Residential uses within Parcels B and C shall provide at a
minimum 1.5 spaces either covered or uncovered for each unit. Residential
within all other parcels shall provide one enclosed parking space (either under
building or within a dedicated garage structure) per unit. In addition,
residential uses within all other parcels shall provide within the developing
lot the equivalent of one-half (1/2) of a parking stall per unit for guest
parking.
         c.   Hotels shall comply with a minimum requirement of one space for
each guestroom.
         d.   Land uses with "game courts" shall provide a minimum of eight (8)
spaces per court. Games such as bocce ball, bags, etc., that do not have a
"court" shall provide a minimum of eight (8) spaces per game type, regardless
of how many games are proposed within that game type.
         e.   At the discretion of the Director of Development Services, a less
stringent parking calculation may be used provided the applicant can
demonstrate a need for a parking rate less than the above, due to shared
parking or off peak uses. (Ord. 2244, 9-5-2017)
      3.   Cross Access/Parking Agreement: Developers of parcels within the
Jordan Creek Crossing must provide a cross access/parking agreement at the time
of platting to utilize shared parking.
      4.   On Street Parking: On street parking may be provided on all internal
private streets unless otherwise determined to be necessary fire lanes. Such on
street parking shall be illustrated on all development applications for all
parcels. On street parking on private streets may be counted toward meeting the
parking requirement. (Ord. 1738, 3-26-2007)
071-06: LANDSCAPING AND BUFFERING:
   A.   Buffer Parks: Buffer parks traditionally required by the City Code
shall not be required for this development. In lieu of buffer parks, along all
public streets except 68th Street, streetscape landscaping shall be provided
within the first twenty five feet (25') parallel to the roadways/travelways.
      1.   Streetscape Landscaping: The streetscape landscaping is intended to
provide a constant design treatment that enhances the travelways. A streetscape
landscaping plan shall be presented to the City for review as part of the
specific plan. Buildings or pedestrian elements such as patios, walkways or
design elements, may intermittently encroach into the landscaped area, however
parking lots may not. The plantings shall be installed with the development of
each site plan. Landscaping standards are as follows:
         a.   To calculate the number of required plants, divide the total
linear feet of street frontage by twenty five (25). For every twenty five feet
(25'), one tree and three (3) shrubs shall be required. Trees shall include
both deciduous and evergreen. The landscaping may be arranged in massing or in
a linear streetscape or a combination thereof.
         b.   Shrubs may be substituted for perennials at a rate of three (3)
shrubs equals to a solid perennial planting area of twenty (20) square feet.
         c.   Alternative concepts that meet the intent of streetscape
landscaping may be allowed at the discretion of the Director of Development
Services.
      2.   Landscape Walls: An articulated three foot (3') or higher berm shall
be required for areas adjoining a parking lot. The berm may be an earthen berm
or landscape walls. Landscape walls must adhere to the following provisions:
         a.   Walls constructed for the retaining of soil which are greater
than four feet (4') in height must be designed by an individual knowledgeable
and certified in structural engineering.
         b.   Walls over four feet (4') shall have one and one-half feet (11/
2') of horizontal terraces for every two feet (2') of exposed vertical wall
face. Exceptions to this requirement may be granted by the Director of
Development Services for unusual situations and to preserve existing vegetation
or landscape features.
         c.   Walls may be brick, individual decorative modular wall stone, or
natural stacked wall or field stone. Walls composed of landscape timbers or
other wood products are not desired due to the deterioration potential of the
material. Wood walls or other material may be used, with approval by the
Director of Development Services, in areas where views of the wall will be
minimal.
         d.   Vegetation shall be planted along all types of walls to soften
the visual impact, visually break up long expanses of the wall and to visually
anchor it to the site.
      3.   Water Features: Ponds, lakes, wetlands or other water features may
be placed within the streetscape landscaping given that a water feature, such
as a fountain and/or significant wetland plantings and edge treatments are
provided. Dry detention areas are not generally allowed in buffer parks,
however if it is determined by the director of development services that the
intent of the buffer park is met, a portion of the dry detention may encroach
into the buffer.
      4.   68th Street: Overstory trees shall be required along 68th Street to
help anchor the buildings. Tree grates and truck guards shall be required to
create a unifying theme. At the review of the site plan, view corridors will be
established to protect views of the plaza areas located along S. 68th Street.
   B.   Parking Lot/Vehicle Use Area Landscaping: The intent of this subsection
is to encourage extensive landscaping within parking lot areas, which tend to
have the greatest negative impact on developments, and to provide breaks in
what could be viewed as a sea of parking. All parking areas shall be designed
to create small, shared, aesthetically landscaped and screened parking lots
that are designed to function not only in the interest of accommodating
automobiles, but also in the interest of promoting safe pedestrian movement.
The following standards are in addition to the required buffer park,
streetscape or plaza landscaping requirements:
      1.   To calculate the number of required plants, divide the site's total
number of proposed parking stalls by ten (10). For every ten (10) parking
stalls, one tree and two (2) shrubs shall be required. Plants shall be located
in the parking lot within the terminal islands, stall islands, landscape pods
or linear islands. No substitutions are allowed for trees; however, shrubs may
be substituted at a rate of three (3) shrubs equal a solid perennial planting
area of twenty (20) square feet of perennials.
      2.   No parking space, within a single row of parking, shall be further
than six (6) stalls from a landscape island or pod.
      3.   Landscape islands shall be located at the terminus end of parking
rows. Islands shall be at least ten feet (10') in width by thirty eight feet
(38') in length for ninety degree (90°) dual parking rows and ten feet (10') in
width by seventeen feet (17') in length for single rows.
      4.   A landscape pod, located within the parking rows shall be at least
six feet (6') from the back of curb to the back of curb. (Ord. 1738, 3-26-2007)
071-07: OPEN SPACE, PLAZA AREAS AND STREETSCAPE REQUIREMENTS:
The intent is to encourage a sense of place through street level activity by
allowing the imaginative and efficient utilization of land and to develop a
sense of community by promoting year round pedestrian and outdoor activities at
the street level.
   A.   Open Space/Plaza Requirements: Each site plan shall include at least
one plaza, courtyard, or patio space, to be located near the building's entry,
which may consist of landscaping, seating, alternative paving, water features
and outdoor art. The size of the outdoor space shall be proportional, as
determined by the director of development services, to the size of the
building. If, during the review of the development application, it is
determined that several buildings could share in the creation of a plaza space,
a detailed agreement as to the responsibilities of the applicants shall be
submitted. These areas shall provide ample opportunities for pedestrian
interaction through activity areas, sidewalk cafes, and seating. At the review
of the site plan, the applicant must demonstrate how the plaza/activity area
design meets the following intents:
      1.   Creates spaces that allow for the day and evening interaction among
pedestrians;
      2.   Provides as many seating opportunities as possible through the
placement of moveable chairs, sidewalk cafes and planter/seat walls;
      3.   When possible, the integration of storm drainage and detention
should be designed to enhance the public space, which would include the
creation of ponds, waterfalls or landscaped waterways;
      4.   Creates an outdoor room, by limiting the interaction with moving
vehicles and partially surrounding the space by buildings, landscaping elements
and architectural features; and
      5.   Provides elements that enrich the space. Elements shall include, but
are not limited to, artwork, fountains, flowers, banners, and children's play
environment.
   B.   Central Plaza/Roundabout: To further define the roundabout area, as
noted on the specific plan map on file in the city, a consistent streetscape
design shall be applied. The streetscape requirements specifically apply to the
area surrounding the roundabout and should continue to the end of the four (4)
driveways. On file in the city are examples of the chosen roundabout design. At
a minimum, the area should have pedestrian seating, street trees, flowers, and
a focal point such as a fountain located in the center of the roundabout. The
central plaza including the features shown on the documents on file in the city
shall be installed no later than one year after the recordation of the final
plat. (Ord. 1738, 3-26-2007)
071-08: ARCHITECTURE:
The intent is to create building facades that are varied and articulated to
provide visual interest to pedestrians. Buildings should be proportioned and
defined by clear facade elements such as a base, middle, and top. Particular
attention shall be paid to transitioning between the residential and commercial
uses through the incorporation of three hundred sixty degree (360°)
architecture, pedestrian connections, and screening of HVAC and loading areas.
   A.   Architectural Concepts: On file in the city are illustrative examples
of the architectural concepts for all development within the Jordan Creek
Crossing. Although it is understood and preferred that not all buildings within
this development are identical, each building should have several elements that
carry through the established theme. All buildings shall use the following in
all building design:
      1.   Fenestration (door and window openings) shall be sized to the scale
of the building and detailed appropriately to the pedestrian theme. Use of
repeating window patterns and details are encouraged to unify the design.
      2.   Entrances into buildings should be easily identified through the use
of building design and detailing. Projected or recessed entryways, higher
rooflines, awnings or changes in building material are examples that can create
this effect.
      3.   Buildings should provide a unifying theme while maintaining each
building's individual character.
      4.   Materials should change with the change in building planes; however,
all materials should keep within the chosen theme.
      5.   Reflective glass or mirrored glass is discouraged. Efforts should be
made to use clear glass on storefronts, windows and doors to promote the
linkage of the interior and exterior of buildings.
      6.   All sides of all buildings open to public view should be treated
with the same level of architectural style and detail.
      7.   Trim and structural elements such as posts or columns shall be sized
to the scale of the building and detailed appropriately to the theme. When
used, masonry materials shall have the appearance of three-dimensional
elements.
      8.   Corporate franchise design, where the building functions as a
trademark, is strongly discouraged. It shall be permissible only if it
incorporates significant architectural elements which are compatible with the
overall theme and uniqueness of the development in which it is located:
         a.   Arches or recessed archways;
         b.   Architectural details such as tile work and moldings which are
integrated into the building structure and design;
         c.   Awnings, canopies or porticos;
         d.   Changes in material;
         e.   Massing;
         f.   Clearly defined, highly visible, multiple customer entrances;
         g.   Display windows;
         h.   Dormers;
         i.   Peaked roof forms;
         j.   Planters, outdoor patios or wing walls that incorporate
landscaped areas and/or places for sitting;
         k.   Raised corniced parapets over the door(s); or
         l.   Separate shops (or the appearance of separate shops) with
separate entrances placed in front of the larger building varying plate
heights.
   B.   Materials: The use of brick, acceptable stone or masonry shall be
incorporated into the building architecture on all sides of the structure,
unless the director of development services determines that the use of
alternate building materials enhances the physical appearance and accomplishes
a compatible structure with the overall development. Smooth faced concrete
block, tilt- up concrete panels, or prefabricated steel panels are prohibited
as the predominant exterior building materials.
   C.   Residential: In addition to the above stated design criteria, the
following shall apply specifically to residential developments. Garages or
accessory structures should incorporate architecture details with the use of
windows, doors and other facade detailing. Eighty percent (80%) of multi-family
units within a development must provide a balcony or patio of at least five
feet (5') deep. Fenestration (door and window openings) shall be sized to the
scale of the building and detailed appropriately to the pedestrian theme. Use
of repeating window patterns and details are encouraged to unify the design.
(Ord. 1738, 3-26-2007)
071-09: SIGNAGE:
Illustrative signage concepts are on file in the city. While some variation may
occur between the actual built sign and the illustration, the nature and intent
of the signs must be consistent with the illustration. The regulations and
provisions set forth in title 9 of the city code for signs shall be met unless
otherwise noted in this ordinance.
   A.   Landscaping: All signs shall incorporate landscaping of shrubs and
perennials to be located at the base of the sign. (Ord. 1738, 3-26-2007)
   B.   Complex Identification Signs (S-2 On Specific Plan Map): A maximum of
two (2) complex identification signs shall be allowed. Said signs, including
the decorative elements, shall be no greater than eleven feet (11') in height
and ten feet (10') in width. The sign panel (copy area) shall be no larger than
sixty four (64) square feet. Said sign may display the development name, logo
and address, and no more than four (4) tenants. Halo lighting or lighting
projecting back towards the sign structure shall be permitted; however no
illumination projecting from the face of the copy shall be permitted. Unless
otherwise allowed by the director of development services, signs shall be
situated in those locations as indicated on the specific plan map. Signs shall
be set back at least fifteen feet (15') from the street right of way line and
shall be so located as to not block visibility at drive intersections. See
schematic elevations for type S-2 signs on file in the city.
   C.   Business Identification Signs (S-3 On Specific Plan Map): A total of
three (3) business identification ground monument signs shall be allowed within
the overall Jordan Creek Crossing development. Said signs, including decorative
elements, shall not exceed five and one-half feet (51/2') in height and twelve
feet (12') in length and shall be set back a minimum of eighty feet (80') from
the street right of way line. The copy area of the sign panel which lists the
tenant names shall not exceed thirty two (32) square feet. The copy panel may
be internally illuminated; however the background shall be opaque with the
intent of only allowing the wording or logo on the sign to illuminate. In
addition, the building name may be identified on the sign structure; however,
the copy area for the building name shall not exceed six (6) square feet. The
intent of building identification is to allow for building name identification;
therefore, no duplication of tenant name and building name shall be allowed.
   D.   Business Directional Signs (S-4 On Specific Plan Map): A total of two
(2) business directional signs shall be allowed within the overall Jordan Creek
Crossing development. Said signs, including decorative elements, shall not
exceed six feet (6') in height and six feet (6') in length and shall be set
back a minimum of fifteen feet (15') from the street right of way line. The
copy area of the sign panel which lists the tenant names and directional arrows
shall not exceed twelve (12) square feet. The copy panel may be internally
illuminated; however the background shall be opaque with the intent of only
allowing the wording or logo on the sign to illuminate. In addition, the
building name may be identified on the sign structure; however, the copy area
for the building name shall not exceed six (6) square feet. The intent of
building identification is to allow for building name identification;
therefore, no duplication of tenant name and building name shall be allowed.
See schematic elevations for type S-4 signs on file in the city. (Ord. 1965,
11-12-2012)
   E.   Clock Tower (S-1 On Specific Plan Map): Development name identification
shall be permitted on the clock tower feature along S. 68th Street, if said
feature is incorporated within a landscaped plaza area. The clock tower shall
be no higher than fifty feet (50') including decorative elements. Signage may
only display the development name or logo; no tenant signage shall be allowed.
Halo lighting or lighting projecting back towards the clock tower shall be
permitted; however no illumination projecting from the face of the copy shall
be permitted. The allowable sign area for each side shall be no more than ten
percent (10%) of the sign face. The tower shall be set back twenty feet (20')
from the right of way.
   F.   Building Signage: Signage for buildings within all parcels of the
Jordan Creek Crossing shall be calculated as follows:
      1.   For ground floor or single-story tenants, a ratio of one square foot
of copy shall be allowed for every one linear foot of the tenant's longest
exterior leasable front.
      2.   Those tenants located on the second or higher floors shall be
allowed to use a ratio of one-half (1/2) square foot of copy for every one
linear foot of front.
      3.   Those tenants with multiple frontages shall be allowed, in addition
to the primary leased frontage calculation, to use one other leased exterior
frontage for additional sign square footage using a ratio of one-half (1/2)
square foot of copy for every one linear foot of secondary frontage.
      4.   The total square footage allowed may be located on the building at
the tenant's discretion and as allowed by the city code or this ordinance;
however, no more square footage of copy shall be allowed on any one facade than
that facade is long at a one to one (1:1) ratio (i.e., an exterior tenant front
which is 20 feet in length may not have more than 20 square feet of copy in
which to identify the tenant).
      5.   Lettering on windows and doors may not exceed four inches (4") in
height.
      6.   Building signage shall respect the residential tenants of the Jordan
Creek Crossing by minimizing light pollution into their residential spaces.
      7.   Wall signage located above a roof element shall be allowed at the
discretion of the director of development services provided that the signage is
located on a flat wall. For instance, signage located on and as part of an
architectural feature such as a tower. Signs placed on the roof are not
allowed. Wall signage above a roof element may use halo lighting or lighting
projecting back towards the wall face; however, no illumination projecting from
the face of the copy shall be permitted.
      8.   Wall signage shall be located directly above the tenant space for
which they identify; first floor tenants shall not place wall signage on second
or third floor walls.
      9.   Unless otherwise noted in this ordinance signage shall conform to
the sign codes.
   G.   Development Logo: Signage that displays the development's logo,
initials or name may be integrated into the architecture to further enhance the
character of the development and may be considered as part of the site plan
review. This signage will not count towards the allowable building signage.
   H.   Character: All signage constructed within the Jordan Creek Crossing
specific plan shall incorporate aesthetic features compatible with the overall
character of the development. All signs shall be composed of self-contained
individual letters with anodized aluminum returns and trim or solid routed
faced metal panels.
   I.   Pedestrian Projection Signs: Signs shall be allowed as a small,
pedestrian oriented sign of less than eight (8) square feet that projects
perpendicular from a structure. Signage shall have a maximum of five inch (5")
letter size.
   J.   Suspended Decorative Banners: Signs which attach to light poles or
other vertical features that consist of colors, greetings, or the development
name shall be allowed at the discretion of the director of development
services. Decorative banners must be located on permanent structures such as a
light pole and designed to withstand structural requirements of the building
code. Said banners shall not exceed twenty one (21) square feet in size. The
top of the banner should be located no more than fifteen feet (15') from the
ground with the bottom of the banner located no less than eight feet (8') above
the ground plane in height. In no case shall said banners display any tenant
signage or tenant logos.
   K.   Temporary Signage: Signs shall adhere to the City Code regarding
duration and size. (Ord. 1738, 3-26-2007; amd. Ord. 1965, 11-12-2012)
071-10: PEDESTRIAN ORIENTATION AND CONNECTION:
Pedestrian access shall be provided between all parcels within the Davis
Estates area development plan and the Jordan Creek Crossing specific plan to
permit and encourage pedestrian movement between parcels and to and from the
development, versus utilizing motorized vehicles for access. Pedestrian
travelways should be separated from vehicular traffic with landscaping,
bollards, special paving, or any other feature which identifies the pedestrian
space. To further promote a higher level of pedestrian awareness, the use of
alternate paving materials to designate pedestrian traffic areas from vehicular
use areas and travel lanes shall be required. The development shall provide
bicycle pathway connections to the street where possible and bicycle parking
shall be provided within the development. (Ord. 1738, 3-26-2007)
071-11: LAND USE DESIGN CRITERIA:
In addition to the general conditions as stated in sections above, the
following land use design criteria shall apply to the areas designated on the
area development plan on file in the City. The specific plan document, which is
made a part of this rezoning action, delineates parcels of the specific plan as
A through K. The following development standards and use regulations shall
apply to each of the following development parcels:
   A.   Parcels A through K: Unless otherwise provided for within this
ordinance, the use regulations and provisions set forth in title 9 of the City
Code for Professional Commerce Park (PCP) District and High Density Residential
(RH) as permitted and permitted conditional shall apply to any development
proposal for all property within these parcels as shown on the specific plan
unless otherwise noted in this ordinance. These parcels combined shall be no
more than twenty four (24) acres. (Ord. 1738, 3-26-2007)
      1.   Uses:
         a.   Permitted Uses: Permitted uses shall include the following:
            (1)   All permitted (P) uses allowed within the Professional
Commerce Park (PCP) and High Density Residential (RH) Districts as set forth in
title 9 of the City Code, except those prohibited by this ordinance shall be
allowed. (Ord. 1963, 10-29-2012)
            (2)   In addition to the permitted (P) uses of the Professional
Commerce Park (PCP) and High Density Residential (RH) Districts, the following
uses shall be permitted:
SIC Codes Permitted Uses
SIC Codes  Permitted Uses
   546  Retail bakeries
   5734 Computer and computer software store
   5941 Sporting goods stores and bicycles
   5942 Bookstores
   5943 Stationery stores
   5945 Hobby, toy and game shops
   5946 Camera and photographic supply stores
   5947 Gift novelty and souvenir shops
   5948 Luggage and leather goods stores
   5992 Florist
   5995 Optical goods stores
   60   Freestanding ATM (maximum 1)
   722  Photographic studio, portrait
   723  Beauty shop
   724  Barbershop
   763  Watch, clock and jewelry repair
   7911-Dance instruction and school services
   7922-Theatrical talent and booking agencies
   7941-Sports clubs, managers, and promoters, NEC
   7991 Physical fitness facilities
           Court games, such as bocce ball, hand ball, pickle ball,
   7999 racquetball, etc. - maximum of 1 such recreational facility within
           the development
   5999 Alcoholic beverage making equipment and supplies
   5999 Art picture frames and decoration stores
   7299-Facility rental and party planning services
   7299-Personal document and incorporation services
   7299-Clothing rental services
   7299-Personal financial services
 
(Ord. 1963, 10-29-2012; amd. Ord. 2244, 9-5-2017)
            (3)   All permitted conditional (Pc) uses allowed within the
Professional Commerce Park (PCP) and High Density Residential (RH) Districts
except those that have been prohibited by this ordinance may be allowed with
the approval of the appropriate review body.
            (4)   In addition to the permitted conditional (Pc) uses of the
Professional Commerce Park (PCP) and High Density Residential (RH) Districts,
the following uses shall be permitted with the approval of the appropriate
review body:
 
SIC Codes Permitted Conditional Uses
   5813Drinking places
   592 Liquor stores
   793 Bowling centers
 
(Ord. 1738, 3-26-2007)
            (5)   The above permitted and permitted conditional uses shall be
limited as follows:
   (A) Maximum of twelve thousand (12,000) square feet of bank uses.
   (B) Maximum of ten thousand (10,000) square feet of sit down restaurants (no
drive-throughs are allowed).
   (C) A maximum of one standalone drinking place (SIC 5813) shall be allowed
which is no greater than three thousand (3,000) square feet of gross floor
area. A standalone drinking place shall include a standalone building or one
tenant space within a multi-tenant building. The square footage of a drinking
establishment shall be counted within the square foot limitations of
restaurants. There is no limit on the number and size of drinking places that
are ancillary to a primary use. (Ord. 2244, 9-5-2017)
         b.   Prohibited Uses: The following permitted (P) and permitted
conditional (Pc) uses otherwise allowed in the Professional Commerce Park (PCP)
and High Density Residential (RH) Districts shall be prohibited:
 
SIC Codes      Prohibited Uses
   42       Trucking and warehousing
   48       Communications
   49       Electric, gas and sanitary services
   8062 and All hospitals
8063 series
 
      2.   Setbacks: Primary and accessory building setbacks from the Jordan
Creek Crossing exterior property lines shall be twenty five feet (25') with the
exception of buildings along S. 68th Street which shall be set back fifteen
feet (15'). Primary buildings may intermittently encroach into this setback if
the buildings are designed to meet the intent of the overlay district through
the creation of a street presence; however in no case shall the building be
located less than fifteen feet (15') from the exterior property line. Buildings
shall be set back zero feet (0') from any internal parcel or property line and
zero feet (0') from any other building, unless otherwise restricted by Building
or Fire Codes. No building shall be constructed in the buffer park. (Ord. 1738,
3-26-2007)
071-12: ALL AREAS TO BE PLATTED:
Prior to, or in conjunction with development or transfer of ownership of any
portion of the specific plan, said area shall be platted in accordance with the
City's subdivision ordinance to delineate within a plat the parcel to be
developed or sold separately or any portion thereof. Lots without public street
frontage, in accordance with the City Code requirements, may be allowed
provided the frontage requirements of the Code have been met by an abutting or
surrounding lot which is under common ownership under any owners' association
with all properties within the master development plan being part of the
association, or there have been cross parking and access easements executed
which provide for the unrestricted use and access of the drives and parking for
all owners within the association. Any such private street shall be constructed
in accordance with public street pavement standards per the City requirements.
(Ord. 1738, 3-26-2007)
071-13: STORMWATER MANAGEMENT:
There shall be submitted to and approved by the West Des Moines Public Works
Department, a master stormwater management plan for the entire development
which shall govern the overall stormwater management of the development.
Specific stormwater management plans will be required with the development of
each site plan, demonstrating compliance with the approved Jordan Creek
Crossing master stormwater management plan, on file with the City's Public
Works Department. The developer will have said specific stormwater management
plans prepared by a professional engineer licensed in the State of Iowa. All
specific stormwater management plans shall comply with the City's current
design standards for stormwater management. The method of stormwater management
and the stormwater conveyance system shall be determined and approved prior to
the development of any site plans within the specific plan area. (Ord. 1738, 3-
26-2007)
071-14: STREET RIGHT-OF-WAY:
Adequate street rights-of-way, as determined by the Department of Public Works
and the approved traffic report, for 64th Street, Wistful Vista Drive and
Coachlight Drive shall be deeded by the applicant to the city. The right of way
shall be deeded to the city as follows:
   A.   One hundred feet (100') of right of way for 64th Street plus additional
right of way as necessary for the intersections.
   B.   One hundred feet (100') of right of way for Wistful Vista Drive plus
additional right of way as necessary for the intersections.
   C.   One hundred feet (100') of right of way for Coachlight Drive plus
additional right of way as necessary for the intersections. (Ord. 1738, 3-26-
2007)
071-15: TRAFFIC SIGNALS:
The cost of installing traffic signals as required pursuant to the policies of
the city shall be divided into the prorated requirements as follows:
   A.   S. 64th Street and Coachlight Drive: As part of this project, applicant
is responsible for installation to a five (5) lane cross section on all legs.
   B.   S. 64th Street and Wistful Vista Drive: To be installed by the city
when deemed necessary based on warrants. Full cost will be assessed by the city
per agreement and waiver.
   C.   S. 60th Street and Wistful Vista Drive: Executing an agreement and
waiver for the proportionate share of the traffic signals based on the final
traffic study's traffic volume located at the intersection of S. 60th Street
and Wistful Vista Drive. The installation of this signal shall be deferred
until traffic warrants as determined by the city.
   D.   S. 60th Street and Coachlight: Executing an agreement and waiver for
one-half (1/2) the cost of the traffic signals located at the intersection of
S. 60th Street and Coachlight Drive. The installation of this signal shall be
deferred until traffic warrants as determined by the city.
   E.   S. 68th Street and Wistful Vista Drive: As part of this project,
applicant is responsible for installation of a signal head for the second
southbound to eastbound dual left turn.
   F.   S. 68th Street and Coachlight Vista Drive: As part of this project,
applicant is responsible for installation of a signal head for the second
southbound to eastbound dual left turn. (Ord. 1738, 3-26-2007)
071-16: SANITARY SEWER SERVICE AND WATER MAIN EXTENSIONS:
The developer, their successors or assigns, if any, shall construct, at their
cost, all sanitary sewer service for service to the Jordan Creek Crossing
specific plan during the time the specific plan is being developed as required
by city of West Des Moines subdivision ordinance and the Des Moines metro
standards.
The developer, their successors or assigns, if any, shall construct, at their
cost, all water mains for water service to the Jordan Creek Crossing specific
plan as required by West Des Moines waterworks during the time the site plan is
being developed. This requirement includes water mains in the specific plan and
in street right of way adjacent to the specific plan. The sizes of all water
mains shall be determined by the waterworks. Water mains shall be constructed
along the entire street frontages of the specific plan.
Nothing in this ordinance shall be construed to prevent the developer, their
successors or assigns, if any, from entering into private agreement(s) as they
may desire to share the cost of the water mains. (Ord. 1738, 3-26-2007)
071-17: CONSTRUCTION OF STREETS:
   A.   Comply with the findings of the final traffic study.
   B.   S. 64th Street may either be initially constructed as a three (3) lane
street or a five (5) lane street with two-way left turn lanes. If the three (3)
lane initial street is chosen, all the design details must incorporate the
possible widening of S. 64th Street to a five (5) lane section in the future.
These details include, but are not limited to, right of way, storm sewer
location, sanitary sewer location, water main location, utility location, etc.
The full cost of all necessary future widening for S. 64th Street between
Coachlight Drive and Wistful Vista Drive will be assessed by the city per
agreement and waiver.
   C.   All full access driveway locations will need to align with future
driveways on the other side of the public streets and shall be coordinated with
and concurrence given by abutting property owners. The proximity of the
driveways to the public street intersections need to be such that there is a
free movement of traffic on the public street system. Driveways shall intersect
the public street at ninety degree (90°) angles if possible. (Ord. 1738, 3-26-
2007)
071-18: STREETLIGHTS:
At the time of platting, the applicant shall enter into an agreement with Mid
American Energy for the installation of all streetlights abutting the Jordan
Creek Crossing specific plan. At such time that specific site plans are
developed within the specific plan area, the applicant proposing a site plan(s)
shall be responsible for the installation of all necessary public streetlights
within and adjacent to the specific site plan area. (Ord. 1738, 3-26-2007)
071-19: PUBLIC ACCESS EASEMENTS:
A public access easement shall be granted to the City at the time of platting
allowing unrestricted public access onto the proposed private drives of Jordan
Crossing specific plan. (Ord. 1738, 3-26-2007)
071-20: TRAFFIC STUDY:
A traffic study has been commissioned by the applicant to study areawide
traffic management which includes the Jordan Creek Crossing specific plan. Per
the traffic analysis completed by Snyder & Associates (2006), Jordan Creek
Crossing has been allocated nine thousand two hundred eighty six (9,286)
average daily trips (ADT); six hundred fifty one (651) A.M. peak; and one
thousand five hundred one (1,501) P.M. peak vehicle trips. As development
proposals are approved, the number of vehicle trips generated by the proposed
development (based upon the number of square feet of a proposed specific use or
number of dwelling units, in conjunction with any parameters established in the
traffic analysis) will be subtracted from the overall total trips allocated to
the development. Approval of this proposed specific plan does not constitute a
guarantee that the proposed plan can be implemented as indicated. Development
of all parcels and implementation of desired land uses, including specific high
traffic generating tenants, will be limited by the available number of trips.
Should anticipated traffic exceed the total trips allocated for the Jordan
Creek Crossing development prior to full build out, further development of
parcels may be limited or prohibited. Alternate uses to those planned for
within the traffic analysis and approved as part of the Jordan Creek Crossing
specific plan ordinance may be allowed, following completion of an amendment to
the approved traffic study analyzing the proposed alternative and appropriate
City approval of an amendment to the respective specific plan ordinance and/or
map, if necessary, if the existing uses and the proposed change(s) collectively
do not exceed the nine thousand two hundred eighty six (9,286) average daily
trips (ADT); six hundred fifty one (651) A.M. peak; and one thousand five
hundred one (1,501) P.M. peak trips. (Ord. 1738, 3-26-2007)
071-21: VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES:
Any person who violates the provisions of this ordinance upon conviction shall
be punished as set forth in section 1-4-1 of the City Code. (Ord. 1738, 3-26-
2007)
071-99: LEGISLATIVE HISTORY:
Ord. 1608, 10-25-2004; Ord. 1738, 3-26-2007; Ord. 1963, 10-29-2012; Ord. 1965,
11-12-2012; Ord. 2244, 9-5-2017.
PUD #72
SOUTH MAPLE GROVE
SECTION:
072-01: Legal Description
072-02: Sketch Plan
072-03: Conditions
072-04: Multi-Family Buildings And Development
072-05: Open Space
072-06: Buffering
072-07: Pedestrian Circulation
072-08: Park Land Dedication
072-09: Signage Regulation
072-10: Property Owners' Association And Building Restrictions, Easements, And
Covenants
072-11: Storm Water Management
072-12: Traffic Reports
072-13: Phasing; Related Public Street Improvements And Right Of Way Dedication
072-14: Access Management
072-15: Realignment And Vacation Of 88th Street
072-16: Special Assessments
072-17: 92nd Street Railroad Crossing
072-18: Lighting
072-19: Violations And Penalties
072-99: Legislative History
072-01: LEGAL DESCRIPTION:
A parcel of land in the south 1/2 of the northeast 1/4, the southeast 1/4, the
east 1/2 of the southwest 1/4 and the southeast 1/4 of the northwest 1/4 of
section 3, township 78 north, range 26 west of the 5th P.M., city of West Des
Moines, Dallas County, Iowa, that is more particularly described as follows:
Beginning at the east 1/4 corner of said section 3; thence S00°23'27"W, 1313.24
feet along the east line of said section 3 to a point; thence S00°24'16"W,
304.78 feet along said east line to a point; thence N89°36'01"W, 47.86 feet to
a point on the west right-of-way line of 88th Street; thence S04°51'52"W, 94.15
feet along said west right-of-way line to a point; thence southwesterly along a
curve concave northwesterly having a radius of 666.30 feet and a chord bearing
of S22°41'38"W, an arc length of 326.08 feet along said west right-of-way line
to a point; thence S49°25'18"W, 183.83 feet along said west right-of-way line
to a point; thence southwesterly along a curve concave northwesterly having a
radius of 651.20 feet and a chord bearing of S62°45'41"W, an arc length of
225.89 feet along said west right-of-way line to a point; thence S70°21'10"W,
252.23 feet along said west right-of-way line to a point; thence S72°40'49"W,
537.77 feet along said west right-of-way line to a point; thence westerly along
a curve concave southeasterly having a radius of 771.20 feet and a chord
bearing of S71°07'37"W, an arc length of 40.02 feet along said west right-of-
way line to a point on the east line of the southwest 1/4 of the southeast 1/
4 of said section 3; thence N00°19'59"E, 1021.39 feet along said east line to
the northeast corner of the southwest 1/4 of the southeast 1/4 of said section
3; thence S83°11'49"W, 1312.27 feet along the north line of the southwest 1/
4 of the southeast 1/4 of said section 3 to the northwest corner of the
southwest 1/4 of the southeast 1/4 of said section 3; thence N00°12'05"E,
1317.69 feet along the east line of the northeast 1/4 of the southwest 1/4 of
said section 3 to the center of said section 3; thence S83°25'59"W, 1278.39
feet along the north line of the northeast 1/4 of the southwest 1/4 of said
section 3 to a point on the east right-of- way line of 98th Street; thence
N00°20'55"E, 33.24 feet along said east right-of- way line to a point; thence
S83°25'59"W, 33.24 feet to a point on the west line of the southeast 1/4 of the
northwest 1/4 of said section 3; thence N00°20'55"E, 1289.59 feet along said
west line to the northwest corner of the southeast 1/4 of the northwest 1/4 of
said section 3; thence N83°24'19"E, 1310.46 feet along the north line of the
southeast 1/4 of the northwest 1/4 of said section 3 to the northeast corner of
the southeast 1/4 of the northwest 1/4 of said section 3; thence N83°22'21"E,
1749.01 feet along the north line of the south 1/2 of the northeast 1/4 of said
section 3 to a point on the south right-of-way line of the former Des Moines &
Ft. Dodge Railroad; thence S63°03'44"E, 977.01 feet along said south right-of-
way line to a point on the east line of said section 3; thence S00°12'57"W,
775.92 feet along said east line to the point of beginning. Except: Outlot "Z",
South Maple Grove Plat 6, an official plat in the City of West Des Moines,
Dallas County, Iowa.
Said tract of land being subject to any and all easements of record.
Said tract of land contains 217.143 acres more or less (including 3.004 acres
of road right-of-way).
   (Northeast 1/4 of section 3 contains 73.737 acres, including 0.596 acres of
road right-of-way)
   (Southeast 1/4 of section 3 contains 103.898 acres, including 1.224 acres of
road right-of-way)
   (Northwest 1/4 of section 3 contains 39.507 acres, including 1.184 acres of
road right-of-way)
Property subject to any and all easements of record.
(Ord. 1610, 10-25-2004; amd. Ord. 2505, 3-21-2022)
072-02: SKETCH PLAN:
The sketch plan document for the South Maple Grove PUD planned unit development
is on file in the city and included as a part of this document, identified as
exhibit A, for purposes of concept description and delineation. It is
recognized that minor shifts or modifications to the general plan layout may be
necessary and compatible with the need to accomplish workable street patterns,
grades, and usable building sites. However, the general layout as depicted by
the sketch plan, including the interrelationship of land uses to each other and
associated development requirements, shall be used as the implementation guide.
Wherever a conflict occurs between the written text contained in this document
and any notations depicted on the sketch plan, the written text shall prevail.
The sketch plan is a graphic representation of the property included in this
planned unit development identifying the approximate location and size of all
parcels for reference purposes for the readily identification of the applicable
regulations of this ordinance. As a note, the sketch plan is meant to serve as
a concept plan and is not meant to convey the approval for the location or size
of any buildings, designated parking areas, required number of parking spaces,
etc., or any other development specifications. These types of development
aspects are reviewed at the time that a site plan or permitted conditional use
permit application is submitted. (Ord. 1610, 10-25-2004)
072-03: CONDITIONS:
Whereas, title 9, chapter 9 of the city code, establishes certain regulations
and guidelines pertaining to the planned unit development district and
accompanying information required on plat and site plan documents.
Now, therefore, the following conditions, restrictions, and regulations are
adopted as part of this approval, to wit:
   A.   General Conditions: The sketch plan incorporates single-family
residential, medium density residential, high density residential, and
commercial/office/retail land uses which shall be distributed by area, types
and location according to the sketch plan and this ordinance.
The development of any parcel shall be designed within the parameters as set in
the total land use that was used for purposes of the traffic study and sanitary
sewer analysis for the area.
In addition, the following general development criteria shall be integrated
into and made a part of this planned unit development district ordinance and
sketch plan approval:
      1.   All subdivisions, public streets, public street rights of way and
general development shall adhere to the standards and design criteria set forth
in the West Des Moines subdivision ordinance and the Des Moines metropolitan
design standards as adopted by the city of West Des Moines, pertaining thereto,
unless otherwise stated within this ordinance.
      2.   Any regulation, standard, provision or requirement that is not
specifically addressed within this document that is regulated elsewhere in the
city code, the requirements of the city code shall be enforced.
      3.   In all areas within a 100-year frequency flood hazard zone or
adjoining drainageways or detention areas involving potential flood hazards, no
building shall be erected which has a lowest floor, including basements, less
than two feet (2') above the determined level of the 100-year frequency flood
event or floodproofed to the same elevation in accordance with the West Des
Moines floodplain ordinance, and no building shall be erected within twenty
five feet (25') of any major drainage, storm water detention basin or pond.
      4.   The developer, their successors, and assigns, if any, shall pay all
construction and engineering costs for the interior development of the planned
unit development, in accordance with the current city's policies at the time of
development, as required by this ordinance, the subdivision ordinance of the
city of West Des Moines, and the Des Moines metropolitan design standards as
adopted by the city of West Des Moines, for all streets, storm sewers, sanitary
sewers, drainage improvements, detention basins, water mains, buffers and other
improvements within the PUD as may be required by the provisions of the city
code.
   B.   Land Use Design Criteria: In addition to the general conditions
requirement stated within this document, the following land use design criteria
shall apply to the development within the PUD. The following development
standards and use regulations shall apply to development within each of the
individual parcels, or portions of said parcel, as applicable: (Ord. 1610, 10-
25-2004)
      1.   Parcel A: The owner/developer shall include approximately seventeen
(17) acres to be reserved for the acquisition and development as a school for
the Waukee School District and shall be required to be platted at the time that
any portion of parcel C is platted.
The developer will also need to grant public access easements within parcel C,
at locations acceptable to the city, to provide locations for pedestrian
connections to the school site with the platting of parcel C.
The development standards for the property shall comply with the minimum
standards for the single-family residential district (RS-8).
      2.   Parcel B: The owner/developer shall reserve for dedication to the
city that ground designated as parcel B as shown on the sketch plan on file in
the city, for active park and open space use at no cost to the city of West Des
Moines. The developer will also need to dedicate public access lots within
parcel C, at locations acceptable to the city, to provide locations for
pedestrian connections to the park site with the platting of parcel C. Said
area shall be platted and dedicated to the city free of any liens,
encumbrances, and assessments with the platting of any portion of parcel A or C
which abuts parcel B, no later than December 31, 2005. The developer will be
responsible for the grading and seeding of parcel B prior to official
dedication and installed per city specifications and approval.
The total required street right of way of the future public east/west street
along the north boundary of parcel B, between 92nd Street and 98th Street, will
be dedicated by the developer to the city at no cost at the time of platting.
The improvements will be installed by the developer at the same time as those
in parcels A and C.
All land for street right of way and all street, sidewalk, water, storm,
sanitary sewer improvements, including sanitary, storm sewer, and water stubs
at the property line, abutting parcel B shall be provided by the developer to
the city at no cost to the city.
The development standards for the property shall comply with the minimum
standards for the single-family residential district (RS-8). (Ord. 1633, 5-23-
2005)
      3.   Parcel C: All general use regulations and provisions set forth in
title 9, "Zoning", of the city code for single-family residential district (RS-
8) with a minimum lot size of eight thousand (8,000) square feet shall apply to
any development proposal for property within parcel C as shown on the sketch
plan of the South Maple Grove PUD ordinance, unless noted otherwise in this
ordinance.
         a.   Setbacks: All residential structures shall have a minimum front
yard setback of thirty feet (30'). Lots located in parcel C west of 92nd Street
may have a minimum lot width of sixty feet (60'). A twenty five foot (25') rear
yard building setback shall be allowed for those double frontage lots that have
frontage on a public street and a public street bulb as identified on exhibit C
on file in the city. A minimum five foot (5') side yard building setback will
be required. Any part of the structure, including cantilevers, overhangs, etc.,
will not be allowed to be any closer than five feet (5') to a property line.
Garage doors facing the public street shall be set back a minimum of thirty
five feet (35'). A residence with a side loaded garage may be set back a
minimum of twenty five feet (25') measured from the front property line. It is
encouraged that the front walls of any garage be set back a minimum of five
feet (5') from the front facade of the residential structure.
In those cases where the front wall of the garage extends more than ten feet
(10') beyond the front wall of the residence, the width of the residence shall
be required to be equal to or greater than the width of the garage unit and the
garage elevations will be required to include a window element to lessen its
dominance of the residential structure.
         b.   Architecture: Architectural design for single-family units shall
attempt to express a creative presentation of exterior building materials,
exterior details and texture, treatment of windows and doors, use of angles and
multiplicity of planes within wall and roof design. Residential units should
incorporate the use of brick, natural stone, roof materials that provide a wood
shake appearance, decorative moldings, cornices, and trim elements, or
combination of design materials that provide variation of architectural styles
or elements.
Front porches shall have a usable area that is no less than five feet (5') in
width and may be allowed to extend into the front yard building setback, but no
closer than twenty feet (20') to the front property line.
         c.   Buffers: A thirty foot (30') buffer park easement shall be
required to be provided for all double frontage lots. All required building
setbacks shall be measured from the easement line of the required buffer park
easement and setbacks shall be measured from the buffer park easement. No
fences shall be allowed to be constructed within the area of the buffer park
easement.
         d.   Landscaping: A minimum of one overstory tree shall be provided by
the home builder within the front yard of each residential lot. The use of red
maples shall be encouraged. Street trees will be permitted with the obtainment
of a street tree permit. Street tree maintenance will be the responsibility of
the property owner and shall not be planted any closer than five feet (5') to a
curb. No tree shall be planted any closer than five feet (5') to a sidewalk.
Trees will be maintained to provide a visual clearance of fourteen feet (14')
over vehicle travel lanes, eight feet (8') above pedestrian travel lanes, and
will be prohibited from being located within the site triangle of a public
street intersection.
The use of any planting materials within the public right of way shall be in
accordance with the provisions of the comprehensive urban forestry program of
the city of West Des Moines. (Ord. 1754, 5-21-2007)
      4.   Parcel D: All general use regulations and provisions set forth in
title 9, "Zoning", of the city code for residential medium- density district
(RM-12) shall apply to any development proposal for all the property located
within parcel D, unless noted otherwise herein.
         a.   Density: Parcel D shall incorporate approximately twelve (12)
acres with a maximum of one hundred thirty two (132) dwelling units allowed.
(Ord. 1654, 10-24-2005)
         b.   Setbacks: All residential structures and garages shall comply
with all general use regulations and provisions set forth in title 9, "Zoning",
of the city code for residential medium- density district (RM-10) shall apply,
unless noted otherwise within this section.
A perimeter building setback of thirty five feet (35') shall apply to any
structure within parcel D. If the property abuts a private street, any
residential structure shall be allowed to be located no closer than fifteen
feet (15') from the back of a curb or back of a sidewalk, whichever is more
restrictive. Garages shall comply with a front yard setback of twenty five feet
(25'), to be measured from the garage opening to the back of a curb sidewalk,
whichever is more restrictive.
         c.   Buffers: A minimum thirty foot (30') buffer park shall be
required to be provided along the boundary that abuts the Union Pacific
Railroad right of way and along the entire southern boundary of parcel D at the
time that a development plan is submitted for parcel D.
Landscaping and berming in the buffer park shall be provided in accordance with
the West Des Moines buffer ordinance. No fences shall be allowed to be
constructed within the thirty foot (30') buffer park area. (Ord. 1610, 10-25-
2004)
      5.   Parcel E: All general use regulations and provisions set forth in
title 9, "Zoning", of the city code for single-family residential district (RS-
10) with a minimum lot size of ten thousand (10,000) square feet shall apply to
any development proposal for property within parcel E as shown on the sketch
plan of the South Maple Grove PUD ordinance, unless noted otherwise in this
ordinance.
         a.   Setbacks: All residential structures shall have a minimum front
yard setback of thirty feet (30'). A twenty five foot (25') rear yard building
setback shall be allowed for those double frontage lots that have frontage on a
public street and a public street bulb as identified on exhibit C on file in
the city. A minimum five foot (5') side yard building setback will be required.
Any part of the structure, including cantilevers, overhangs, etc., will not be
allowed to be any closer than five feet (5') to a property line.
Garage doors facing the public street shall be set back a minimum of thirty
five feet (35'). A residence with a side loaded garage may be set back a
minimum of twenty five feet (25') measured from the front property line. It is
encouraged that the front walls of any garage be set back a minimum of five
feet (5') from the front facade of the residential structure.
In those cases where the front wall of the garage extends more than ten feet
(10') beyond the front wall of the residence, the width of the residence shall
be required to be equal to or greater than the width of the garage unit and the
garage elevations will be required to include a window element to lessen its
dominance of the residential structure.
         b.   Architecture: Architectural design for single-family units shall
attempt to express a creative presentation of exterior building materials,
exterior details and texture, treatment of windows and doors, use of angles and
multiplicity of planes within wall and roof design. Residential units should
incorporate the use of brick, natural stone, roof materials that provide a wood
shake appearance, decorative moldings, cornices, and trim elements, or
combination of design materials that provide variation of architectural styles
or elements.
Front porches shall have a usable area that is no less than five feet (5') in
width and may be allowed to extend into the front yard building setback, but no
closer than twenty feet (20') to the front property line.
         c.   Buffers: A thirty foot (30') buffer park easement shall be
required to be provided for all double frontage lots. All required building
setbacks shall be measured from the easement line of the required buffer park
easement.
No fences shall be allowed to be constructed within the thirty foot (30')
buffer park easement area.
         d.   Landscaping: A minimum of one overstory tree shall be provided by
the home builder within the front yard of each residential lot. The use of red
maples shall be encouraged. Street trees will be permitted with the obtainment
of a street tree permit. Street tree maintenance will be the responsibility of
the property owner and shall not be planted any closer than five feet (5') to a
curb. No tree shall be planted any closer than five feet (5') to a sidewalk.
Trees will be maintained to provide a visual clearance of fourteen feet (14')
over vehicle travel lanes, eight feet (8') above pedestrian travel lanes, and
will be prohibited from being located within the site triangle of a public
street intersection. (Ord. 1754, 5-21-2007)
      6.   Parcel F: (Rep. by Ord. 2034, 5-19-2014)
      7.   Parcel G: All general use regulations and provisions set forth in
title 9, "Zoning", of the city code for single-family residential district (RS-
8) with a minimum lot size of eight thousand (8,000) square feet shall apply to
any development proposal for property within parcel G as shown on the sketch
plan of the South Maple Grove PUD ordinance, unless noted otherwise in this
ordinance.
         a.   Setbacks: All residential structures shall have a minimum front
yard setback of thirty feet (30'). A twenty five foot (25') rear yard building
setback shall be allowed for those double frontage lots that have frontage on a
public street and a public street bulb as identified on exhibit C on file in
the city. A minimum five foot (5') side yard building setback will be required.
Any part of the structure, including cantilevers, overhangs, etc., will not be
allowed to be any closer than five feet (5') to a property line.
Garage doors facing the public street shall be set back a minimum of thirty
five feet (35'). A residence with a side loaded garage may be set back a
minimum of twenty five feet (25') measured from the front property line. It is
encouraged that the front walls of any garage be set back a minimum of five
feet (5') from the front facade of the residential structure.
In those cases where the front wall of the garage extends more than ten feet
(10') beyond the front wall of the residence, the width of the residence shall
be required to be equal to or greater than the width of the garage unit and the
garage elevations will be required to include a window element to lessen its
dominance of the residential structure.
         b.   Architecture: Architectural design for single-family units shall
attempt to express a creative presentation of exterior building materials,
exterior details and texture, treatment of windows and doors, use of angles and
multiplicity of planes within wall and roof design. Residential units should
incorporate the use of brick, natural stone, roof materials that provide a wood
shake appearance, decorative moldings, cornices, and trim elements, or
combination of design materials that provide variation of architectural styles
or elements.
Front porches shall have a usable area that is no less than five feet (5') in
width and may be allowed to extend into the front yard building setback, but no
closer than twenty feet (20') to the front property line.
         c.   Buffers: A thirty foot (30') buffer park easement shall be
required to be provided for all lots having more than one frontage on a public
street. All required building setbacks shall be measured from the easement line
of the required buffer park easement. All side loaded single-family residential
lots that abut an arterial street shall be buffered with a thirty foot (30')
buffer park.
No fences shall be allowed to be constructed within the thirty foot (30')
buffer park easement area.
         d.   Landscaping: A minimum of one overstory tree shall be provided by
the home builder within the front yard of each residential lot. The use of red
maples shall be encouraged. Street trees will be permitted with the obtainment
of a street tree permit. Street tree maintenance will be the responsibility of
the property owner and shall not be planted any closer than five feet (5') to a
curb. No tree shall be planted any closer than five feet (5') to a sidewalk.
Trees will be maintained to provide a visual clearance of fourteen feet (14')
over vehicle travel lanes, eight feet (8') above pedestrian travel lanes, and
will be prohibited from being located within the site triangle of a public
street intersection. (Ord. 1932, 9-19-2011)
      8.   Parcel H: All general use regulations and provisions set forth in
title 9, "Zoning", of the city code for residential high- density district (RH-
18) shall apply to any development proposal for property within parcel H as
shown on the sketch plan of the South Maple Grove PUD ordinance, unless noted
otherwise within this section.
         a.   Density: Parcel H shall incorporate approximately sixteen (16)
acres with a maximum of two hundred twenty six (226) dwelling units allowed.
         b.   Setbacks: A perimeter building setback of thirty five feet (35')
shall apply to any structure within parcel H. If the property abuts a private
street, any residential structure shall be allowed to be located no closer than
fifteen feet (15') from the back of a curb or back of a sidewalk, whichever is
more restrictive. However, an additional twelve feet (12') of height may be
allowed for each additional ten feet (10') of setback.
In addition, for any building abutting a private street, garages shall comply
with a front yard setback of twenty five feet (25'), to be measured from the
garage opening to the back of a curb or sidewalk, whichever is more
restrictive.
         c.   Buffers: A minimum thirty foot (30') buffer park shall be
required to be provided along the entire north, south, and west boundaries of
parcel H. No fences shall be allowed to be constructed within the thirty foot
(30') buffer park area. (Ord. 1610, 10-25-2004)
      9.   Parcel I: All general use regulations and provisions set forth in
title 9, "Zoning", of the city code for residential medium- density district
(RM-12) shall apply to any development proposal for all the property located
within parcel I, unless noted otherwise herein.
         a.   Density: Parcel I shall incorporate approximately eleven (11)
acres with a maximum of one hundred thirty four (134) dwelling units allowed.
(Ord. 1654, 10-24-2005)
         b.   Setbacks: A perimeter building setback of thirty five feet (35')
shall apply to any structure within parcel I. If the property abuts a private
street, any residential structure shall be allowed to be located no closer than
fifteen feet (15') from the back of a curb or back of a sidewalk, whichever is
more restrictive. In addition, for any building abutting a private street,
garages shall comply with a front yard setback of twenty five feet (25'), to be
measured from the garage opening to the back of a curb or sidewalk, whichever
is more restrictive.
         c.   Buffers: A minimum thirty foot (30') buffer park shall be
required to be provided between parcel I and parcel E along the north and east
boundaries of parcel I, at the time that parcel I is developed. Landscaping and
berming in the buffer park shall be provided in accordance with the West Des
Moines buffer ordinance. No fences shall be allowed to be constructed within
the designated buffer park. (Ord. 1610, 10-25-2004)
      10.   Parcels F And J: All general use regulations and provisions set
forth in title 9, "Zoning", of the city code for residential medium-density
district (RM-12) shall apply to any development proposal for all the property
located within parcels F and J, unless noted otherwise herein.
         a.   Density: Parcel F shall incorporate approximately 13.6 acres with
a maximum density of one hundred sixty (160) dwelling units. Parcel J shall
incorporate approximately ten (10) acres with a maximum of one hundred eighteen
(118) dwelling units allowed.
         b.   Setbacks: A perimeter building setback of thirty five feet (35')
shall apply to any structure within parcels F and J. If the property abuts a
private street, any residential structure shall be allowed to be located no
closer than fifteen feet (15') from the back of a curb or back of a sidewalk,
whichever is more restrictive. In addition, for any building abutting a private
street, garages shall comply with a front yard setback of twenty five feet
(25'), to be measured from the garage opening to the back of a curb or
sidewalk, whichever is more restrictive.
         c.   Buffers: A minimum thirty foot (30') buffer park shall be
required to be provided between parcel J and parcel G along the east boundary
of parcel J and installed at such time that a development plan is submitted for
parcel J. Landscaping and berming in the buffer park shall be provided in
accordance with the West Des Moines buffer ordinance. (Ord. 2034, 5-19-2014)
No fences shall be allowed to be constructed within the designated buffer park.
(Ord. 1610, 10-25-2004)
072-04: MULTI-FAMILY BUILDINGS AND DEVELOPMENT:
Parcels D, F, I, J, and H. (Ord. 2034, 5-19-2014)
   A.   Buildings: Multi-density homes and high density apartment complexes
should have a street orientation. All sides of all buildings should be treated
with the same level of architectural style. Buildings should provide a unifying
theme while maintaining each building's individual character.
Entrances into buildings should be easily identified through the use of
building design and detailing. Projected or recessed entryways, higher
rooflines, awnings or changes in building material are examples that can create
this effect.
Buildings should be arranged to create view corridors between pedestrian
destinations within and adjacent to the site including building entrances, open
space or parks.
Developments should provide breaks between buildings at midblock and should
have pedestrian amenities such as walkways, benches, etc.
Fenestration (door and window openings) shall be sized to the scale of the
building and detailed appropriately to the pedestrian theme. Use of repeating
window patterns and details are encouraged to unify the design.
Materials should change with the change in building planes; however, all
material should keep within the chosen theme.
Garage doors shall not be the predominate feature of a home. Garage doors
facing the public street shall be set back so as to minimize the dominance of
their appearance and provide adequate space between the street or sidewalk and
the garage to accommodate additional parking.
Garages or accessory structures should incorporate architecture details with
the use of windows, doors and other facade detailing.
   B.   Parking: Parking areas should consist of separated parking fields that
are aesthetically pleasing, landscaped to screen the public views and located
so as not to be the dominant feature along any street or intersection.
Parking lots should be designed to contribute to an attractive appearance of
the streetscape and not deter from the pedestrian orientation of the district.
Additional guest parking spaces are required to be provided calculated at one
space for every fifteen (15) dwelling units. Parking areas should provide
pedestrian access to both the street level and multi-story residential or
retail.
Parking should be located to utilize natural landscape and topography. Parking
and refuse containers must be placed in a convenient location for the
residential units.
   C.   Pedestrian Orientation And Usable Open Space: A publicly accessible
outdoor space such as a private park, plaza, pavilion or courtyard should be
included within each residential development to provide a focal point for such
activities as outdoor gatherings, neighborhood events, picnicking, sitting and
passive and active recreation.
Pedestrian circulation should be an integral part of the initial site layout.
Organize the site so that the building's frame allows and reinforces pedestrian
circulation.
Each development shall provide a complete network of paths or open spaces that
interconnect building entrances, parking, sidewalks, adjacent properties and
other key destinations.
Any pedestrian paths which cross internal drives should be constructed to
visually contrast to provide a highly visible crosswalk.
Each development should provide outdoor lighting fixtures, integrated street
pavers or patterns, and landscaping that reinforces the neighborhood theme and
identity.
Enhanced pedestrian elements at the sidewalk level including decorative
lighting, seating or low sitting walls, and planters, enhanced paving
techniques, etc., shall be incorporated into the theme.
To promote a higher level of pedestrian awareness, the use of alternate paving
materials to designate pedestrian traffic areas from vehicular use areas and
travel lanes is strongly encouraged.
Pedestrian travelways should be separated from vehicular traffic with
landscaping, on street parking, bollards, special paving, or any other feature
which identifies the pedestrian space.
All developments shall provide usable open space, or spaces which allow for the
interaction among pedestrians and with the surrounding environment.
Usable open spaces should be designed to encourage the interaction and presence
of people throughout the day and evening.
Usable outdoor spaces should provide as many seating opportunities as possible
through the placement of movable chairs and planter walls.
Usable outdoor space shall be privately owned and maintained by the developer
or property owners' association.
When possible, the integration of storm drainage and detention should be
designed to enhance the public space, which would include the creation of
ponds, waterfalls or landscaped waterways. (Ord. 1610, 10-25-2004)
Asphalt shingles shall be allowed provided the shingle materials are of a
heavier grade that produces a shake or shadowing effect and is consistent with
the color and materials used for the multi-family residential developments on
parcels D, F, I, J, and H. (Ord. 2034, 5-19-2014)
072-05: OPEN SPACE:
The minimum open space required to be provided for any parcel shall include
twenty five percent (25%) of the total area of the property, with an additional
ten percent (10%) of the total paved area for the site. Features such as, but
not limited to, pedestrian plazas, sidewalk connections, public gathering areas
with benches, landscape features, i.e., fountains, flower gardens, should be
considered to provide and promote a pedestrian orientation between the
commercial and the other adjoining residential uses within the entire PUD.
(Ord. 1610, 10-25-2004)
072-06: BUFFERING:
   A.   All development within the South Maple Grove PUD shall comply with the
buffering provisions of the buffer ordinance of the city code. In the
situations where this PUD ordinance specifies the provision of a buffer park,
the buffer park and the required building setbacks may be allowed to overlap
one another.
   B.   The modification or reduction of any buffering requirements of any
parcel, unless as otherwise specified within this ordinance, may be considered
with the proposal of provision of pedestrian access, walkways, open space or
plaza areas, outdoor gardens or other common amenities to be utilized for the
purposes to promote or heighten the integration of mixed land uses with the
PUD.
   C.   The buffering of any negative elements, such as parking, drop off
drives, trash enclosures, utility or gas meters, heating, ventilation, and air
conditioning equipment shall be required to be screened from the public view
and from adjacent residential properties through the use of landscaping,
berming, and architectural features or other measures determined to be
necessary to mitigate their effects. (Ord. 1610, 10-25-2004)
072-07: PEDESTRIAN CIRCULATION:
A master pedestrian circulation plan shall be prepared and submitted with any
development proposal for any parcel within the PUD providing internal access
connections to minimize pedestrian conflicts with traffic movements to areas
within the PUD as well as providing access to public facilities, i.e., parks,
schools, etc. Pedestrian walkways and bike trails within the PUD shall form an
on site circulation system that minimizes the conflict between pedestrians/
bikes and vehicular traffic. The relationship between the proposed single-
family residential, the multi-family residential, and the commercial uses
within the PUD will be organized so as to promote pedestrian travel and access
within the various land uses within the PUD and to the adjoining public
facilities within the public park and the elementary school located on the
northern portion of the PUD.
There shall also be a forty five foot (45') greenbelt/landscape buffer required
along the west side of 92nd Street and the south side of Westown Parkway that
will be designated as outlots to be owned and maintained by the property
owners' association. The developer shall be responsible for the costs of
landscaping and its installation in the landscape buffer area. A thirty foot
(30') easement will be granted to the city within the outlots for the purpose
of installation and maintenance of a ten foot (10') public trail along 92nd
Street and Westown Parkway. The trail shall be designed by the developer in
consultation with the city's park and recreation department. The costs of the
trail's installation shall be shared between the developer and the city, with
forty percent (40%) of the costs being the developer's responsibility and sixty
percent (60%) being the responsibility of the city. The trail shall be
constructed with a minimum of five inches (5") of PCC concrete or six inches
(6") of ACC asphalt.
No fences shall be allowed to be constructed within the forty five foot (45')
designated outlot.
Thirty feet (30') of the required forty five foot (45') greenbelt/buffer will
be allowed to be counted toward the greenbelt requirements for the entire PUD
per the park land dedication ordinance. (Ord. 1610, 10-25-2004)
072-08: PARK LAND DEDICATION:
An area calculated by a set formula based upon the size and density of the
proposed development will be required to be provided for purposes of a public
park and greenbelt areas. A letter of agreement, acceptable to the park and
recreation department, detailing the specifics related to the park land
dedication requirements for the development of any area contained within the
PUD will be required to be submitted prior to the submittal of any development
proposal. (Ord. 1610, 10-25-2004)
072-09: SIGNAGE REGULATION:
All signs shall comply with all provisions of the city sign code. All signage
constructed as wall signs on building fascias within the PUD shall incorporate
aesthetic features compatible with the overall character of the development.
(Ord. 1610, 10-25-2004)
072-10: PROPERTY OWNERS' ASSOCIATION AND BUILDING RESTRICTIONS, EASEMENTS, AND
COVENANTS:
With the first development proposal for the rezoned property as acted upon
herein and legally described in section
072-01 of this ordinance, proper action shall be taken to establish a master
property owners' association with said property into the South Maple Grove
Property Owners' Association and all building restrictions, covenants, and
other associated conditions attached to the South Maple Grove PUD shall be made
to also apply to said property. The South Maple Grove Property Owners'
Association shall be responsible for the ongoing upkeep and maintenance of any
privately owned common grounds, structures, signs, etc., as outlined in the
association documents and any other specific development improvements noted as
their responsibility in this ordinance.
The developer shall, with the approval of the city council, adopt building
restrictions, easements, and covenants pertaining to the property where the
developer and the city deem appropriate. (Ord. 1610, 10-25-2004)
072-11: STORM WATER MANAGEMENT:
Specific storm water management plans will be required with the development of
each parcel, demonstrating compliance with the approved South Maple Grove PUD
master storm water management plan, on file with the city's public works
department. The developer will have said specific storm water management plans
prepared by a professional engineer licensed in the state of Iowa, prior to the
submittal of any specific development proposals within the PUD. All specific
storm water management plans shall comply with the city's current design
standards for storm water management. The method of storm water management and
the storm water conveyance system shall be determined and approved prior to the
development of any portion of the property within the PUD. (Ord. 1610, 10-25-
2004)
072-12: TRAFFIC REPORTS:
A traffic report has been prepared for this development that outlines what the
ultimate traffic circulation requirements will be for the major roadways in the
vicinity of the South Maple Grove development. Prior to, or in conjunction with
the development of any parcel, or portion of a parcel, the developer shall
ensure that the development is in accordance with the assumptions of and
results of the South Maple Grove traffic study report.
Section
 072-13 of this ordinance identifies the land use and number of proposed units
that were used for purposes of the traffic study and sanitary sewer analysis
for the area.
Increases in land use density and/or other changes to the PUD ordinance that
would alter the original traffic analysis (i.e., change in street layout or
access locations), will require an amended traffic report, to be submitted for
review as deemed necessary by the city. (Ord. 1610, 10-25-2004)
072-13: PHASING; RELATED PUBLIC STREET IMPROVEMENTS AND RIGHT OF WAY
DEDICATION:
The phasing plan of development for the area within the South Maple Grove PUD
is included as part of this document, identified as exhibit B on file in the
city, for purposes of concept description and delineation. The numbering of the
phases is not meant to reflect the actual order of development. However, any
deviations to change the phasing boundaries will require the review and
approval by the plan and zoning commission and city council. (Ord. 1610, 10-25-
2004)
Phase 1:   A.   Public Streets: In accordance with the South Maple Grove
traffic report, at such time of platting or development within phase 1, the
applicant proposing said platting and/or development shall be responsible for:
Construction of 92nd Street, from the phase 1/phase 2 line to the railroad
tracks. A thirty one foot (31') wide street shall be constructed (2 lanes),
with forty three foot (43') width (3 lanes) constructed at all of the
intersections with 92nd Street, to provide for a left turn lane and future
median placement.
Construction of 98th Street, from the phase 1/phase 2 line to the minor
collector street. A twenty six foot (26') wide street shall be constructed (2
lanes).
Construction of Westown Parkway, from the phase 1/phase 2 line to 88th Street.
A thirty one foot (31') wide street shall be constructed (2 lanes), with forty
three foot (43') width (3 lanes) constructed at all of the intersections with
Westown Parkway, to provide for a left turn lane and future median placement.
Construction of the minor collector street located just north of the park/
school site, from 92nd Street to 88th Street. A thirty one foot (31') wide
street (2 lanes) shall be constructed, with thirty seven foot (37') width (3
lanes) constructed at the intersection with 92nd Street to provide for a left
turn lane.
Construction of all other streets (local streets) at a width of twenty six feet
(26') (2 lanes), except at intersections with 92nd Street and Westown Parkway
construct a thirty seven foot (37') width (3 lanes) to provide for a left turn
lane.
At such time that development occurs just north or south of the minor collector
street located just north of the park/school site, construction of said minor
collector street located just north of the park/school site, from 92nd Street
to 98th Street. A thirty nine foot (39') wide street shall be constructed (3
lanes), to provide for a continuous left turn lane from 92nd Street to 98th
Street.
Construction of the remaining unpaved section of 88th Street (approximately 100
feet - immediately south of railroad tracks). A thirty one foot (31') wide
street shall be constructed to match existing pavement.
B.   Right Of Way Dedication: In accordance with the South Maple Grove traffic
report, at such time of platting or development within phase 1, the applicant
proposing said platting and/or development shall deed to the city:
One hundred twenty feet (120') of right of way for 92nd Street, from the phase
1/phase 2 line to the railroad tracks.
Additional 98th Street right of way necessary to provide fifty feet (50') of
right of way from the centerline of street.
One hundred feet (100') of right of way for the minor collector street located
just north of the park/school site, from 92nd Street to 98th Street.
One hundred twenty feet (120') of right of way for Westown Parkway, from the
phase 1/phase 2 line to 88th Street, with fifty foot (50') intersecting radii
provided at intersection with 88th Street.
Seventy feet (70') of right of way for the minor collector street located just
north of the park/school site, from 92nd Street to 88th Street.
Additional 88th Street right of way necessary to provide fifty feet (50') of
right of way from the centerline of street (88th Street is a major collector),
with fifty foot (50') intersecting radii provided at intersection with Westown
Parkway right of way.
Sixty feet (60') of right of way for all other streets (local streets), with
seventy feet (70') provided at intersections with 92nd Street and Westown
Parkway to accommodate left turn lanes. (Ord. 1633, 5-23-2005)
Phase 2:   A.   Public Streets: In accordance with the South Maple Grove
traffic report, at such time of platting or development within phase 2, the
applicant proposing said platting and/or development shall be responsible for:
Construction of 92nd Street, from the phase 1/phase 2 line to the phase 2/phase
4 line. A thirty one foot (31') wide street shall be constructed (2 lanes),
with forty three foot (43') width (3 lanes) constructed at all of the
intersections with 92nd Street, to provide for a left turn lane and future
median placement.
Construction of Westown Parkway, from the phase 1/phase 2 line to 98th Street.
A thirty one foot (31') wide street shall be constructed (2 lanes), with forty
three foot (43') width (3 lanes) constructed at all of the intersections with
Westown Parkway, to provide for a left turn lane and future median placement.
Construction of 98th Street, from the phase 1/phase 2 line to Westown Parkway.
A twenty six foot (26') wide street shall be constructed (2 lanes).
Construction of all other streets (local streets) at a width of twenty six feet
(26') (2 lanes), except at intersections with 92nd Street and Westown Parkway
construct a thirty seven (37') foot width (3 lanes) to provide for a left turn
lane.
B.   Right Of Way Dedication: In accordance with the South Maple Grove traffic
report, at such time of platting or development within phase 2, the applicant
proposing said platting and/or development shall deed to the city:
One hundred twenty feet (120') of right of way for 92nd Street, from the phase
1/phase 2 line to the phase 2/phase 4 line, with fifty foot (50') intersecting
radii provided at intersection with Westown Parkway right of way.
Additional 98th Street right of way necessary to provide fifty feet (50') of
right of way from the centerline of street, with fifty foot (50') intersecting
radii provided at intersection with Westown Parkway right of way.
One hundred twenty feet (120') of right of way for Westown Parkway, from the
phase 1/phase 2 line to 98th Street, with fifty foot (50') intersecting radii
provided at intersections with 92nd Street and 98th Street right of way.
Sixty feet (60') of right of way for all other streets (local streets), with
seventy feet (70') provided at intersections with 92nd Street and Westown
Parkway to accommodate left turn lanes.
Phase 3:   A.   Public Streets: In accordance with the South Maple Grove
traffic report, at such time of platting or development within phase 3, the
applicant proposing said platting and/or development shall be responsible for:
Construction of the minor collector street located between Ashworth Road and
Westown Parkway (realigned 88th Street), from the west boundary of the PUD
parcel to Westown Parkway. A thirty one foot (31') wide street shall be
constructed (2 lanes), with thirty seven foot (37') width (3 lanes) constructed
at the intersection with Westown Parkway to provide for a left turn lane.
Construction of all other streets (Local streets) at a width of twenty six feet
(26') (2 lanes), except at intersections with Westown Parkway construct a
thirty seven foot (37') width (3 lanes) to provide for a left turn lane.
B.   Right Of Way Dedication: In accordance with the South Maple Grove traffic
report, at such time of platting or development within phase 3, the applicant
proposing said platting and/or development shall deed to the city:
Seventy feet (70') of right of way for the minor collector street located
between Ashworth Road and Westown Parkway (realigned 88th Street), from the
westerly boundary of the PUD parcel to Westown Parkway, with fifty foot (50')
intersecting radii provided at intersection with Westown Parkway right of way.
Sixty feet (60') of right of way for all other streets (local streets), with
seventy feet (70') provided at intersections with Westown Parkway to
accommodate left turn lanes.
Phase 4:   A.   Public Streets: In accordance with the South Maple Grove
traffic report, at such time of platting or development within phase 4, the
applicant proposing said platting and/or development shall be responsible for:
Construction of 92nd Street, from the phase 2/phase 4 line to the westerly
boundary of the PUD. A thirty one foot (31') wide street shall be constructed
(2 lanes), with forty three foot (43') width (3 lanes) constructed at all of
the intersections with 92nd Street, to provide for a left turn lane and future
median placement.
Construction of all other streets (local streets) at a width of twenty six feet
(26') (2 lanes), except at intersections with 92nd Street and Westown Parkway
construct a thirty seven foot (37') width (3 lanes) to provide for a left turn
lane.
B.   Right Of Way Dedication: In accordance with the South Maple Grove traffic
report, at such time of platting or development within phase 4, the applicant
proposing said platting and/or development shall deed to the city:
One hundred twenty feet (120') of right of way for 92nd Street, from the phase
2/phase 4 line to the westerly boundary of the PUD, with fifty foot (50')
intersecting radii provided at intersection with Westown Parkway right of way.
Sixty feet (60') of right of way for all other streets (local streets), with
seventy feet (70') provided at intersection with Westown Parkway right of way
to accommodate left turn lanes. (Ord. 1610, 10-25-2004)
072-14: ACCESS MANAGEMENT:
To provide logical and orderly development within the PUD, allowable street
access locations are defined on the PUD plan. All development within the PUD
shall comply with the allowable access locations indicated on the PUD plan.
The access points as shown on exhibit A on file in the city, sketch plan, of
the PUD ordinance, are based upon the ultimate street configurations (medians,
auxiliary turn lanes, etc.). Therefore, "offset" right-in/right-out locations
(opposing right- in/right-out locations that do not directly align with each
other) will not be allowed unless the applicable median is constructed. Any
opposing right-in/right-out locations constructed prior to installation of
applicable median shall be located to directly align with each other.
No direct access onto 88th Street, 92nd Street, 98th Street, Westown Parkway
and the minor collector street located just north of the park/school site,
between 88th Street and 98th Street, and the minor collector street located
between Ashworth Road and Westown Parkway (realigned 88th Street) is permitted
for the single-family residential lots. (Ord. 1610, 10-25-2004)
072-15: REALIGNMENT AND VACATION OF 88TH STREET:
The realignment of the section of 88th Street south of Westown Parkway will be
determined prior to the development of parcel G or H. The new 88th Street and
the north/south public street connection to Westown Parkway will be required to
be constructed and accepted by the city prior to the vacation of the existing
right of way for 88th Street. Access to the property owner to the south of
parcel G will need to be provided prior to the vacation of the existing 88th
Street right of way. (Ord. 1610, 10-25-2004)
072-16: SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS:
The developer of the property within the PUD is responsible for the public
improvements that are necessary to serve the property. Those improvements
include the paving of public streets, sanitary sewer extension, water main
extension, storm sewer improvements and traffic signals. In the event that the
city deems that certain public improvements are necessary for the public
health, safety and welfare, prior to the developer's schedule of installation
of certain public improvements, the property may be subject to future areawide
assessments, including, but not limited to, the reconstruction, construction,
widening, and/or improvements to 88th Street, 92nd Street, 98th Street, Westown
Parkway, and Ashworth Road as shall be permitted and limited by the laws of the
state of Iowa. (Ord. 1610, 10-25-2004)
072-17: 92ND STREET RAILROAD CROSSING:
The developer shall be responsible for all costs associated with the
construction of the 92nd Street at the time of platting of any area contained
within the South Maple Grove PUD. (Ord. 1610, 10-25-2004)
072-18: LIGHTING:
   A.   Street Lighting: The developer shall be responsible for all costs
associated with the installation of public streetlights within or adjacent to
any proposed area to be platted or included within a development.
   B.   Building And Parking Lot: Wall pack lighting shall be prohibited. All
lighting shall be of a cutoff type to eliminate glare and spillover lighting
beyond a property line.
Any lighting used to illuminate any off street parking or loading area shall be
so arranged as to divert the light away from adjoining residential uses or
premises in any residential district and away from the traveled roadway of
public streets; lighting levels shall be one foot-candle level at the property
lines and a photometric plan may be required by the city at the time of site
plan or permitted conditional use permit review. (Ord. 1610, 10-25-2004)
072-19: VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES:
Any person who violates the provisions of this ordinance upon conviction shall
be punished as set forth in section 1-4-1 of the city code. (Ord. 1754, 5-21-
2007)
072-99: LEGISLATIVE HISTORY:
Ord. 1610, 10-25-2004; Ord. 1633, 5-23-2005; Ord. 1654, 10-24-2005; Ord. 1754,
5-21-2007; Ord. 1932, 9-19-2011; Ord. 2034, 5-19-2014; Ord. 2505, 3-21-2022.
PUD #73
BELLA SOUTH
SECTION:
073-01: Legal Description
073-02: Intent Of Development
073-03: Required Plans
073-04: Requirements
073-05: Street Improvements
073-06: Sanitary Sewer
073-07: Storm Water Management
073-08: Traffic Reports
073-09: Architecture
073-10: Signage Regulation
073-11: Master Property Owners' Association
073-12: Violations And Penalties
073-99: Legislative History
073-01: LEGAL DESCRIPTION:
A part of outlot T, U and V, Davis Estates plat 1, an official plat recorded in
book 2004, page 6409, now in the city of West Des Moines, Dallas County, Iowa,
being more particularly described as follows:
Beginning at the southeast corner of said outlot "V"; thence south 66°29'12"
west, 488.60 feet to the southwest corner of said outlot "V"; thence north
89°52'51" west along the south line of said outlot "U", 59.51 feet; thence
northwesterly along a curve concave southwesterly whose radius is 1050.00 feet,
whose arc length is 307.80 feet and whose chord bears north 18°18'14" west,
306.70 feet; thence north 26°42'07" west, 105.61 feet to the west right of way
line of south 64th Street as platted by Jordan Creek Crossing book 2004, page
18558; thence north 63°17'53" east, 100.00 feet to the east right of way line
of said south 64th Street; thence north 26°42'07" west continuing along said
east right of way line, 15.00 feet; thence northeasterly along said east right
of way line and a curve concave southeasterly whose radius is 35.00 feet, whose
arc length is 54.98 feet and whose chord bears north 18°17'53" east, 49.50
feet; thence north 63°17'53" east along the south right of way line of
Coachlight Drive as platted by Jordan Creek Crossing book 2004, page 18558, a
distance of 0.80 feet; thence north 26°42'07" west, 70.00 feet to the north
right of way line of said Coachlight Drive; thence north 63°17'53" east, 297.05
feet; thence easterly along a curve concave southerly whose radius is 685.00
feet, whose arc length is 322.70 feet and whose chord bears north 76°47'38"
east, 319.72 feet; thence south 89°42'38" east, 10.14 feet to the east line of
said outlot "T"; thence south 00°17'22" west along said outlot "T" and "V",
565.42 feet to the point of beginning and containing 8.02 acres (349,369 square
feet).
(Ord. 1635, 6-6-2005)
073-02: INTENT OF DEVELOPMENT:
To provide unique multi-family residential opportunities that are cohesive with
surrounding developments while promoting a pedestrian friendly environment and
opportunities to interact with these surrounding developments. (Ord. 1635, 6-6-
2005)
073-03: REQUIRED PLANS:
The following plans shall be required as a part of the processing of any
development application for any property within Bella South:
   A.   Area Development Plan: An area development plan must be approved by the
city council prior to, or in conjunction with, the review of the specific plan
for any property within said specific plan. No change to the area development
plan shall be made without approval from the appropriate reviewing bodies.
An area development plan is a plan that identifies infrastructure, planning
units, major street patterns, drainage and detention, utilities, shared public
spaces, vehicular traffic impacts, proposed densities, and land use
assumptions. It is intended to promote the communication and cooperation
between adjacent property owners and developers to encourage cohesive, unified
development, and identify the anticipated phasing of construction, and parties
involved.
On file in the city, (exhibit A) is the city council approved Davis Estates
area development plan shown as area 9 on the map identifying the overlay
district planning areas within the town center overlay district guidelines as
adopted by the West Des Moines city council which includes the above legally
described property.
   B.   Specific Plan: A specific plan identifies detailed development criteria
for each planning unit as identified within the associated area development
plan. The specific plan must to be in conformance with the general intent of
the approved area development plan and town center overlay district guidelines.
The specific plan shall be adopted by the city council by ordinance.
This council adopted ordinance shall constitute the Bella South specific plan
for planning unit H as identified in the approved Davis Estates area
development plan as exhibit A on file in the city. Also on file in the city and
made a part of this rezoning is a specific plan diagram for the Bella South
specific plan (see exhibit B). It is recognized that slight modifications and
changes to the map may be necessary due to changes in building footprints or
details; however, the intent is that the major elements of the specific plan
should be adhered to and may not be altered without the approval of the city
council. Where the specific plan drawing and specific plan language conflict,
the specific plan language shall prevail.
   C.   Development Applications: The site plan for any parcel within the Bella
South specific plan must meet the intent of the approved specific plan. This
site plan shall be submitted to the city of West Des Moines for review and
approval prior to the development of any portion of the property within the
specific plan. Site plans, which meet the intent of the specific plan, as
determined by city staff, will be subject to administrative review and approval
by the director of community development. If the site is deemed not to be in
compliance with the specific plan, the site plan will be subject to review by
the appropriate viewing body (i.e., city council, plan and zoning commission or
board of adjustment).
   D.   Preliminary Plat/Final Plat: As part of the transfer of ownership of
any property within the Davis Estates area development plan, said area shall be
preliminary platted in accordance with the city's subdivision ordinance to
delineate the parcel subject to ownership change. Additionally, prior to or in
conjunction with any site plan submittal for proposed development, the parcel
to be developed shall be preliminary and final platted. Ground work associated
with roads and utilities may be started, at the developer's risk, upon approval
of the preliminary plat by the city council and required construction plans by
the city of West Des Moines department of public works unless otherwise
specifically restricted by plan and zoning or city council action. A final plat
must be approved and recorded with the Dallas County recorder prior to issuance
of any building permit, including footing and foundation permits, for
construction of any structure within the associated site plan. (Ord. 1635, 6-6-
2005)
073-04: REQUIREMENTS:
The following shall apply to all property within the Bella South specific plan:
   A.   General Conditions:
      1.   Unless otherwise specified herein, the development of the Bella
South specific plan shall comply with the provisions of the West Des Moines
zoning ordinance.
      2.   Unless otherwise specifically approved by the city council, the
developer, their successors and/or assigns, if any, shall pay all planning,
engineering, and construction costs for the development of the planned unit
development, as required by this ordinance and approved site plans which may
include, but are not limited to, the cost of all streets, storm sewers,
sanitary sewers, drainageway improvements, detention basins, water mains,
buffers and other improvements as required. No occupancy permits, either
temporary or permanent, will be issued until all public improvements are either
installed or properly bonded for. Additionally, the developer shall establish
all necessary easements for public rights of way and utilities within the Bella
South specific plan in conjunction with the recordation of the final plat.
      3.   All streets and internal traffic flows, including parking lots,
shall permit the travel of the fire department's largest vehicle, including
accommodating adequate turning needs. Approval of unique design solutions to
accommodate turning movements may be granted by the city council if the
solutions proposed are acceptable to the West Des Moines fire marshal.
   B.   Specific Conditions: In addition to elements shown of the specific plan
drawing (exhibit B), the following shall be required;
      1.   Land Use: All general use regulations and provisions set forth in
title 9, "Zoning", of the city code for medium density residential district
(RM-12) shall apply unless otherwise noted in this ordinance.
         a.   Density And Land Use: Bella South specific plan consists of one
parcel which encompasses 7.26 acres for medium density residential. A maximum
of twelve (12) dwelling units per acre is allowed thus dwellings within this
specific plan shall not exceed a total of eighty seven (87) units. The site may
be subdivided into additional parcels, however no additional density above
eighty seven (87) units shall be allowed.
         b.   Setbacks:
            (1)   The north and west sides (Coachlight Drive and South 64th
Street sides) shall maintain a twenty five foot (25') building setback from the
property line. Porches and patio spaces are allowed to encroach into this
setback area, but no accessory structures or uncovered parking is allowed.
            (2)   The south and east sides shall maintain a twenty foot (20')
building setback from the property line. Porches and patio spaces are allowed
to encroach into this setback area, but no accessory structures or uncovered
parking is allowed.
      2.   Sidewalks: Sidewalks shall be provided to allow for pedestrian
movement throughout the site and connections to adjacent sites. Public
sidewalks shall be installed along Coachlight Drive and South 64th Street.
Public sidewalks within the site shall be a minimum of four feet (4') in width
except in those situations in which a vehicle may overhang the sidewalk, in
which case the sidewalk width shall be increased to six feet (6') (see
subsection B5e of this section). Public sidewalks shall be installed as a part
of the public improvements of the plat or at/before the time of construction of
the buildings. Public sidewalks shall be in place prior to issuance of any
occupancy permits, either temporary or final.
      3.   Street Furniture: On file in the city are representations of the
street furniture that shall be provided in the plaza areas throughout this
development. Although slight deviations from the illustrations are permissible,
the street furniture shall be used as a unifying element throughout this
development. Without compromising the design intent of the plazas, the maximum
number of furniture opportunities possible shall be incorporated.
      4.   Lighting Standards: It is intended that lighting within the Bella
South development shall be designed to provide a safe environment, yet should
attempt to mitigate light pollution onto adjoining properties.
         a.   All light levels shall fall at or below one foot-candle at the
property line. During the site plan review, the applicant shall submit a
photometric plan which demonstrates light levels and how the adjoining
properties will not be adversely affected by the lighting, specifically those
with a different type of land use.
         b.   Light fixtures within parking areas shall not exceed twenty five
feet (25') in height as measured from the top of the grade to the top of the
fixture. Extra care should be taken in the placement of lights in the parking
area along the eastern side of the property to minimize the views from the
neighboring single- family homes of the overhead light fixtures, as well as the
glow of the lights.
         c.   No wall pack or floodlighting is allowed. All lights shall have a
cutoff feature to direct the light to its intended target and minimize light
pollution.
      5.   Parking Requirements: Parking shall conform to chapter 15 of the
zoning ordinance unless specifically stated otherwise within this ordinance.
         a.   Two (2) parking spaces are required per residential unit and
shall be included in the purchase/rental price of the unit.
         b.   Uncovered surface parking shall be set back a minimum of thirty
feet (30') from the property line. Covered parking shall be set back a minimum
of twenty feet (20') from the property line and shall include provisions to
screen undesirable views thereof.
         c.   No parking space, within a single row of uncovered parking, shall
be greater than six (6) stalls from a landscape island/pod which contains at
least one tree or natural green space.
         d.   Islands or open areas shall be located at the terminus end of all
parking rows.
         e.   Islands within a single row of parking shall measure at least
nine feet (9') in width by nineteen feet (19') in length (back of curb to back
of curb). If the proposed parking area is designed to allow the bumper of the
vehicle to overhang an open area, the length of both the parking stall and
island may be reduced by that overhang amount (i.e., a 2 foot overhang would
reduce stall and island length to 17 feet minimum). If the proposed overhang is
over a sidewalk rather than natural green space, that sidewalk width shall
measure a minimum of six feet (6') in width to accommodate the pedestrian
movement and vehicle overhang.
      6.   Buffers: Buffer screening between districts or parcels and uses
shall not be required as set forth in section 9-3-10, "Buffers", of the city
code. Specific buffering shall be provided as follows and as noted otherwise in
this ordinance:
         a.   Vegetation used to buffer/screen shall be predominately evergreen
in nature in order to provide year round effectiveness.
         b.   Buffering/screening shall be located along the eastern property
line to mitigate views of the garages, trash enclosures, etc., from the
adjoining single-family lots situated to the east. This buffering shall achieve
opaque visual screening within five (5) years of establishment. Buffering may
be achieved through the use of vegetation, berming, fences, or any combination
thereof. Achievement of opacity will be at the discretion of the director of
community development.
         c.   Provide buffering/screening from the adjoining public streets of
the backs of garages B-8, B-14, B-16, B-17 and B-19 as identified on the
specific plan drawings in exhibit B, on file in the city. This buffering shall
provide visual breaks to minimize the wall expanses of the garages that are
visible; however opaque screening is not required. Buffering may be achieved
through the use of vegetation or berming, or any combination thereof.
         d.   Views into surface parking areas shall be broken up through the
use of vegetation and/or berms.
         e.   Provide buffering/screening of mechanical equipment and trash
dumpsters as required in section 9-3-10, "Buffers", of the city code.
      7.   Landscaping: The landscaping requirements specified herein are
intended to foster aesthetically pleasing development which will enhance,
protect and preserve the appearance, character, general health, safety and
welfare of the city of West Des Moines.
         a.   There is no percent of open space required with development of
any parcel associated with the Bella South specific plan; however the site
design and layout should achieve a pleasing balance of built and natural
environment and should aim to provide close to or more than what would
typically be required of a similar development outside of the overlay district.
         b.   In lieu of buffers, except where specifically identified
previously, streetscape landscaping shall be provided within the first fifteen
feet (15') parallel to public roadways. This streetscape landscape is intended
to enhance and visually soften the paved expanses of roadways. Pedestrian
elements such as patios and walkways may encroach into this streetscape area,
however no buildings or parking may.
         c.   The vegetation illustrated on the specific plan drawing (exhibit
B on file in the city) shall be the minimum amount of vegetation required.
Details regarding varieties, quantities, and the minimum size at time of
planting shall be provided and approved as part of the site plan submittal and
shall meet the general guidelines in respect to minimum plant size
traditionally applied to development within the city.
      8.   Usable Outdoor Spaces: The town center overlay district guidelines
aim to create interactive spaces for pedestrians through the incorporation of
plaza areas and pedestrian pathways.
         a.   As illustrated on the specific plan drawing (exhibit B on file in
the city), several small open air patios shall be created at various locations
in the development. These patios should be so situated so as to provide at
least one usable patio area per building, however use of any patio within the
site by any tenant should be allowed.
         b.   The patio areas shall encourage opportunities for interaction
among pedestrians and should provide as many seating opportunities as possible
through the placement of benches, chairs, tables, planter walls, etc. The
director of community development shall determine the exact number of seating
opportunities to be provided.
         c.   Landscape lighting shall also be provided to extend the usability
of the patios into the evening.
         d.   The patio areas shall incorporate alternative decorative paving
materials for visual interest and variety and shall implement landscape
plantings to soften, enhance, and delineate the areas. Additionally, whenever
possible, elements that enrich the space (i.e., art, fountains, flowers,
banners, and children's play environment, etc.) should be incorporated.
         e.   Installation of the patios shall be at the time of construction
of the associated building and at the cost of the developer.
         f.   Details regarding maintenance and replacement responsibilities
for the plaza spaces should be identified within the master property owners'
association document required per section
073-11 of this ordinance. (Ord. 1635, 6-6-2005)
073-05: STREET IMPROVEMENTS:
All subdivisions, public and private streets, public or private street rights
of way and general development shall adhere to the standards and design
criteria set forth in the West Des Moines subdivision ordinance and/or
established city policies pertaining thereto, unless otherwise stated within
this ordinance.
   A.   The developer shall provide seventy feet (70') of right of way for
Coachlight Drive and one hundred feet (100') of right of way for South 64th
Street. Additional right of way to accommodate street improvements as
identified in the traffic report shall also be provided by the developer. This
right of way shall be platted and conveyed to the city as a part of the first
final plat for land included within the Bella South specific plan.
   B.   The developer shall be responsible for the paving of a thirty seven
foot (37') b/b street (Coachlight Drive) and intersection and access drive
improvements as required by the traffic report for the safe movement of
traffic. Street improvements shall be installed as a part of the public
improvements of the plat or at/before the time of construction of the
buildings.
   C.   South 64th Street may either be initially constructed as a three (3)
lane street or a five (5) lane street with two-way left turn lanes. If the
three (3) lane initial street is chosen, all the design details must
incorporate the possible widening of South 64th Street to a five (5) lane
section in the future. These details include, but are not limited to, right of
way, storm sewer location, sanitary sewer location, water main location,
utility location, etc. Street improvements shall be installed as a part of the
public improvements of the plat or at/before the time of construction of the
buildings. The full cost of all necessary future widening for South 64th Street
between Coachlight Drive and the southern property line of the parcel legally
described in section
073-01 of this ordinance will be assessed by the city per agreement and waiver.
   D.   Included within the "street improvements" shall be the installation of
public streetlights adjacent to Coachlight Drive and South 64th Street.
Streetlights shall be installed at the time of the site plan with the full cost
of the streetlights to be the responsibility of the site plan applicant. (Ord.
1635, 6-6-2005)
073-06: SANITARY SEWER:
The city shall not be responsible for restoration and/or replacement within the
public sanitary sewer easement should the city need to excavate the public
sewer for normal city operations (maintenance, repair, etc.). (Ord. 1635, 6-6-
2005)
073-07: STORM WATER MANAGEMENT:
A master storm water management plan (MSWMP) for the entire development which
governs the overall storm water management of the development has been
submitted to the West Des Moines public works department, as part of the Davis
Estates area development plan and to which this specific plan is associated.
More specific storm water management proposals are required with the
development of each parcel and shall be prepared by the developer prior to
development within the parcel. The method of storm water management and the
conveyance system shall be determined and approved prior to construction of any
portion of the PUD. (Ord. 1635, 6-6-2005)
073-08: TRAFFIC REPORTS:
A traffic report has been prepared by the developer for the land area
encompassed by the Davis Estates area development plan which outlines what the
ultimate paving requirements will be for the major roadways within this area.
An amended traffic report shall be prepared to ensure that the provisions and
assumptions of the original traffic report done for the area development plan
are still valid and applicable. The amended traffic study shall be finalized to
the approval of the public works department prior to city council action on the
specific plan. The specific plan and subsequent site plan development shall
comply with the recommendations and findings of the amended traffic report.
(Ord. 1635, 6-6-2005)
073-09: ARCHITECTURE:
Architectural design of the buildings shall attempt to express a creative
presentation of exterior building materials, exterior details and texture,
treatment of windows and doors, use of angles, and multiplicity of planes
within the wall and roof design. The buildings should work together to provide
a unifying theme through the development and the Davis Estates area development
plan as a whole. Buildings and garages should have a variety of materials such
as brick, natural stone, etc., which present a variation of architectural
styles or elements and overall provides visual interest. Architecture of the
buildings should be as generally shown in the Bella South specific plan
concepts package (see exhibit C on file in the city). After approval by the
plan and zoning commission and city council, slight modifications to the
exterior appearance of the buildings may be allowed with the approval of the
director of community development.
   A.   Garages visible from the public streets shall incorporate enhanced
architectural roof elements to provide visual interest and attempt to disguise
the purpose of the building.
   B.   Balconies are required for at least eighty percent (80%) of the units
of at least five feet (5') deep, which may extend beyond the front setback, yet
may be no closer than fifteen feet (15') to the front property line. (Ord.
1635, 6-6-2005)
073-10: SIGNAGE REGULATION:
Signage shall comply with the sign standards and provisions of the city sign
code for the applicable residential district.
   A.   All ground signs shall be located on private property and a minimum of
ten feet (10') from a public street right of way line.
   B.   All ground signs shall incorporate landscape vegetation at the base to
visually anchor the sign. (Ord. 1635, 6-6-2005)
073-11: MASTER PROPERTY OWNERS' ASSOCIATION:
With the first site plan development proposal for the property herein legally
described in section
073-01 of this ordinance, proper action shall be taken to establish the
appropriate Bella South property owners' association including all building
restrictions, covenants, and other associated conditions which shall apply to
said property. The Bella South property owners' association, at a minimum,
shall be responsible for the ongoing upkeep and maintenance of any privately
owned common grounds, structures, plazas, signs, etc., as outlined in the
association documents and any other specific development improvements noted as
their responsibility in this ordinance. It is strongly encouraged that a
reciprocal agreement be entered between the Bella South Association and other
appropriate associations within the land included in the Davis Estates area
development plan for the shared use of recreation amenities. (Ord. 1635, 6-6-
2005)
073-12: VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES:
Any person who violates the provisions of this ordinance upon conviction shall
be punished as set forth in section 1-4-1 of the city code. (Ord. 1635, 6-6-
2005)
073-99: LEGISLATIVE HISTORY:
Ord. 1635, 6-6-2005.
PUD #74
JORDAN CREEK CROSSING II
SECTION:
074-01: Legal Description
074-02: Intent Of The Jordan Creek Crossing II Specific Plan
074-03: Required Plans
074-04: Requirements
074-05: Landscaping
074-06: Usable Outdoor Space
074-07: Pedestrian Connections
074-08: Architecture
074-09: Signage
074-10: Storm Water Management
074-11: Traffic Study
074-12: Street Improvements And Access Drives
074-13: Sanitary Sewer Service And Water Main Extensions
074-14: Streetlights
074-15: Easements
074-16: Violations And Penalties
074-99: Legislative History
074-01: LEGAL DESCRIPTION:
A part of outlot U, Davis Estates plat 1, an official plat recorded in the city
of West Des Moines, Dallas County, Iowa, being more particularly described as
follows:
Beginning at the southwest corner of said outlot "U"; thence north 14°31'33"
west along the west line of said outlot "U", 173.26 feet to the southerly right
of way line of Coachlight Drive; thence northeasterly along said southerly
right of way line and a curve concave northwesterly whose radius is 760.00
feet, whose arc length is 149.38 feet and whose chord bears north 68°55'44"
east, 149.14 feet; thence north 63°17'53" east continuing along said southerly
right of way line, 397.01 feet; thence southeasterly continuing along said
southerly right of way line and a curve concave southwesterly whose radius is
35.00 feet, whose arc length is 54.98 feet and whose chord bears south
71°42'07" east, 49.50 feet; thence south 26°42'07" east, 105.21 feet; thence
southerly along a curve concave westerly whose radius is 1050.00 feet, whose
arc length is 308.16 feet and whose chord bears south 18°17'39" east, 307.06
feet to the south line of said outlot "U"; thence north 89°52'51" west
continuing along said south line, 641.04 feet to the point of beginning and
containing 4.24 acres (184,576 s.f.).
(Ord. 1739, 3-26-2007)
074-02: INTENT OF THE JORDAN CREEK CROSSING II SPECIFIC PLAN:
To create a development that complements the surrounding area by capitalizing
upon and further promoting the mixture of uses in order to create live, work
and play environments, and to facilitate nonmotorized transportation through
the connection of sidewalks and trails into and out of the development. (Ord.
1739, 3-26-2007)
074-03: REQUIRED PLANS:
The following plans shall be required as a part of the processing of any
development application for any property within Jordan Creek Crossing II:
   A.   Area Development Plan: Exhibit A, on file in the city, is the city
council approved Davis Estates area development plan which includes the above
legally described property identified as planning unit G.
   B.   Specific Plan: This council adopted specific plan identifies detailed
development criteria for planning unit G as identified within the associated
area development plan. On file in the city and made a part of this rezoning is
a specific plan diagram for the Jordan Creek Crossing II specific plan (see
exhibit B). It is recognized that modifications and changes to the specific
plan drawing may be necessary due to changes in building footprints or details;
however, the intent is that the major elements of the specific plan should be
adhered to and may not be altered without the approval of the city council.
Where the specific plan drawing and specific plan language conflict, the
specific plan language shall prevail.
   C.   Preliminary Plat/Final Plat: Property included within planning unit G
shall be preliminary and final platted prior to or in conjunction with any site
plan submittal for any proposed development within the above legally described
property. Ground work associated with roads and utilities may be started, at
the developer's risk, upon approval of the preliminary plat by the city council
and required construction plans by the city of West Des Moines department of
public works, unless otherwise specifically restricted by plan and zoning or
city council action. A final plat must be approved and recorded with the Dallas
County recorder prior to issuance of any building permit, including footing and
foundation permits, for construction of any building or structure within the
associated specific plan.
   D.   Development Applications: The site plan for any parcel within the
Jordan Creek Crossing II specific plan must meet the general guidelines and
regulations specified within the approved specific plan. Site plans which meet
the guidelines and regulations of the specific plan, as determined by city
staff, will be reviewed administratively and granted approval by the director
of development services. If the site is deemed not to be in compliance with the
specific plan, the site plan will be subject to review and approval by the
appropriate viewing body (i.e., city council, plan and zoning commission or
board of adjustment). An approved site plan is required prior to issuance of
any building permits, including footing and foundation permits, for
construction of any building or structure. (Ord. 1739, 3-26-2007)
074-04: REQUIREMENTS:
Unless otherwise noted, the following shall apply to all land within the Jordan
Creek Crossing II specific plan:
   A.   General Conditions:
      1.   Unless otherwise specified herein, the development of the Jordan
Creek Crossing II specific plan shall comply with the provisions of the West
Des Moines zoning ordinance.
      2.   Unless otherwise specifically approved by the city council, the
developer, their successors and/or assigns, if any, shall pay all planning,
engineering, and construction costs for the development of the planned unit
development, as required by this ordinance and approved site plans which may
include, but are not limited to, the cost of all streets, storm sewers,
sanitary sewers, streetlights, drainageway improvements, detention basins,
water mains, buffers and other improvements as required. No occupancy permits,
either temporary or permanent, will be issued until all public improvements are
either installed or properly bonded for as determined by the public works
department and accepted by the city council.
      3.   All streets and internal traffic flows, including parking lots,
shall permit the travel of the fire department's largest vehicle, including
accommodating adequate turning needs. Approval of unique design solutions to
accommodate turning movements may be granted by the city council if the
solutions proposed are acceptable to the West Des Moines fire marshal.
   B.   Specific Conditions: In addition to the general conditions of this
specific plan, the following guidelines and requirements shall apply:
      1.   Land Use: All general use regulations and provisions set forth in
title 9, "Zoning", of the city code for the regional commercial (RC) district
as permitted and permitted conditionally shall apply except as designated
below:
         a.   Prohibited uses:
SIC 075: Animal services, except veterinary.
SIC 45: Transportation by air.
SIC 46: Pipelines.
SIC 47: Transportation services.
SIC 726: Funeral service.
SIC 75: Automotive repair, services, and parking.
SIC 7832: Motion picture theaters.
SIC 79: Amusement and recreational services.
SIC 806: Hospitals.
SIC 8069: Specialty hospitals.
         b.   Permitted uses:
SIC 472: Arrangement of passenger transportation.
SIC 473: Arrangement of transportation of freight and cargo.
SIC 521b: Showrooms/display rooms and associated offices.
SIC 5813: Drinking places.
SIC 7542: Car washes.
SIC 791: Dance studios, schools, and halls.
SIC 7991: Physical fitness facilities.
SIC 7993: Coin operated amusement devices (video arcade).
SIC 7997: Membership sports and recreation clubs.
         c.   Drive-through facilities are not allowed.
         d.   Outdoor storage of materials is not allowed.
      2.   Setbacks:
         a.   A twenty five foot (25') building setback from the property line
shall be provided along Coachlight Drive and South 64th Street. Porticos and
pedestrian patio/plaza spaces are allowed to encroach into this setback area,
but no parking or accessory structures not associated with and approved as part
of an outdoor patio/plaza space is allowed to encroach into the setback area.
         b.   A twenty foot (20') building setback from the property line shall
be provided along the south and west sides of the specific plan area. Porticos
and pedestrian patio/plaza spaces are allowed to encroach into this setback
area, but no parking or accessory structures not associated with and approved
as part of an outdoor patio/plaza space is allowed to encroach into the setback
area.
         c.   Off street parking areas shall be set back a minimum of twenty
five feet (25') from the ultimate right of way line for both Coachlight and
South 64th Street. A ten foot (10') setback is required along any other
adjoining lot lines; however, no parking lot setback is required when the
parking area is designed as a shared lot between two (2) parcels and a
reciprocal access and use agreement has been established.
      3.   Height Restrictions: Unless otherwise noted in this ordinance, the
height of buildings shall conform to the standard zoning provisions for the
professional commerce park (PCP) district, with the exception of building
elements such as bell towers, clock towers or other vertical architectural
elements. These elements may exceed height restrictions, to a maximum height of
seventy feet (70'), with the approval of the director of development services
as part of the site plan process or city council, when applicable.
      4.   Parking Requirements:
         a.   Lot 1: The minimum number of parking stalls required per building
per use on any parcel included within the Jordan Creek Crossing II specific
plan shall conform to title 9, chapter 15 of the city code.
         b.   Lot 2: A minimum of one space per three hundred (300) square feet
of gross leasable area (gla) of nonresidential uses shall be provided within
lot 2.
         c.   Parking Less Than Required: At the discretion of the director of
development services, a less stringent parking calculation may be used provided
the applicant can demonstrate that a parking rate less than the required will
adequately provide for the site due to shared parking or offsetting peak use
times.
      5.   Internal Site Lighting: Lighting within the site shall be designed
to provide for a safe environment while minimizing light pollution onto
adjoining properties.
         a.   All light levels shall fall at or below one foot-candle at the
property line of planning unit G. Prior to site plan approval, the applicant
shall submit a photometric plan which verifies adherence to these light levels.
         b.   Light fixtures within parking areas shall not exceed twenty five
feet (25') in height as measured from the top of the grade to the top of the
fixture. Extra care should be taken in the location of lights in the parking
areas to minimize views of the overhead light fixtures, as well as the impacts
of the lights on neighboring properties, especially the residential uses to the
north and east.
         c.   No wall pack or flood lighting is allowed.
         d.   All lights shall have a cutoff feature to direct the light to its
intended target. In addition to cutoff fixtures, additional measures to
minimize light pollution, prevent hot spots, and reduce light glare may be
required upon site review and may include, but are not limited to, lowering
parking lot light levels after business hours, turning off lights not necessary
for security purposes and implementing landscaping for light screening.
         e.   On file in the city are representations of the light fixtures
that shall be provided within this development. Although slight deviations from
the illustrations are permissible, the light fixtures shall be used as a
unifying element throughout the development. (Ord. 1739, 3-26-2007)
074-05: LANDSCAPING:
The landscaping requirements specified herein are intended to foster
aesthetically pleasing development which will enhance, protect and preserve the
appearance, character, general health, safety and welfare of the city of West
Des Moines. Landscaping is required to address the following primary aspects or
consequences of development:
•   Open space protection and enhancement.
•   Create environments conducive and inviting to pedestrian activities.
•   Street side enhancement ("streetscapes").
•   Visual screening of undesirable views and/or activities.
•   Mitigation of paving expanses associated with off street parking.
•   Impact of vehicle use areas.
The specific plan drawing, on file in the city, illustrates the buffering and
landscaping concept; this plan should be used as the guide for site plan
development in respect to the locations and quantities of plant material to be
provided. In the event that alternatives to what is shown on the specific plan
on file in the city are desired, the minimum vegetation requirements given
below will need to be provided. Details regarding specific varieties, exact
quantities, and the minimum size at time of planting shall be provided and
approved as part of the site plan submittal and shall meet the general
guidelines in respect to the minimum plant size traditionally applied to
development within the city. The provision of adequate buffering and
landscaping shall also be more thoroughly evaluated and approved as part of the
site plan approval. Additional buffering and landscaping may be required at
that time in response to additional details of the use, buildings, parking,
etc., to be implemented.
   A.   General:
      1.   Landscape plans shall be harmonious with the existing environment
and architectural design and should demonstrate a recognizable pattern or theme
through choice and location of materials for the overall development of the
project.
      2.   Foundation plantings shall be used at the base of buildings and
other structures to anchor the buildings to the site and create a transition
between lawn areas and wall planes.
      3.   The use of predominately evergreen vegetation is encouraged to
provide winter substance within the landscape and year round buffering or
visual screening.
      4.   Trees that will overhang into vehicle or pedestrian use areas or
travel lanes shall be of a variety that will accommodate pruning to allow for
the minimum required clearance height without adversely affecting the overall
natural shape of the variety (14 feet over vehicle travel lanes; 8 feet over
pedestrian travel lanes).
   B.   Open Space: The intent of open space is to allow for a balance between
natural areas and the built environment and to provide for the overall
beautification and "greening" of the city. All of the land within a site that
is not occupied by buildings, off street parking areas, or other vehicle use
areas can be classified as open space. Structures such as gazebos, arbors,
pergolas, etc., that are associated with outdoor pedestrian use areas may be
counted towards fulfilling the minimum open space requirement.
      1.   A minimum of twenty five percent (25%) of open space is required
within each parcel associated with the Jordan Creek Crossing II specific plan.
      2.   Two (2) trees and three (3) shrubs are required for every three
thousand (3,000) square feet of bulk open space. A twenty (20) square foot mass
planting of perennial flowers or ornamental grasses may be substituted for
three (3) shrubs; no substitution for required trees is allowed.
      3.   Vegetation required as part of the open space may be placed into off
street parking areas, streetscape areas, or buffers required; however the open
space vegetation is in addition to that which would be required of buffer,
parking and streetscape areas and may not be counted towards fulfilling the
minimum amount of vegetation required for these areas.
   C.   Street Enhancement; Streetscapes: A landscaped edge or "streetscape"
shall be provided along streets that are "thought of" as public streets and
upon which the general public is allowed to travel, regardless if they are
public or private. These streetscapes are intended to be purely ornamental in
nature, providing desired "green" to the city, shade, interest, street
enhancement, and visual softening of pavement expanses. The streetscapes should
have a theme or noticeable pattern/design and should attempt to serve as a
distinguishing or identifiable landmark for the development.
      1.   The streetscape area shall consist of a twenty five foot (25') area
parallel with and adjacent to the street right of way for Coachlight Drive and
South 64th Street.
      2.   Streetscapes may contain buffer/screening areas and may be
intermittently encroached into by building porticos or pedestrian plazas/open
spaces.
      3.   For the purpose of calculating minimum vegetation required within a
streetscape, streetscape areas shall be considered as those areas of the
"streetscape" that remain which are unpaved and which buffering or screening of
negative site elements is not necessary (i.e., adjacent to buildings or open
space areas).
         a.   One tree and two (2) shrubs are required for every twenty five
(25) linear feet of streetscape area. A twenty (20) square foot mass planting
of perennial flowers or ornamental grasses may be substituted for every two (2)
shrubs; no substitution for required trees is allowed.
   D.   Off Street Parking: It is desired that all off street parking areas be
aesthetically improved to reduce obtrusive characteristics which are inherent
to their function. All parking areas shall be designed to create small,
aesthetically landscaped and screened parking lots that are designed to
function not only in the interest of accommodating automobiles, but also in the
interest of promoting safe pedestrian movement. Multiple landscape islands
combined with vegetation shall be incorporated to effectively eliminate a "sea
of asphalt/concrete" and to decrease hot spots and heat reflection back into
the environment. Island locations should aim to shade the majority of the
parking area with tree canopies upon tree maturity.
      1.   Landscape islands or open areas shall be located at the terminus end
of all parking rows. Terminal islands shall measure at least ten feet (10') in
width by thirty eight feet (38') in length for ninety degree (90°) dual parking
rows or ten feet (10') in width by nineteen feet (19') in length for single
rows. For single rows that are designed to allow the vehicle bumper to overhang
an abutting open space, the island length may be reduced to seventeen feet
(17') in length.
      2.   Any linear parking row that contains greater than nine (9) parking
stalls must incorporate landscape islands or landscape pods spaced no greater
than six (6) stalls apart.
      3.   Stall islands within a single row of parking shall measure at least
nine feet (9') in width by nineteen feet (19') in length (back of curb to back
of curb) or nine feet (9') in width by thirty eight feet (38') for dual rows.
If the proposed parking area is designed to allow the bumper of the vehicle to
overhang an open area at least eight feet (8') in width, the length of both the
parking stall and stall island may be reduced by that overhang amount (i.e., a
2 foot overhang would reduce stall and stall island length to 17 feet minimum).
      4.   Parking lot layouts that utilize a parking stall angle different
than ninety degrees (90°) will be evaluated as part of the site plan review and
approval.
      5.   Landscape pods shall measure a minimum of six feet (6') from the
back of curb to the back of curb.
      6.   The minimum vegetation required within off street parking areas
shall be as follows:
         a.   One tree should be installed in each landscape pod.
         b.   One tree should be installed in each nine foot by nineteen foot
(9' x 19') stall island.
         c.   Two (2) trees shall be installed in each nine foot by thirty
eight foot (9' x 38') stall island.
         d.   Two (2) trees shall be installed in all terminal islands.
         e.   Additionally, two (2) shrubs or a twenty (20) square foot mass
planting of perennial flowers or ornamental grasses shall be incorporated
within the islands for every ten (10) parking stalls located on the site;
additional vegetation is desired within these islands, but is not required. No
substitutions are allowed for trees required within the islands.
         f.   No trees shall be required in those islands which overlap the
public sanitary sewer line/easement.
   E.   Buffers: Buffer screening between districts or parcels and uses shall
not be required as set forth in section 9-3-10, "Buffers", of the city code.
Buffer areas shall be implemented to visually screen and mitigate the impacts
of uses, structures, and negative elements of development (car wash bays,
surface parking areas, vehicle queuing lanes, trash enclosures, service areas,
etc.) on and from neighboring roadways and properties.
The implementation of vegetation is required as part of buffering/screening.
This vegetation may be combined with other measures such as berming, low stone
walls, decorative opaque fencing, or any combination thereof to enhance the
effectiveness of the buffering/screening. Buffers should be designed to achieve
the maximum amount of screening from the maximum number of viewpoints with
vegetation layered to ensure adequate blockage of views and to create depth and
a sense of naturalness. Care should be taken to ensure that "through-views"
under tree canopies are adequately blocked. Alternative concepts that meet the
intent of buffering/screening may be allowed at the discretion of the director
of development services.
In the event that the site plan approved buffering/screening measures for any
portion of the Jordan Creek Crossing II specific plan area is removed to
accommodate an internal drive connection to either the west or south adjoining
properties, additional screening measures, including implementation of
additional vegetation, shall be the responsibility of the adjoining developing
property. This additional screening may be located on the property included
within the Jordan Creek Crossing II specific plan area with the permission of
the property owner, as well as on the adjoining property being developed
(designated as parcel I on the Davis Estates area development plan).
Achievement of adequate screening will be reviewed and approved as part of the
specific plan and subsequent site plan submittal and review process for
adjoining parcel I.
Specific buffering shall be provided as follows and as noted otherwise in this
ordinance:
      1.   Trash Containment Areas: All trash containment devices, including
compactors and dumpsters shall be buffered and visually screened from adjacent
roadways, pedestrian paths and adjoining properties.
         a.   Trash containment areas shall be located within the site to
minimize views of them from adjacent streets and properties and shall be
completely enclosed so as to not be seen from off site.
         b.   The enclosure shall exceed the highest point of the compactor or
dumpster.
         c.   The enclosure shall be made of material that is opaque and
compatible and consistent with the architecture and materials of the principal
building. Solid metal gates shall be incorporated to contain windblown litter.
         d.   Pedestrian access to the receptacle, separate from the gates,
should be located and designed to minimize views into the enclosure.
         e.   The area surrounding the enclosure shall be landscaped to soften
and minimize the visual presence of the structure.
      2.   Mechanical And Utility Equipment: Heating, ventilation, air
conditioning, generators, utility meters, and other mechanical and utility
equipment, which is located on, beside, or adjacent to any building or
development shall be buffered and visually screened from adjacent roadways,
pedestrian paths and adjoining properties.
         a.   Mechanical and/or utility equipment shall not be located within
the front yard of any development and should be located within the site to
minimize views of from adjacent streets and properties. If no other location
within the site is suitable for the placement of the equipment, the director of
development services may allow the location of the equipment within the front
yard provided appropriate screening is implemented to conceal the equipment.
         b.   A permanent screen that utilizes building materials and designs
compatible and consistent with the architecture and materials of the principal
building shall be implemented whenever possible.
         c.   Screening should exceed the height of the equipment and should
provide for year round visual obstruction.
      3.   Vehicle Use Areas: Vehicle use areas (off street parking, vehicle
storage, queuing lanes, loading docks, service areas, and any other vehicle
related elements deemed undesirable) shall be buffered and visually screened
from adjacent roadways, pedestrian paths and adjoining properties.
         a.   Off street parking areas shall be screened from the ground to a
height of at least three feet (3').
         b.   This screening implemented should not leave unobstructed openings
of greater than ten feet (10') in length. As a general guideline, a minimum of
three (3) evergreen trees and ten (10) shrubs shall be planted for every thirty
five (35) linear feet of necessary visual screen length.
      4.   Other: Views from adjacent roadways, pedestrian paths and adjoining
properties into the car wash bays proposed for the western parcel (identified
as lot 1 on the specific plan drawing on file in the city) shall be buffered
and visually screened.
         a.   This screening implemented should not leave any unobstructed
openings. As a general guideline, a minimum of three (3) evergreen trees and
ten (10) shrubs shall be planted for every thirty five (35) linear feet of
necessary visual screen length. (Ord. 1739, 3-26-2007)
074-06: USABLE OUTDOOR SPACE:
The town center overlay district guidelines aim to create interactive spaces
for pedestrians through the incorporation of plaza areas and pedestrian
pathways.
   A.   Patio/plaza areas shall be designed to encourage opportunities for
interaction among pedestrians and should provide as many seating opportunities
as possible through the placement of benches, chairs, tables, planter walls,
etc. During site plan review, the director of development services shall
determine the exact number of seating opportunities to be provided.
   B.   Landscape lighting shall be provided whenever possible to extend the
usability of the patios into the evening.
   C.   Patio areas should incorporate alternative decorative paving materials
for visual interest and variety and shall implement landscape plantings to
soften, enhance, and delineate the areas. Additionally, whenever possible,
elements that enrich the space (i.e., art, fountains, flowers, banners, and
children's play environment, etc.) should be incorporated.
   D.   Installation of the patios shall be at the time of construction of the
associated building and at the cost of the developer.
      1.   If the car wash use proposed for the western parcel (identified as
lot 1 on the specific plan drawing on file in the city) is the type of car wash
in which the owner of the vehicle stays with their vehicle at all times rather
than turning the vehicle over to a wash attendant, no outdoor plaza space will
be required. However, in the event that the car wash is the type where the
vehicle owner is separated from their vehicle and waits for it in a common
patron area, the incorporation of an outdoor patio/plaza space is required.
Additionally, if a car wash use of any type is no longer active on the site and
a different use is established, the incorporation of an outdoor patio/plaza
space may be required. Determination as to whether a usable outdoor space is
required will be made by the director of development services at such time that
the site plan review of the use/site is being conducted and details of the
exact use operations are known.
      2.   A usable outdoor space is required within the eastern parcel
(identified as lot 2 on the specific plan drawing on file in the city). Details
of the patio/plaza size, location, design, and materials are required with the
first site plan submittal for this area. The size of the outdoor space shall be
proportional, as determined by the director of development services, to the
size and use of the building and may be required to be larger than what is
conceptually shown on the specific plan drawing on file in the city. If, during
the review of the site plan development application, it is determined that
several tenants could share in the creation of a plaza space, a detailed
agreement as to the responsibilities of the applicants shall be submitted.
   E.   When applicable, details regarding use, maintenance, and replacement
responsibilities for the plaza spaces should be identified within either a
private master property owners' association document or within private lease
agreements.
   F.   On file in the city are representations of the street furniture that
shall be provided within patio/plaza areas in this development. Although slight
deviations from the illustrations are permissible, the street furniture shall
be used as a unifying element throughout this development. Without compromising
the design intent of the plazas, the maximum number of furniture opportunities
possible shall be incorporated. (Ord. 1739, 3-26-2007)
074-07: PEDESTRIAN CONNECTIONS:
Sidewalks and trails shall be provided to allow for pedestrian movement
throughout the specific plan area, as well as pedestrian connections to other
parcels within the Davis Estates area development plan.
   A.   Public sidewalks shall be installed along Coachlight Drive and South
64th Street as a part of the public improvements of the plat. If final plat
release for recordation is desired prior to construction of and acceptance of
the public sidewalks by the public works department and city council, the
developer will be required to post the appropriate surety prior to the council
approval of the final plat.
   B.   Public sidewalks shall be in place prior to issuance of any occupancy
permits, either temporary or final.
   C.   Sidewalks within the site shall be a minimum of four feet (4') in width
except in those situations in which a proposed parking lot is designed to allow
the bumper of the vehicle to overhang the sidewalk; in these situations, the
sidewalk width shall be increased to measure a minimum of six feet (6') in
width to accommodate pedestrian movement.
   D.   Whenever possible, multiple private sidewalks shall be installed at
various points along the perimeter to promote pedestrian movement into the site
(i.e., corners, midblock access, etc.). Private walkways within the site shall
be reviewed and approved with the site plan and shall be designed to be wide
enough to accommodate pedestrians in conjunction with any outdoor seating areas
and/or pedestrian street furniture planned. (Ord. 1739, 3-26-2007)
074-08: ARCHITECTURE:
The intent of these regulations is to create building facades that are varied
and articulated to provide visual interest to pedestrians and passing vehicular
traffic, while providing a unique design to the West Des Moines community.
   A.   Architectural Concepts: On file in the city are illustrative examples
of the architectural concept for the first building to be constructed on the
western parcel (identified as lot 1 on the specific plan drawing on file in the
city). Although it is understood and preferred that not all buildings within a
development be identical, each building within the development should however
implement architectural components and building materials found on other
buildings within the site to create a visually cohesive development and carry
through an established theme. The development of additional buildings within
any property included in the Jordan Creek Crossing II specific plan area are
required to implement a building that is cohesive in design and materials with
any previously established or approved buildings.
      1.   Whenever possible, all buildings shall implement the following basic
design components:
         a.   Fenestration (door and window openings) shall be sized to the
scale of the building and detailed appropriately to the pedestrian theme. Use
of repeating window patterns and details are encouraged to unify the design.
         b.   Entrances into buildings should be easily identified through the
use of building design and detailing. Projected or recessed entryways, higher
rooflines, awnings or changes in building material are examples that can create
this effect.
         c.   Reflective glass or mirrored glass is discouraged. Efforts should
be made to use clear glass to promote a connection between the interior and
exterior of buildings.
         d.   In order to provide delineation and hierarchy, materials should
change with the change in building planes; however, all material should
complement the chosen theme.
         e.   All sides of all buildings should be treated to a level of
architectural style and detail appropriate to how open to public view the wall
plane is (i.e., 360 degree architecture).
         f.   Trim and structural elements such as posts or columns shall be
proportionately sized to the scale of the building and detailed appropriately
to the theme. When used, masonry materials shall have the appearance of three-
dimensional elements.
         g.   Corporate franchise design where the building functions as a
trademark is prohibited. Components of the corporate architecture shall be
permissible if they can be integrated into the building design while still
incorporating established architectural components from other buildings within
the development. The building design must be visually compatible with the
overall theme and uniqueness of the development in which it is located;
achievement of compatibility will be at the discretion of the director of
development services.
      2.   On file in the city is the architectural concept for the building to
be located on the western parcel of the Jordan Creek Crossing II area
(identified as lot 1); no conceptual drawings are included at this time for the
proposed building for the eastern parcel (identified as lot 2). Any future
building located within the eastern parcel (lot 2) shall incorporate similar
flat roof elements, trim details, and at least one of the building materials as
that is shown in the concept packet. Final building design approval for all
building within the Jordan Creek Crossing II development (both lots 1 and 2)
shall be administratively approved as part of the site plan approval after a
review and comment period by both plan and zoning commission and city council
members.
   B.   Materials: The use of brick, acceptable natural stone or masonry shall
be incorporated into the building architecture on all sides of the structure,
unless the director of development services determines that the use of
alternate building materials enhances the physical appearance and accomplishes
a compatible structure with the overall development. Smooth faced concrete
block, tilt-up concrete panels, or prefabricated steel panels are prohibited as
the predominant exterior building materials. (Ord. 1739, 3-26-2007)
074-09: SIGNAGE:
The regulations and provisions set forth in title 9, chapter 18, "Signs", of
the city code shall be met unless otherwise noted in this ordinance. All
signage, temporary and permanent, requires the submittal and approval of a sign
permit by the city of West Des Moines.
   A.   Monument Signs:
      1.   The western parcel (identified as lot 1 on the specific plan drawing
on file in the city) is allowed one ground monument sign along Coachlight
Drive.
      2.   The eastern parcel (identified as lot 2 on the specific plan drawing
on file in the city) is allowed one ground monument sign along Coachlight Drive
and one along South 64th Street.
      3.   A separation distance of one hundred fifty feet (150') shall be
maintained between ground monument signs located on the eastern parcel. A
separation distance of one hundred feet (100') between ground monument signs is
required between signs located on different parcels. The sharing of one
monument sign at the entrance drive off of Coachlight Drive is encouraged, but
not required.
      4.   All ground signs shall be located on private property and shall
maintain a minimum setback of ten feet (10') from the ultimate public street
right of way. To comply with fire code identification requirements, monument
signs shall include the site address in minimum eight inch (8") letters mounted
at least thirty inches (30") above the grade. Maximum height of sign copy shall
not exceed five feet (5') (except for address). The height of the ground sign
structure shall not exceed six feet (6') except architectural enhancements and
ornamentation which may extend to a maximum height of seven feet (7'). Three-
dimensional sign structures shall be allowed and the two (2) largest sign faces
shall be used to calculate the sign area.
      5.   All ground monument signs shall incorporate landscaping, including
vegetation, at the base of the sign in order to visually anchor and blend the
sign to the site.
   B.   Building Signage: As allowed per code.
   C.   Character: All signage constructed within the Jordan Creek Crossing II
specific plan shall incorporate aesthetic features compatible with the overall
character of the development. All signs shall be composed of self-contained
individual letters with anodized aluminum returns and trim or solid routed
faced metal panels.
   D.   Temporary Signage: As allowed per code. (Ord. 1739, 3-26-2007)
074-10: STORM WATER MANAGEMENT:
As part of the Davis Estates area development plan, to which this specific plan
is associated, a master storm water management plan (MSWMP) for the entire
development that governs the overall storm water management of the development
has been submitted to the West Des Moines public works department. A specific
storm water management plan (SWMP) is required with the development of each
parcel of land included within the Jordan Creek Crossing II specific plan area.
Approval of the SWMP by the public works department is required prior to
initiating any grading or construction activities. The method of storm water
management and the conveyance system for each parcel shall be determined and
approved prior to construction of any portion of this development. Preparation
of the MSWP shall be by the developer at his expense. (Ord. 1739, 3-26-2007)
074-11: TRAFFIC STUDY:
Per the traffic analysis completed by Snyder & Associates (2006), Jordan Creek
Crossing II has been allocated one thousand eight hundred forty seven (1,847)
average daily trips (ADT); one hundred fifty (150) A.M. peak; and one hundred
seventy two (172) P.M. peak vehicle trips. As development proposals are
approved, the number of vehicle trips generated by the proposed development
(based upon the number of square feet of a proposed specific use or number of
dwelling units, in conjunction with any parameters established in the traffic
analysis) will be subtracted from the overall total trips allocated to the
development. Approval of this proposed specific plan does not constitute a
guarantee that the proposed plan can be implemented as indicated. Development
of all parcels and implementation of desired land uses, including specific high
traffic generating tenants, will be limited by the available number of trips.
Should anticipated traffic exceed the total trips allocated for the Jordan
Creek Crossing II development prior to full build-out, further development of
parcels may be limited or prohibited. Alternate uses to those planned for
within the traffic analysis and approved as part of the Jordan Creek Crossing
II specific plan ordinance may be allowed, following completion of an amendment
to the approved traffic study analyzing the proposed alternative and
appropriate city approval of an amendment to the respective specific plan
ordinance and/or map, if necessary, if the existing uses and the proposed
change(s) collectively do not exceed the one thousand eight hundred forty seven
(1,847) average daily trips (ADT); one hundred fifty (150) A.M. peak; and one
hundred seventy two (172) P.M. peak trips. (Ord. 1739, 3-26-2007)
074-12: STREET IMPROVEMENTS AND ACCESS DRIVES:
All subdivisions, public and private streets, public or private street rights
of way and general development shall adhere to the standards and design
criteria set forth in the West Des Moines subdivision ordinance and/or
established city policies pertaining thereto, unless otherwise stated within
this ordinance.
   A.   All access drive and street locations and configurations shall comply
with the findings of the final public works approved traffic study.
   B.   All full access driveway locations will need to align with driveways on
the other side of the public streets and shall be coordinated with and
concurrence given by abutting property owners. The proximity of the driveways
to the public street intersections needs to be such that there is a free
movement of traffic on the public street system. Driveways shall intersect the
public street at ninety degree (90°) angles whenever possible.
   C.   The developer of Jordan Creek Crossing II specific plan shall
illustrate as part of said plan the location and details of potential future
access drive connections to the adjoining western property. Private ingress/
egress easements for a future access connection drive shall be established by
the developer of the property included within the Jordan Creek Crossing II
specific plan at the time of recordation of the final plat. Additionally, the
developer shall execute an agreement with the city of West Des Moines which
establishes that the construction/paving of that connection drive portion that
is located on lot 1 will be constructed/paved by the owner of this west parcel
(identified as lot 1 on the specific plan drawing on file in the city). (Ord.
1739, 3-26-2007)
074-13: SANITARY SEWER SERVICE AND WATER MAIN EXTENSIONS:
If not already completed, the developer, their successors or assigns, if any,
shall construct, at their cost, all main sanitary sewers for service to
property within the Jordan Creek Crossing II specific plan at the time that any
portion of the property is being developed. Construction of these utilities
shall be in accordance with the requirements of the city of West Des Moines
subdivision ordinance and the Des Moines metro standards. No occupancy permits,
either temporary or permanent, will be issued until all public improvements are
either installed and accepted by the city council or properly bonded for as
determined by the public works department.
If not already completed, the developer, their successors or assigns, if any,
shall construct, at their cost, all water mains for water service to property
within the Jordan Creek Crossing II specific plan as required by West Des
Moines waterworks at the time that any portion of the property is being
developed. This requirement includes all water mains as indicated for property
included within the Jordan Creek Crossing II specific plan area, as well as all
mains in street rights of way adjacent to the specific plan property. The sizes
of all water mains shall be determined by the waterworks department. Water
mains shall be constructed along the entire street frontages of the specific
plan area. No occupancy permits, either temporary or permanent, will be issued
until all public improvements are either installed and accepted by the
waterworks board or properly bonded for as determined by the waterworks
department.
Nothing in this ordinance shall be construed to prevent the developer, their
successors or assigns, if any, from entering into private agreement(s) as they
may desire to share the cost of the installation of water, sanitary sewer, and/
or storm water infrastructure. (Ord. 1739, 3-26-2007)
074-14: STREETLIGHTS:
Prior to final plat approval by the city council, the applicant shall provide
the city of West Des Moines a streetlight bond for the installation of public
lights on Coachlight Drive and South 64th Street which abut the property. Due
to the overall width of the adjoining streets, streetlights will be required on
both sides of the streets. Streetlights shall be installed at the time of the
site plan with the full cost of the streetlights to be the responsibility of
the site plan applicant. No occupancy permits, either temporary or permanent,
will be issued until all streetlights are either installed or properly bonded
for as determined by the public works department. (Ord. 1739, 3-26-2007)
074-15: EASEMENTS:
   A.   Sanitary Sewer Access Easement: Prior to final plat recordation, an
access agreement shall be executed allowing the city unrestricted access to the
public sanitary sewer within the Jordan Creek Crossing II specific plan area.
This easement should clearly state that the city is not responsible for
restoration and/or replacement within the public sanitary sewer easement should
the city need to excavate the public sewer for normal city operations
(maintenance, repair, etc.).
   B.   Ingress/Egress Easement: Prior to final plat recordation, private
ingress/egress easements for a future access connection drive to the adjoining
west property shall be executed. (Ord. 1739, 3-26-2007)
074-16: VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES:
Any person who violates the provisions of this ordinance upon conviction shall
be punished as set forth in section 1-4-1 of the city code. (Ord. 1739, 3-26-
2007)
074-99: LEGISLATIVE HISTORY:
Ord. 1641, 7-18-2005; Ord. 1739, 3-26-2007.
PUD #75
JORDAN HEIGHTS
SECTION:
075-01: Legal Description
075-02: Required Plans
075-03: Intent Of The Jordan Heights Development
075-04: Requirements
075-05: Landscaping And Buffering
075-06: Open Space And Plaza Area Requirements
075-07: Architecture
075-08: Signage
075-09: Pedestrian Orientation And Connection
075-10: Land Use Design Criteria
075-11: All Areas To Be Platted
075-12: Stormwater Management
075-13: Street Right Of Way
075-14: Sanitary Sewer Service And Water Main Extensions
075-15: Construction Of Streets
075-16: Streetlights
075-17: Public Access Easements
075-18: Traffic Study
075-19: Violations And Penalties
075-99: Legislative History
075-01: LEGAL DESCRIPTION:
Lots 1 through 22, Jordan Heights Rowhouses, city of West Des Moines, Dallas
County, Iowa. (Ord. 1854, 1-11-2010)
075-02: REQUIRED PLANS:
The following plans shall be required as a part of the processing of any
development application for any property within the Jordan Heights specific
plan area:
   A.   Area Development Plan: An area development plan must be approved by the
city council prior to, or in conjunction with, the review of the specific plan
for any property within said specific plan. No change to the area development
plan shall be made without approval from the appropriate reviewing bodies. An
area development plan is a plan that identifies infrastructure, planning units,
major street patterns, drainage and detention, utilities, shared public spaces,
vehicular traffic impacts, proposed densities, and land use assumptions. It is
intended to promote the communication and cooperation between adjacent property
owners and developers to encourage cohesive, unified development, and identify
the anticipated phasing of construction, and parties involved. (Ord. 1854, 1-
11-2010)
On file in the city is the city council approved Davis Estates area development
plan (exhibit A) for this property which is labeled area 9 on the map
identifying the area development plans within the "Town Center Overlay District
Guidelines" as adopted by the West Des Moines city council.
   B.   Specific Plan: A specific plan identifies detailed development criteria
for each planning unit identified in the area development plan. The specific
plan will conform to the general intent of the area development plan and the
"Town Center Overlay District Guidelines" and shall be adopted by the city
council by ordinance. This ordinance shall constitute the specific plan for the
Jordan Heights development. On file in the city and made a part of this
rezoning is a specific plan map for Jordan Heights (exhibit B) and development
concepts booklet (exhibit C). It is recognized that slight modifications and
changes to the map may be necessary due to changes in building footprints or
details; however, the intent is that the major elements of the specific plan
should be adhered to and may not be altered without the approval of the city
council. Where the specific plan map and specific plan language conflict, the
specific plan language shall prevail. (Ord. 1854, 1-11-2010; amd. Ord. 1948, 4-
30-2012)
   C.   Development Applications: Site plans for parcels within the Jordan
Heights development must meet the intent of the approved specific plan and
shall be submitted to the city of West Des Moines for review and approval prior
to the development of any portion of the property within the specific plan.
Site plans, which meet the intent of the specific plan as determined by the
city staff, will be subject to administrative review and approval by the
director of development services. If the site is deemed not to be in compliance
with the specific plan, the site plan will be subject to review by the
appropriate reviewing body. (Ord. 1854, 1-11-2010)
075-03: INTENT OF THE JORDAN HEIGHTS DEVELOPMENT:
To create a development of rowhouses and townhomes surrounding a pedestrian
oriented green space. (Ord. 1854, 1-11-2010)
075-04: REQUIREMENTS:
Requirements for all parcels within the Jordan Heights development shall be as
follows:
   A.   Walkways: Private walkways adjacent to buildings or plaza areas shall
be reviewed with the site plan and shall be designed to be wide enough to
accommodate areas for pedestrian street furniture, walkways and street trees.
   B.   Screening: Loading areas, transformers, HVAC, and trash enclosures
shall be screened in accordance with city code. Screening materials shall be
consistent with that used on the primary structure. (Ord. 1854, 1-11-2010)
   C.   Street Furniture: On file in the city are representations of the street
furniture that shall be installed within the Jordan Heights development.
Although slight deviations from the illustrations are permissible, the street
furniture shall distinguish districts as well as primary and secondary vehicle
and pedestrian travelways. (Ord. 1854, 1-11-2010; amd. Ord. 1948, 4-30-2012)
   D.   Height Restrictions: Unless otherwise noted in this ordinance, the
height of a building will conform to the standard zoning provisions for that
district, with the exception of building elements such as bell towers, clock
towers or other vertical architectural elements. These elements may exceed
height restrictions, as determined by the director of development services.
   E.   Lighting Standards: It is intended that lighting for all areas within
the Jordan Heights development shall be designed to provide a safe environment,
yet mitigate light pollution onto adjoining properties. During the design
review of each building, the applicant must demonstrate how lighting will not
adversely affect the adjoining properties.
      1.   With the exception of public streetlights along Beechtree Drive,
64th Street and Wistful Vista Drive, light fixtures shall be limited to a
maximum of twenty five feet (25') in height as measured from the grade to the
top of the fixture.
      2.   No wall pack or flood lighting is allowed. Included in the concepts
packet for the development are examples of light fixtures to be implemented.
All lights shall be directed to their intended target and shall be of a design
and so located as to mitigate any spillover impact on surrounding properties.
As part of the review of each site plan, a photometric plan must be submitted.
At the time of application, the plan shall demonstrate that light levels fall
at or below one foot-candle at each development's property line.
   F.   Parking Requirements: All backs of garages and off street parking lots,
excluding on street parking areas shall be landscaped to screen their
visibility from public rights of way or from any adjoining property outside the
Jordan Heights development through the use of buffering and/or berming and
shall be reviewed at the time of review of the site plan for the development of
the parcel.
      1.   Off street parking lots shall be set back a minimum of thirty feet
(30') from property line.
      2.   A minimum of two (2) covered and two (2) uncovered spaces for each
unit shall be provided.
      3.   On street parking may be provided on all internal private streets.
Such on street parking shall be illustrated on all development applications for
all parcels. (Ord. 1854, 1-11-2010)
075-05: LANDSCAPING AND BUFFERING:
   A.   Buffer Parks And Streetscapes: Traditional buffer parks required by the
city code shall not be required for this development with the exception of
along the east property line where a thirty foot (30') buffer park shall be
required. Landscaping for the buffer park shall be per city code requirements.
In lieu of buffer parks, along all public streets, streetscape landscaping
shall be provided within the first fifteen feet (15') parallel to the roadways/
travelways.
      1.   The streetscape landscaping is intended to provide a constant design
treatment that enhances the travelways. A conceptual streetscape street tree
plan shall be illustrated as part of the specific plan. Details regarding final
vegetation location and varieties of trees and shrubs to be implemented shall
be evaluated and approved as part of the site plan process. Buildings or
pedestrian elements such as patios, walkways or design elements, may
intermittently encroach into the landscaped area, however parking lots may not.
The plantings shall be installed with the development of each site plan.
Landscaping standards are as follows:
         a.   To calculate the number of required plants, divide the total
linear feet of street frontage by thirty five (35). For every thirty five feet
(35') of frontage, one tree and three (3) shrubs shall be required. Trees may
include both deciduous and evergreen. The landscaping may be arranged in
natural plantings/massing, in a linear pattern or a combination thereof. The
incorporation of retaining walls into the streetscape plan is permissible
during the review of the site plan.
         b.   Shrubs may be substituted for perennials at a rate of three (3)
shrubs being equal to a solid perennial planting area of twenty (20) square
feet with perennials spaced twelve inches (12") on center or less unless it is
determined by the director of development services that another spacing
provides the same appearance in massing. No more than twenty five percent (25%)
of the shrubs may be substituted for perennials.
         c.   Alternative concepts that meet the intent of streetscape
landscaping may be allowed at the discretion of the director of development
services.
      2.   An articulated three foot (3') or higher berm shall be required for
areas adjoining an off street parking lot. The berm may be an earthen berm or
landscape walls. Landscape walls must adhere to the following provisions:
         a.   Walls constructed for the retaining of soil which are greater
than four feet (4') in height must be designed by an individual knowledgeable
and certified in structural engineering.
         b.   Walls over four feet (4') shall have one and one-half feet (11/
2') of horizontal terraces for every two feet (2') of exposed vertical wall
face. Exceptions to this requirement may be granted by the director of
development services for unusual situations and to preserve existing vegetation
or landscape features.
         c.   Walls may be brick, individual decorative modular wall stone, or
natural stacked wall or field stone. Walls composed of landscape timbers or
other wood products are not desired due to the deterioration potential of the
material. Wood walls or other material may be used, with approval by the
director of development services, in areas where views of the wall will be
minimal.
         d.   Vegetation shall be planted along all types of walls to soften
the visual impact, visually break up long expanses of the wall and to visually
anchor it to the site.
      3.   Ponds, lakes, wetlands or other water features may be placed within
the streetscape landscaping given that a water feature, such as a fountain and/
or significant wetland plantings and edge treatments are provided. Dry
detention areas are not generally allowed in buffer parks however if it is
determined by the director of development services that the intent of the
buffer park is met, a portion of the dry detention may encroach into the
buffer.
   B.   Site Landscaping: Due to the limited opportunities for the
incorporation of coniferous vegetation within the overall site, the provision
of thirty five percent (35%) coniferous vegetation as required in subsection 9-
19-8B6 of the city code shall not apply to this development. The applicant
shall however incorporate evergreen material to the greatest extent possible in
order to provide visual variety, winter interest, assist in mitigating negative
elements of development such as utility equipment and community trash
receptacles and to provide separation of private resident spaces from one
another and adjoining roadways. (Ord. 1854, 1-11-2010)
075-06: OPEN SPACE AND PLAZA AREA REQUIREMENTS:
The intent is to encourage a sense of place through street level activity by
allowing the imaginative and efficient utilization of land and to develop a
sense of community by promoting year round pedestrian and outdoor activities at
the street level.
   A.   Open Space/Plaza Requirements: The development shall include one large
central green space and several pedestrian walkways throughout the development
to connect to the central space as well as provide connections to the
surrounding public sidewalk network. The central green space is intended as a
focal and gathering point for the residents of the Jordan Heights development.
The features of the central green space may consist of such elements and
amenities as vegetative plantings, seat benches, tables, alternative paving,
pedestrian lighting, water features, play equipment and outdoor art. The
central green space as shown in the specific plan illustrations on file in the
city and further detailed on the respective site plan for the area shall be
installed at such time that fifty percent (50%) of all anticipated buildings
within the development are constructed or at such time that all lots adjacent
to the plaza area are developed.
At the review of the site plan, the applicant must demonstrate how the plaza/
activity area design meets the following intents:
      1.   Creates spaces that allow for the day and evening interaction among
pedestrians;
      2.   Provides multiple seating opportunities;
      3.   When possible, the integration of storm drainage and detention
should be designed to enhance the public space, which would include the
creation of ponds, waterfalls or landscaped waterways;
      4.   Creates an outdoor room, by limiting the interaction with moving
vehicles and partially surrounding the space by buildings, landscaping elements
and architectural features; and
      5.   Provides elements that enrich the space. Elements may include, but
are not limited to, artwork, fountains, flowers, banners, and children's play
environment. (Ord. 1854, 1-11-2010)
075-07: ARCHITECTURE:
The intent is to create building facades that are varied and articulated to
provide visual interest to pedestrians and homeowners. Buildings should be
proportioned and defined by clear facade elements such as a base, middle, and
top. Particular attention shall be paid to the incorporation of three hundred
sixty degree (360°) architecture, pedestrian connections, and screening of HVAC
units.
   A.   Architectural Concepts: On file in the city with this specific plan are
illustrative examples of the architectural concepts for buildings within the
Jordan Heights development. Although it is understood and preferred that not
all buildings within this development are identical, each building should have
several elements that carry through the established theme. All buildings shall
use the following in all building design:
      1.   Fenestration (door and window openings) shall be sized to the scale
of the building and detailed appropriately to the pedestrian theme. Use of
repeating window patterns and details are encouraged to unify the design.
      2.   The architecture should clearly delineate the individual units.
      3.   Each building of the development should carry a consistent
appearance while varying the color or style of the brick, stone and siding to
distinguish between buildings.
      4.   Entrances into buildings should be easily identified through the use
of building design and detailing. Projected or recessed entryways, higher
rooflines, awnings or changes in building material are examples that can create
this effect.
      5.   Materials should change with the change in building planes; however,
all material should keep within the chosen theme.
      6.   Trim and structural elements such as posts or columns shall be sized
to the scale of the building and detailed appropriately to the theme. When
used, masonry materials shall have the appearance of three-dimensional
elements.
      7.   Garages or accessory structures should incorporate architecture
details with the use of windows, doors and other facade detailing.
      8.   Eighty percent (80%) of multi-family units within a development must
provide a balcony or patio of at least five feet (5') deep.
   B.   Materials: The use of brick, acceptable stone or masonry shall be
incorporated into the building architecture on all sides of the structure,
unless the director of development services determines that the use of
alternate building materials enhances the physical appearance and accomplishes
a compatible structure with the overall development. Smooth faced concrete
block, tilt- up concrete panels, or prefabricated steel panels are prohibited
as the predominant exterior building materials. (Ord. 1854, 1-11-2010)
075-08: SIGNAGE:
Illustrative signage concepts are on file in the city. While some variation may
occur between the actual built sign and the illustration, the nature and intent
of the signs must be consistent with the attached illustration. The regulations
and provisions set forth in title 9, chapter 18, "Signs", of the city code, for
the residential medium density (RM) district shall be met unless otherwise
noted in this ordinance.
   A.   Character: All signage constructed within the Jordan Heights
development shall incorporate aesthetic features compatible with the overall
character of the development. All signs shall be composed of self-contained
individual letters with anodized aluminum returns and trim or solid routed
faced metal panels.
   B.   Directory Boards: Directory boards which illustrate the layout of the
development and identify the addresses of each unit or address range for each
building shall be designed and placed within the development per the direction
of the fire marshal. (Ord. 1854, 1-11-2010)
075-09: PEDESTRIAN ORIENTATION AND CONNECTION:
Pedestrian access shall be provided between all parcels within the Davis
Estates area development plan and the Jordan Heights development to permit and
encourage pedestrian movement between parcels and to and from the development,
versus utilizing motorized vehicles for access. Pedestrian travelways should be
separated from vehicular traffic with landscaping, bollards, special paving, or
any other feature which identifies the pedestrian space. To further promote a
higher level of pedestrian awareness, the use of alternate paving materials to
designate pedestrian traffic areas from vehicular use areas and travel lanes
shall be required. The development shall provide bicycle pathway connections to
the street where possible and bicycle parking shall be provided within the
development. (Ord. 1854, 1-11-2010)
075-10: LAND USE DESIGN CRITERIA:
In addition to the general conditions as stated in sections above, the
following land use design criteria shall apply to the areas designated on the
specific plan map on file in the city. The specific plan map document, which is
made a part of this rezoning action, delineates parcels of the specific plan as
parcels A through G. The following development standards and use regulations
shall apply to each of the following development parcels: (Ord. 1854, 1-11-
2010; amd. Ord. 1948, 4-30-2012)
   A.   Parcels A Through G: The use regulations and provisions set forth in
title 9 of the city code for medium density residential (RM-12) as permitted
and permitted conditional shall apply to any development proposal for all
property within these parcels as shown on the specific plan unless otherwise
noted in this ordinance. These parcels combined shall be no more than seventeen
(17) acres.
      1.   Setbacks: Primary and accessory building setbacks from the exterior
property lines of the Jordan Heights development shall be fifteen feet (15').
Buildings may be set back zero feet (0') from any internal parcel or property
line and zero feet (0') from any building; however, all building and fire code
separation requirements must be abided by. No buildings or fences shall be
constructed in the buffer park along the eastern property line without
permission of the city. (Ord. 1854, 1-11-2010)
075-11: ALL AREAS TO BE PLATTED:
Prior to, or in conjunction with development or transfer of ownership of any
portion of the specific plan, said area shall be platted in accordance with the
city's subdivision ordinance to delineate within a plat the parcel to be
developed or sold separately or any portion thereof. Lots without public street
frontage, in accordance with the city code requirements, may be allowed
provided the frontage requirements of the code have been met by an abutting or
surrounding lot which is under common ownership or is part of an owners'
association for all properties within the development area and an ingress/
egress/shared parking easement is executed which provides for the unrestricted
use and access of the drives and parking for all parcels within the
development.
Ownership and responsibility of private sewer, stormwater detention, private
streets and driveways shall be established with a homeowners' association.
(Ord. 1854, 1-11-2010)
075-12: STORMWATER MANAGEMENT:
There shall be submitted to and approved by the West Des Moines public works
department, a master stormwater management plan for the entire development
which shall govern the overall stormwater management of the development.
Specific stormwater management plans will be required with the development of
each site plan, demonstrating compliance with the approved Jordan Heights
development master stormwater management plan, on file with the city's
development services department. The developer will have said specific
stormwater management plans prepared by a professional engineer licensed in the
state of Iowa, in conjunction with the submittal of specific site plans within
the Jordan Heights specific plan area. All specific stormwater management plans
shall comply with the city's design standards for stormwater management. The
method of stormwater management and the stormwater conveyance system shall be
determined and approved prior to the development of any site plans within the
specific plan area. (Ord. 1854, 1-11-2010)
075-13: STREET RIGHT OF WAY:
Adequate street rights of way, as determined by the department of public works
and the approved traffic report, for 64th Street, and Wistful Vista Drive shall
be deeded by the applicant to the city. The right of way shall be deeded to the
city as follows:
   A.   Seventy feet (70') of right of way for Wistful Vista Drive.
   B.   Seventy feet (70') of right of way for 64th Street. (Ord. 1854, 1-11-
2010)
075-14: SANITARY SEWER SERVICE AND WATER MAIN EXTENSIONS:
The developer, their successors or assigns, if any, shall construct, at their
cost, all sanitary sewer service for service to the Jordan Heights development
as required by city of West Des Moines subdivision ordinance and the Des Moines
metro standards with West Des Moines addendums.
The developer, their successors or assigns, if any, shall construct, at their
cost, all water mains for water service to the Jordan Heights development as
required by West Des Moines waterworks during the time the site plan is being
developed. This requirement includes water mains in the specific plan and in
street right of way adjacent to the specific plan area. The sizes of all water
mains shall be determined by the waterworks. Water mains shall be constructed
along the entire street frontages of the specific plan.
Nothing in this ordinance shall be construed to prevent the developer, their
successors or assigns, if any, from entering into private agreement(s) as they
may desire to share the cost of the water mains. (Ord. 1854, 1-11-2010)
075-15: CONSTRUCTION OF STREETS:
   A.   Comply with the findings of the traffic studies.
   B.   64th Street shall be constructed as a three (3) lane street.
   C.   All full access driveways locations will need to align with future
driveways on the other side of the public streets and shall be coordinated with
and concurrence given by abutting property owners. The proximity of the
driveways to the public street intersections needs to be such that there is a
free movement of traffic on the public street system. Driveways shall intersect
the public street at ninety degree (90°) angles if possible.
   D.   Private streets shall be built to public street standards.
Acknowledging in writing that a report certified by a third party recognized
testing agency, acceptable to the city, shall be submitted to document the
thickness and strength of the pavement, the subgrade compaction, compliance
with the metro design standards for streets, and the standards listed in the
West Des Moines "off street parking ordinance" for parking lots and driveways.
(Ord. 1854, 1-11-2010)
075-16: STREETLIGHTS:
At the time of platting, the applicant shall post surety for the installation
of all streetlights abutting the Jordan Heights development. At such time that
specific site plans are developed within the specific plan area, the applicant
proposing a site plan(s) shall be responsible for the installation of all
necessary public streetlights within and adjacent to the specific site plan
area. (Ord. 1854, 1-11-2010)
075-17: PUBLIC ACCESS EASEMENTS:
A public access easement shall be granted to the city at the time of platting
allowing unrestricted public access onto the proposed private drives within the
Jordan Heights specific plan area. (Ord. 1854, 1-11-2010)
075-18: TRAFFIC STUDY:
The 2005 Jordan Creek Crossing traffic impact study has examined areawide
traffic impacts which include the Jordan Heights development. Development
within this specific plan shall comply with the recommendations and findings in
the approved report. (Ord. 1854, 1-11-2010)
075-19: VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES:
Any person who violates the provisions of this ordinance upon conviction shall
be punished as set forth in section 1-4-1 of the city code of the city of West
Des Moines, Iowa. (Ord. 1854, 1-11-2010)
075-99: LEGISLATIVE HISTORY:
Ord. 1625, 3-28-2005; Ord. 1854, 1-11-2010; Ord. 1948, 4-30-2012.
PUD #76
MAPLE GROVE WEST
SECTION:
076-01: Legal Description
076-02: Sketch Plan
076-03: Conditions
076-04: Pedestrian Circulation
076-05: Park Land Dedication
076-06: Signage Regulation
076-07: Property Owners' Association And Building Restrictions, Easements, And
Covenants
076-08: Storm Water Management
076-09: Traffic Reports
076-10: Phasing; Related Public Street Improvements And Right Of Way Dedication
076-11: Sanitary Sewer
076-12: Realignment And Vacation Of 98th Street (Annexation And Deannexation)
076-13: Lighting
076-14: Violations And Penalties
076-99: Legislative History
076-01: LEGAL DESCRIPTION:
A part of parcel B as recorded in book 2005, page 1795 in government lots 3, 4,
6, 7, and 8, section 3, and township 78 north, range 26 west of the fifth
principal meridian, and a part of outlot W-1, South Maple Grove plat 1, in the
city of West Des Moines, Dallas County, Iowa, that is more particularly
described as follows:
Beginning at the southeast corner of said government lot 6; thence south
83°32'43" west, 1278.26 feet along the southerly line of said parcel B; thence
north 00°26'15" east, 1390.80 feet along the westerly line of said parcel B;
thence south 83°35'27" west, 329.72 feet along the westerly line of said parcel
B; thence north 02°16'51" east, 630.41 feet along the westerly line of said
parcel B; thence south 62°54'15" east, 306.49 feet along the northerly line of
said parcel B; thence south 62°51'41" E, 172.47 feet along the northerly line
of said parcel B; thence south 03°46'38" west, 431.47 feet along the northerly
line of said parcel B; thence north 83°35'27" east, 790.15 feet along the
northerly line of said parcel B; thence south 62°55'39" east, 1770.44 feet
along the northerly line of said parcel B; thence south 00°23'32" west, 88.07
feet along the west right of way of 92nd Street; thence southerly continuing
along said west right of way and a curve concave westerly whose radius is
1440.00 feet, whose arc length is 273.38 feet and whose chord bears south
5°49'52" west, 272.96 feet; thence southwesterly along the right of way and a
curve concave northwesterly whose radius is 50.00 feet, whose arc length is
81.63 feet and whose chord bears south 58°02'22" west, 72.86 feet; thence
northwesterly along a curve concave southwesterly whose radius is 1470.00 feet,
whose arc length is 160.37 feet and whose chord bears north 78°18'58" west,
160.29 feet to the southerly line of said parcel B; thence south 83°30'46"
west, 956.48 feet along the southerly line of said parcel B to the point of
beginning and containing 62.12 acres (2,705,890 square feet).
Property subject to any and all easements of record.
(Ord. 1646, 9-26-2005)
076-02: SKETCH PLAN:
The sketch plan document for the Maple Grove West PUD planned unit development
is on file in the city and included as a part of this document, identified as
exhibit A, for purposes of concept description and delineation. It is
recognized that minor shifts or modifications to the general plan layout may be
necessary and compatible with the need to accomplish workable street patterns,
grades, and usable building sites. However, the general layout as depicted by
the sketch plan, including the interrelationship of land uses to each other and
associated development requirements, shall be used as the implementation guide.
Wherever a conflict occurs between the written text contained in this document
and any notations depicted on the sketch plan, the written text shall prevail.
The sketch plan is a graphic representation of the property included in this
planned unit development identifying the approximate location and size of all
parcels for reference purposes for the ready identification of the applicable
regulations of this ordinance. As a note, the sketch plan is meant to serve as
a concept plan and is not meant to convey the approval for the location or size
of any buildings, designated parking areas, required number of parking spaces,
etc., or any other development specifications. These types of development
aspects are reviewed at the time that a site plan or permitted conditional use
permits application is submitted. (Ord. 1646, 9-26-2005)
076-03: CONDITIONS:
Whereas, title 9, "Zoning", chapter 9 of the city code, establishes certain
regulations and guidelines pertaining to the planned unit development district
and accompanying information required on plat and site plan documents.
Now, therefore, the following conditions, restrictions, and regulations are
adopted as part of this approval, to wit:
   A.   General Conditions: The sketch plan incorporates single-family
residential, and medium density residential land uses which shall be
distributed by area, types and location according to the sketch plan and this
ordinance.
The development of any parcel shall be designed within the parameters as set in
the total land use that was used for purposes of the traffic study and sanitary
sewer analysis for the area.
In addition, the following general development criteria shall be integrated
into and made a part of this planned unit development district ordinance and
sketch plan approval.
      1.   All subdivisions, public streets, public streets rights of way and
general development shall adhere to the standards and design criteria set forth
in the West Des Moines subdivision ordinance and the Des Moines metropolitan
design standards as adopted by the city of West Des Moines, pertaining thereto,
unless otherwise stated within this ordinance.
      2.   Any regulation, standard, provision or requirement that is not
specifically addressed within this document that is regulated elsewhere in the
city code of West Des Moines, the requirements of the city code shall be
enforced.
      3.   In all areas within a 100-year frequency flood hazard zone or
adjoining drainageways or detention areas involving potential flood hazards, no
building shall be erected which has a lowest floor, including basements, less
than two feet (2') above the determined level of the 100-year frequency flood
event or floodproofed to the same elevation in accordance with the West Des
Moines floodplain ordinance, and no building shall be erected within twenty
five feet (25') of any major drainage, storm water detention basin or pond.
      4.   The developer, their successors, and assigns, if any, shall pay all
construction and engineering costs for the interior development of the planned
unit development, in accordance with the current city policies at the time of
development, as required by this ordinance, the subdivision ordinance of the
city of West Des Moines, and the Des Moines metropolitan design standards as
adopted by the city of West Des Moines, for all streets, storm sewers, sanitary
sewers, drainage improvements, detention basins, water mains, buffers and other
improvements within the PUD as may be required by the provisions of the city
code.
   B.   Land Use Design Criteria: In addition to the general conditions
requirement stated within this document, the following land use design criteria
shall apply to the development within the PUD. The following development
standards and use regulations shall apply to development within each of the
individual parcels, or portions of said parcel, as applicable:
      1.   Parcel A: All general use regulations and provisions set forth in
title 9, "Zoning", of the city code for single-family residential district (RS-
5) with a minimum lot size of five thousand (5,000) square feet shall apply to
any development proposal for property within parcel A as shown on the sketch
plan of the Maple Grove West PUD ordinance, unless noted otherwise in this
ordinance.
         a.   Architectural Design: Architectural design for single-family
units shall attempt to express a creative presentation of exterior building
materials, exterior details and texture, treatment of windows and doors, use of
angles and multiplicity of planes within wall and roof design. Residential
units should incorporate the use of brick, natural stone, roof materials,
decorative moldings, cornices, and trim elements, or combination of design
materials that provide variation of architectural styles or elements.
In those cases where the front wall of the garage extends more than ten feet
(10') beyond the front wall of the residence, the width of the residence shall
be required to be equal to or greater than the width of the garage unit and the
garage elevations will be required to include a window element to lessen its
dominance of the residential structure.
The petitioner will need to submit design criteria for the development of the
single-family residential lots for approval by staff at the time of final plat
review.
         b.   Setbacks: All residential structures shall comply with a twenty
foot (20') front yard setback and a thirty five foot (35') rear yard setback,
with the exception for those lots that abut a buffer park, where a twenty five
foot (25') rear yard setback will be allowed. A minimum of a five foot (5')
side yard building setback will be allowed.
Front porches shall have a usable area that is no less than five feet (5') in
width, and may be allowed to extend into the front yard building setback, but
no closer than fifteen feet (15') to the front property line.
A residence with a side loaded garage may be set back a minimum of twenty feet
(20') measured from the front property line.
Garage units shall comply with a minimum setback of twenty five foot (25')
front yard setback measured to the garage door. It is encouraged that garage
doors facing the public street shall not extend beyond the front facade of the
residential unit to minimize the dominance of their appearance. It is also
encouraged that the front walls of any garage be set back a minimum of five
feet (5') from the front facade of the residential structure. (Ord. 1646, 9-26-
2005)
         c.   Buffers: A thirty foot (30') buffer park shall be required to be
provided along 98th Street and Chalk Street and shall be designated as an
outlot to be owned and maintained by the property owners' association. The
developer shall be responsible for the costs of landscaping and its
installation in the landscape buffer area.
A thirty foot (30') buffer park easement will be required along the Union
Pacific Railroad. All required building setbacks shall be measured from the
easement line of the required buffer park easement.
No fences shall be allowed to be constructed within the thirty foot (30')
buffer park located along 98th Street or Chalk Street. Fences shall be allowed
to be constructed within the thirty foot (30') buffer park located within lots
6 through 15, Maple Grove West plat 1; however, said fences must be designed
and constructed in such a manner so as to allow city access to existing public
storm sewer and manholes, including the removal of fence panels and structural
members should such be deemed necessary to accommodate maintenance and repair
equipment/measures. (Ord. 1971, 1-7-2013)
      2.   Parcel B: All general use regulations and provisions set forth in
title 9, "Zoning", of the city code for residential medium- density (RM-12)
district, unless noted otherwise herein. (Ord. 1646, 9-26-2005)
         a.   Architecture: Architectural design for multi-family buildings
shall express a creative presentation of exterior building materials, exterior
details and texture, treatment of windows and doors, and use of angles and
multiplicity of planes within the wall and roof design to lessen the plainness
of appearance which can be characteristic of large residential buildings. The
use of building articulation that breaks up the building mass into modules
which reflect proportions similar to the single-family residential dwellings
shall be required. Methods used to create intervals which reflect individual
dwelling units are:
            (1)   Facade modulation - stepping back or extending forward a
portion of the facade.
            (2)   Entrances to the dwelling units should be easily and
individually identified through the use of design and detailing. Projected or
recessed entryways, higher rooflines, awnings or changes in materials are
examples that can create this effect.
            (3)   Changing the rooflines by alternating dormers, stepped roofs,
gables, or other roof elements to reinforce the modulation or articulation
interval.
            (4)   Changing materials with the change in building plane to vary
the look of the individual dwelling units.
            (5)   Using paint and materials to reinforce the modulation or
articulated intervals.
Buildings shall use materials such as brick, stone, vertical or lap siding,
shakes and stucco, combining materials along with trim and details to provide
visual interest within the development. Use of natural materials is encouraged,
composite materials such as fiber cement and wood composites are appropriate
substitutions. Vinyl siding may be used only with appropriately scaled trim.
All material, trim and details for a building shall be designed appropriately
for chosen architectural style. Materials should change with the change in
building planes. Trim and structural elements such as posts or columns shall be
sized to the scale of the building. When used, masonry materials shall have the
appearance of three-dimensional elements. Fenestration (door and window
openings) shall be sized to the scale of the building, incorporated on all
sides of the building and be compatible to the chosen architectural style.
Asphaltic shingles shall be allowed provided the shingle materials are of a
heavier grade that produces a shake or shadowing effect and is consistent with
the color and materials used for the multi-family residential developments.
Garage doors facing the public street should be set back to minimize the
dominance of their appearance or staggered across the building facade to create
opportunities for individuality of the dwelling units. The architectural
details of garage should incorporate the materials and treatments of the
dwelling unit, such as windows, doors, paint and materials, and style of the
dwelling unit.
All facades of the building in unobstructed view of the public shall be treated
with the same level of architectural style and detail.
         b.   Setbacks: All residential structures and garages shall comply
with all general use regulations and provisions set forth in title 9, "Zoning",
of the city code for residential medium- density district (RM-12) shall apply,
unless noted otherwise within this section.
A building front yard and perimeter setback of thirty five feet (35') shall
apply to any structure within parcel B, except that the perimeter setback
adjacent to municipal property at the time of development of any part of parcel
B shall be twenty five feet (25'). If the property abuts a private street, any
residential structure shall be allowed to be located no closer than fifteen
feet (15') from the back of a curb or back of a sidewalk, whichever is more
restrictive. Garages shall comply with a front yard setback of twenty five feet
(25'), to be measured from the garage opening to the back of a curb for garages
opening onto a private street where the sidewalk is immediately adjacent to the
private street. In those cases where the garage opens onto a public street, the
front yard setback for garages shall be twenty five feet (25') to be measured
from the garage opening to the back of sidewalk.
A building separation of a minimum of fifteen feet (15') is required for all
one- and two-story structures. Any structure greater than two (2) stories will
have a minimum building separation of thirty feet (30').
         c.   Buffers: A minimum thirty foot (30') buffer shall be required
along any boundary that abuts property zoned for single-family development and
along 98th Street. (Ord. 2084, 3-9-2015)
         d.   Landscaping: Street trees will be permitted with the obtainment
of a street tree permit. Street tree maintenance will be the responsibility of
the property owner and shall not be planted any closer than five feet (5') to a
curb. Any tree shall be planted no closer than five feet (5') to a sidewalk.
Trees will be maintained to provide a visual clearance of fourteen feet (14')
over vehicle travel lanes, eight feet (8') above pedestrian travel lanes, and
will be prohibited from being located within the sight triangle of a public
street intersection.
         e.   Guest Parking: One guest parking space will be required for every
fifteen (15) residential units. (Ord. 1646, 9-26-2005)
076-04: PEDESTRIAN CIRCULATION:
A master pedestrian circulation plan shall be prepared and submitted with any
development proposal for any parcel within the PUD providing internal access
connections to minimize pedestrian conflicts with traffic movements to areas
within the PUD as well as providing access to public facilities, i.e., parks,
schools, etc. Pedestrian walkways and bike trails within the PUD shall form an
on site circulation system that minimizes the conflict between pedestrians/
bikes and vehicular traffic. The relationship between the proposed single-
family residential and the multi- family residential uses within the PUD will
be organized so as to promote pedestrian travel and access within the various
land uses within the PUD and to the adjoining public facilities within the
public park and the elementary school located on the south side of Chalk
Street.
There shall also be a forty five foot (45') greenbelt/landscape buffer required
along the west side of 92nd Street that will be designated as outlots to be
owned and maintained by the property owners' association. The developer shall
be responsible for the costs of landscaping and its installation in the
landscape buffer area. A thirty foot (30') easement will be granted to the city
within the outlots for the purpose of installation and maintenance of a ten
foot (10') public trail along 92nd Street. The trail shall be designed by the
developer in consultation with the city's park and recreation department. The
costs of the trail's installation shall be shared between the developer and the
city, with forty percent (40%) of the costs being the developer's
responsibility and sixty percent (60%) being the responsibility of the city.
The trail shall be constructed with a minimum of five inches (5") of PCC
concrete or six inches (6") of ACC asphalt.
No fences shall be allowed to be constructed within the forty five foot (45')
designated outlot.
Thirty feet (30') of the required forty five foot (45') greenbelt/buffer will
be allowed to be counted toward the greenbelt requirements for the entire PUD
per the park land dedication ordinance. (Ord. 1646, 9-26-2005)
076-05: PARK LAND DEDICATION:
An area calculated by a set formula based upon the size and density of the
proposed development will be required to be provided for purposes of a public
park and greenbelt areas. A letter of agreement, acceptable to the park and
recreation department, detailing the specifics related to the park land
dedication requirements for the development of any area contained within the
PUD will be required to be submitted prior to the submittal of any development
proposal for parcel A or parcel B. (Ord. 1646, 9-26-2005)
076-06: SIGNAGE REGULATION:
All signs shall comply with all provisions of the city sign code. All signage
constructed as wall signs on building fascias within the PUD shall incorporate
aesthetic features compatible with the overall character of the development.
(Ord. 1646, 9-26-2005)
076-07: PROPERTY OWNERS' ASSOCIATION AND BUILDING RESTRICTIONS, EASEMENTS, AND
COVENANTS:
With the first development proposal for the rezoned property as acted upon
herein and legally described in section
076-01 of this ordinance, proper action shall be taken to establish a master
property owners' association with said property into the Maple Grove West
property owners' association and all building restrictions, covenants, and
other associated conditions attached to the Maple Grove West PUD shall be made
to also apply to said property. The Maple Grove West property owners'
association shall be responsible for the ongoing upkeep and maintenance of any
privately owned common grounds, structures, signs, etc., as outlined in the
association documents and any other specific development improvements noted as
their responsibility in this ordinance.
The developer shall, with the approval of the city council, adopt building
restrictions, easements, and covenants pertaining to the property where the
developer and the city deem appropriate. (Ord. 1646, 9-26-2005)
076-08: STORM WATER MANAGEMENT:
Specific storm water management plans will be required with the development of
each parcel, demonstrating compliance with the approved Maple Grove West PUD
master storm water management plan, on file with the city's public works
department. The developer will have said specific storm water management plans
prepared by a professional engineer licensed in the state of Iowa, prior to the
submittal of any specific development proposals within the PUD. All specific
storm water management plans shall comply with the city's current design
standards for storm water management. The method of storm water management and
the storm water conveyance system shall be determined prior to city approval of
any development within any portion of the property within the Maple Grove West
PUD. (Ord. 1646, 9-26-2005)
076-09: TRAFFIC REPORTS:
A traffic impact study, dated May 27, 2005, has been prepared for the Maple
Grove West PUD. This traffic impact study outlines what the ultimate
transportation needs will be for the Maple Grove West PUD area and the
surrounding impacted area. All development within the Maple Grove West PUD
shall comply with the analysis included within the May 27, 2005, Maple Grove
West traffic impact study. An amendment to the May 27, 2005, Maple Grove West
traffic impact study shall be required for any development proposed within the
Maple Grove West PUD that is not in compliance with the analysis included
within the May 27, 2005, Maple Grove West traffic impact study. (Ord. 1646, 9-
26-2005)
076-10: PHASING; RELATED PUBLIC STREET IMPROVEMENTS AND RIGHT OF WAY
DEDICATION:
At time of subdivision platting within the Maple Grove West PUD, the subdivider
shall be responsible for construction and/or installation of all required
public infrastructure improvements in accordance with the city's subdivision
ordinance, and as indicated on the approved Maple Grove West PUD sketch
proposal. With any subdivision plat within the Maple Grove West PUD, the
subdivider shall be responsible for constructing and/or installing the public
infrastructure necessary to support development within the subdivision in a
manner that will assure that the public infrastructure functions at an
acceptable level of service (per the city's comprehensive plan) and that
complies with all city ordinances. (Ord. 1646, 9-26-2005)
076-11: SANITARY SEWER:
Any proposed change in approved land use densities for the Maple Grove West PUD
will require an analysis of the downstream sanitary sewer capacity to assure
that adequate capacity is available for the proposed change in approved land
use densities. (Ord. 1646, 9-26-2005)
076-12: REALIGNMENT AND VACATION OF 98TH STREET (ANNEXATION AND DEANNEXATION):
The change in the shared corporate boundary between the city of West Des Moines
and the city of Waukee created by the realignment of 98th Street will need to
be adopted prior to final platting and/or development of those portions of the
Maple Grove West PUD that would necessitate realignment and reconstruction of
98th Street. (Ord. 1646, 9-26-2005)
076-13: LIGHTING:
   A.   Street Lighting: The developer shall be responsible for all costs
associated with the installation of public streetlights within or adjacent to
any area proposed to be platted or included within a development.
   B.   Building And Parking Lot: Wall pack lighting shall be prohibited. All
lighting shall be of a cutoff type to eliminate glare and spillover lighting
beyond a property line.
Any lighting used to illuminate any off street parking or loading area shall be
so arranged as to divert the light away from adjoining residential uses or
premises in any residential district and away from the traveled roadway of
public streets; lighting levels shall be one foot-candle level at the property
lines and a photometric plan may be required by the city at the time of site
plan or permitted conditional use permit review. (Ord. 1646, 9-26-2005)
076-14: VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES:
Any person who violates the provisions of this ordinance upon conviction shall
be punished as set forth in section 1-4-1 of the city code. (Ord. 1646, 9-26-
2005)
076-99: LEGISLATIVE HISTORY:
Ord. 1646, 9-26-2005; Ord. 1971, 1-7-2013; Ord. 1996, 8-5-2013; Ord. 2033, 5-
19-2014; Ord. 2050, 8-25-2014; Ord. 2084, 3-9-2015.
PUD #77
PUBLIC SAFETY STATION #19
SECTION:
077-01: Legal Description
077-02: Required Plans
077-03: General Requirements
077-04: Land Use Design Criteria
077-05: Architecture
077-06: Signage
077-07: Storm Water Management
077-08: Street Right Of Way
077-09: Public Streetlights
077-10: Violations And Penalties
077-99: Legislative History
077-01: LEGAL DESCRIPTION:
A parcel of land in the southwest quarter of the northeast quarter of section
14, township 78 north, range 26 west of the 5th principal meridian, city of
West Des Moines, Dallas County, Iowa, more particularly described as follows:
Commencing at the center quarter corner of said section 14; thence north
00°02'34" east, 453.45 feet along the quarter section line; thence north
82°58'28" east, 50.38 feet to the easterly right-of-way line of 81st Street and
the point of beginning; thence continuing north 82°58'28" east, 278.82 feet;
thence south 00°02'34" west, 403.06 feet to the northerly right-of-way line of
Mills Civic Parkway; thence south 82°58'28" west, 250.53 feet along said right-
of-way line; thence 42.35 feet along the arc of a 25.00 feet radius curve
concave northeasterly with a delta of 97°04'12" and whose chord bears north
48°29'30" west, 37.47 feet; thence north 00°02'34" east, 374.77 feet along the
east right-of- way line of said 81st Street to the point of beginning and
containing 2.56 acres, more or less.
(Ord. 1647, 9-26-2005)
077-02: REQUIRED PLANS:
The following plans shall be required as a part of the processing of any
development application for any property within the Public Safety Station #19
specific plan.
   A.   Area Development Plan: An area development plan must be approved by the
city council prior to, or in conjunction with, the review of the specific plan
for any property within said specific plan. No change to the area development
plan shall be made without approval from the appropriate reviewing bodies. An
area development plan is a plan that identifies infrastructure, planning units,
major street patterns, drainage and detention, utilities, shared public spaces,
vehicular traffic impacts, proposed densities, and land use assumptions. It is
intended to promote the communication and cooperation between adjacent property
owners and developers to encourage cohesive, unified development, and to
identify the anticipated phasing of construction, and parties involved.
On file in the city as exhibit A is the city council approved area development
plan for this property which is labeled as the southwestern most corner of area
5 on the map identifying the area development plans within the town center
overlay district guidelines as adopted by the West Des Moines city council.
   B.   Specific Plan: A specific plan identifies detailed development criteria
for each planning unit identified in the area development plan. The specific
plan will conform to the general intent of the area development plan and the
town center overlay district guidelines and shall be adopted by the city
council by ordinance. The ordinance shall constitute the specific plan for the
Public Safety Station #19 specific plan. On file in the city and made a part of
this rezoning as exhibit B is a specific plan map for the Public Safety Station
#19. It is recognized that slight modifications and changes to the map may be
necessary due to changes in building footprints or details; however, the intent
is that the major elements of the specific plan shall be adhered to and may not
be altered without the approval of the city council. Where the specific plan
map and specific plan language conflict, the specific plan language shall
prevail.
   C.   Development Applications: Site plans for parcels within the Public
Safety Station #19 specific plan must meet the intent of the approved specific
plan and shall be submitted to the city of West Des Moines for review and
approval prior to the development of any portion of the property within the
specific plan. Site plans, which meet the intent of the specific plan as
determined by the city staff, will be subject to administrative review and
approval by the director of community development. If the site is deemed not to
be in compliance with the specific plan, or if two (2) or more city council or
plan and zoning commission members request, the site plan will be subject to
review by the appropriate reviewing body. (Ord. 1647, 9-26-2005)
077-03: GENERAL REQUIREMENTS:
Requirements for all parcels within the Public Safety Station #19:
   A.   Buffer Parks: Buffer parks shall be provided as required by city code
to buffer any adjoining dissimilar land uses and shall be designed in
accordance with the minimum berming and planting requirements of the city code.
The landscaping required within the buffer parks shall be in addition to the
open space landscaping required for the site. No parking lots, fences, or
structures are permitted within the buffer parks. Sidewalks, trails, landscape
features, pedestrian furniture, and permitted signage may be located within the
buffer parks. A thirty foot (30') wide buffer park shall be required along the
north and east property lines to buffer the adjacent residential land uses.
   B.   Communication Towers, Antennas, Satellite Dishes, And Related Equipment
Buildings: This parcel shall be permitted one communications tower a maximum
seventy five feet (75') tall on which to locate and affix commercial and
noncommercial communication antennas subject to the regulations and provisions
set forth in the city code unless otherwise noted in this ordinance. Commercial
antennas, including mobile (cell) telephone antennas, shall be mounted in a
symmetrical fashion and include antenna screens or covers if necessary to
provide for a more aesthetic appearance. Any antennas and satellite dishes
mounted on the building or ground shall be screened from view or be of a minute
size as to be visually unobtrusive to the surrounding area. Related
communications equipment buildings shall be surfaced and designed to match the
principal structure. Prior to erection or installation, all communication
towers, antennas, satellite dishes, and communication equipment buildings must
be reviewed through the overlay district site plan administrative approval
process and receive the approval of the city of West Des Moines community
development department director as well as obtain any necessary building
permits. (Ord. 1647, 9-26-2005)
077-04: LAND USE DESIGN CRITERIA:
In addition to the general requirements as stated within this ordinance, the
following land use design criteria shall apply to the area designated on the
area development plan on file in the city. The area development plan document
which is made a part of this rezoning action delineates the specific plan as
"Public Safety Station #19" (see exhibit A). The following development
standards and use regulations shall apply:
   A.   Public Safety Station #19: The use regulations and provisions set forth
in title 9 of the city code for the residential medium- density (RM) district
shall apply to any development proposal for all property within this parcel as
shown on the specific plan unless otherwise noted in this ordinance. This
parcel shall encompass approximately 2.56 acres.
      1.   Land Uses: Allowable uses within this parcel are limited to local
municipal government uses including, but not limited to, fire, EMS, and police
stations and facilities and related ancillary uses including communication
antennas, towers, and dishes (SIC 92).
      2.   Setbacks: All building heights and setbacks shall be in accordance
with the setback and bulk density regulations of the West Des Moines zoning
ordinance for the residential medium- density (RM) district unless otherwise
herein modified.
      3.   Open Space: The minimum open space requirement for this parcel shall
be twenty five percent (25%) of the total site area.
      4.   Landscaping: The minimum required landscaping within this parcel
shall be based upon the amount of required open space. A minimum two (2) trees
and three (3) shrubs shall be required for every three thousand (3,000) square
feet of required open space with the following plant material size
requirements:
         a.   Trees:
 
(1) 10 percent 3 inch to 3.5 inch caliper
(2) 30 percent 2 inch to 2.5 inch caliper
(3) Balance    1.5 inch caliper
(4) Minimum height for evergreens shall be 6 feet and may be counted as a 2
inch to 2.5 inch caliper tree.
 
         b.   Shrubs:
            (1)   18 inches to 24 inches tall or 5 gallon size
      5.   Parking Lot Open Space: The open space requirement within the
surface parking areas within this parcel shall be a minimum of ten percent
(10%) of the parking lot area. This ten percent (10%) is required to be in
addition to the twenty five percent (25%) of open space required for the total
site area of this parcel.
      6.   Parking Lot Landscaping And Screening: All parking areas shall be
landscaped to screen their visibility from public rights of way or from any
adjoining property outside the Public Safety Station #19 with the use of
evergreen plant materials and/or berming and shall be reviewed at the time of
review of the site plan for the development of the parcel. No parking space
shall be farther than seventy five feet (75') from a landscaped island or
landscaped open space area. Parking lot islands shall be a minimum eight feet
(8') wide and landscaped with an organic ground cover or plant material; no
rock or paving. Parking lot islands shall be installed on all parking lot end
rows and located periodically throughout the parking lots to break up large
expanses of paving and provide locations for landscaping and shade trees.
      7.   Parking Lot Setbacks: The parking lot setback shall be a minimum
fifteen feet (15') from any public street right of way and thirty feet (30')
from side and rear property lines.
      8.   Parking Standards: The minimum parking space requirement for this
parcel shall be based upon the anticipated maximum personnel occupancy with
additional space provided for public parking as follows:
      Fire   -   3   shifts of 4 persons   =   8 stalls
      EMS   -   3   shifts of 2 persons   =   4 stalls
         -   7   administrative staff   =   7 stalls
      Police   -   3   shifts of 5 persons   =   10 stalls
      Public   -   6   stalls + 2 HC stalls   =   8 stalls
                                
                  Total required =   37 stalls
   (Ord. 1647, 9-26-2005)
077-05: ARCHITECTURE:
The architectural design of any building shall be acceptable to the city
council of the city of West Des Moines and all buildings within the parcel
shall have brick, colored precast concrete, and architectural metal wall panel
as the primary elements of the exterior with all sides of any building built
within the parcel consistent in design and use of materials. (Ord. 1647, 9-26-
2005)
077-06: SIGNAGE:
All signage shall comply with the West Des Moines sign code regulations for the
residential medium-density (RM) district, as set forth in title 9 of the city
code, except as herein modified. This parcel shall be permitted one square foot
of wall signage per linear foot of building frontage facing a public street
right of way. Wall signage may be attached to the face of the building tower
element. All signage is subject to review and approval of a sign permit by the
city of West Des Moines community development department. (Ord. 1647, 9-26-
2005)
077-07: STORM WATER MANAGEMENT:
The site is divided into six (6) drainage areas, with most of the storm water
directed to the south, shifting the drainage of several acres of the site from
one drainage basin to a different drainage basin. The storm water system is
made up of wet and dry detention basins. The site must comply with all city,
state, and federal regulations related to storm water management.
   A.   There shall be submitted to and approved by the West Des Moines public
works department a master storm water management plan for the entire
development which shall govern the overall storm water management of the
development.
   B.   A more specific, detailed storm water management plan shall be
submitted to and approved by the city prior to any development on the site. The
detailed storm water management plan shall be in accordance with the Des Moines
metro design standards and provide detailed information regarding storm water
overflow if basin overtopping was to occur. A provision to route overflow water
in a manner that will not adversely affect and/or damage adjacent/downstream
private properties, create life/safety issues for the public, flood public
streets and/or damage public infrastructure shall also be detailed and
provided. Said details shall also include a summary that describes how the
water will be routed and a detail that includes swales, arrows indicating
direction of flow, etc.
   C.   A letter from the Iowa department of natural resources (IDNR) which
verifies that a dam permit is not required for the grading and development of
this site as proposed shall be provided. (Ord. 1647, 9-26-2005)
077-08: STREET RIGHT OF WAY:
Adequate street rights of way for the site's half of the adjacent public
streets, as determined by the city, shall be dedicated to the city. Any
necessary public utility easements and temporary construction easements shall
also be dedicated. (Ord. 1647, 9-26-2005)
077-09: PUBLIC STREETLIGHTS:
The developer of this site will be responsible for the costs of the necessary
streetlights along the adjacent public streets where not covered by the
development agreement. At the time of platting and development of the property,
the applicant is required to install streetlights where their developed
property adjoins a public street and where not covered by the development
agreement. Surety for any streetlights not installed will need to be provided
prior to the recordation of the final plat for this property. (Ord. 1647, 9-26-
2005)
077-10: VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES:
Any person who violates the provisions of this ordinance upon conviction shall
be punished as set forth in section 1-4-1 of the city code. (Ord. 1647, 9-26-
2005)
077-99: LEGISLATIVE HISTORY:
Ord. 1647, 9-26-2005.
PUD #78
HERITAGE BEND
SECTION:
078-01: Legal Description
078-02: Required Plans
078-03: Conditions
078-04: Park Land Dedication
078-05: Master Property Owners' Association
078-06: Landscaping
078-07: Architecture
078-08: Land Use Design Criteria
078-09: Signage Regulation
078-10: Storm Water Management
078-11: Public Street Improvements And Right Of Way Dedication
078-12: Sanitary Sewer
078-13: Lighting
078-14: Traffic Reports
078-99: Legislative History
078-01: LEGAL DESCRIPTION:
A part of parcel E as recorded in book 2005, page 2223 in the east half of the
northwest quarter, section 14, township 78 north, range 26 west of the fifth
principal meridian, city of West Des Moines, Dallas County, Iowa, being more
particularly described as follows:
Beginning at the southeast corner of said parcel "E" which is also the center
of said section 14; thence south 83°37'41" west along the southerly line of
said parcel "E", 661.65 feet; thence north 8°25'57" west continuing along said
southerly line, 416.70 feet; thence south 85°37'36" west continuing along said
southerly line, 578.99 feet; thence north 00°37'58" east along the west line of
said parcel "E", 1741.07 feet; thence northeasterly along a curve concave
northwesterly whose radius is 2325.00 feet, whose arc length is 586.20 feet and
whose chord bears north 58°42'34" east, 584.65 feet; thence northeasterly along
a curve concave southeasterly whose radius is 1325.00 feet, whose arc length is
539.91 feet and whose chord bears north 63°09'35" east, 536.18 feet to the
northerly line of said parcel "E"; thence south 00°41'42" west along said
northerly line, 44.04 feet; thence north 83°49'25" east continuing along said
northerly line, 282.03 feet; thence south 00°41'42" west continuing along said
northerly line, 60.44 feet; thence north 83°49'25" east continuing along said
northerly line, 50.36 feet; thence south 00°41'42" west along the east line of
said parcel "E", 2512.80 feet to the point of beginning and containing 67.22
acres (2,927,973 square feet).
Property subject to any and all easements of record.
(Ord. 1672, 1-17-2006)
078-02: REQUIRED PLANS:
Prior to or in conjunction with development or transfer of ownership of any
portion of the property covered by this PUD, said area shall be platted in
accordance with the city's subdivision ordinance. (Ord. 1672, 1-17-2006)
078-03: CONDITIONS:
Whereas, subsection 9-4-3A25, "PUD - Planned Unit Development District", of the
city code, establishes certain regulations and guidelines pertaining to
accompanying information required on plat and site plan documents. Now,
therefore, the following conditions, restrictions, and regulations are adopted
as part of this approval:
   A.   General Conditions: In addition to the PUD sketch plan map, the
following general development criteria shall be integrated into and made a part
of this planned unit development.
      1.   General Conformance To Subdivision Ordinance: All subdivisions,
public and private streets, public or private street rights of way and general
development shall adhere to the standards and design criteria set forth in the
West Des Moines subdivision ordinance and/or established city policies
pertaining thereto, unless otherwise stated within this ordinance.
      2.   General Conformance To Zoning Ordinance: Unless otherwise specified
herein, the development of the Heritage Bend PUD shall comply with the
provisions of the West Des Moines zoning ordinance. For the purposes of section
9-9-5 of the city code, planned unit development district, final plan
submittal, the submittal of plat, site plan, permitted conditional use permit,
or master plan documents for any parcel or part of any parcel of the Heritage
Bend PUD within two (2) years after approval and publication of this ordinance,
shall be considered to satisfy the terms and requirements of such section.
      3.   Flood Hazard: In all areas within a 100-year frequency flood hazard
zone, or adjoining drainageways, and detention ponding areas involving
potential flood hazards, no building shall be erected which has a lowest level
floor, including basements, less than two feet (2') above the determined level
of the 100-year frequency flood event. Buildings shall only be permitted within
twenty five feet (25') of any easement or property boundary of a major
drainageway, storm water detention basin or pond if the applicant can
demonstrate during the development review process that potential flooding from
extraordinary flood events have been mitigated through site design or building
design and approval is granted by the city council.
      4.   Developer Responsibilities: The developer, their successors and/or
assigns, if any, shall pay all planning, engineering, and construction costs
for the development of the planned unit development, as required by this
ordinance and approved site plans and the cost of all streets, storm sewers,
sanitary sewers, drainageway improvements, detention basins, water mains,
buffers and other improvements as required for rights of way or public
easements within the Heritage Bend PUD, unless otherwise approved by the city
council.
      5.   Storm Water Management: Specific storm water management plans will
be required with the development of each parcel, demonstrating compliance with
the approved Heritage Bend PUD master storm water management plan, on file with
the city's public works department. The developer will have said specific storm
water management plans prepared by a professional engineer licensed in the
state of Iowa, prior to the submittal of any specific development proposals
within the PUD. All specific storm water management plans shall comply with the
city's current design standards for storm water management. The method of storm
water management and the storm water conveyance system shall be determined
prior to city approval of any development within any portion of the property
within the Heritage Bend PUD.
      6.   Public Street Improvements And Right Of Way Dedication: At time of
subdivision platting within the Heritage Bend PUD, the subdivider shall be
responsible for construction and/or installation of all required public
infrastructure improvements in accordance with the city's subdivision
ordinance, as indicated herein, and/or as indicated on the approved Heritage
Bend PUD sketch proposal. With any subdivision plat within the Heritage Bend
PUD, the subdivider shall be responsible for constructing and/or installing the
public infrastructure necessary to support development within the subdivision
in a manner that will assure that the public infrastructure functions at an
acceptable level of service (per the city's comprehensive plan) and that
complies with all city ordinances.
      7.   Sanitary Sewer: Any proposed change in approved land use densities
for the Heritage Bend PUD will require an analysis of the downstream sanitary
sewer capacity to assure that adequate capacity is available for the proposed
change in approved land use densities.
      8.   Street Lighting: The developer shall be responsible for all costs
associated with the installation of public streetlights within or adjacent to
any area proposed to be platted or included within a development. (Ord. 1672,
1-17-2006)
078-04: PARK LAND DEDICATION:
An area calculated by a set formula based upon the size and density of the
proposed development will be required to be provided for purposes of a public
park and greenbelt areas. A letter of agreement, acceptable to the park and
recreation department, detailing the specifics related to the park land
dedication requirements for the development of any area contained within the
PUD will be required to be submitted prior to the submittal of any development
proposal. (Ord. 1672, 1-17-2006)
078-05: MASTER PROPERTY OWNERS' ASSOCIATION:
When the first plat within this development is recorded, proper action shall be
taken to establish a master property owners' association with said property
into the Heritage Bend property owners' association and all building
restrictions, covenants, and other associated conditions attached to the
Heritage Bend PUD shall be made to also apply to said property. The Heritage
Bend property owners' association shall be responsible for the ongoing upkeep
and maintenance of any privately owned common grounds such as the buffer parks,
greenbelts, parks and other common space, as outlined in the association
documents and any other specific development improvements noted as their
responsibility in this ordinance. (Ord. 1672, 1-17-2006)
078-06: LANDSCAPING:
Buffer screening between districts or parcels and uses shall not be required as
set forth in section 9-3-10, "Buffers", of the city code, except as noted
otherwise in this ordinance.
   A.   A thirty foot (30') "buffer park outlot" shall be provided along South
81st Street, Bridgewood Boulevard and Mills Civic Parkway. The outlot
maintenance shall be the responsibility of the homeowners' association and may
not include any fencing or structures. Landscape planting within the buffer
park outlots shall be in accordance with city code requirements for thirty foot
(30') buffer parks. Additional landscaping may be installed at the discretion
of the association; however living vegetation may not be removed without city
consent.
   B.   With the approval of the preliminary plat, a landscaping plan shall be
submitted and approved by the city for the pond and open space area. The plan
should focus on enhancing the edges of the pond through native grasses, wetland
plantings and enhancing the open space with clusters of trees and shrubs. These
areas will be maintained by the homeowners' association.
   C.   One overstory tree per lot is required, by the home builder, for all
lots within this PUD to provide for the visual softening, shading, and
enhancement of streets. Lot trees shall be installed prior to the initial
occupancy of the structure on the property. The tree shall be placed in the
front yard setback of the property. Tree maintenance shall be the
responsibility of the individual homeowner or the homeowners' association.
Trees that will encroach into any vehicle or pedestrian use area or travel lane
shall be of a variety that will accommodate pruning to allow for the minimum
clearance height (14 feet over vehicle travel lanes; 8 feet over pedestrian
travel lanes) without adversely affecting the overall natural shape of the
variety. Maintaining trees to these clearance levels is the responsibility of
the property owner.
   D.   Trees shall not be planted closer than five feet (5') to a sidewalk as
measured from the center of the tree or shrub trunk. The planting of trees on
corner lots within the area bounded by the street or alley lines of such lots
and a line adjoining points along said street or alley lines twenty five feet
(25') from the point of intersection of the public right of way lines shall be
prohibited. This area is defined as the "site triangle". No tree shall be
permitted within the sight triangle of a public street intersection. (Ord.
1672, 1-17-2006)
078-07: ARCHITECTURE:
Architectural design for single-family units shall attempt to express a
creative presentation of exterior building materials, exterior details and
texture, treatment of windows and doors, and use of angles and multiplicity of
planes within the wall and roof design. Homes should have materials such as
brick, natural stone, wood shakes, decorative molding and cornice treatments,
or similar combination of material which represents a variation of
architectural styles or elements. Garages or accessory structures should
incorporate architectural details with the use of windows, doors and other
facade detailing.
Any residential structure with a garage which projects in front of the front
facade equal to or greater than three feet (3') will be required to provide a
minimum five foot (5') deep covered front porch, covered stoop, or balcony. Any
residential structure with a garage which projects less than three feet (3') or
is recessed behind the front facade does not need to meet this requirement.
Prior to the issuance of any building permit for any lot, the architecture of
the residence shall be reviewed and approved by the community development
department. (Ord. 1672, 1-17-2006)
078-08: LAND USE DESIGN CRITERIA:
In addition to the general criteria as stated above, the following land use
design criteria shall apply to the development areas designated on the sketch
plan. The specific plan document which is made a part of this rezoning action
and on file in the city delineates one parcel for application of specific
development standards. The maximum number of dwelling units may not exceed one
hundred seventy five (175). The following development standards and use
regulations shall apply to each of the following development parcels: (Ord.
1672, 1-17-2006)
   A.   For all lots within parcel A the development standards and use
regulations and provisions set forth in title 9, "Zoning", of the city code for
RS-7 single-family residential district will apply with the exception of front
and rear yard setbacks which are as follows:
      1.   Front yard: Twenty five feet (25').
      2.   Rear yard: Thirty five feet (35') with the exception of those lots
with buffer parks which may have a twenty foot (20') setback. (Ord. 1689, 5-22-
2006)
   B.   Parcel B will be dedicated to the city for park use.
   C.   Parcel C is reserved for storm water detention and greenway and will be
wholly the responsibility of the homeowners' association.
   D.   No driveway access from an individual dwelling unit shall be permitted
directly onto Bridgewood Boulevard, South 81st Street or Mills Civic Parkway.
   E.   All fencing along the greenway shall be no more than four feet (4') in
height, except to enclose a pool for which purpose a six foot (6') fence will
be allowed. All fences shall be constructed of wood or decorative metals with
no chainlink materials. All other fence provisions shall adhere to those found
in the city code. (Ord. 1672, 1-17-2006)
078-09: SIGNAGE REGULATION:
Signage restrictions shall be imposed to limit and reduce the negative impacts
of sign clutter. Signage within the residential areas of the PUD shall comply
with the sign standards of the applicable residential district. All signs shall
comply with all provisions of the city sign code. (Ord. 1672, 1-17-2006)
078-10: STORM WATER MANAGEMENT:
Specific storm water management plans will be required with the development of
each parcel, demonstrating compliance with the approved Heritage Bend PUD
master storm water management plan, on file with the city's public works
department. The developer will have said specific storm water management plans
prepared by a professional engineer licensed in the state of Iowa, prior to the
submittal of any specific development proposals within the PUD. All specific
storm water management plans shall comply with the city's current design
standards for storm water management. The method of storm water management and
the storm water conveyance system shall be determined prior to city approval of
any development within any portion of the property within the Heritage Bend
PUD.
At time of platting or development, ownership and responsibility for all storm
water detention areas and private storm water detention outlet structures will
need to be established. (Ord. 1672, 1-17-2006)
078-11: PUBLIC STREET IMPROVEMENTS AND RIGHT OF WAY DEDICATION:
At the time of subdivision platting within the Heritage Bend PUD, the
subdivider shall be responsible for construction and/or installation of all
required public infrastructure improvements in accordance with the city's
subdivision ordinance, and as indicated on the approved Heritage Bend PUD
sketch proposal. With any subdivision plat within the Heritage Bend PUD, the
subdivider shall be responsible for constructing and/or installing the public
infrastructure necessary to support development within the subdivision in a
manner that will assure that the public infrastructure functions at an
acceptable level of service (per the city's comprehensive plan) and that
complies with all city ordinances.
   A.   The street classifications are as follows:
Mills Civic Parkway: Arterial street
Bridgewood Boulevard: Major collector
South 81st Street: Major collector
Coachlight Drive: Minor collector
All other interior streets: Local streets
   B.   Paving requirements (refer to traffic report for required storage and
taper lengths):
      1.   Mills Civic Parkway: The ultimate paving is six (6) lanes with dual
left turns at intersections. The developer will provide surety for one-half (1/
2) of a three (3) lane street and all required appurtenances (storm sewer,
grading, etc.) for the ultimate street configuration at Mills Civic Parkway
adjacent to plat. Mills Civic Parkway will be constructed at such time that the
city of West Des Moines deems necessary.
      2.   Bridgewood Boulevard: The developer will be responsible for the
ultimate street grading with all required appurtenances (storm sewer, etc.) and
construction of the remainder of the north two (2) lanes from the existing
terminus of Bridgewood Boulevard to the west plat boundary. The ultimate
configuration will be an eighty foot (80') wide boulevard with thirty foot
(30') median (with a median break at 83rd Street), eastbound left turn lane at
the entrance to the aquatic park and at 81st Street, and westbound left turn
lane at 83rd Street and at 85th Street.
      3.   South 81st Street: The developer will be responsible for the interim
paving of a minimum of two (2) lanes with designated left turn lanes at all
intersections from Mills Civic Parkway to Wistful Vista. The developer will be
responsible for paving three (3) lanes along South 81st Street between Wistful
Vista and Bridgewood Boulevard. Developer has agreed to secure a developer's
agreement with the adjacent property owner to the east to obtain the required
right of way (50 feet) north of the city's public safety facility along the
east side of 81st Street and complete interim paving for entire street adjacent
to plat. The ultimate pavement will be four (4) lanes with designated left
turns between Mills Civic Parkway and Wistful Vista Drive and five (5) lanes
between Wistful Vista Drive and Bridgewood Boulevard.
      4.   Coachlight Drive: The developer will be responsible for constructing
a thirty one foot (31') back to back street with a left turn lane at South 81st
Street.
      5.   All Remaining Internal Streets: The developer will be responsible
for constructing a twenty six foot (26') back to back street.
      6.   Other Requirements: The developer will be responsible for
constructing temporary turnarounds at ends of Skyview Circle and 84th Street to
the satisfaction of the city's public works department.
   C.   At such time of platting or development, the applicant proposing said
platting and/or development shall deed to the city:
      1.   Additional right of way along Mills Civic Parkway necessary to
provide eighty two and one-half feet (82.5') from the centerline of street with
fifty foot (50') intersecting radii provided at the intersection with 81st
Street right of way.
      2.   Additional right of way for 81st Street necessary to provide sixty
feet (60') of right of way from the centerline of the street from Mills Civic
Parkway north to end of the taper for the right turn lane, thence additional
right of way to provide fifty feet (50') of right of way from the centerline of
the street to the north end of the plat.
      3.   Additional right of way along Bridgewood Boulevard necessary to
provide seventy five feet (75') from the centerline of the street.
      4.   Right of way for streets internal to this development should be
identified as follows:
         a.   Seventy feet (70') of right of way for Coachlight Drive.
         b.   Sixty feet (60') of right of way for Wistful Vista Drive.
         c.   Sixty feet (60') of right of way for Nelson Street.
         d.   Sixty feet (60') of right of way for Heritage Bend Road.
         e.   Sixty feet (60') of right of way for Skyview Circle.
         f.   Sixty feet (60') of right of way for 82nd Street.
         g.   Sixty feet (60') of right of way for 83rd Street.
         h.   Sixty feet (60') of right of way for 83rd Place.
         i.   Sixty feet (60') of right of way for 84th Street. (Ord. 1672, 1-
17-2006)
078-12: SANITARY SEWER:
Any proposed change in approved land use densities for the Heritage Bend PUD
will require an analysis of the downstream sanitary sewer capacity to assure
that adequate capacity is available for the proposed change in approved land
use densities. (Ord. 1672, 1-17-2006)
078-13: LIGHTING:
The developer shall be responsible for all costs associated with the
installation of public streetlights within or adjacent to any area proposed to
be platted or included within a development. (Ord. 1672, 1-17-2006)
078-14: TRAFFIC REPORTS:
A traffic report has been prepared by the city for this area that outlines what
the ultimate paving requirements will be for the major roadways in the vicinity
of the Heritage Bend development. Prior to, or in conjunction with the
development of any parcel, or portion of a parcel, the developer shall have the
traffic report reviewed by the city's traffic consultant to ensure that the
provisions and assumptions of the original traffic report are still valid and
applicable. (Ord. 1672, 1-17-2006)
078-99: LEGISLATIVE HISTORY:
Ord. 1672, 1-17-2006; Ord. 1689, 5-22-2006.
PUD #79
VILLAGE AT JORDAN CREEK
SECTION:
079-01: Legal Description
079-02: Intent
079-03: Required Plans
079-04: Conditions
079-05: Requirements
079-06: Architecture
079-07: Signage
079-08: Vehicle Trip Allocation
079-09: Public Street Improvements
079-10: Public Street Lights
079-11: Stormwater Management Plan
079-12: Utilities
079-13: Fire Access
079-99: Legislative History
079-01: LEGAL DESCRIPTION:
A part of outlot T, Davis Estates plat 1, an official plat, West Des Moines,
Dallas County, Iowa, more particularly described as follows:
Beginning at the southeast corner of lot 'B', Jordan Heights Rowhouses, an
official plat, West Des Moines, Dallas County, Iowa, said point being on the
east line of said Davis Estates plat 1 and on the west line of Kings Valley
Subdivision, an official plat, West Des Moines, Dallas County, Iowa; thence
S00°15'54"W, 912.62 feet along said east line and said west line, to the
northeast corner of lot 'A', Bella South plat 1, an official plat, West Des
Moines, Dallas County, Iowa and to the north right-of-way line of Coachlight
Drive as it is presently established; thence N89°14'23"W, 10.14 feet along the
north line of said lot 'A' and said north right-of-way line, to a point of
curvature of a 685.00 feet radius curve concave to the southeast; thence
southwesterly 322.73 feet along said north line, said north right-of-way line
and said curve, said curve has a chord length of 319.75 feet and a chord
bearing of S76°46'40"W; thence S63°17'53"W, 297.01 feet along said north line
and said north right-of-way line to the easterly line of lot 'C', Jordan Creek
Crossing, an official plat, West Des Moines, Dallas County, Iowa, and to a
point of curvature of a 35.00 feet radius curve concave to the northeast;
thence northwesterly, 56.92 feet along the northerly line of said lot 'C', and
said north right-of-way line and said curve, said curve has a chord length of
50.85 feet and a chord bearing of N70°13'32"W, to the east line of lot 'B' in
said Jordan Creek Crossing and to the east right-of-way line of South 64th
Street as it is presently established, a to a point of compound curvature of a
685.00 feet radius curve concave to the northeast; thence northwesterly, 285.44
feet along said east lines, said east right-of-way line and said curve, said
curve has a chord length of 283.38 feet and a chord bearing of N11°41'24"W;
thence N00°14'12"E, 493.79 feet along said east line and said east right-of-way
line to a point of curvature of a 565.00 feet radius curve concave to the
southwest; thence northwesterly, 144.70 feet along said east line, said east
right-of-way line, the easterly line of lot 'A' in said Jordan Creek Crossing
and said curve, said curve has a chord length of 144.30 feet and a chord
bearing of N07°07'40"W, to a point of reverse curvature of a 35.00 feet radius
curve concave to the southeast; thence northeasterly, 53.69 feet along the east
line of said lot 'A', said east right-of-way line and said curve, said curve
has a chord length of 48.58 feet and a chord bearing of N29°34'00"E, to the
southwest corner of lot 'B' in said Jordan Creek Rowhouses and to the south
right-of-way line of Wistful Vista Drive as it is presently established; thence
N73°29'38"E, 341.78 feet along the south line of said lot 'B' and said south
right-of-way line, to a point of curvature of a 1165.00 feet radius curve
concave to the southeast; thence northeasterly, 337.56 feet along said south
line, south right-of-way line and said curve, said curve has a chord length of
336.38 feet and a chord bearing of N81°47'13"E; thence S89°57'24"E, 27.51 feet
to the southeast corner of said lot 'B' and to the point of beginning.
Said tract of land contains 15.056 acres more or less.
Said tract of land subject all easements of record.
(Ord. 1886, 11-15-2010)
079-02: INTENT:
To develop a planned residential development which provides the necessary
population densities to capitalize on and support other nonresidential
developments in the surrounding area. (Ord. 1886, 11-15-2010)
079-03: REQUIRED PLANS:
The following plans shall be required as a part of the processing of any
development application for any property within the Village At Jordan Creek
specific plan:
   A.   Area Development Plan: An area development plan is a plan that
identifies planning units, major street patterns, master stormwater drainage
and detention concepts, utilities, shared public spaces, land use assumptions
and proposed densities. It is intended to be a tool used to promote the
communication and cooperation between adjacent property owners and developers
to ensure cohesive and unified development.
An area development plan shall be reviewed by the plan and zoning commission
and approved by the city council prior to, or in conjunction with, the review
of the specific plan for any property within said specific plan area. No change
to the area development plan shall be made without approval of an amended plan
from the appropriate reviewing bodies.
Exhibit A on file in the city is the city council approved area development
plan for this property.
   B.   Specific Plan: A specific plan identifies development intent for each
planning unit indicated on the area development plan or more specifically
delineated on the specific plan map. The specific plan shall conform to the
general development intent identified in the approved area development plan, as
well as the town center overlay district guidelines. The specific plan shall be
reviewed by the plan and zoning commission and adopted by the city council by
ordinance.
This document shall constitute the specific plan ordinance for Village At
Jordan Creek. A specific plan map (exhibit B on file in the city) illustrates
the site layout concept for Village At Jordan Creek. This document and the
associated exhibits on file with the city, are intended to specify the
components, parameters, and requirements to be adhered to and implemented in
order to ensure the realization of Village At Jordan Creek development concept.
It is recognized that modifications and changes in building footprints and
layout may be necessary in response to market demands. These changes may be
allowed with the appropriate city approvals if the shift does not have a
negative impact on the overall concept for the development and traffic patterns
and the total number of vehicle trips does not exceed that which has been
allocated to the overall Village At Jordan Creek development. At the discretion
of the city's development services department, changes to the layout of the
development that are deemed to be "major" changes shall require an amendment to
the specific plan map and/or ordinance, whichever is applicable. Major
amendments shall require the review and approval of the plan and zoning
commission and city council.
Where the specific plan map and specific plan ordinance conflict, the specific
plan ordinance shall prevail.
   C.   Development Applications (Overlay District Site Plans): Site plans for
all buildings and land area within the Village At Jordan Creek development must
meet the intent of the approved specific plan. Site plans shall be submitted to
the city of West Des Moines for review and approval prior to the development of
any portion of the associated supporting lot. Site plans for permitted uses
which comply (as determined by the city's development services department) with
the design intent as set forth in this specific plan will be subject to
administrative review and approval by the planning division manager. A one week
review and comment period by each and all available members of the plan and
zoning commission and city council shall precede the administrative approval.
If upon review, two (2) or more members of the city council, plan and zoning
commission, or a combination thereof request such; or if the city's development
services department deems the proposed site plan is not in compliance with the
approved specific plan or is potentially controversial, the site plan will be
processed through the traditional full site plan review and approval process.
Site plans for permitted conditional uses (PC) as defined in the city code,
unless otherwise amended within this ordinance, shall be approved by the
appropriate review body. At the discretion of the city's development services
department, an amendment to Village At Jordan Creek specific plan ordinance may
be required to bring consistency between the ordinance and site plan
development proposed.
   D.   Preliminary And Final Platting: Prior to or in conjunction with any
site plan submittal for proposed development of any land within Village At
Jordan Creek, said area shall be preliminary and final platted, in accordance
with the city's subdivision ordinance, to delineate the parcels or lots to be
developed or sold. All necessary code (building, fire, subdivision and zoning)
requirements, unless amended elsewhere in this ordinance, for the type of
residential development and intended ownership shall be accommodated. Platted
outlots are not buildable.
Unless otherwise specifically restricted by city council action, ground work
and construction of private roads, drives and utilities may be started, at the
developer's risk, upon approval of the preliminary plat by the city council.
Public street and utility construction may begin, at the risk of the developer,
after approval of the preliminary plat by the city council and construction
improvement plans by the city of West Des Moines.
Prior to approval of the final plat, unless otherwise allowed by council, the
developer of Village At Jordan Creek shall provide the appropriate agreements,
easements, and sureties for all public rights of way and other public
improvements (utilities, sidewalks, streetlights, etc.) within and associated
with the development.
A final plat applicable to each proposed development area must be approved and
recorded with the Dallas County recorder's office prior to issuance of any
building permit, including footing and foundation permits, for construction of
any structure within the area proposed for development. (Ord. 1886, 11-15-2010)
079-04: CONDITIONS:
Whereas, title 9, chapter 9, "Planned Unit Development District", of the city
code establishes certain regulations and guidelines pertaining to accompanying
information required on plat and site plan documents. Now, therefore, the
following conditions, restrictions, and regulations are adopted as part of this
approval, to wit:
In addition to the specific plan map, the following general development
criteria shall be integrated into and made a part of this specific plan
ordinance:
   A.   General Conformance To Subdivision Ordinance: All subdivisions, public
streets, public street rights of way, and general development shall adhere to
the standards and design criteria set forth in the West Des Moines subdivision
ordinances and the most current design standards adopted by the city of West
Des Moines pertaining thereto unless otherwise stated within this ordinance.
   B.   General Conformance To Zoning Ordinance: Unless otherwise specified
herein, the development of the Village At Jordan Creek specific plan shall
comply with title 9, "Zoning", of the city code or any other applicable codes.
   C.   Flood Hazard: In all areas within a 100-year frequency flood hazard
zone, or adjoining drainageways, and detention ponding areas involving
potential flood hazards, no building shall be erected that has a lowest floor,
including basements, less than one foot (1') above the determining level of the
100-year frequency flood event, and no building shall be located within twenty
five feet (25') of any easement or property boundary of a major drainageway,
stormwater detention basin, or pond, unless said location is approved as part
of a development entitlement by the city council and said building is
structurally designed accordingly.
   D.   Developer Responsibilities: Unless otherwise specifically approved by
the city council, the developer, its successors and/or assigns, if any, shall
pay all planning, engineering, and construction costs for the development of
the planned unit development as required by this ordinance, and shall pay all
costs related to approved site plans, which may include, but is not limited to,
the cost of all streets, storm sewers, sanitary sewers, water mains and service
lines, drainageway improvements, detention basins, buffers, and other
improvements as required. No occupancy permits, either temporary or permanent,
shall be issued until all necessary public improvements applicable to the area/
lot or structure requesting occupancy are installed and accepted by the city of
West Des Moines. Nothing in this ordinance shall be construed to prevent the
developer, its successors and/or assigns, if any, from entering into private
agreement(s) as it/they may desire to share the cost of improvements.
   E.   Common Areas: Prior to approval of the final plat and if applicable,
the developer shall put in place covenants that shall identify responsibility
for the maintenance of all common areas in perpetuity. (Ord. 1886, 11-15-2010)
079-05: REQUIREMENTS:
Unless provided otherwise in this ordinance, all general use regulations,
performance standards and provisions set forth in title 9, "Zoning", of the
city code for the residential medium density (RM) district shall apply to
development of Village At Jordan Creek specific plan area. To the extent that
the provisions of this section conflict with or are more restrictive than
similar provisions provided elsewhere in the West Des Moines zoning ordinance,
the provisions of this section shall control. The following land use design
criteria, development standards, and landscaping regulations shall apply to all
parcels within the Village At Jordan Creek specific plan area:
   A.   Land Use: Land use shall be limited to multiple single-family attached
dwellings (multi-family) within multiple buildings. A maximum density of twelve
(12) dwelling units per gross acre shall be allowed. Based on a project acreage
of 15.06 acres, a maximum of one hundred eighty (180) dwelling units shall be
allowed. A clubhouse type facility which provides limited entertainment,
gathering area, fitness or childcare services shall be allowed as an ancillary
use to the development. Said facility should be intended for use by the
residents of the development and shall not be geared toward use by the general
public. Said facility, including parking shall be wholly located within the
development boundaries.
   B.   Building Setback:
      1.   Buildings shall be set back a minimum of thirty feet (30') from the
perimeter development boundaries or ultimate street right of way line,
whichever is more restrictive. The setback shall be measured from the
appropriate boundary line to the closest point on the visible vertical
foundation wall. Intermittent encroachment into the north, west and south
setbacks for canopies, decks and awnings may be allowed at the discretion of
the city's development services department. Due to the location of a required
buffer along the eastern boundary, no building encroachments into the thirty
foot (30') setback shall be allowed.
      2.   Detached accessory structures shall be set back a minimum of twenty
five feet (25') from perimeter boundaries adjacent to a public street; and
shall be set back a minimum of thirty feet (30') from perimeter boundaries not
adjacent to a public street.
   C.   Building Separation:
      1.   Principal structures shall be separated by a minimum of twenty five
feet (25') or as otherwise required by building and fire codes, whichever is
more restrictive.
      2.   A minimum fifteen feet (15') of separation shall be maintained
between primary and detached accessory structures and between two (2) detached
accessory structures unless otherwise required by building or fire codes to be
greater.
   D.   Building Height:
      1.   Building heights shall respect the single-family detached
residential area to the east. In general, maximum one- and two- story buildings
shall be located along the eastern boundary of the development; taller
buildings may be located in the western two-thirds (2/3) of the site. Primary
dwelling buildings shall not exceed three (3) stories unless an additional ten
feet (10') of building setback is provided for each story above three (3)
stories.
      2.   Ancillary use buildings, as allowed (clubhouse facility) shall not
exceed one story.
      3.   Freestanding place making elements and landmarks such as clock
towers shall not exceed a maximum height of forty five feet (45').
   E.   Parking Ratios:
      1.   Parking shall be provided as follows:
         a.   Dwelling Units:
            (1)   Efficiency apartment units shall provide 1.5 spaces per unit.
            (2)   One to two (2) bedroom apartment units shall provide 2.0
spaces per unit.
            (3)   Three plus (3+) bedroom apartment units shall provide 2.5
spaces per unit.
            (4)   Garage stalls attached to and incorporated into a dwelling
building shall count one hundred percent (100%) toward fulfillment of the
minimum required number of parking spaces. A maximum of 0.67 of detached garage
stalls may be counted toward fulfilling the minimum required number of parking
stalls.
            (5)   Uncovered parking stalls shall count one hundred percent
(100%) toward fulfillment of the minimum required number of parking spaces.
            (6)   Tandem parking stalls located in front of garages
incorporated or attached to dwelling buildings may be counted one hundred
percent (100%) toward fulfilling the minimum required number of parking spaces.
Tandem stalls located in front of detached garages shall not be counted toward
fulfilling the minimum required number of parking spaces.
            (7)   For any single-family attached dwelling intended as owner
occupied and/or for which a condominium regime is established, a minimum of one
of the required spaces for each unit shall be as an enclosed parking space.
This parking space shall be a minimum of nineteen feet by nine feet (19' x 9')
and may be designed as a freestanding garage, attached garage or multiple
garage spaces within an enclosure. A specific covered parking space shall be
designated for and legally tied to each dwelling unit. The covered space must
be for the exclusive use of the occupant of the dwelling unit and cannot be
optional for purchase or rent even if the dwelling unit is rented.
            (8)   Minimum parking stall measurements and drive aisle widths
shall conform to title 9, chapter 15 of the city code.
         b.   Ancillary/Clubhouse Facility:
            (1)   One space per one hundred (100) square feet of GFA of that
portion of the development's clubhouse that is to be utilized by patrons
visiting the site and not residing within the development (complex leasing
offices, gathering/party rooms, etc.) shall be provided on site and within
walking proximity to the building. Space within the development's clubhouse
that is intended for use by the residents only and not individuals that must
drive to the site (fitness rooms, restrooms/pool locker rooms, etc.) shall not
be included in the square footage utilized to calculate clubhouse parking
requirements.
      2.   If developed as multiple legal parcels a blanket easement shall be
executed providing cross access parking and ingress/egress.
   F.   Parking Setbacks:
      1.   Off street parking areas shall be set back from ultimate right of
way lines a minimum of thirty feet (30'). Off street parking areas shall be set
back from the eastern property boundary a minimum of thirty feet (30') due to
the presence of the thirty foot (30') buffer.
      2.   Minimum parking stall measurements and drive aisle widths shall
conform to title 9, chapter 15 of the city code.
      3.   No portion of any parking lot or internal circulation drive may be
located within a required streetscape or buffer.
   G.   Fences:
      1.   Perimeter fencing shall be allowed in accordance with all of the
following provisions, but shall be located no closer than fifteen feet (15') to
the north, south and western property boundaries. A fence may be located at the
eastern property boundary, however, the fence design and/or location shall not
impede the flow of water within this area. Perimeter fencing is allowed within
the required twenty five foot (25') streetscape area. Swimming pool fencing
shall be located and designed consistent with typical pool enclosure standards
and regulations.
      2.   Pedestrian access by residents of the apartment complex through
gates in the fence shall be provided at multiple locations. Residents of the
complex must be able to both exit and enter at all gate locations (gates shall
not be exit only with residents required to access the site at the main vehicle
access drives).
      3.   Shall be a maximum of six feet (6') in height except swimming pool
enclosures which must meet minimum height requirements as otherwise governed.
Stone columns (see below) shall be allowed to exceed the maximum fence height
by no more than twelve inches (12"). Pedestrian entry features which include
arbors, arched entries, arcades or finials shall be a maximum of ten feet (10')
in height.
      4.   Shall be constructed of decorative metal and shall maintain a
consistency of fifty percent (50%) openness.
      5.   For strength and stability, brick or stone support columns twenty
four inches (24") or greater in width and depth shall be incorporated and
spaced no greater than sixty feet (60') on center. Typical fence posts of the
same material as the fence may be utilized as necessary in between the support
columns. The stone columns of the fence shall not be located within any public
utility easement area unless the developer provides an indemnification/hold
harmless agreement to the city of West Des Moines for any damages that may
occur in the removal of the fence should the city need to access or work within
the easement area. The reinstallation of the fence, including the stone
columns, shall be at the effort and expense of the developer. The city shall
not be financially responsible for any costs associated with the removal,
repair or reinstallation of the fence.
      6.   To avoid damage to utilities, the appropriate location of the
utilities shall be conducted prior to the installation of any portion of the
fence, including the stone columns and/or other fence supports.
      7.   Development identification plaques that display the development's
logo, initials or name may be incorporated into or attached to the major
support columns. Said signage plaques may not exceed one and one-half (11/2)
square feet in size. Said signage shall be in addition to signage allowed
elsewhere in this ordinance.
   H.   Buffers: Buffers as required by title 9 of the city code shall be
required between adjoining properties which do not abut a public or private
street; thus a thirty foot (30') buffer shall be required along the eastern
perimeter boundary. In addition, a twenty five foot (25') streetscape shall be
provided along those parcel boundaries which are adjacent to a public or
private street (see landscaping-streetscape requirements within this
ordinance). One overstory tree, two (2) understory or evergreen trees and six
(6) shrubs shall be provided for every thirty five (35) linear feet of required
buffer. Of the total number of trees within the buffer, a minimum of fifty
percent (50%) shall be evergreen in nature to provide for year round screening.
   I.   Landscaping: The landscaping requirements specified herein are intended
to create an aesthetically pleasing development which enhances the appearance
and character of the city of West Des Moines, while protecting the general
health, safety and welfare of the citizens. Landscaping is required to address
the following primary aspects or consequences of development:
Open space protection and enhancement,
Mitigation of paving expanses associated with off street parking,
Visual screening of undesirable views, activities and/or site elements, and
Street side enhancement ("streetscapes").
At the time of site plan review, landscaping shall be evaluated to ensure
achievement of the standards stated within this specific plan ordinance.
Additional vegetation beyond that required herein may be required to be
implemented in response to additional details of the use, buildings, parking,
site layout, etc. Details regarding specific varieties, exact quantities, and
the minimum size at time of planting shall be provided and approved as part of
the site plan submittal and shall meet the general guidelines in respect to the
minimum plant size traditionally applied to development within the city.
      1.   Open Space: The intent of open space is to allow for a balance
between natural areas and the built environment and to provide for the overall
beautification and "greening" of the city.
         a.   A minimum of twenty percent (20%) open space shall be provided
within the development.
         b.   Open space shall be considered all areas unencumbered by
buildings or paved areas associated with parking, drive aisles, and loading
docks or zones. Plaza areas, water features and structures such as gazebos,
arbors, pergolas, etc., that are associated with outdoor pedestrian use areas,
as well as designated and enhanced pedestrian walkways through and between
parcels may be counted toward fulfilling the minimum open space requirement.
         c.   Vegetation at a rate of two (2) trees and three (3) shrubs per
three thousand (3,000) square feet of required open space shall be provided
within each parcel.
            (1)   Minimum Requirements: Of the total number of trees required
for open space, a minimum of fifty percent (50%) shall be overstory or
evergreen in nature, unless otherwise done and approved for design intent.
Sizes at time of planting shall be in accordance with title 9, chapter 19,
"Landscaping", of the city code.
            (2)   Vegetation Substitution:
   (A) A twenty five (25) square foot mass planting of perennials or ornamental
grasses may be substituted for two (2) shrubs.
            (3)   Vegetation Requirements: Vegetation required as part of the
open space may be placed into off street parking areas, streetscapes or
required buffers; however the open space vegetation is in addition to that
which would be required of buffers, streetscapes or parking islands/pods and
may not be counted toward fulfilling the minimum amount of vegetation required
for these areas.
      2.   Off Street Parking Areas:
         a.   Whenever possible, the appearance of numerous smaller parking
areas shall be created versus one larger parking expanse.
         b.   All off street parking areas shall be aesthetically improved to
reduce obtrusive characteristics that are inherent to their function. Multiple
landscape islands combined with vegetation shall be incorporated to effectively
eliminate a "sea of asphalt/concrete" and to provide shade thus decreasing heat
reflection back into the environment. Landscape islands and/or pods shall be
implemented in accordance with the following:
            (1)   Islands or open areas shall be located at the terminus end of
all parking rows. Terminal islands shall equal a typical parking stall width
and shall match, at a minimum, the stall length unless otherwise allowed per
the discretion of the director of development services.
            (2)   Linear parking rows with greater than twelve (12) parking
stalls shall incorporate a landscape island or pod every six (6) stalls. At a
minimum, islands shall match the dimensions of one parking stall and pods which
are to contain trees shall measure a minimum of six feet (6') from back of curb
to back of curb. In those situations in which parking is located immediately
adjacent to a pedestrian pathway, thus creating situation in which a full six
foot (6') pod cannot be implemented, the pods may be eliminated and the trees
that would otherwise be located within landscape pods located immediately
adjacent to the sidewalk. Trees in this circumstance shall be overstory in
nature in order to achieve a large enough canopy to allow for shading of the
parking area.
            (3)   One overstory or ornamental tree shall be implemented in
every landscape island and six foot (6') pod except for those islands or pods
in which vegetation placement would interfere with utility or fire hydrant
access.
            (4)   For every twelve (12) parking stalls, two (2) shrubs or a
twenty five (25) square foot massing of perennials or ornamental grasses shall
be located within the islands or pods within the parking areas or in those
areas immediately adjacent to and/or at the end of a parking row. Whenever
possible, ornamental grasses and perennials shall be of a variety which reaches
a minimum of three feet (3') in height in order to be visible between vehicles.
      3.   Visual Screening:
         a.   Detached Accessory Structures (Garages): Views from public
streets and from property outside of the development of the "backs" and "sides"
of garages and other detached accessory structures shall be mitigated through a
combination of the following:
            (1)   Architectural enhancement to visually break wall plane and
roof expanses and to "disguise" the function of the building.
            (2)   Incorporation of vegetation, with or without berming to
visually screen and aid in anchoring the structure to the site.
         b.   Mechanical Equipment:
            (1)   Ground level views from public streets and adjoining
properties of the negative aspects of development and land uses such as
heating, ventilation, or air conditioning (HVAC) units or similar electrical or
mechanical appurtenances shall be adequately screened. Said screening shall be
achieved through the use of architectural enclosures and/or earth berming and
landscaping consisting of predominately evergreen material for year round
screening.
            (2)   All rooftop mechanical units shall be screened from ground
level views from public streets and from buildings on the adjacent residential
properties through architecturally incorporated opaque screen walls, raised
parapet walls, penthouse features, or other opaque material comprised of
materials consistent with the associated primary structure. Screening measures
and materials shall be provided and reviewed as part of the site plan review
process.
            (3)   Utility meters and equipment shall be visually screened to
minimize their presence through the use of berming, vegetation, fencing or
building "wing walls". The use of building wing walls or other architecturally
integrated building extensions is encouraged to screen utility meters and
equipment visible from views from the perimeter streets and adjacent
properties. Whenever possible, banks of meters shall be sited in locations that
are not visible from the public street or adjoining properties.
         c.   Trash Enclosures: Trash receptacles and dumpsters shall be
screened by the use of a permanent enclosure. Enclosures shall be constructed
of materials consistent with or complementary to the primary structure.
Additionally, the enclosure should be landscaped to minimize the visual
presence and impact of the structure on surrounding properties, businesses, and
public streets.
      4.   Streetscaping: A landscaped edge or "streetscape" shall be provided
along all public streets. These streetscapes are intended to provide desired
green to the city, interest, comfort to pedestrians, visual softening of
pavement expanses, bring human scale to adjoining buildings, minimize heat
reflection, and provide traffic calming benefits. The streetscape should have a
noticeable pattern, design, and plant varieties and should attempt to serve as
a distinguishing or identifiable landmark for the development.
         a.   The streetscape area shall consist of the first twenty five feet
(25') parallel and adjacent to the street right of way of public streets or
back of curb of private streets. As much as possible, streetscape landscaping
shall be located within the first fifteen feet (15') adjacent to the street
unless conflicts with utilities and/or easements dictate otherwise.
         b.   Vegetation within streetscape areas shall be provided at a rate
of one tree and three (3) shrubs per thirty five (35) linear feet of
streetscape. A twenty five (25) square foot mass planting of perennials or
ornamental grasses may be substituted for two (2) shrubs.
         c.   Vegetation required of streetscapes shall be in addition to
vegetation required of parking, buffers and open space. Vegetation required as
part of open space or buffers may be placed into streetscapes; however the open
space or buffer vegetation may not be counted toward fulfilling the minimum
amount of vegetation required for the streetscape.
   J.   Pedestrian Elements: The Village At Jordan Creek development, in
alignment with town center overlay district guidelines, aims to encourage
pedestrian movement and opportunities for pedestrian interaction through a
series of interconnected sidewalks, central greenbelt/open area and community
pool and clubhouse. The attached specific plan map indicates the locations and
type of anticipated plaza areas and pedestrian corridors; however, it should be
realized that additional areas may be required to adequately serve the proposed
development. Conceptual illustrations for the plaza areas indicated are
included in the exhibit packet on file in the city. Specific details and final
materials and layouts for each of these plaza areas shall be submitted,
reviewed, and approved as part of the site plan for the associated area.
      1.   Usable Open Space: The Village At Jordan Creek development shall
provide usable open space or activity spaces through the integration of plazas,
green spaces, interconnected and enhanced pedestrian corridors and focal point
elements. Each area shall incorporate usable open space of a size and number
proportionate to the number of intended dwellings in that area. Fulfillment of
this provision shall be at the discretion of the plan and zoning commission and
city council at the time of their review.
         a.   These areas shall encourage opportunities for interaction among
pedestrians through the provision of seating opportunities (benches, chairs,
tables, planter walls, etc.). Without compromising the design intent of the
plazas, the developer is encouraged to maximize the number of furniture/seating
opportunities throughout the development. Representations of the site
amenities, including street furniture that will be provided throughout this
development are included in the exhibit packet on file in the city. Although
deviations from the illustrations are permissible, the street furniture is
intended to serve as a unifying element throughout the development.
         b.   Open space plaza areas shall incorporate a variety of hardscape
landscape materials (stone pavers, colored and/or stamped concrete, field
boulders, etc.) for visual interest and variety and shall implement landscape
vegetation to soften, enhance, and delineate the areas. All plaza/pedestrian
areas are required to incorporate "green" through the incorporation of planter
beds, containers, raised planters or landscaping within or immediately adjacent
to the plaza area.
         c.   Appropriate lighting should be incorporated into the plaza areas
and along pedestrian pathways for safety reasons and to extend the usability of
the area into the evening hours. Such lighting may be provided by either pole
or building mounted fixtures or bollard style lighting.
         d.   Plaza areas shall be located within walking proximity to nearby
dwellings. If necessary, identifiable pedestrian plaza areas may be located
within the specified streetscape area as long as appropriate landscaping and
other plaza enhancements are incorporated.
         e.   The installation of these pedestrian elements shall occur in
conjunction with the development of adjacent buildings and shall be completed
prior to issuance of a final occupancy permit for the last building within an
area and to which the pedestrian elements are intended to serve.
      2.   Pedestrian Connections: The overall development shall integrate
interconnected pedestrian walkways to allow and encourage pedestrian movement
within and through the Village At Jordan Creek development, as well as provide
more direct paths to other surrounding developments.
         a.   Pedestrian pathways internal to the development and across
parking areas and drive aisles shall be constructed with contrasting color,
paving material or pavement patterns to the adjoining paving in order to
provide a definable and highly visible crosswalk. Simply striping pedestrian
crosswalks shall not meet the intent of this section.
   K.   Lighting:
      1.   Fixtures used within off street parking areas shall be consistent
with those illustrated in the exhibits packet on file in the city. Although
deviations from the illustrations are permissible, the fixtures are intended to
serve as a unifying element throughout the development.
      2.   Fixtures shall not be mounted higher than twenty five feet (25') as
measured from the ground to the top of the light structure.
      3.   No floodlighting is allowed. No unshielded wall packs are allowed.
Wall mounted lights shall be directional in nature or shall incorporate the
necessary shields to direct the light to a defined target area. Building
uplighting for architectural interest may be allowed provided it does not
produce light spillover or pollution.
      4.   Utilitarian wall mounted light fixtures should be of a color to
blend with the adjacent building materials in order to minimize their presence.
Decorative wall fixtures need not blend and may be of a contrasting color in
order to increase their presence if so desired.
      5.   In addition to cut off fixtures, particular attention shall be given
to eliminate hot spots and light glare. To achieve this, additional measures
may include, but are not limited to, lowering parking lot light levels after
certain hours, turning off lights not necessary for security purposes, and use
of landscaping for light screening/blockage.
      6.   As a part of the review of a site plan, a photometric plan shall be
submitted. During the review, the applicant must demonstrate how lighting will
not adversely affect adjoining properties. (Ord. 1886, 11-15-2010)
079-06: ARCHITECTURE:
The intent is to create building facades throughout this development that are
varied and articulated to provide visual interest to pedestrians and to
establish a unique identity for the development. The architectural design of
any building within this development shall be acceptable to the city. The
architecture shall attempt to express a creative presentation by careful
attention to exterior building materials and details, use of fenestration and
change in building mass within the plane and roof design to lessen the
plainness of appearance which can be characteristic of large buildings.
Building design, materials, trim, detailing, and colors shall provide
continuity and cohesiveness amongst buildings. All sides to each building shall
receive high quality materials, finishes, and details (360 degree architectural
treatment). There are no "backs" to a building. Materials should be durable and
of a quality that will maintain their appearance over a prolonged time.
On file with the city are conceptual architectural illustrations of the general
building style and material options. Once city approval is gained on a
particular building design, any alteration in design or materials, before or
during construction must be reviewed and approved by the city's development
services department.
   A.   All buildings within this development shall accommodate or incorporate
the following in building design and materials:
      1.   Buildings shall be organized to create a logical and identifiable
relationship with the site and other buildings, open spaces, and pedestrian
circulation paths.
      2.   The use of building articulation and materials which break up the
building mass into modules that respect a pedestrian scale and reflects
proportions similar to other residential buildings.
      3.   The building's design should meet context and site objectives such
as providing gateways, creating visual and physical linkages and framing or
terminating views.
      4.   Variation in building height, mass and roof forms shall be provided
to create interest while still maintaining an overall building continuity.
Roofs should not be designed as attention getting devices.
      5.   Entrances into buildings should be easily identified through the use
of building design and detailing. Projected or recessed entryways, change in
rooflines, addition of awnings or changes in building material are examples
that can create this effect.
      6.   Shifts in building planes/facades and variation in exterior
materials shall be incorporated to minimize long expanses of wall. Long blank
walls shall be prohibited.
      7.   Variation in materials, material modules, expressed joints,
textures, colors and details should be used to break up the mass of the
buildings. Materials should change with the change in building planes.
      8.   Natural materials such as brick and stone shall be incorporated.
Architectural concrete or metal acceptable to the city may be incorporated in
the design. Whenever possible, the highest grade and type of siding material
should be implemented in order to provide an upscale appearance and extend the
attractiveness and life of the material. The use of EIFS or synthetic stucco
shall be used in moderation and primarily used as an accent or trim material;
EIFS or synthetic stucco may not be the predominate building material.
      9.   Hard materials (brick and stone) shall appropriately return around
corners to provide authenticity to the material. The appropriate sills and
headers over and around doors and windows within areas comprised of hard
materials shall be incorporated to provide structural authenticity.
      10.   Trim and structural elements such as posts or columns shall be
sized to the scale of the building. (Ord. 1886, 11-15-2010)
079-07: SIGNAGE:
All proposed ground signage requires approval of a sign permit issued by the
city of West Des Moines through normal sign review procedures. Unless otherwise
provided herein, signage shall abide by the standards and regulations as set
forth in title 9, chapter 18, "Signs", of the city code for the residential
medium density (RM) district.
   A.   Monument/Ground Sign:
      1.   One ground monument sign shall be allowed per parcel frontage that
has access to a public street.
      2.   The sign structure shall generally not exceed six feet (6') in
height; however, architectural elements shall be allowed to a maximum height of
seven feet (7').
      3.   The development identification copy area shall not exceed thirty
(30) square feet with the top edge of the copy area located no higher than six
feet (6') from the ground.
      4.   Address indication shall be placed on the sign per the fire
marshal's direction.
   B.   Building Directory Sign: Building directory signs shall be implemented
interior to the development to assist in directing patrons and emergency
response crews through the site. Size, design and location of said signs shall
be worked out with the city's fire marshal.
   C.   Development Identification Plaques: See subsection
079-05G, "Fences", of this ordinance for allowed development identification
plaques incorporated/attached to major fence support columns. (Ord. 1886, 11-
15-2010)
079-08: VEHICLE TRIP ALLOCATION:
The traffic study completed by the traffic engineering division of the city of
West Des Moines and approved for the Village At Jordan Creek allocates one
thousand two hundred twenty six (1,226) average daily trips (ADT); ninety five
(95) A.M. peak; and one hundred thirteen (113) P.M. peak vehicle trips for the
entire development. This allocation constitutes the maximum number of vehicle
trips allowed for the development.
As the initial site plan for each parcel within the Village At Jordan Creek
development is approved, the assigned number of vehicle trips generated by each
developed parcel (determined by the number of square feet of the proposed
specific use and/or residential dwellings, in conjunction with parameters, if
any, established by the traffic analysis) shall be subtracted from the total
trips allocated to the Village At Jordan Creek development.
The number of trips assigned to each parcel at the time of initial site plan
approval shall be an entitlement to the parcel and shall run with the land.
Traffic allocation to each parcel due to subsequent redevelopment or change of
use shall not exceed the traffic allocation originally authorized for the
parcel unless there is a corresponding reduction within the overall development
and the change in allocation is approved by the city of West Des Moines.
Approval of this proposed specific plan does not constitute a guarantee that
the proposed specific plan can be implemented. Development and/or redevelopment
of each parcel and implementation of desired land uses for each parcel,
including specific high traffic generating tenants, will be limited by the
available number of trips assigned to the overall development.
If the traffic proposed to be generated from the development or redevelopment
of any parcel or parcels cause the vehicle trips generated from the overall
development to exceed the maximum vehicle trips originally allocated, further
development and/or redevelopment of remaining parcels may be limited or
prohibited.
Alternate uses to those originally analyzed by the traffic study and approved
as part of Village At Jordan Creek specific plan ordinance may be allowed,
following completion of an amendment to the traffic study analyzing the
proposed alternate uses and approval by the city of West Des Moines of an
amendment to the specific plan ordinance and/or map, if necessary, if the
existing uses and the proposed alternate use(s) collectively do not exceed the
one thousand two hundred twenty six (1,226) average daily trips (ADT); ninety
five (95) A.M. peak; and one hundred thirteen (113) P.M. peak trips allocated
to the Village At Jordan Creek development. (Ord. 1886, 11-15-2010)
079-09: PUBLIC STREET IMPROVEMENTS:
Improvements and modifications to adjoining public roads as identified as
necessary within the traffic study shall be constructed and accepted by the
city council; or the developer may petition the city council to provide surety
in lieu of public improvement acceptance prior to approval and recordation of
the first final plat. Dedication of permanent right of way to accommodate
public road improvements shall be provided as necessary upon request. Temporary
right of way required during the construction/installation shall be provided as
necessary. (Ord. 1886, 11-15-2010)
079-10: PUBLIC STREET LIGHTS:
If existing lighting is determined to be inadequate, at the time of final
platting, the developer shall enter into an agreement with Mid-American Energy
for the installation of public street lights along all public streets adjoining
the land being platted into buildable lots. Surety to ensure installation of
the public street lights shall be provided to the Mid-American prior to
approval and recordation of the associated final plat. Installation of public
street lights shall occur in conjunction with construction of the adjoining
parcel. (Ord. 1886, 11-15-2010)
079-11: STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN:
A master stormwater management plan (MSWMP) for the entire development which
governs the overall stormwater management of the development shall be submitted
to and approved by the city of West Des Moines. Specific stormwater management
plans (SWMP) demonstrating compliance with the approved Village At Jordan Creek
MSWMP, on file with the city, will be required with the development of each
phase and/or site plan. The specific SWMP shall be prepared at the developer's
expense, by a professional engineer licensed in the state of Iowa. All SWMPs
shall comply with the city's applicable design standards for stormwater
management existing at the time each site plan is approved.
In addition, title 7, chapter 8, article G, "Postconstruction Stormwater
Management", of the city code, must be adhered to. The following is a summary
of the requirements of said article; however the summary is not all inclusive.
Refer directly to the article for more details.
At the time of site plan approval, the developer of the site plan associated
property shall execute a stormwater management facility maintenance covenant
and permanent easement agreement. The agreement shall provide for access to the
facility at reasonable times for periodic inspection by the city to ensure that
the facility is maintained in proper working condition and meets design
standards. In addition, the agreement shall identify the parties responsible
for maintenance of any stormwater facilities as well as plans for periodic
inspection and maintenance of said facilities to ensure proper performance. The
agreement shall be binding on all subsequent owners of land served by the
facility and subject to review by the city. The agreement shall be recorded
into the land record at the time of final plat or site plan approval. (Ord.
1886, 11-15-2010)
079-12: UTILITIES:
The developer, its successors or assigns, if any, shall construct at its cost,
and if for general public use, dedicate to the city all sanitary sewer mains,
water mains, and storm sewers associated with the development as required by
the city of West Des Moines' subdivision ordinance in accordance with
applicable city design standards. All necessary easements to allow city access
to public utilities for maintenance and repair purposes shall be executed prior
to approval and recordation of the final plat for each respective area or shall
be executed as a blanket access agreement prior to the approval and recordation
of the first final plat. Unless otherwise specified within a specific easement
document, the city shall not be responsible for reimbursement, restoration and/
or replacement of any improvements located within the public easements should
the city be required to excavate the public utilities for normal city
operations. No occupancy permits, either temporary or permanent, shall be
issued until all necessary public improvements applicable to the area/lot or
structure requesting occupancy are installed and accepted by the city of West
Des Moines. Nothing in this ordinance shall be construed to prevent the
developer, its successors and/or assigns, if any, from entering into private
agreement(s) as it/they may desire to share the cost of improvements.
The placement of public utility easements within buffer parks, streetscapes and
under landscape islands or pods within parking areas is discouraged due to the
potential conflict between trees and the need to access the lines for repair.
Overstory trees should be placed off utility lines a minimum distance equal to
the one to one (1:1) excavation trench necessary for the deepest utility.
Adequate access for maintenance vehicles shall be provided into and through the
easement areas. (Ord. 1886, 11-15-2010)
079-13: FIRE ACCESS:
   A.   All access drives, internal drive aisles and parking lots shall permit
the travel of the fire department's largest vehicle, including adequate
accommodation of the vehicle's turning needs. Approval of unique design
solutions to accommodate fire access may be granted by the city council if, the
solutions proposed are recommended by the West Des Moines fire department.
   B.   A minimum of fourteen feet (14') of vertical clearance over the travel
portion shall be maintained at all times over all vehicle travelways.
   C.   At the discretion of the city's fire marshal, "no parking fire lane"
areas may be established as necessary to ensure efficient movement and access
of the firetrucks. The developer shall be responsible for the procurement and
erection of approved fire lane signage.
   D.   The developer or its designee shall be responsible for enforcement of
no parking lanes and maintaining adequate clearance of structures and
vegetation along and above all vehicle travelways regardless if public or
private.
   E.   Adequate fire accesses as determined by the city's fire marshal shall
be provided at all times to those areas under construction. (Ord. 1886, 11-15-
2010)
079-99: LEGISLATIVE HISTORY:
Ord. 1688, 5-22-2006; Ord. 1886, 11-15-2010.
PUD #80
TALLYN'S REACH
SECTION:
080-01: Legal Description
080-02: Definitions
080-03: Required Plans
080-04: Intent Of The Tallyn's Reach PUD
080-05: Requirements
080-06: Open Space Requirements
080-07: Landscaping And Buffering
080-08: Architecture
080-09: Signage
080-10: Pedestrian Orientation And Connection
080-11: Land Use Design Criteria
080-12: Decorative Streetlights, Traffic Signals, Street Sign Poles And
Sidewalk Corner Treatments
080-13: Stormwater Management
080-14: Development Agreement
080-15: Public Access Easements
080-16: Traffic Study
080-17: Development On Parcels H, I, J, K
080-18: Violations And Penalties
080-99: Legislative History
080-01: LEGAL DESCRIPTION:
Corrected Micheal's Landing plat 1, an official plat in book 2007, page 3042 at
the Dallas County recorder's office, city of West Des Moines, Dallas County,
Iowa. Property containing 344.51 acres more or less
And
Parcel 'A' of SE1/4 NE1/4 and SW1/4 NE1/4 of section 22, township 78 north
range 26 west of the fifth principal meridian as shown on the plat of survey
recorded in book 777, page 912, as recorded at Dallas County, Iowa. Property
containing 12.00 acres more or less
And
The north 1010.00 feet of the east 1087.00 feet of the northeast quarter of
section 22, township 78 north, range 26 west of the 5th P.M., Dallas County,
Iowa; except the acquisition plat recorded in book 2008, page 5204 subject to
any and all easements, restrictions and covenants of record.
(Ord. 2130, 12-14-2015)
080-02: DEFINITIONS:
HARDSCAPE: Nonliving materials used to augment the beauty or naturalness of a
landscaped area. Hardscape may include, but is not limited to: brick, stone,
rock walls, fountains, ponds, pools, planters or retaining walls, but it
excludes all forms of artificial and live vegetation.
LANDSCAPE ISLAND: Island which takes the place of a parking stall within a
single linear row of parking.
LANDSCAPE POD/DIAMOND: Small, individual, unpaved areas within a parking lot
incorporated to provide locations for vegetation thus increasing the aesthetic
quality and microclimate of the parking area.
LINEAR ISLAND: Island located perpendicular to and dividing two (2) back to
back linear rows of parking.
PROJECTION SIGNS: A sign attached to and projecting out from a building face or
wall, generally at right angles to the building. Signs may not project above
the building's roofline and may not project more than four feet (4') from the
building.
TERMINAL ISLAND: Island located at the terminus end of all linear rows of
parking. (Ord. 2047, 7-28-2014)
080-03: REQUIRED PLANS:
The following plans shall be required as a part of the processing of any
development application for any property within the Tallyn's Reach PUD.
   A.   Platting: Prior to, or in conjunction with development or transfer of
ownership of any portion of the PUD, said area shall be platted in accordance
with the city's subdivision ordinance to delineate within a plat the parcel to
be developed or sold separately or any portion thereof. Lots without public
street frontage, in accordance with the city code requirements, may be allowed
provided the frontage requirements of the code have been met by an abutting or
surrounding lot which is under common ownership under an owners' association
with all properties within the master development plan being part of the
association, or there have been cross parking and access easements executed
which provide for the unrestricted use and access of the drives and parking for
all owners within the association. Outlots are not buildable. No building
permit may be issued until the final plat is recorded.
   B.   Development Applications: Site plans for parcels within the Tallyn's
Reach PUD must meet the intent of the approved planned unit development plan
and shall be submitted to the city of West Des Moines for review and approval
prior to the development of any portion of the property within the PUD.
   C.   PUD Map: On file in the city is the Tallyn's Reach PUD map detailing
the location, size, use and density of each PUD parcel. The following changes
to the PUD map on file in the city will require an amendment to the PUD
approved by the city council:
      1.   Additional square footage, acres or use that results in additional
A.M. and P.M. peak and ADT trip generation that is not noted in the traffic
study. However, on parcels A, B, C, E and I the specific allowed square
footages of each use listed may be modified subject to city review and approval
of an amendment to the approved traffic study, with the exception of the square
footages listed for restaurants and bank uses of parcels A, B, and C.
      2.   A significant change from the approved traffic report in the layout
of access points or street layout as determined by community development
director.
      3.   Where the PUD map and PUD language conflict, the language shall
prevail. (Ord. 2047, 7-28-2014)
080-04: INTENT OF THE TALLYN'S REACH PUD:
To create a residential village that encompasses several housing types and
demographics of homeowners and includes a pedestrian oriented mixed use center
that is accessed by pedestrian trails. (Ord. 2047, 7-28-2014)
080-05: REQUIREMENTS:
Requirements for all parcels within Tallyn's Reach PUD.
   A.   Walkways: Private walkways adjacent to buildings or plaza areas shall
be reviewed with the site plan and shall be designed to be wide enough to
accommodate outdoor seating areas for pedestrian street furniture, walkways and
street trees as identified in exhibit B.
   B.   Outdoor Patios: Establishments that have an outdoor patio and that
serve alcoholic beverages are required to provide a barrier to public access
which consists of a visual barrier from the private establishments to public
spaces. The barrier specifications shall be determined at the review of the
development application and may include, but are not limited to, fencing,
landscaping and signage.
   C.   Screening: Loading areas, transformers, HVAC, and trash enclosures
shall be screened in accordance with city code. Screening materials shall be
consistent with that used on the primary structure. Roof mounted HVAC screening
shall be incorporated into the design of the building through the use of
parapets, screening walls, or other acceptable solutions as identified during
the review of the site plan.
   D.   Height Restrictions: Unless otherwise noted in this ordinance, the
height of a building will conform to the standard zoning provisions for that
district or parcel, with the exception of building elements such as bell
towers, clock towers or other vertical architectural elements. These elements
may exceed height restrictions, as determined by the city council.
   E.   Private Lighting Standards: It is intended that lighting for each
commercial or office development within the Tallyn's Reach PUD shall be
designed to provide a safe environment, yet mitigate light pollution onto
adjoining properties. During the design review of each building, the applicant
must demonstrate how lighting will not adversely affect the adjoining
properties.
      1.   Light fixtures shall be limited to a maximum of twenty five feet
(25') in height as measured from the grade to the top of the fixture.
      2.   All lights shall be cutoff fixtures, no wall pack type or flood
lighting is allowed. As part of the review of each site plan, a photometric
plan must be submitted. At the time of application, the plan shall demonstrate
that light levels fall at or below one foot-candle at each development's
property line.
      3.   Particular attention shall be given to eliminate hot spots or light
glare however, this does not preclude low light decorative uplighting which
illuminates an architectural or landscape feature.
   F.   Parking Requirements: All parking areas shall be landscaped to screen
their visibility from public rights of way or from any adjoining property
outside the Tallyn's Reach development with the use of predominately evergreen
plant materials and/or berming and shall be reviewed at the time of review of
the site plan for the development of the parcel.
      1.   Parking lots shall be set back a minimum of twenty five feet (25')
from the property line unless a similar use abuts the lot in which case the
parking lot setback shall be zero unless otherwise required to be set back to
accommodate placement of vegetation, earthen berming, or landscaped walls.
      2.   Commercial and residential uses shall provide minimum parking stalls
in accordance with title 9, chapter 15 of the city code. For any residential
dwelling intended as owner occupied and/or for which a condominium regime is
established, a minimum of one of the required spaces for each unit shall be as
an enclosed parking space. This parking space shall be a minimum of nineteen
feet by nine feet (19' x 9') and may be designed as a freestanding garage,
attached garage or multiple garage spaces within an enclosure. A specific
covered parking space shall be designated for and legally tied to each dwelling
unit. The covered space must be for the exclusive use of the occupant of the
dwelling unit and cannot be rented or purchased by a third party, even if the
dwelling unit is rented. Covered parking attached to a multi-family dwelling
unit shall count one hundred percent (100%) toward meeting the required number
of parking spaces. Covered parking detached from a multi-family dwelling
building shall count at a maximum of 0.67 toward meeting the required number of
parking spaces.
      3.   Developers of parcels within the Tallyn's Reach PUD must provide a
cross access/parking agreement at the time of platting to utilize shared
parking between each parcel. Shared parking between unlike parcels shall be
reviewed with the site plan.
      4.   On street parking may be provided on all internal private streets
provided said parking does not interfere with the movement of emergency
response vehicles. Such on street parking shall be illustrated on all
development applications for all parcels. On street parking on private streets
may be counted toward meeting the parking requirement if the stalls comply with
the city code standards. (Ord. 2047, 7-28-2014)
080-06: OPEN SPACE REQUIREMENTS:
Open space shall be in conformance with the city code. (Ord. 2047, 7-28-2014)
080-07: LANDSCAPING AND BUFFERING:
   A.   Buffer Parks: Buffer parks, as noted in city code, shall only apply as
follows:
      1.   A minimum thirty foot (30') buffer park shall be required along
Mills Civic Parkway, S. 88th Street, and Booneville Road.
      2.   A minimum thirty foot (30') buffer park shall be required between
residential uses of differing densities and from commercial or office uses,
except no buffer shall be required between parcels G and H. The buffer shall be
placed on the higher intense land use. Buffers may be split between the land
uses if it is determined by the city council that it achieves the required
screening. In those areas where the comprehensive plan has a like land use but
the existing use of the property is incompatible, a buffer is required unless
the adjoining property owner provides written documentation waiving the buffer
park requirement.
      3.   No dry detention basins may be located within the buffer parks
except the buffer park along the north side of parcel G, with the provision
that additional landscaping and/or a consistent decorative fencing or wall be
installed to provide screening if the detention area restricts the placement of
plant material. The requirement of additional landscaping or fencing/wall shall
be determined during the review of the site plan.
   B.   Streetscape Landscaping: Those parcels along S. 91st Street and
Stagecoach Drive which are not required buffer parks shall provide streetscape
landscaping within the first fifteen feet (15') parallel beyond the public
right of way of roadways/travelways.
      1.   The streetscape landscaping is intended to provide a consistent
design treatment that enhances the travelways. A streetscape landscaping plan
shall be presented to the city for review as part of each site plan. Buildings
or pedestrian elements such as patios, walkways or design elements, may
intermittently encroach into the landscaped area, however parking lots may not.
The plantings shall be installed with the development of each site plan.
Streetscape landscaping requirements are in addition to the required open
space, or parking lot requirements as follows:
         a.   To calculate the number of required plants, divide the total
linear feet of street frontage by thirty five (35). For every thirty five feet
(35'), one tree and three (3) shrubs shall be required. Trees shall include
both deciduous and evergreen. The landscaping may be arranged in massing or in
a linear streetscape or a combination thereof.
         b.   Perennials may be substituted for shrubs at a rate of two (2)
shrubs equals to a solid perennial planting area of twenty (20) square feet.
         c.   Alternative concepts that meet the intent of streetscape
landscaping may be allowed at the discretion of the city council.
         d.   Street trees may count toward the streetscape landscaping.
      2.   An articulated three foot (3') or higher berm or landscape wall
shall be required for areas adjoining a parking lot which require visual
screening. Landscape walls must adhere to the following provisions:
         a.   Walls constructed for the retaining of soil which are greater
than four feet (4') in height must be designed by a licensed engineer.
         b.   Walls over four feet (4') shall have one and one-half feet (11/
2') of horizontal terraces for every four feet (4') of exposed vertical wall
face. Exceptions to this requirement may be granted by the director of
community development for unusual situations and to preserve existing
vegetation or landscape features.
         c.   Walls may be brick, individual decorative modular wall stone, or
natural stacked wall or field stone. Walls composed of landscape timbers or
other wood products are not desired due to the deterioration potential of the
material. Wood walls or other material may be used, with approval by the
community development director, in areas where views of the wall will be
minimal.
         d.   Vegetation shall be planted along all types of walls to soften
the visual impact, visually break up long expanses of the wall and to visually
anchor it to the site.
      3.   Ponds, lakes, wetlands or other water features may be placed within
the streetscape landscaping given that a water feature, such as a fountain and/
or significant wetland plantings and edge treatments are provided. Ponds or
water features may not saturate the subgrade of a public street. Dry detention
may not be located within the streetscape landscaping area.
   C.   Open Space Landscaping: Open space landscaping shall adhere to the city
code.
   D.   Parking Lot Landscaping: Parking lot landscaping shall adhere to title
9, chapter 19 of the city code except for parcels A, B, C and I which shall
adhere to the following: The intent of this section is to encourage extensive
landscaping within parking lot areas, which tend to have the greatest negative
impact on developments, and to provide breaks in what could be viewed as a sea
of parking. All parking areas shall be designed to create small, shared,
aesthetically landscaped and screened parking lots that are designed to
function not only in the interest of accommodating automobiles, but also in the
interest of promoting safe pedestrian movement. The following standards are in
addition to the required buffer park, open space, or plaza landscaping
requirements and is in lieu of the traditional ten percent (10%) parking lot
open space requirement:
      1.   Landscape islands shall be spaced on average no greater than twelve
(12) parking stalls apart within a single row of parking. Islands shall be ten
feet in width by thirty eight feet in length (10' x 38') for dual parking rows
and ten feet in width by nineteen feet in length (10' x 19') for single rows.
      2.   Landscape islands shall be located at the terminus end of all
parking rows.
      3.   Landscape pods shall be spaced no greater than six (6) parking
stalls apart from another landscape pod or island within a single row of
parking. Landscape pods shall measure a minimum of six feet (6') back of curb
to back of curb in each direction.
      4.   A minimum of one tree should be installed in each landscape pod and
ten foot by nineteen foot (10' x 19') island. Two (2) trees shall be installed
in each ten foot by thirty eight foot (10' x 38') island. Additional shrub or
perennial planting is encouraged.
   E.   Street Trees: The use of any planting materials within the public
street right of way shall be in accordance with the provisions of the city code
and design standards unless stated below:
      1.   The mature spread of a tree shall dictate its spacing however, at a
minimum street trees shall be forty feet (40') on center, plus or minus five
feet (±5').
      2.   All species shall be in accordance with the metro design standards.
      3.   Maintenance and removal of any street trees shall be the
responsibility of the master property owners' association.
      4.   Approval for any street trees should be sought at the time of
platting and/or site planning. During the review of the site plan or
preliminary plat, waivers of specific requirements of the street tree
regulations may be granted by the city council. (Ord. 2047, 7-28-2014)
080-08: ARCHITECTURE:
The intent is to create building facades throughout this development that are
varied and articulated to provide visual interest to pedestrians. Buildings
should be proportioned and defined by clear facade elements such as a base,
middle, and top. Particular attention shall be paid to transitioning between
the residential and commercial uses through the incorporation of three hundred
sixty degree (360°) architecture, pedestrian connections, and screening of HVAC
and loading areas.
   A.   Building Design: Although it is understood and preferred that not all
buildings within this development are identical, each building should have
several elements that carry through the established theme as noted on the
drawings on file in the city. All buildings within this PUD, except for the
single-family, shall use the following in all building design:
      1.   Fenestration (door and window openings) shall be sized to the scale
of the building and detailed appropriately to the pedestrian theme. Use of
repeating window patterns and details are encouraged to unify the design.
      2.   Entrances into buildings should be easily identified through the use
of building design and detailing. Projected or recessed entryways, higher
rooflines, awnings or changes in building material are examples that can create
this effect.
      3.   Buildings should provide unifying elements while maintaining each
building's individual character.
      4.   Materials should change with the change in building planes.
      5.   Reflective glass or mirrored glass is discouraged. Efforts should be
made to use clear glass on storefronts, windows and doors to promote the
linkage of the interior and exterior of buildings.
      6.   All sides of all buildings open to public view should be treated
with the same level of architectural style and detail.
      7.   Trim and structural elements such as posts or columns shall be sized
to the scale of the building.
      8.   Corporate franchise design, where the building functions as a
trademark is discouraged. It shall be permissible only if it incorporates
significant architectural elements which are compatible with the overall theme
and uniqueness of the development in which it is located.
   B.   Multi-Family Residential: In addition to the above stated design
criteria, the following shall apply specifically to multi- family residential
developments:
      1.   For developments which have multiple buildings within a parcel, each
building should have its own distinguishing character. This should be achieved
with changes in materials, color, window type and size and scale.
      2.   Multi-family units and their accessory structures are encouraged to
use materials such as brick, natural stone, wood shakes, decorative molding and
cornice treatments, or similar combination of material which represents a
variation of architectural styles or elements.
   C.   Single-Family: Architectural design for single-family units shall
attempt to express a creative presentation of exterior building materials,
exterior details and texture, treatment of windows and doors, and use of angles
and multiplicity of planes within the wall and roof design. Homes should have
materials such as brick, natural stone, wood shakes, decorative molding and
cornice treatments, or similar combination of material which represents a
variation of architectural styles or elements. Garages or accessory structures
should incorporate architectural details with the use of windows, doors and
other facade detailing.
      1.   Any residential structure with a garage which projects in front of
the front facade equal to or greater than three feet (3') will be required to
provide a minimum five foot (5') deep covered front porch, covered stoop, or
balcony. Any residential structure with a garage which projects less than three
feet (3') or is recessed behind the front facade does not need to meet this
requirement.
      2.   Prior to the issuance of any building permit for any lot, the
architecture of the residence shall be reviewed and approved by the development
services department.
   D.   Commercial: The architectural design of any commercial building within
this parcel shall be acceptable to the city, and shall incorporate elements
that provide a common theme and compatibility with residential uses in the
neighborhood. In addition, particular attention shall be given to the
architecture of gas stations and convenience stores. For those uses, the fuel
canopy design shall be at a neighborhood scale. This may be accomplished by
providing breaks in the canopy, enhancing the canopy design to appear as a
building roof element and providing brick columns.
   E.   Materials: The use of brick, acceptable stone or masonry shall be
incorporated on all sides of the structure into all buildings except parcels G,
H, I, J, F, unless the director of community development determines that the
use of alternate building materials enhances the physical appearance and
accomplishes a compatible structure with the overall development. Smooth faced
concrete block, tilt-up concrete panels, or prefabricated steel panels are
prohibited as the predominant exterior building materials. (Ord. 2047, 7-28-
2014)
080-09: SIGNAGE:
The regulations and provisions set forth in title 9 of the city code for signs
shall be met unless otherwise noted in this ordinance.
   A.   Parcel I: All tenants' signage for buildings within parcel I shall be
calculated as follows:
      1.   For ground floor or single-story tenants, a one to one (1:1) ratio
of the tenant's longest exterior leasable linear frontage to a street.
      2.   Those tenants located on the second or higher floors, a ratio of
one-half to one (1/2:1) the linear footage.
      3.   Those tenants with multiple street frontages shall be allowed, in
addition to the primary leased frontage calculation, to use one other leased
exterior frontage for additional sign square footage using a ratio of one-half
to one (1/2:1).
      4.   The total square footage shall be divided, at the tenant's
discretion, between any type and location of building signage allowed by the
city code or this ordinance. Unless noted below, signage shall conform to the
sign codes:
         a.   Lettering on window and doors may not exceed four inches (4") in
height.
      5.   Building signage shall respect the residential tenants of
surrounding parcels by minimizing light pollution into residential spaces.
      6.   Wall signage shall be located on the tenant space for which they
identify, i.e., first floor tenants shall not place wall signage on second or
third floor walls.
   B.   Parcel E; Wesley Signage:
      1.   Landscape or monument signs may be located and sized in accordance
with the city code.
      2.   It is the intent of the commercial uses within the Wesley complex to
draw those patrons from the Wesley complex and the adjoining active adult
townhouse development, not from the entire Tallyn's Reach or surrounding
developments. Therefore, it is intended that they have limited signage.
Commercial uses may have window signage and small pedestrian projection signs
as follows:
         a.   Window signage shall be no greater than eight inches (8") and may
not be illuminated.
         b.   Pedestrian projection signs shall be allowed as a small,
pedestrian oriented sign of less than six (6) square feet that projects
perpendicular from a structure. Signage shall have a maximum of five inch (5")
letter size. Projection signs may not be internally illuminated.
         c.   All other types of building signage which displays the tenant
name or logo are prohibited.
   C.   Real Estate Marketing Signs:
      1.   Real estate marketing signs of no larger than sixty four (64) square
feet may be placed on a temporary basis at Mills Civic Parkway, South 88th
Street and along Booneville Road may be permitted. No more than four (4) signs
per frontage may be allowed. Signs shall be set back a minimum of twenty feet
(20') from the ultimate street right of way. Signs may be lit from an external
lighting source provided the light shines directly onto the sign to minimize
light pollution. Signs may remain for up to five (5) years from the recordation
of the final plat.
      2.   Flags displaying Regency Homes or Tallyn's Reach may be placed at
the entrance to the development along Mills Civic Parkway and 88th Street. No
more than one flag may be allowed per entrance. The flag may be no larger than
twenty four (24) square feet and the pole no higher than twenty five feet
(25'). Flags must be set back from the right of way equal to the pole height.
   D.   Character: All signage constructed within the Tallyn's Reach PUD shall
incorporate aesthetic features compatible with the overall character of the
development. All signs shall be composed of self-contained individual letters
with anodized aluminum returns and trim or solid routed faced metal panels.
(Ord. 2047, 7-28-2014)
080-10: PEDESTRIAN ORIENTATION AND CONNECTION:
Pedestrian access shall be provided between all parcels within the Tallyn's
Reach PUD to permit and encourage pedestrian movement between parcels and to
and from the development, versus utilizing motorized vehicles for access.
Pedestrian travelways should be separated from vehicular traffic with
landscaping, bollards, special paving, or any other feature which identifies
the pedestrian space. Features shall be located outside of the public right of
way. (Ord. 2047, 7-28-2014)
080-11: LAND USE DESIGN CRITERIA:
In addition to the general conditions as stated in sections above, the
following land use design criteria shall apply to the areas designated on the
Tallyn's Reach PUD map on file in the city. The PUD map document, which is made
a part of this rezoning action, delineates parcels of the PUD as A through M.
The following development standards and use regulations shall apply to each of
the following development parcels:
   A.   Parcels A And B: All general use regulations and provisions set forth
in title 9, "Zoning", of the city code for professional commerce park shall
apply to any development proposal for property within parcels A and B as shown
on the PUD plan of the Tallyn's Reach ordinance, unless noted otherwise in this
ordinance.
      1.   Allowed Uses: Uses allowed within parcels A and B shall be permitted
in accordance with the provisions of the city code for all uses allowed within
the professional commerce park (PCP) pursuant to title 9 of the city code. The
following uses are not permitted:
 
SIC 58  Drinking places.
SIC 701 Hotel and motels.
 
Only one sit down restaurant (SIC 5812) and a total of one bank with drive-
through (SIC 60) may be located within parcel A, B or C. Restaurant shall be no
larger than six thousand three hundred (6,300) square feet. Bank shall be no
larger than four thousand nine hundred (4,900) square feet.
      2.   Allowed Development Size: No more than one hundred twenty four
thousand two hundred (124,200) square feet of office uses and 13.19 acres shall
be permitted within parcels A and B.
   B.   Parcel C: All general use regulations and provisions set forth in title
9, "Zoning", of the city code for Neighborhood Commercial (NC) shall apply to
any development proposal for property within parcel C as shown on the PUD map
of the Tallyn's Reach ordinance, unless noted otherwise in this ordinance.
      1.   Allowed Uses: Uses allowed within parcel C shall be permitted in
accordance with the provisions of the city code for all uses allowed within the
Neighborhood Commercial (NC) pursuant to title 9 of the city code. A total of
one sit down restaurant (SIC 5812) and only one bank with drive-through (SIC
60) may be located within parcel A, B or C. Restaurant shall be no larger than
six thousand three hundred (6,300) square feet. Bank shall be no larger than
four thousand nine hundred (4,900) square feet.
Uses within two hundred feet (200') of the east boundary of parcel C that have
noise or lighting components that could be disruptive to the adjacent
residential as determined by the City may have requirements placed on
operations or be prohibited.
      2.   Allowed Development Size: No more than forty three thousand three
hundred (43,300) square feet of commercial uses and 5.61 acres shall be
permitted within parcel C.
      3.   Character: In addition to the architecture requirements found within
the language of this PUD, it is intended that this development is small in
nature, have a pedestrian scale and be designed so that it directly relates to
the Tallyn's Reach development and not intersection of Mills Civic and S 88th
Street.
      4.   Driveway Access: This parcel is required to provide street or
private driveway access for all development within the parcel. During the
review of the site plan within the parcel, it shall be determined how that
connection is provided.
   C.   Parcel D: All general use regulations and provisions set forth in title
9, "Zoning", of the city code for residential high- density (RH) shall apply to
any development proposal for property within parcel D as shown on the PUD plan
of the Tallyn's Reach ordinance, unless noted otherwise in this ordinance.
      1.   Driveway Access: This parcel is required to provide street or
private driveway access to the adjoining properties along 88th at the time of
development. During the review of the site plan, it shall be determined how
that connection is provided.
      2.   Allowed Development Size: No more than one hundred eighty (180)
units and 13.42 acres shall be permitted.
   D.   Parcel E; Wesley Retirement Community: The intended user of this parcel
is Wesley Retirement Village. The concept of this development is a continuing
care retirement community which offers a full continuum of elderly services and
residential options which includes independent living apartments or cottages,
independent living common areas, assisted living residential units, assisted
living common areas, dementia or memory support living units and skilled
nursing beds. These units are for those members of our community over fifty
five (55) years of age. The conceptual development of the site is noted on the
PUD map and intends for apartments, townhomes and service retail organized
around a pond. To accommodate for the intended uses, all general use
regulations and provisions set forth in title 9, "Zoning", of the city code for
residential medium-density (RM) shall apply to any development proposal within
parcel E.
      1.   Allowed Uses: Uses allowed within parcel E shall be permitted in
accordance with the provisions of the city code for all uses allowed within the
residential medium-density pursuant to title 9 of the city code and the
following uses which are permitted:
 
SIC 5812 Eating places, sit down.
SIC 724  Barbershops.
SIC 7299 Massage parlor.
 
In the event that the Wesley Retirement Community does not develop, no
ancillary commercial or office shall be permitted.
      2.   Allowed Development Size: No more than thirteen thousand (13,000)
square feet of ancillary retail and seven thousand five hundred (7,500) square
feet of ancillary office shall be permitted. Residential unit allowances shall
adhere to the approved traffic study.
   E.   Parcel F: All general use regulations and provisions set forth in title
9, "Zoning", of the city code for residential medium- density shall apply to
any development proposal for property within parcel F as shown on the PUD
sketch plan of the Tallyn's Reach PUD, unless noted otherwise in this
ordinance.
      1.   Allowed Development Size: No more than ninety four (94) units and
23.3 acres shall be permitted.
      2.   Building Separation: The required building separation may be
reduced, subject to city council approval at the time of site plan and
preliminary plat, as follows:
         a.   A fourteen foot (14') minimum separation between biattached units
is applicable for building side yards at conditions where neither opposing unit
has outdoor living spaces on the building side that determines the separation
requirements.
         b.   The applicant will need to comply with all other required
standards as noted in the setback and bulk density regulations in the city's
zoning ordinance in addition to any building code separation requirement in
effect at the time of site plan submittal.
      3.   Garage Setback/Driveway Length: The distance between the opening of
the garage and pedestrian pathway or curb shall be consistent with the
following:
         a.   A distance of twenty five feet (25') or greater, measured
perpendicularly from the garage opening to the closest point of the sidewalk or
back of curb of the intersecting private street or drive, whichever is more
restrictive; or
         b.   A distance of ten feet (10') or less, measured perpendicularly
from the garage opening to the closest point of the back of curb of the
intersecting private street or drive.
Garages set back within a range of distance of ten (10) and twenty five feet
(25') from the sidewalk or back of curb shall not be permitted due to concerns
that vehicles parked in front of a garage setback within this range of distance
may block or obstruct safe vehicle or pedestrian movement on the private
street/drive or sidewalk. Garages shall be set back no less than twenty five
feet (25') from the right of way line of a public street.
If garages are not set back sufficiently to allow for the parking of a vehicle
in front of the garage, multiple garage spaces or additional parking spaces
will need to be provided within the site to provide, at a minimum, the required
number of parking spaces per dwelling unit based on the number of bedrooms as
identified in section 9-15-7 of the city code.
   F.   Parcel G; Residential Medium-Density: All general use regulations and
provisions set forth in title 9, "Zoning", of the city code for residential
medium-density (RM-12) shall apply to any development proposal for property
within parcel G as shown on the PUD plan of the Tallyn's Reach ordinance,
unless noted otherwise in this ordinance.
      1.   Setbacks: Building setbacks and separation shall abide by city code
with the exception that should this property develop with urban row houses or
townhomes, the setback and separation may be reduced as follows, subject to
city council approval at the time of site plan and preliminary plat, unless
otherwise required by building and/or fire codes:
         a.   Fifteen foot (15') front yard. Front porches, stoops and
balconies may extend into the front yard setback, yet may be no closer than ten
feet (10') to the front property line.
         b.   A minimum five foot (5') side and rear yard setback as measured
from the lot line to the closest building element, including, but not limited
to, decks, patios, etc., shall be provided.
            (1)   "Row houses" shall be defined as a series of one and one-
half-, two- or three-story units attached in a row by no more than two (2)
common walls where a front porch or front stoop faces the public street or
public green space.
            (2)   "Townhomes" shall be defined as dwelling units which are
attached horizontally, and not vertically to one or more other dwelling.
         c.   The applicant will need to comply with all other required
standards as noted in the setback and bulk density regulations in the city's
zoning ordinance in addition to any building code separation requirement in
effect at the time of site plan submittal.
      2.   Garage Setback/Driveway Length: The distance between the opening of
the garage and pedestrian pathway or curb shall be consistent with the
following:
         a.   A distance of twenty five feet (25') or greater, measured
perpendicularly from the garage opening to the closest point of the sidewalk or
back of curb of the intersecting private street or drive, whichever is more
restrictive; or
         b.   A distance of ten feet (10') or less, measured perpendicularly
from the garage opening to the closest point of the back of curb of the
intersecting private street or drive.
Garages set back within a range of distance of ten (10) and twenty five feet
(25') from the sidewalk or back of curb shall not be permitted due to concerns
that vehicles parked in front of a garage set back within this range of
distance may block or obstruct safe vehicle or pedestrian movement on the
private street/drive or sidewalk. Garages shall be set back no less than twenty
five feet (25') from the right of way line of a public street.
If garages are not set back sufficiently to allow for the parking of a vehicle
in front of the garage, multiple garage spaces or additional parking spaces
will need to be provided within the site to provide, at a minimum, the required
number of parking spaces per dwelling unit based on the number of bedrooms as
identified in section 9-15-7 of the city code.
      3.   Allowed Development Size: No more than two hundred eighty-six (286)
units within 44.33 acres shall be permitted.
   G.   Parcel H: There is no parcel H.
   H.   Parcel I: There is no Parcel I.
   I.   Parcel J; Single-Family: All general use regulations and provisions set
forth in title 9, "Zoning", of the city code for residential single-family with
a minimum of five thousand (5,000) square foot lots (RS-5) shall apply to any
development proposal for property within parcel J as shown on the PUD plan of
the Tallyn's Reach ordinance, unless noted otherwise in this ordinance.
      1.   Setbacks: Setbacks for all single-family shall be:
         a.   Twenty five foot (25') minimum and thirty five foot (35') maximum
front yard.
         b.   Thirty five foot (35') rear yard except for those lots along
Booneville Road and Cascade Avenue, which may have a twenty five foot (25')
rear yard as measured from the interior line of any required buffer park.
         c.   Five foot (5') side yard as measured to the overhang.
         d.   Front porches, stoops and balconies may extend into the front
yard setback, yet may be no closer than fifteen feet (15') to the front
property line.
      2.   Allowed Development Size: No more than three hundred sixty (360)
single-family residential dwellings within one hundred and ten and a half
(110.5) acres shall be permitted.
   J.   Parcels K And L; Greenbelt And Park: All general use regulations and
provisions set forth in title 9, "Zoning", of the city code for open space (OS)
shall apply to any development proposal for property within parcels K and L as
shown on the PUD plan of the Tallyn's Reach ordinance.
      1.   The owner/developer shall reserve for dedication to the city that
ground designated as parcels K and L as shown on the sketch plan, on file in
the city and made part hereof, for active park and open space use at no cost to
the city of West Des Moines. The developer will also need to dedicate public
access lots within adjoining parcels, at locations acceptable to the city, to
provide locations for pedestrian connections to the park site with the platting
of adjoining parcels. Said area shall be platted and dedicated to the city free
of any liens, encumbrances, and assessments with the platting of any portion of
parcel J. The developer will be responsible for the grading and seeding of
parcel L and any disturbed areas along parcel K prior to official dedication
and installed per city specifications and approval. The abutting improvements
will be installed by the developer at the same time as those in parcel J. All
land for street right of way and all street, sidewalk, water, storm, sanitary
sewer improvements, including sanitary, storm sewer, and water stubs at the
property line, abutting parcel L shall be provided by the developer to the city
at no cost to the city.
   K.   Parcel M; Single-Family: All general use regulations and provisions set
forth in title 9, "Zoning", of the city code for residential single-family (RS-
5), a minimum five thousand (5,000) square foot lots shall apply to any
development proposal for property within parcel M as shown on the PUD plan of
the Tallyn's Reach ordinance, unless noted otherwise in this ordinance.
      1.   Setbacks: Setbacks for all single-family shall be:
         a.   Twenty five (25) minimum and thirty five (35) maximum foot front
yard.
         b.   Thirty five foot (35') rear yard except for those lots along
Stagecoach Road, which may have a twenty five foot (25') rear yard.
         c.   Five foot (5') side yard as measured to the overhang.
         d.   Front porches, stoops and balconies may extend into the front
yard setback, yet may be no closer than fifteen feet (15') to the front
property line.
      2.   Allowed Development Size: No more than sixty nine (69) units of
single-family residential within 17.88 acres shall be permitted. (Ord. 2047, 7-
28-2014; amd. Ord. 2089, 4-20-2015; Ord. 2130, 12-14-2015; Ord. 2421, 7-6-2020;
Ord. 2426, 8-3-2020 ; Ord. 2491, 10-4-2021 )
080-12: DECORATIVE STREETLIGHTS, TRAFFIC SIGNALS, STREET SIGN POLES AND
SIDEWALK CORNER TREATMENTS:
With the approval of the preliminary plat or site plan decorative streetlights,
traffic signals, street sign poles and sidewalk corner treatments may be
allowed if approved by the city council. (Ord. 2047, 7-28-2014)
080-13: STORMWATER MANAGEMENT:
There shall be submitted to and approved by the West Des Moines public works
department, a master stormwater management plan for the entire development
which shall govern the overall stormwater management of the development.
Specific stormwater management plans will be required with the development of
each site plan, demonstrating compliance with the approved Tallyn's Reach PUD
master stormwater management plan, on file with the city's public works
department. The developer will have said specific stormwater management plans
prepared by a professional engineer licensed in the state of Iowa, prior to the
submittal of any specific site plans within the specific plan area. All
specific stormwater management plans shall comply with the city's current
design standards for stormwater management. The method of stormwater management
and the stormwater conveyance system shall be determined and approved prior to
the development of any site plans within the PUD area. (Ord. 2047, 7-28-2014)
080-14: DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENT:
On file with the city clerk is the agreement for private development by and
between the city of West Des Moines and KTJ 201, LLC, dated October 2011, and
amendments. When this PUD and the developers' agreement conflict, the
developers' agreement shall prevail. (Ord. 2047, 7-28-2014)
080-15: PUBLIC ACCESS EASEMENTS:
A public access easement shall be granted to the city at the time of platting
allowing unrestricted public access onto the proposed private drives of
Tallyn's Reach PUD. (Ord. 2047, 7-28-2014)
080-16: TRAFFIC STUDY:
A traffic study has been commissioned by the applicant to study area wide
traffic management which includes the Tallyn's Reach PUD. Regardless of the
uses permitted in the underlying zoning, any development within the Tallyn's
Reach PUD must comply with the findings of the final traffic study. (Ord. 2047,
7-28-2014)
080-17: DEVELOPMENT ON PARCELS H, I, J, K:
Development of these parcels must accommodate the future grading and
construction of Booneville Road. (Ord. 2047, 7-28-2014)
080-18: VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES:
Any person who violates the provisions of this ordinance upon conviction shall
be punished as set forth in section 1-4-1 of the city code. (Ord. 2047, 7-28-
2014)
080-99: LEGISLATIVE HISTORY:
Ord. 1699, 6-19-2006; Ord. 1772, 8-13-2007; Ord. 2000, 9-3-2013; Ord. 2046, 7-
28-2014; Ord. 2047, 7-28-2014; Ord. 2089, 4-20-2015; Ord. 2130, 12-14-2015;
Ord. 2421, 7-6-2020; Ord. 2426, 8-3-2020; Ord. 2491, 10-4-2021.
PUD #81
VILLAGE OF PONDEROSA
SECTION:
081-01: Legal Description
081-02: Development Intent
081-03: Required Plans
081-04: Compliance With Code
081-05: Developer Responsibilities
081-06: Vehicle Trip Allocation
081-07: Stormwater Management Plan
081-08: Utilities
081-09: Fire Access
081-10: Park Land Dedication Requirements
081-11: Public Street Right-Of-Way Dedication
081-12: Street Design
081-13: Parking
081-14: Pedestrian Elements
081-15: Landscaping
081-16: Signage
081-17: Lighting
081-18: Architecture
081-19: Land Use And Bulk Regulations
081-20: Violations And Penalties
081-21: Other Remedies
081-22: Savings Clause
081-23: Effective Date
081-99: Legislative History
081-01: LEGAL DESCRIPTION:
The north 66.70 acres of lot 1 in partition plat of the SW 1/4 of the NW 1/
4 and the N 1/2 of the SW 1/4 and the N 1/2 of the SE 1/4 of section 18,
township 78 north, range 25, west of the 5th P.M., now included in and forming
a part of the city of West Des Moines, Iowa.
And
The 30.0 acres described as follows; the southeast quarter of the northwest
quarter of section 18, township 78 north, range 25 west of the 5th P.M., except
the north 10.0 acres thereof, now included in and forming a part of the city of
West Des Moines, Polk County, Iowa. (Now Platted as The Village of Ponderosa
Plat 1 with subsequent plats to date of Plat 2 through Plat 8.)
(Ord. 2093, 6-1-2015)
081-02: DEVELOPMENT INTENT:
The Village Of Ponderosa aims to create an urban residential community that
offers opportunities for residents of all ages to live in a variety of housing
types with nearby options to fulfill retail, business and recreational needs.
The centrally located Crescent Lake creates a natural gathering spot and focal
point of the development. Tree lined streets unify the development, while
pedestrian pathways provide recreational opportunities and link neighborhoods
within the village and to the surrounding office and commercial developments.
(Ord. 2093, 6-1-2015)
081-03: REQUIRED PLANS:
The following plans shall be required as a part of the processing of any
development application for any property within the Village Of Ponderosa
specific plan:
   A.   Area Development Plan: An area development plan identifies planning
units, major street patterns, master stormwater drainage and detention
concepts, utilities, shared public spaces, land use assumptions and proposed
densities. The intent of the area development plan is to provide a tool that
can be used to promote the communication and cooperation between adjacent
property owners and developers to ensure cohesive and unified development.
The area development plan shall be reviewed by the Plan and Zoning Commission
and approved by the City Council prior to, or in conjunction with, the review
of the specific plan for any property within said specific plan area. No change
to the area development plan shall be made without approval of an amended plan
from the appropriate reviewing bodies.
On file in the City (Exhibit 1) is the City Council approved area development
plan for this property. (Ord. 2093, 6-1-2015)
   B.   Specific Plan: The specific plan identifies detailed development
criteria for each planning unit indicated on the area development plan or more
specifically delineated on the specific plan map. The specific plan shall
conform to the general development intent identified in the approved area
development plan, as well as the "Town Center Overlay District Guidelines". The
specific plan shall be reviewed by the Plan and Zoning Commission and adopted
by the City Council by ordinance.
This document shall constitute the specific plan ordinance for the Village Of
Ponderosa. On file in the City and made a part of this ordinance is a specific
plan map that illustrates the overall site layout concept for the Village Of
Ponderosa (Exhibits 2A and 2B). This document and the associated exhibits
(included or on file with the City Clerk) are intended to specify the
components, parameters, and requirements to be adhered to and implemented in
order to ensure the realization of the Village Of Ponderosa development
concept. It is recognized that modifications and changes may be necessary due
to changes in building footprints, site details, and response to market demand.
At the discretion of the Director of Development Services, changes to the
layout of the development that are deemed to be "major" changes shall require
an amendment to the specific plan map and ordinance, if applicable. Major
amendments shall require the review and approval of the Plan and Zoning
Commission and City Council. Changes that are deemed to still meet the use
intent for an area as indicated in the specific plan map and ordinance shall
not necessitate an amendment to the map or ordinance.
Where the specific plan map and specific plan language conflict, the specific
plan language shall prevail. (Ord. 2093, 6-1-2015; amd. Ord. 2208, 4-3-2017)
   C.   Development Applications (Overlay District Site Plans): Site plans for
all lots within the Village Of Ponderosa must meet the intent of the approved
specific plan. Site plans for all lots, except lots approved for single-family
detached residential dwellings unless otherwise specified, shall be submitted
to the City of West Des Moines for review and approval prior to the development
of any portion of the lot. Site plans for permitted uses which comply (as
determined by the Director of Development Services or designee) with the design
intent as set forth in this specific plan will be subject to administrative
review and approval by the Director of Development Services. A one (1) week
review and comment period by each and all available members of the Plan and
Zoning Commission and City Council shall precede the administrative approval.
If upon review, two (2) or more City Council or Plan and/or Zoning Commission
members request, or if the Director of Development Services deems the proposed
site plan is not in compliance with the approved specific plan, the site plan
will be processed through the traditional full site plan review and approval
process. Site plans for permitted conditional uses (Pc) as defined in the City
Code, unless otherwise amended within this ordinance, shall be approved by the
appropriate review body. At the discretion of the Director of Development
Services, an amendment to the Village Of Ponderosa specific plan ordinance may
be required to bring consistency between the ordinance and site plan
development proposed.
   D.   Preliminary And Final Platting: Prior to or in conjunction with any
site plan submittal for proposed development, or prior to legal ownership
change of any land within the Village Of Ponderosa, such area shall be
subdivided by both preliminary and final plat, in accordance with the City's
subdivision ordinance, to delineate the parcel to be developed or sold. Lots
without public street frontage, in accordance with the City Code requirements,
may be allowed provided the frontage requirements of the Code have been met by
an abutting or surrounding lot which is under common ownership under an owners'
association, or a cross parking and access easement has been executed which
provides for the unrestricted use and access of the drives and parking. Outlots
are not buildable.
Unless otherwise specifically restricted by the City Council, groundwork and
construction of private roads and utilities may be started, at the developer's
risk, upon approval of the preliminary plat by the City Council. Public street
and utility construction may begin, at the sole risk of the developer, after
approval of the preliminary plat by the City Council and construction
improvement plans by the City of West Des Moines.
Prior to approval of the final plat, unless otherwise authorized by the City
Council, the developer of the Village Of Ponderosa shall provide all necessary
and appropriate agreements, easements, and sureties for all public rights- of-
way and other public improvements (utilities, sidewalks, streetlights, etc.)
within and associated with the development.
A final plat applicable to each proposed development area must be approved and
recorded with the Polk County Recorder's Office prior to issuance of any
building permit, including footing and foundation permits, for construction of
any structure or improvement within the area proposed for development. (Ord.
2093, 6-1-2015)
081-04: COMPLIANCE WITH CODE:
Unless otherwise specified herein, the development of the Village Of Ponderosa
shall comply with the provisions of the West Des Moines "Town Center Overlay
District Guidelines" and the West Des Moines city code. (Ord. 2093, 6-1-2015)
081-05: DEVELOPER RESPONSIBILITIES:
   A.   A master association shall be established by the developer(s) for the
property encompassing the Village Of Ponderosa. The master association shall be
responsible for the ongoing upkeep and maintenance of any privately owned
common grounds, structures and signs as outlined in the association documents
and any other specific development improvements noted as the association's
responsibility in this ordinance. At the option and discretion of the developer
(s), an association or associations having jurisdiction over subareas or units
located within the Village Of Ponderosa may be established and which shall have
the same responsibilities regarding the privately owned common grounds,
structures and signs outlined in the association documents and any other
specific development improvements noted as the association's responsibility in
this ordinance unless specifically excluded by the association documents or
this ordinance.
Unless otherwise specifically noted or delineated, "developer", "master
association" and "association" shall have equal responsibility for the
obligations specifically set forth in this section or as generally noted in
this ordinance. Unless otherwise specifically noted or delineated, the terms
"developer", "master association" and "association" shall be interchangeable in
regard to the obligations imposed by this ordinance.
   B.   Unless otherwise specifically approved by the city council, the
developer(s), its successors and/or assigns, if any, shall pay all planning,
engineering, and construction costs for the development of the planned unit
development as required by this ordinance, and shall pay all costs related to
approved site plans, which may include, but is not limited to, the cost of all
streets, storm sewers, sanitary sewers, water mains and service lines,
drainageway improvements, detention basins, buffers, and other improvements as
required. No occupancy permits, either temporary or permanent, shall be issued
until all necessary improvements applicable to the area/lot or structure
requesting occupancy are installed and accepted by the city of West Des Moines.
Nothing in this ordinance shall be construed to prevent the developer(s), its
successors and/or assigns, if any, from entering into private agreement(s) as
it/they may desire to share the cost of improvements.
   C.   At the time of final platting, the developer(s) shall enter into an
agreement with Mid American Energy for the installation of public streetlights
along all public streets within and abutting the Village Of Ponderosa specific
plan area. Surety to ensure installation of the public streetlights shall be
provided to the city prior to approval and recordation of the first final plat.
Installation of public streetlights shall occur in conjunction with
construction of the public street. Installation of private streetlights shall
occur in conjunction with development of adjacent parcels within the Village Of
Ponderosa.
   D.   A public access easement or easements in favor of the city of West Des
Moines allowing unrestricted public access and use of the proposed private
streets, excluding specified areas described in the easement document, trails,
and sidewalks within the Village Of Ponderosa specific plan shall be executed
prior to the approval and recordation of the first final plat and in
conjunction with the approval and recordation of any future plat(s). The
developer(s) and the city shall execute separate easement documents in which
the rights and responsibilities of the parties shall be delineated.
   E.   The developer(s) shall execute an agreement and waiver for the
developer's proportionate share of the cost of installation of all improvements
associated with the 60th Street improvement project lying west of and adjacent
to development.
   F.   The cost of installation of traffic signals located within the
development shall be the responsibility of the developer(s). The cost of
installation of traffic signals as shown in exhibit 5 shall be the
responsibility of the developer and abutting property owners pursuant to the
assessment policy of the city, of which the city shall have no financial
responsibility whatsoever.
   G.   The developer(s) shall be responsible for the maintenance of the area
encompassing the roundabout and related public right of way, including the
splitter islands, and the developer(s) and the city shall execute a separate
easement document in which the rights and responsibilities of the parties shall
be delineated.
   H.   The developer(s) shall be responsible for all maintenance and
replacement of public and private street signage, including the provision of
street sign poles. The developer(s) shall also be responsible for maintaining
an adequate inventory of signs, poles and related items.
   I.   Developer's responsibilities include all obligations contained in this
section as well as those responsibilities set forth in this ordinance. (Ord.
2093, 6-1-2015)
081-06: VEHICLE TRIP ALLOCATION:
As part of the 2015 amendments to the area development plan, comprehensive
plan, and specific plan approved for this site and consistent with the original
traffic analysis completed by Snyder & Associates (July 10, 2006) and the
updated traffic analysis completed by the city (May, 2015), the Village Of
Ponderosa has been allocated the following vehicle trips: twelve thousand seven
hundred fifty seven (12,757) average daily trips (ADT); one thousand six
hundred two (1,602) P.M. peak hour trips; and one thousand two hundred sixty
one (1,261) A.M. peak hour trips. As development proposals are approved the
number of vehicle trips generated by the proposed development (based upon the
number of square feet of a proposed specific use or number of dwelling units,
in conjunction with any parameters established in the traffic analysis) will be
subtracted from the overall total trips allocated to the development. Approval
of this proposed specific plan does not constitute a guarantee that the
proposed plan can be implemented. Development of all parcels and implementation
of desired land uses, including specific high traffic generating tenants, will
be limited by the available number of trips. The 2015 adoption of the amended
specific plan does not guarantee that the total number of residential dwellings
indicated for inclusion within the overall development (1,137) may be
implemented. The 2015 amendment proposes five hundred (500) active senior
dwellings, four hundred eighty (480) nonage restricted market rate apartments
in combination with thirty three (33) existing attached townhomes and a total
of one hundred twenty four (124) traditional single-family detached homes (81
existing plus 43 proposed). At the time of the 2015 traffic analysis, senior
housing (ITE code 252) generated traffic at 3.78 ADT trips, 0.20 A.M. peak, and
0.25 P.M. peak trips per dwelling which is approximately fifty seven percent
(57%) of the rate at which market rate apartments (ITE code 220) generate trips
(6.65 ADT, 0.52 A.M. peak, and 0.62 P.M. peak trips per dwelling). Therefore,
it is recognized that a one to one (1:1) conversion of senior housing dwellings
for nonage restricted market rate apartments is not possible while remaining
under the twelve thousand seven hundred fifty seven (12,757) average daily
trips (ADT); one thousand six hundred two (1,602) P.M. peak hour trips; and one
thousand two hundred sixty one (1,261) A.M. peak hour trips as established with
the original 2006 study and reaffirmed with the 2015 traffic study. Should the
types of dwellings desired to be implemented vary from that specified and
analyzed as part of the 2015 traffic analysis, a reduction in the total number
of dwellings may be necessary.
Should anticipated traffic exceed the total trips allocated for the Village Of
Ponderosa development prior to full build out, further development of parcels
may be limited or prohibited. Alternate uses to the proposed planned
development(s), if within the parameters of the traffic analysis and approved
as part of the comprehensive plan amendment, area development plan and this
specific plan ordinance, as applicable, may be allowed, following completion of
an amendment to the approved traffic study analyzing the proposed alternative
and appropriate city approval if the existing uses and the proposed change(s)
collectively do not exceed twelve thousand seven hundred fifty seven (12,757)
average daily trips (ADT), one thousand six hundred two (1,602) P.M. peak hour
trips and one thousand two hundred sixty one (1,261) A.M. peak hour trips
allocated to this development. (Ord. 2093, 6-1-2015)
081-07: STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN:
A master stormwater management plan for the entire development which governs
the overall stormwater management of the development shall be submitted to and
approved by the city of West Des Moines. Specific stormwater management plans
demonstrating compliance with the approved Village Of Ponderosa master
stormwater management plan, on file with the city, will be required with the
development of each site plan. The specific stormwater plans shall be prepared
at the developer's expense, by a professional engineer licensed in the state of
Iowa. All specific stormwater management plans shall comply with the city's
applicable design standards for stormwater management existing at the time each
development (site plan) is approved. (Ord. 2093, 6-1-2015)
081-08: UTILITIES:
The developer(s), its successors or assigns, if any, shall construct at its
cost, and if for general public use, dedicate to the city all sanitary sewer
mains, water mains, and storm sewers associated with the Village Of Ponderosa
as required by the city of West Des Moines' subdivision ordinance in accordance
with applicable city design standards. All necessary easements to allow city
access to public utilities for maintenance and repair purposes shall be
executed prior to approval and recordation of the final plat for each
respective area or shall be executed as a blanket access agreement prior to the
approval and recordation of the first final plat. Unless otherwise specified
within a specific easement document, the city shall not be responsible for
reimbursement, restoration and/or replacement of any improvements located
within the public easements should the city be required to excavate the public
utilities for normal city operations.
The placement of public utility easements within buffer parks is discouraged
due to the potential conflict between trees and the need to access the lines
for repair. Overstory and understory trees should be placed off utility lines a
minimum distance equal to the one to one (1:1) excavation trench necessary for
the deepest utility. Adequate access for maintenance vehicles shall be provided
into and through the easement areas. (Ord. 2093, 6-1-2015)
081-09: FIRE ACCESS:
   A.   All streets and parking lots shall permit the travel of the fire
department's largest vehicle, including adequate accommodation of the vehicle's
turning needs. Approval of unique design solutions to accommodate fire access
may be granted by the city council if the solutions proposed are recommended by
the West Des Moines fire department.
   B.   At the discretion of the city's fire marshal, "no parking fire lane"
areas may be established as necessary to ensure efficient movement and access
of the firetrucks. The developer(s) of the Village Of Ponderosa shall be
responsible for the procurement and erection of approved fire lane signage.
   C.   All roads, alleys, and access drives shall maintain a minimum of twenty
feet (20') of clear pavement.
   D.   A minimum of fourteen feet (14') of vertical clearance over the travel
portion shall be maintained at all times over all vehicle travelways.
   E.   The developer(s) or its designee shall be responsible for enforcement
of no parking lanes and maintaining adequate clearance of structures and
vegetation along and above all vehicle travelways regardless if public or
private. (Ord. 2093, 6-1-2015)
081-10: PARK LAND DEDICATION REQUIREMENTS:
Developers are required to dedicate land for public parks and greenways as a
method of ensuring that new development provides for a portion of the park
needs created by the number of new residents and their families moving into the
new developments.
A revised park land dedication agreement acceptable to the city of West Des
Moines, tailored to the 2015 specific plan update detailing the specifics
relating to all park land dedication requirements and/or recreation based
improvements that are required of the developer(s) as a result of the original
and amended proposed development shall be executed prior to issuance of the
first building permit, including any footing and foundation permits associated
with a residential dwelling structure within areas 1, 2, 3, 4, or 6 as
identified on exhibit 2B. Implementation of the improvements shall occur as set
forth in the agreement. A copy of this agreement shall be on file with the city
of West Des Moines. (Ord. 2093, 6-1-2015)
081-11: PUBLIC STREET RIGHT OF WAY DEDICATION:
In order to maintain the functional class of the city's roadway system as set
forth in the comprehensive plan while recognizing the unique design of the
development, a portion of the right of way necessary for South Prairie View
Drive may be provided to the city by easement, with the balance of the right of
way to be dedicated to the city in fee title. All other public street rights of
way shall be dedicated to the city in fee title. The developer shall provide
the necessary easements and dedication at the time of recordation of the first
final plat, in accordance with right of way standards for each road
classification consistent with the city's comprehensive plan or as otherwise
defined in this ordinance. The developer shall provide at no cost to the city
temporary easements necessary for the construction of public streets within the
development. (Ord. 2093, 6-1-2015)
081-12: STREET DESIGN:
Exhibit 5 identifies the public and private street network to be implemented as
part of the Village Of Ponderosa development. The illustrations should be
understood to illustrate the vehicle use portion of the roadway, utility
corridors, and associated pedestrian pathways with building locations, heights,
and landscaping included for illustrative purposes only.
   A.   Public Streets: South Prairie View Drive and Bluestem Circle shall be
the only public roads within the development.
      1.   South Prairie View Drive shall be constructed as specified in the
traffic analysis and as conceptually illustrated in exhibit 6. It shall be
built as a two (2) lane roadway, thirty one feet (31') back of curb to back of
curb extending from the northeast corner of the site running south and west to
Bluestem Circle. Expansion to a thirty seven foot (37') three (3) lane roadway
(2 through lanes with a 2-way left turn lane (TWLTL)) for vehicle safety and
congestion mitigation will warrant consideration if subsequently determined
necessary by the city. However, no additional improvements are anticipated
prior to 2010, at which time such improvements may be specially assessed
pursuant to the provisions of the code of Iowa.
      2.   Bluestem Circle shall be constructed as specified in the traffic
analysis and conceptually illustrated in exhibit 7. Any deviation from this
design shall be reviewed and approved by the city of West Des Moines upon
recommendation of the West Des Moines public works department and West Des
Moines fire marshal to ensure adequate design to accommodate efficient
maintenance and firetruck movements. No street intersections or parking access
roads shall be located within two hundred feet (200') of the roundabout entry.
The placement of any landscaping or other improvements on public right of way
within or adjacent to the roundabout shall require the approval of the West Des
Moines city council. If approval is given, the developer(s) and the city shall
execute a separate easement document in which the rights and responsibilities
of the parties are delineated.
      3.   South Prairie View Drive between Bluestem Circle and Mills Civic
Parkway Circle shall be constructed as specified in the traffic analysis and
conceptually illustrated in exhibit 8. Any deviation from this design shall be
reviewed and approved by the city of West Des Moines upon recommendation of the
West Des Moines public works department and West Des Moines fire marshal to
ensure adequate design to accommodate efficient maintenance and firetruck
movements.
   B.   Private Streets: The design of all other roads within the development
shall be consistent with the recommendations of the traffic analysis (Snyder &
Associates: July 10, 2006) and the updated traffic analysis completed by the
city (May, 2015) and shall be private in ownership. It is the intent of the
developers and the city that all private roads within the Village Of Ponderosa
shall not subsequently be conveyed to the city as public streets but shall
remain private in perpetuity.
      1.   All private streets within the planned unit development shall
function as public streets. The developer and the city shall execute a public
access easement in which the rights and responsibilities of the parties shall
be delineated.
      2.   Adequate sight distances shall be maintained at all intersections to
allow vehicles and pedestrians approaching intersections to identify and
anticipate potential interaction and conflicts with other vehicles and
pedestrians.
      3.   Streets shall be maintained and function (including timely snow
removal) in a fashion similar to the public expectations of a public street.
      4.   No road closures are allowed without prior permission of the chief
of police of the city of West Des Moines.
      5.   Lane configuration shall be as identified in the traffic analysis.
Exhibits 9 through 16 illustrate the lane configuration for the private roads
within the development (see exhibit 4 for the location of these streets within
the development). Internal roads shall be designed to reduce vehicle speeds in
residential areas through the incorporation of traffic calming measures such as
narrower street widths, on street parking, and implementation of street trees.
Roundabouts will be used for traffic control purposes and to help reduce
vehicle speeds at the intersections of Stagecoach Drive and South Crescent Way;
and South Ridgefield Way, north end of South Crescent Way, and Fairway Drive.
Said traffic calming measures shall fully accommodate emergency vehicle access
through and around the Village Of Ponderosa.
   C.   Signalized Intersections: Traffic signals may be required at the
following intersections when traffic warrants as determined by the city (see
exhibit 5):
      1.   South 60th Street and Village View Drive.
      2.   South 60th Street and Stagecoach Drive.
      3.   South Prairie View Drive and Market Street.
      4.   South Prairie View Drive and South Crescent Way.
      5.   South Prairie View Drive and north access to West Glen.
The city may facilitate installation, but shall have no responsibility for the
cost of installation of these signals.
Dedication of permanent right of way to accommodate the placement of future
signals and appurtenances shall be provided to the city at no cost. Temporary
construction easements shall be provided at no cost to the city by the
developer(s).
   D.   Traffic Signs:
      1.   Signage for traffic control purposes associated with public streets
shall be installed and maintained by the city with the exception of the sign
poles.
      2.   Signage on private streets shall be procured and installed
consistent with the "Manual On Uniform Traffic Control Devices" (MUTCD) and the
signing/pavement marking conventions of the city. Maintenance and replacement
of private street signage shall be the responsibility of the developer(s).
   E.   Street Name Signage:
      1.   Public streets and those private streets as deemed necessary by the
city's addressing administrator shall be named in accordance with the city's
"Street Naming And Addressing Guidelines". Exhibit 4 identifies the named
streets within the development.
      2.   Signs shall conform to the "Manual On Uniform Traffic Control
Devices" and the "Street Naming And Addressing Guidelines" of the city for
street name signing.
      3.   Public street signage shall be the responsibility of the city. In
the event replacement of a public sign is necessary, replacement poles shall be
provided by and at the expense of the developer.
      4.   The name blades of private street signs shall match the public
street signs in design and color and shall be manufactured by the city. Poles
and mounting hardware for the street name signs shall be black or tones of gray
in color and shall be provided by the developer(s). Private street signs shall
be maintained and replaced by the developer(s).
      5.   Additional wayfinding signage may be required by the addressing
administrator to assist emergency services in efficient location of addresses.
If such signage is required, it shall be procured, installed, maintained, and
replaced as necessary by the developer(s). (Ord. 2093, 6-1-2015)
081-13: PARKING:
   A.   On Street Parking: As illustrated in exhibit 17, on street parking may
be provided on certain roads within the development.
      1.   No on street parking shall be allowed along any portion of South
Prairie View Drive, Bluestem Circle, or any public street within and abutting
the development. No on street angled parking shall be allowed anywhere along
Stagecoach Drive; however, on street parallel parking may be allowed along
Stagecoach Drive east of South 60th Street after the first drive intersection.
      2.   On street parking along Village View Drive shall be located no
closer than seventy five feet (75') from the splitter island of the roundabout
intersection with South Prairie View Drive.
      3.   On street parking shall abide by the design parameters for the
respective type (parallel, angled, head in, etc.) consistent with the minimum
off street parking design standards as identified in title 9, chapter 15 of the
city code.
      4.   At all street intersections, no on street parking shall be located
closer than twenty feet (20') from pedestrian crosswalks.
      5.   Notwithstanding anything contained in this ordinance, parking shall
be prohibited in a manner or in areas which would create a hazard to the public
or which would violate the West Des Moines fire code.
   B.   Off Street Parking: (Excluding driveways for single-family detached
residential.)
      1.   All off street parking areas shall be sited and landscaped to screen
their visibility from street rights of way, residential dwellings, pedestrian
pathways, and adjoining property outside of the Village Of Ponderosa
development.
      2.   Excluding parking structures, parking stall measurements and drive
aisle widths shall conform to title 9, chapter 15 of the city code.
      3.   A multilevel parking structure shall be allowed within area 3.
Structured parking can be incorporated into/under the multi- family residential
buildings in areas 1, 2, 3 and 4. Architectural design and vehicle
functionality, including emergency services access and maneuverability, shall
be reviewed in conjunction with site plan review of those areas.
      4.   If a proposed parking stall is designed to allow the bumper of the
vehicle to overhang an open area or center median, the length of both the
parking stall and island may be reduced by a maximum of two feet (2') (i.e., a
2 foot overhang would reduce a 19 foot stall and island length to 17 feet
minimum). If the proposed overhang is over a sidewalk rather than natural green
space, that sidewalk width shall be increased two feet (2') to accommodate
pedestrian movements and vehicle overhang.
      5.   It is desired that all off street parking areas be aesthetically
improved to reduce obtrusive characteristics that are inherent to their
function. Multiple landscape islands combined with vegetation shall be
incorporated to effectively eliminate a "sea of asphalt/concrete" and to
provide shade thus decreasing heat reflection back into the environment.
Landscape islands and/or pods shall be implemented in accordance with the
following:
         a.   Ground level parking areas, except within a parking structure
unless otherwise noted, shall incorporate the following:
            (1)   Islands or open areas shall be located at the terminus end of
all parking rows including parking within parking structures. Terminal islands
shall measure at least ten feet (10') in width and shall match, at a minimum
the stall length.
            (2)   Linear parking islands that run the length of the parking row
shall be implemented every six (6) rows. Said linear islands shall measure a
minimum of eight feet (8') in width and shall be heavily landscaped to provide
a mass of "green" within the parking lot. These areas may also serve as
bioswales/detention areas.
            (3)   Linear parking rows with greater than eleven (11) parking
stalls shall incorporate within the parking row landscape islands every twelve
(12) stalls and landscape islands or pods spaced no greater than every six (6)
stalls.
            (4)   Islands shall measure a minimum of nine feet (9') in width
and shall match, at a minimum the stall length.
   (A) Each nine foot by nineteen foot (9' x 19') (17 foot if adjusted due to
vehicle overhang) island shall contain at least one overstory or ornamental
tree, except for parking islands associated with lower levels within a parking
structure.
            (5)   Pods shall measure a minimum of six feet (6') from the back
of curb to back of curb.
   (A) Each landscape pod shall incorporate trees, shrubs, perennials, or
ornamental grasses to provide interest and color. Said plantings shall reach a
minimum of three feet (3') in height in order to be visible between the parked
vehicles.
   C.   Parking Ratios: Parking shall be provided as follows:
      1.   Residential:
         a.   Single-family detached shall provide a total of three (3)
dedicated parking spaces per residential dwelling; at least two (2) spaces
shall be covered parking.
         b.   Single-family attached located within areas 1C, 4B, 6A, and 6C,
except residential dwellings incorporated as part of a mixed use building,
shall provide at least one dedicated covered parking space per dwelling. In
addition, a minimum of one-half (0.5) of a space per dwelling shall be provided
within the lot boundaries of the associated dwelling. Said additional spaces
shall be provided through either dedicated driveways or on street parking.
Designated (striped) on street parking on that side of the street adjacent to
the lot may be counted toward fulfilling the required additional parking.
         c.   Multi-family apartment buildings located in areas 2E and 3C,
shall provide a minimum of one dedicated space for an efficiency unit, one and
one-half (1.5) dedicated spaces for a one bedroom unit, two (2) dedicated
spaces for a two (2) bedroom unit and two and one-half (2.5) dedicated spaces
for a three (3) or more bedroom unit. If the dwelling is intended to be owner
occupied, a minimum of one of those dedicated parking spaces per unit shall be
covered parking.
         d.   Age restricted (senior) multi-family apartment buildings within
areas 1D and 4A shall provide a minimum of one dedicated space for each bedroom
within the unit and one dedicated space for each efficiency unit. If the
dwelling is intended to be owner occupied, a minimum of one of those dedicated
parking spaces per unit shall be covered parking.
         e.   Residential dwellings incorporated as part of a mixed use
building shall provide a minimum of one dedicated space, covered or uncovered,
per bedroom unit.
         f.   Each covered space provided for a unit will be allowed to count
as one (1) parking space toward meeting the required number of parking spaces
for that unit. (Ord. 2093, 6-1-2015)
         g.   Building H must provide parking in accordance with subsection C1c
of this section for multi-family apartment buildings located in Area 2E.
Clubhouse/recreation space within Building H and intended to serve only the
multi-family building tenants is not required to provide parking. (Ord. 2208,
4-3-2017)
      2.   Office, Retail And Mixed Use:
         a.   With the exception of a hotel, a minimum of three and one-half
(3.5) spaces per one thousand (1,000) square feet of gross leasable area (gla)
of nonresidential uses shall be provided. Hotels shall provide parking at a
rate of one (1) stall per guestroom plus one (1) space for each employee on the
maximum shift. Additional parking in accordance with that specified above for
other retail uses shall be incorporated for any ancillary retail/service/
entertainment areas incorporated into the hotel and intended for general public
outside of hotel guest's use.
         b.   On street parking along both sides of Market Street may be
counted toward fulfilling the parking requirements of the commercial or office
buildings along the east side of the street. Additional parking for these
buildings shall be located in the shared lots behind the buildings along the
west side of Market Street. On street parking along Market Street shall not
count toward provision of parking for any residential units/buildings located
in Areas 2E or 3C.
      3.   At The Discretion Of The Development Services Director:
         a.   A less stringent parking calculation may be used provided the
applicant can demonstrate a parking rate less than the above is adequate due to
the type of potential use, shared uses or off peak uses.
         b.   A portion of the required parking for any building not
specifically noted above may be provided on a separate parcel. Details of such
parking shall be submitted for review and approval as part of the site plan for
each building.
      4.   Cross Access Agreements: Cross access agreements shall be executed
to allow for vehicle access through Areas 1, 2 and 3.
      5.   Shared Parking Agreement: A shared parking agreement shall be
executed to allow shared parking between building parcels. (Ord. 2093, 6-1-
2015)
081-14: PEDESTRIAN ELEMENTS:
The Village Of Ponderosa, in alignment with the "Town Center Overlay District
Guidelines", aims to encourage pedestrian movement and opportunities for
pedestrian interaction through a series of interconnected sidewalks and trails
which lead to the office and retail establishments within the Village Of
Ponderosa and adjoining developments, outdoor plaza areas, the lake feature,
dog park, and community open space and gathering spots. Exhibit 18 illustrates
these trails, sidewalks, plaza areas and features. Development of these areas
shall comply with the following guidelines with details of the development of
each area to be specified, reviewed, and approved at the time of site plan
development. Unless otherwise specified, the installation of these pedestrian
elements shall be by the developer(s) of the Village Of Ponderosa in
conjunction with or before the development of the surrounding areas.
   A.   Trails And Sidewalks:
      1.   Identification Markings: Pedestrian street crossings should be
identified through street markings, contrasting pavement colors, or textured
pavement treatments.
      2.   Vertical Clearance: A minimum of eight feet (8') of vertical
clearance shall be maintained at all times over all pedestrian travelways.
      3.   Public Trails:
         a.   Public trails shall be installed within the Village Of Ponderosa
in alignment with the City's master trail plan or as agreed upon with the City
of West Des Moines and detailed as part of the park land dedication agreement.
         b.   Trails shall be constructed in accordance with the City of West
Des Moines' standard specifications except for those trails intended to serve
as an access route for City maintenance vehicles. In these situations, the
trails shall be constructed over a six inch (6") compacted rock base in order
to accommodate the weight of the maintenance vehicles.
         c.   A minimum of two feet (2') of clear shoulder should be provided
on each side of the trail.
         d.   Signage traditionally located along public trails shall be
provided and installed by the city of West Des Moines; except trail size stop
signs at all street crossings which shall be installed by the developer
immediately following construction of trails. Nontraditional signage, if
desired, to mark circuit distances, direct pedestrians to features/areas within
the development, etc., shall be procured, installed, and maintained by the
developer. The locations of any private signage along public trails shall be
approved by the city of West Des Moines prior to installation.
         e.   Emergency call boxes located along public trails may be provided
and installed by the city of West Des Moines.
         f.   Trail markings on the trail surface itself utilized to indicate
road crossings, direct traffic, etc., shall be approved by the city of West Des
Moines prior to installation. Responsibility for installation and maintenance
of markings shall be as determined and agreed upon with the city of West Des
Moines.
         g.   Repairs to the public trails shall be the responsibility of the
city following a four (4) year maintenance period. General maintenance (snow
removal, sweeping, etc.) of the trails shall be as agreed upon between the city
and the developer. In general, the trail along South 60th Street shall be
maintained by the city, all other trails within the development shall be
maintained by the developer.
         h.   Installation, maintenance and replacement of trail lighting, if
incorporated, shall be the responsibility of the developer. Locations of light
fixtures along public trails shall be set to the appropriate distance from the
trail and approved by the city of West Des Moines prior to installation.
         i.   The following public trails shall be constructed within the site:
            (1)   South 60th Trail: As shown on exhibit 18, a trail will be
created from the northern to southern property boundary along South 60th
Street. As indicated, this trail will meander in and out of the right of way,
but shall not encroach into the right of way farther than typical public trail
placement at one foot (1') off of the property line would allow (11 feet from
property line to street edge of trail).
   (A) This trail shall be five inch (5") PCC, saw cut at ten foot by ten foot
(10' x 10') panels. No longitudinal/centerline joints allowed.
   (B) In order to fulfill part of the developer's park land dedication
requirements, the developer shall pay all costs associated with the
construction of the entire ten foot (10') trail.
            (2)   Ponderosa Creek Trail: As shown on exhibit 18, a public trail
will be installed which connects the South 60th Street trail to Willow Springs
Park located directly to the north. This trail shall be located along Ponderosa
Creek as part of an open space "meadow".
   (A) This trail shall be six inch (6") asphalt, except those portions that
are to serve as an access route for city maintenance trucks. These portions
shall consist of six inch (6") asphalt pavement constructed over a six inch
(6") compacted rock base. Approaches at all street crossing are to be concrete.
Midblock crossings shall be designed, constructed, and maintained according to
MUTCD standards (figure 9B-7 of manual).
   (B) To accommodate grade changes, retaining walls may be necessary along
this trail. These retaining walls shall be set back a minimum of two feet (2')
from the trail edge in order to provide a clear recovery zone and to minimize
the potential for bicycle handlebars and wall contact. Exhibit 19 illustrates
the relationship between trail and retaining wall.
   (C) In order to fulfill part of the developer's park land dedication
requirements, the developer shall be responsible for all costs associated with
the construction of this ten foot (10') trail. In addition, the developer shall
be responsible for the extension of the Willow Springs Park Trail south to
connect with the Ponderosa Creek Trail in this development.
            (3)   South Granite Way: As shown on exhibit 18, a trail will be
implemented which runs from the Ponderosa Creek trail south and easterly
through the open greenbelt to South Granite Way; south along the western side
of South Granite Way to north of West Glen's retention pond; the trail shall
parallel the north side of the pond to the east side of South Prairie View
Drive; crossing at the intersection of South Crescent Way and South Prairie
View Drive; and continuing along the west side of South Prairie View Drive to
the applicant's southern property boundary.
   (A) This trail shall be a combination of five inch (5") PCC and six inch
(6") asphalt. In general, that portion of the trail that crosses the open space
may be asphalt while that portion that parallels streets shall be PCC.
   (B) This trail shall be set back a minimum five feet (5') from the back of
curb of South Granite Way. The trail along South Prairie View Drive shall be
set one foot (1') off of the standard right of way line and a minimum of seven
feet (7') from back of curb.
   (C) In order to fulfill part of the developer's park land dedication
requirement, the developer shall pay all costs associated with construction of
this ten foot (10') trail.
      4.   Private Trails:
         a.   Trails shall be constructed of either six inch (6") asphalt or
five inch (5") PCC; choice of material shall be at the discretion of the
developer unless otherwise set forth in this ordinance.
         b.   Whenever possible, trails shall be six feet (6') or greater in
width, but in no situation shall they be less than four feet (4') in width.
         c.   Trails shall be set back a minimum of five feet (5') from the
back of curb of private streets; however, no minimum setback from the property
line shall be required for those trails within greenbelts that abut private
property.
         d.   Signage desired along the trails shall be procured, installed,
and maintained by the developer.
         e.   Repairs and maintenance of the trails shall be the responsibility
of the developer.
         f.   Installation and maintenance of trail lighting, if incorporated,
shall be the responsibility of the developer.
      5.   Public Sidewalks:
         a.   Public sidewalks shall be located and installed within the
Village Of Ponderosa in accordance with city code.
         b.   Sidewalks shall be installed as a part of the public improvements
associated with the lot or area being developed, in conjunction with or before
the time of construction of the buildings.
         c.   Sidewalks shall be constructed in accordance with the city of
West Des Moines standard specifications.
         d.   Public sidewalks within the site shall be a minimum of four feet
(4') in width.
      6.   Private Sidewalks:
         a.   Sidewalks shall be located as illustrated in exhibit 18.
         b.   Sidewalks shall be located in relation to the adjoining private
streets as indicated in the applicable street cross sections (see exhibits 9
through 16).
         c.   Private sidewalks within the site shall be a minimum of four feet
(4') in width except in those situations in which vehicle parking overhangs the
sidewalk; in these situations, the sidewalk width shall be increased two feet
(2') to accommodate pedestrian movements and vehicle overhang.
   B.   Plaza Areas: A key element to encouraging pedestrian activities is the
incorporation of plaza areas and structured pedestrian gathering areas. Exhibit
18 identifies the locations of these areas while exhibits 25 through 27 provide
conceptual layouts and designs for these areas. Details for each of these plaza
areas will be submitted, reviewed, and approved as part of the site plan for
the adjoining parcels.
      1.   Plaza areas shall encourage opportunities for interaction among
pedestrians through the provision of seating opportunities (benches, chairs,
tables, planter walls, etc.). Within the appendix attached to the exhibit
packet are representations of the site amenities including street furniture
that will be provided throughout this development. Although deviations from the
illustrations are permissible, the street furniture is intended to serve as a
unifying element throughout the development. Without compromising the design
intent of the plazas, the developer is encouraged to maximize the number of
furniture/seating opportunities throughout the development.
      2.   Whenever possible, outdoor dining associated with restaurants and
sidewalk cafes shall be implemented.
      3.   Open space plaza areas shall incorporate a variety of hardscape
landscape materials (stone pavers, stamped concrete, field boulders, etc.) for
visual interest and variety and shall implement landscape vegetation to soften,
enhance, and delineate the areas. A minimum of twenty percent (20%) of the
plaza area shall be "green space" consisting of shrub and perennial planting
beds, tree islands, or lawn areas. Whenever possible, elements that enrich the
space (i.e., gazebos, art, fountains, banners, and children's play environment,
etc.) should be incorporated. See exhibit 18 for locations, and exhibits 25 and
26 for conceptual character images of acceptable plaza areas.
      4.   Appropriate lighting should be incorporated into the plaza areas for
safety reasons and to extend the usability of the area into the evening hours.
      5.   Plaza areas associated with establishments which serve alcoholic
beverages shall provide a definable boundary (change in material, unmovable
signage, physical feature, etc.) between the private establishments in which
alcohol consumption is allowed and the public area in which it is not. A
physical barrier (fencing, railing, landscaping, etc.) should prohibit access
into the patio area from the public area; all access into the patio area should
be through the interior of the establishment. The barrier specifications shall
be reviewed and approved as part of the development application.
      6.   Details regarding maintenance and replacement responsibilities for
the plaza spaces should be identified within the association documents.
   C.   Crescent Lake: The most significant open space in the Village Of
Ponderosa is Crescent Lake. It provides an identity and gathering places for
the entire village. Diverse environments and people spaces are located around
the perimeter of the lake. The lake covers approximately 2.25 acres. It has
been designed as a sustainable environment with depths and water quality that
will support aquatic plants and animals. Recirculating pumps will create a
bubbling spring effect in the lower pool. The upper pool (approximately 4 feet
above the main pool) will be linked with the main pool by recirculating
waterfall. Stormwater systems, including filtered bioretention swales and
surface runoff will provide additional sources of water. The perimeter of the
pond has been designed with minimum depths (approximately 18 inches to 30
inches) to comply with safety standards. The lake's dam, spillway and
downstream watershed shall be designed in accordance with Iowa DNR (department
of natural resources) and army corps of engineers' requirements.
   D.   Lakeside Terrace: The core gathering place for the village is the
Lakeside Terrace. Located adjacent to both Crescent Lake and Market Street this
strategic location provides a flexible place for diverse activities. A water
feature provides a bubbling water source along the pedestrian streetscape that
flows down to the lake with a waterfall and plunge pool. The water feature will
provide several different sound effects, both soothing and dramatic.
The Lakeside Terrace is designed to accommodate a wide range of activities
including:
      1.   Informal gathering of individuals, couples, families and small
groups as well as special event assemblies for large groups;
      2.   Seating with movable chairs and small tables as well as informal
seating opportunities such as sloping lawns and broad steps;
      3.   Paved and landscaped areas that can accommodate a range of temporary
exhibits, fairs and events; and
      4.   Both sunny and shaded spaces that also vary according to the season
and time of day including a desirable morning sun exposure and protection from
westerly winds.
Another feature of the Lakeside Terrace is the clock tower. Clad in wood with
an internally illuminated clock face, the tower provides an accent on the
village skyline providing practicable purposes of orientation and timekeeping.
No tenant signage shall be located on the clock tower, however the development
name and logo may be. The tower shall not exceed fifty feet (50') in height.
   E.   Art And Bocce Ball Park: A public open space will be provided adjacent
to the southeast terminus of Crescent Lake and its companion lake. This area
will provide an area to display public art (either permanent or rotating
temporary installation). In addition a lawn area with adjacent seating will be
provided to accommodate bocce ball.
   F.   Dog Park: A fenced area (5 foot, metal grid) with shade trees, open
lawn area and patio with seating will be provided for Village Of Ponderosa
residents and their dogs. The area will be secure and only accessible by
Village Of Ponderosa resident key card. A water fountain (designed for dog
parks) will be provided. Groves of shade trees will be provided for shade and a
combination of shrubs and tall grasses will reduce the visual impact of the
perimeter fence.
   G.   Meadow: A broad open space system or meadow extends from South 60th
Street to the northeastern portion of the village. Designed to function as a
broad meadow with a meandering stream along its edge, it provides a passive
outdoor recreation and public pathway system that links to a broader community
wide open space system. Portions of the meadow are designed to reduce
stormwater impacts through controlled release of peak runoff flows; public
pathways are located outside of areas susceptible to stormwater storage. Stream
edges and areas susceptible to erosion will be planted with appropriate
riparian plant material (such as red switch grass and equisetum) and will
incorporate stone features to stabilize soils and further manage water
velocities. A combination of native and low maintenance grasses will be
utilized to create sustainable environments while encouraging public use.
   H.   Art: Multiple locations have been identified for the installation of
permanent or temporary/rotating art pieces. The village's main entrance off of
South 60th Street is designed as an art lawn with broad lawns and unobstructed
views to potentially two (2) art locations (southwest corner of Village View
Drive and Market Street, and the north view terminus of Market Street).
Art and development identification elements are desired for integration into
Bluestem Circle to create a development entry feature and enhance the sense of
community. Details of any feature shall be submitted for review and approval by
the city council prior to installation. If approved, the developer and the city
shall execute an easement document in which the rights and responsibilities of
the parties shall be delineated.
   I.   Residential Park: Courtyard type parks will be incorporated within the
larger multi-family buildings located in areas 1D, 4A and 3C. These areas are
intended to serve the immediate building residents, however may be accessed by
other development residents or visitors. The park design should be well
integrated within the building design, providing a sense of enclosure, yet
allow views to the surrounding area and admit sunlight. Residential units
bordering the park should include architectural features such as balconies,
roof decks or large windows to reinforce the connection between the living
units and the courtyard activities. A variety of paving and landscaping
elements including planting beds or water features should be incorporated as
well as benches, steps and defined seating areas such as gazebos to encourage
social interaction. If size allows, features such as small sport courts,
fitness trails, or level turf areas for group activities can be provided.
Details of the residential park design shall be submitted for review and
approval as part of the site plan for each building. (Ord. 2093, 6-1-2015)
081-15: LANDSCAPING:
The landscaping requirements specified herein are intended to create an
aesthetically pleasing development which enhances the appearance and character
of the city of West Des Moines, while protecting the general health, safety and
welfare of the citizens. Landscaping is required to address the following
primary aspects or consequences of development:
    Open space protection and enhancement,
    Creation of environments conducive and inviting to pedestrian activities,
    Street side enhancement ("streetscapes"),
    Visual screening of undesirable views, activities and/or site elements, and
    Mitigation of paving expanses associated with off street parking.
The specific plan drawing (exhibit 2A) on file in the city illustrates the
general landscaping concept; this plan should be used as the guide for site
plan development in respect to the general locations of plant material to be
provided. Details regarding specific varieties, exact quantities, and the
minimum size at time of planting shall be provided and approved as part of the
site plan submittal and shall meet the general guidelines in respect to the
minimum plant size traditionally applied to development within the city. In the
event that alternatives to what is shown on the attached specific plan are
desired, the minimum vegetation requirements specified within this ordinance
will need to be provided and the original intent of the required vegetation
met.
   A.   Open/Green Space: The intent of open space is to allow for a balance
between natural areas and the built environment and to provide for the overall
beautification and "greening" of the city. All of the land within a site that
is not occupied by buildings, on street and off street parking areas, or other
vehicle use areas may be classified as open space. Plaza areas, water features
and structures such as gazebos, arbors, pergolas, etc., that are associated
with outdoor pedestrian use areas may be counted toward fulfilling the minimum
open space requirement.
Due to the nature of the intended development in respect to design intent,
uses, and densities, the amount and locations of open space and green space/
vegetation within the development will vary; some areas will be considerably
more "urban" in appearance (Market Street district, and the senior apartments
along Village View Drive between the lake and Bluestem Circle and Lakeside
Terrace) while others will be more "natural" (meadow, lake embankment,
greenbelts, etc.). Although the current specific plan map provides for open
space within each of the planning areas which range from thirty one (31) to
fifty nine percent (59%); in lieu of the traditional practice of a percentage
of open space being required per parcel, the Village Of Ponderosa as a whole
shall provide a minimum of thirty five percent (35%) open space. In addition,
open space areas have been required within parking areas through the
incorporation of landscape islands and pods. The specific plan map (exhibit 2A)
indicates the open/green areas within the development. This map, along with the
useable open space areas and pedestrian plazas conceptually discussed in the
"pedestrian elements" section of this ordinance shall be used as a guide for
site plan development in respect to the general locations of open areas to be
provided.
      1.   In order to ensure "green" within the development, vegetation must
be incorporated at a rate of two (2) overstory trees, one understory or conifer
tree, and three (3) shrubs for every three thousand (3,000) square feet of open
space. Based upon a thirty five percent (35%) rate, the Village Of Ponderosa
shall provide a minimum of nine hundred eighty four (984) overstory trees; four
hundred ninety two (492) understory or conifer trees; and one thousand four
hundred seventy six (1,476) shrubs.
         a.   One tree may be substituted for ten (10) shrubs.
         b.   A twenty (20) square foot mass planting of perennial flowers or
ornamental grasses may be substituted for three (3) shrubs.
         c.   No substitution for required trees is allowed.
         d.   The incorporation of evergreen vegetation is encouraged to
provide winter substance within the landscape.
      2.   Vegetation required as part of the open space may be placed into off
street parking areas or required buffers; however the open space vegetation is
in addition to that which would be required of buffers or parking islands/pods
and may not be counted toward fulfilling the minimum amount of vegetation
required for these areas.
   B.   Streetscaping: A landscaped edge or "streetscape" shall be provided
along all streets. These streetscapes are intended to provide desired green to
the city, interest, comfort to pedestrians, visual softening of pavement
expanses, bring human scale to adjoining buildings, minimize heat reflection,
and provide traffic calming benefits. The streetscape should have a noticeable
pattern, design, or plant variety and should attempt to serve as a
distinguishing or identifiable landmark for that portion of the development.
Streetscapes within the Village Of Ponderosa will vary in complexity depending
upon the street configuration, in response to uses adjacent to each street.
      1.   Street Trees: Street trees are intended as a unifying element
throughout the development and shall be provided along all main roads,
regardless if public or private.
         a.   In general, placement of street trees along public streets shall
be in accordance with the city's public right of way tree and shrub planting
regulations (authority ordinance 427 and amended ordinance 972) unless
otherwise approved by the city council. It is anticipated that street trees
along public right of way and utilities within the public right of way shall be
placed in the approximate location as shown on exhibit 6.
         b.   The placement and spacing of street trees shall be determined by
design intent in combination with anticipated mature spread of the respective
variety.
         c.   To ensure safety, streetscape vegetation shall not be located
within the vision triangle of intersecting vehicle pathways or vehicle and
pedestrian pathways.
         d.   A minimum of fourteen feet (14') of vertical clearance over the
travel portion shall be maintained at all times over all vehicle travelways.
         e.   A street tree planting plan identifying exact tree locations
shall be prepared for South Prairie View Drive and Bluestem Circle. These
planting plans shall be reviewed and approved by the plan and zoning commission
and city council prior to installation of any trees.
         f.   Exhibits 6 through 16 illustrate potential streetscape
configurations in relationship to curbs and sidewalks. Location of trees along
private streets may be adjusted as desired in respect to proximity to curbs and
sidewalks as long as visibility and clearances are maintained so as to not
interfere with both vehicular and pedestrian traffic.
         g.   Street trees may be counted toward fulfillment of the provision
of vegetation required of open space.
         h.   Maintenance and removal of any street trees shall be the
responsibility of the developer. (Ord. 2093, 6-1-2015)
      2.   Market Street:
         a.   Street trees shall be provided as part of an enhanced landscaping
treatment at the corners of intersecting streets and at intervals of at least
every thirteen (13) parking spaces in a row.
         b.   Vegetation in the form of trees, flowering shrubs, perennials,
ornamental grasses and annuals shall be provided to provide interest, color and
place making.
         c.   Benches and/or other seating surfaces will be provided at typical
meeting and gathering spaces.
         d.   Public art, pedestrian scale lighting, and other specialty
features may be provided to add festivity and variety to the street.
         e.   Residential urban gardens will be provided between the public
walkways and ground floor residential dwelling units to provide an amenity to
both residents and pedestrians, as well as provide a buffer between the private
dwelling units and public walkway. (Ord. 2208, 4-3-2017)
   C.   Buffers And Visual Screening: Due to the design intent to create a
"village" atmosphere with the blending of areas and uses, traditional buffering
as set forth in City Code shall not be required. The provision of adequate
buffering and landscaping shall be more thoroughly evaluated and approved as
part of the site plan approval. Additional buffer and landscaping may be
required at that time in response to additional details of the use, buildings,
parking, etc., to be implemented.
The implementation of vegetation is required as part of buffering/screening.
This vegetation may be combined with other measures such as berming, low stone
walls, decorative fencing, or any combination thereof to enhance the
effectiveness of the buffering/screening. Buffers should be designed to achieve
the maximum amount of screening from the maximum number of viewpoints with
vegetation layered to ensure adequate blockage of views and to create depth and
a sense of naturalness. Care should be taken to ensure that "through views"
under tree canopies are adequately blocked. Landscape vegetation required
within buffers shall be in addition to the open space landscaping required for
the site.
      1.   A thirty foot (30') wide buffer shall be required along South 60th
Street. One (1) overstory tree, two (2) understory trees and three (3) shrubs
shall be provided for every thirty five (35) linear feet of this buffer; of the
required trees, two-thirds (2/3) shall be evergreen in nature.
         a.   Vegetation may be substituted at the following rate:
            (1)   One (1) tree may be substituted for ten (10) shrubs.
            (2)   A twenty (20) square foot mass planting of perennial flowers
or ornamental grasses may be substituted for three (3) shrubs.
            (3)   No substitution for required trees is allowed.
         b.   No parking lots, drive-throughs, fences, or buildings are
permitted within required buffers; however, sidewalks, trails, landscape
features, pedestrian furniture, and permitted signage may be located within the
buffers.
      2.   In addition to that specified above, the elements identified within
the following subsections shall be buffered/screened regardless of area:
         a.   Views of off street parking areas, loading docks, and other
vehicle related service areas from adjacent roadways, pedestrian paths and
adjoining properties shall be buffered and visually screened to a height of at
least three feet (3').
         b.   Drive-throughs (restaurants, banks, pharmacy, etc.) shall be
opaquely screened from views from adjacent roadways, pedestrian paths and
adjoining properties. Whenever possible, drive-throughs should be integrated
into the building architecture rather than appearing as an attached element to
the building.
         c.   Mechanical and/or utility equipment for residential dwellings
shall not be located within the front yard and should be situated within the
site to minimize views from adjacent streets and adjoining properties.
         d.   Mechanical, utility meters, transformers, HVAC, satellite dishes,
and other similar undesirable elements/equipment which are located on, beside,
or adjacent to any retail, office, or multi-family building shall be buffered
and visually screened from streets, residential dwellings, pedestrian pathways,
and adjoining property outside of the development. A permanent screen that
utilizes building materials and designs compatible and consistent with the
architecture and materials of the principal building shall be implemented
whenever possible. Equipment should be screened on all sides.
         e.   Roof mounted HVAC screening shall be incorporated into the design
of the building through the use of parapets, screening walls, or other
acceptable solutions as identified during the review of the site plan.
         f.   Sanitation/recycle enclosures shall be visually screened from
view from streets, dwellings, businesses, pedestrian pathways, and adjoining
property outside of the development. The enclosure should incorporate the
primary building material of the adjacent buildings on three (3) sides (either
brick or limestone). The fourth side or enclosure opening shall be designed to
prevent views into the enclosure and consist of exterior grade wood slats on a
black painted steel structure. Landscape vegetation should be incorporated
around the screen enclosure to soften and minimize the presence of the
equipment and enclosure. (Ord. 2093, 6-1-2015)
081-16: SIGNAGE:
All proposed exterior signage requires the review and approval of a sign permit
by the city of West Des Moines. All signage within the Village Of Ponderosa
shall be reviewed and approved by the Village Of Ponderosa's design review
committee prior to approval by the city of West Des Moines and documentation of
their approval shall be submitted to the city with the sign permit application.
The city shall review the application and make the final determination as to
whether a sign meets all applicable requirements prior to issuance of a permit
and installation. Any signage not specifically addressed within this ordinance
shall comply with the West Des Moines sign code. The following sign regulations
shall apply:
   A.   Development Identification Signs:
      1.   Primary (labeled as E1 on exhibit 18A) and secondary (labeled as E2
on exhibit 18A) ground monument signs as generally illustrated in exhibit 28
shall be allowed at the locations indicated in exhibit 18A.
      2.   These signs shall be set back a minimum of ten feet (10') from the
public street right of way and fifteen feet (15') from the back of curb of the
private streets. In addition, these signs should be located to not block
visibility at intersections and so located to accommodate future potential
traffic signal poles and structures.
      3.   These signs shall only indicate the development name; no tenant
identification is allowed.
      4.   These signs shall be consistent with the following size limitations:
         a.   Primary development identification sign (E1): Landscape sign a
maximum of eight feet (8') in height, seventy five feet (75') in length, and
three feet (3') in width. The text copy shall not exceed sixty (60) square
feet.
         b.   Secondary development identification signs (a.k.a.: village
markers) (E2): Shall be a columnar brick or stone structure a maximum of five
and one-half feet (51/2') in height and two feet (2') in width. The text copy
shall not exceed four (4) square feet per side of the structure.
         c.   These signs shall be either "halo lit" or externally illuminated
with ground lights directed at the face of the sign; shields shall be installed
to prevent light spillover beyond the sign face.
      5.   A custom development identification sign may be placed in the center
of the roundabout with the review and approval of a specific site plan by the
city council through the site plan process. As part of the approval, the
council shall establish the overall structure and text copy size limitations
and details of the signage (labeled as E3 on exhibit 18A).
   B.   Business Identification Signs:
      1.   Building Mounted Signs:
         a.   Wall Signage:
            (1)   All office, retail, and mixed use buildings within the market
district shall be allowed exterior wall signage in accordance with the
following:
   (A) All wall signage shall consist of individual three-dimensional letters.
No cabinet or panel signs shall be allowed except for contoured cabinet signs
necessary to display logos. (Ord. 2093, 6-1-2015)
   (B) A total of one square foot of copy per one linear foot of tenant space
which faces a public street or internal private street, shall be allowed per
tenant. If the side of the building with the main entrance faces away from a
street frontage, that wall may be counted in the calculations at a rate of one-
half (1/2) the linear footage of said wall. At no time shall more than two (2)
walls be used to compute allowable signage and no wall area shall be allowed to
have more signage on that side of the building than what the wall would earn at
one square foot per linear foot of building wall. The number of signs is
limited only by the maximum allowable square footage. Of the total square
footage of signage allowed, a maximum one- half (1/2) square foot per linear
foot of tenant space which contains the primary public entrance may be located
on a window or wall that is not immediately adjacent to the tenant space but
still within the same building. (Ord. 2138, 2-22-2016)
   (C) No illuminated wall signs shall be located on a facade which faces
residential dwellings, except residential uses incorporated as part of a mixed
use building or in situations in which the residential dwelling structure is
located more than two hundred feet (200') from the business displaying the
sign.
         b.   Projecting Signs: Projecting signs as defined in the city of West
Des Moines' sign code may be used as part of the allowed signage on buildings
within the Market Street district in lieu of traditional wall signage. All
projecting signs shall comply with the regulations within the sign code except
as noted otherwise in this ordinance. Said signs shall not project above the
primary roofline of the building to which it is attached.
         c.   Projecting Pedestrian Signs: Projecting signs consistent in
design and intent as "under awning signs" identified within the city of West
Des Moines' sign code may be allowed. The pedestrian projecting signs are
intended to provide information to pedestrians and therefore are not intended
to be of a size and scale to be legible to passing vehicles and draw vehicles
from adjacent roadways. This type of signage is in addition to allowed wall
signage.
            (1)   All office, retail, and mixed use buildings within the market
district may be allowed projecting pedestrian signage in accordance with the
following:
   (A) A maximum of ten (10) square feet, including copy and background, shall
be allowed per public door per tenant space.
   (B) Signs located under a canopy or the building arcade on the western side
of Market Street shall be located wholly under the canopy or arcade. Unless
integrated as part of an architectural element that is an extension of the
building; projecting pedestrian signs which are attached to a building but not
under a canopy or arcade shall not project from the wall face more than thirty
inches (30").
   (C) The bottom of the sign shall be a minimum of eight feet (8') of vertical
clearance over pedestrian walkways and fourteen (14) above any drive or vehicle
access.
   C.   Wayfinding Signs:
      1.   Ground Signs (Monument And Landscape Signs):
         a.   Within the market district there shall be a maximum of six (6)
ground signs allowed which are to be utilized for the identification of
multiple tenants within the district. These signs are intended to provide
tenant information and serve as tenant directional signage or wayfinding signs
of a scale to be visible by the motoring public. Multiple buildings and tenants
may be identified on each sign. Individual monument/landscape signs for
buildings or parcels as typically allowed by the sign code shall be prohibited.
A single tenant may occupy the entire sign area of one of the six (6) signs,
but approval and acknowledgment from the Village Of Ponderosa's design review
committee confirming that one of these signs is being allocated to one tenant
shall be submitted with the sign permit application to the city prior to
installation of the sign.
         b.   These signs shall be located a minimum of fifteen feet (15') from
back of curb/property line whichever is more restrictive and situated so as to
not obstruct visibility at street intersections and/or intersections of street
and lot access drives.
         c.   Sign structure shall not exceed six feet (6') in height, five
feet (5') in width and two feet (2') in depth and of which, the top three feet
(3') shall be dedicated to identification of the building name and tenants.
      2.   Pedestrian Signs: Pedestrian directional signage such as would be
typically found on informational kiosks shall be allowed along pedestrian
pathways in accordance with the following:
         a.   Said signage is not intended to be legible to nor direct
vehicular traffic.
         b.   A maximum of six (6) "kiosks" shall be allowed within the Village
Of Ponderosa development.
         c.   Said kiosks may include a map identifying building names and
businesses within various buildings. Multiple buildings and tenants may be
identified on each sign.
         d.   Individual business identification copy may not exceed two inches
(2") in height.
         e.   Signs shall be located a minimum of fifteen feet (15') from the
property line or back of curb of a private street and shall not block
pedestrian or vehicle visibility at intersections.
         f.   Signs shall not exceed six feet (6') in height and three feet
(3') in width or depth.
      3.   Directional Signs: Generic directional signs (without distinct
tenant identification) such as "drive-through", "entrance/exit", etc., shall be
governed by the regulations set forth in the sign code for "directional signs"
in the professional commerce park (PCP) district.
   D.   Village Of Ponderosa Identification: Signage, medallions, keystones,
banners, pavement markings, etc., that display the development's logo,
initials, or name may be integrated into the development to further enhance the
character of the development; no individual tenant identification is allowed.
   E.   Murals, Banners, Window Graphics, And Projected Images: Art elements,
such as murals, large scale graphic images displayed in windows, banners, and
projected media on pavement or walls shall be encouraged to provide interest,
color, and festivity to the area. With the exception of the Village Of
Ponderosa's logo, said elements shall not include or display logos, be
recognizable as part of a corporate identity, or draw attention to or otherwise
advertise or identify any one use, product, business, establishment or service.
The director of development services shall review and approve all proposals and
determine whether the proposal is in compliance before they are installed or
displayed. Images determined to be recognizable as part of a corporate
identity, draw attention to or otherwise advertise or identify a use, product,
business, establishment or service may be allowed; however, the image shall be
counted as part of the square footage of wall signage allowed for the
associated building or tenant.
   F.   Active Adult/Senior Residential Signage: Signage may be provided for
the active adult/senior residential development on parcels 3D and 4A
identifying this area as a distinct residential neighborhood as follows:
      1.   A general neighborhood sign can be located along Village View Drive
at both the eastern and western edges of parcels 3D and 4A. A maximum of twenty
(20) square feet of text can be provided at each of the two (2) locations.
Total sign area to be a maximum of twenty five (25) square feet.
      2.   Building identification signs can be provided for each of the four
(4) buildings. These signs cannot face any adjacent single- family
neighborhoods. A maximum of fifteen (15) square feet of text can be provided at
each of the four (4) locations. Total sign area to be a maximum of twenty (20)
square feet.
   G.   Fiber Optic Signs:   LED or fiber optic signs may be permitted at the
discretion of the director of development services. No moving signs are
allowed.
   H.   Advertising: No aerial or search lights are allowed for advertising
purposes but may be used to promote village sponsored events after obtainment
of the proper permits from the city. (Ord. 2093, 6-1-2015)
081-17: LIGHTING:
The Village Of Ponderosa will have a family of light fixtures ranging from
parking lot lights and roadway fixtures to pathway lights. Included within the
site amenities are sketches and images of the intended lighting series (see
appendix I of the exhibits packet on file in the city). The following general
guidelines shall be in addition to the specific regulations stated within any
Village Of Ponderosa lighting regulations:
   A.   Streetlights: In order to maintain a consistent visual aesthetic
throughout the Village Of Ponderosa development, along all public roadways a
Kim Archetype fixture (#33-2751 (150w) or comparable fixture acceptable to the
city) black in color shall be used. The height, spacing, light levels and
uniformity coefficients of streetlights along public streets shall be in
accordance with the city's street lighting standards. Streetlights along
private streets shall be the Spectra fixture by architecture area lighting or
comparable fixture acceptable to the director of development services. The
private lights shall be a maximum of twenty five feet (25') in height as
measured from the ground to the top of the fixture. Due to the nonstandard
color and type of private street lighting fixtures to be used, the developer
shall be responsible for the financial cost, procurement, and installation of
replacement parts and wiring for fixtures. Typical paint maintenance of all
fixtures shall be the responsibility of the development with the approval of
the city of West Des Moines when painting public streetlight poles and
signposts.
   B.   Parking Luminaries: Fixtures used within off street parking areas shall
be consistent with those illustrated in the appendix of the exhibits packet.
Said fixtures shall be black or tones of gray in color and shall not exceed
twenty five feet (25') in height as measured from the ground to the top of the
light structure.
   C.   Photometric Plan: No wall packs, or floodlighting without shields to
direct the light to its intended target are allowed. In addition to cutoff
fixtures, particular attention shall be given to eliminate hot spots and light
glare. To achieve this, additional measures may include, but are not limited
to, lowering parking lot light levels after business hours, turning off lights
not necessary for security purposes, and use of landscaping for light
screening/blockage. As a part of the review of each site plan, a photometric
plan must be submitted. During the review, the applicant must demonstrate how
lighting will not adversely affect adjoining properties.
   D.   Residential Areas: Floodlighting in residential areas should be limited
to emergency lighting and shall be controlled to prevent the frequent tripping
of the light by typical pedestrian and animal movements so as to not disturb
neighbors. (Ord. 2093, 6-1-2015)
081-18: ARCHITECTURE:
The Village Of Ponderosa is designed as a diverse community of commercial
buildings and varied residential housing types and styles. Exhibits 32 through
38 on file in the city are illustrative examples of the architectural concepts.
Additionally, on file with the city is a companion "pattern book" which
provides more detail of the architectural concepts and options for the various
buildings within the development. The pattern book is intended to guide
architectural design to ensure compatibility. Specific architecture for all
buildings, with the exception of single-family detached residential dwellings
shall be evaluated as part of the site plan review and approval process.
Architecture, materials, and colors for single-family detached residential
dwellings shall be reviewed and approved by the Village Of Ponderosa design
review board (VOP-DRB). Approval of the VOP-DRB shall be provided to the city
in conjunction with the building permit application. Enforcement of the
approved design of single-family detached dwellings shall be by the Village Of
Ponderosa, not the city.
   A.   Building Design: All buildings within this development, except for
single-family detached residential, shall accommodate the following in building
design:
      1.   Form And Scale: Buildings shall be designed to relate specifically
to the pedestrian in scale and variety as well as reinforce the "village"
aesthetic/concept. The following techniques should be used to meet this
objective:
         a.   Corporate architecture shall be prohibited. Building concepts
should avoid the conventional commercial approach to design.
         b.   Buildings shall be organized to create a logical balance and
relationship with the site, open spaces and circulation.
         c.   The building's design should meet context and site objectives
such as providing gateways, creating linkages and framing or terminating views.
         d.   Variation in building height, mass and roof forms shall be
provided while still maintaining an overall building continuity.
         e.   Shifts in building planes/facades and variation in exterior
materials shall be incorporated to minimize long expanses of wall.
         f.   Variation in materials, material modules, expressed joints,
textures, colors and details should be used to break up the mass of the
buildings.
         g.   Variation in horizontal planes through the use of materials,
color and projecting forms should be implemented to signify an entry and/or
protect the pedestrian.
         h.   Ground floor retail areas should provide the maximum possible
glazing toward sidewalks to provide pedestrians with visual interest. (Ord.
2093, 6-1-2015)
         i.   High density residential buildings adjacent to single-family
attached or detached (areas 1B, 1C and 4B) should step down massing as
illustrated in figure 7c of the architectural pattern book. (Ord. 2138, 2-22-
2016)
         j.   Diversity in window systems through the use of clear and
transparent glass as well as the use of applied vinyl window "super graphics"
that express/relate to the interior's intended use should be incorporated. Said
graphics are intended to add to the festivity of the area and aid in blocking
interior views of not so desirable elements, activities, or functions. Said
graphics shall not be used for advertising purposes and shall not identify the
tenant's name.
         k.   A building's roof form and related details/materials are an
integral part of the architectural design aesthetic. Roofs should not be
designed as attention getting devices related to the reinforcement of signage
or as an identifiable corporate image.
      2.   Material Quality And Detail: All sides to each building are to
receive high quality materials and finishes (360 degree architectural
treatment). There are no "backs" to a building. Materials should be durable,
economically maintained and of a quality that will maintain their appearance
over a prolonged time.
         a.   Primary building materials should include, but not be limited to,
iron spot or reclaimed brick, limestone or cast stone, concrete and
architectural metals.
            (1)   Composite building materials acceptable to the City, as
determined as part of the site plan review process, may be incorporated in the
design as a primary building material.
            (2)   Architectural metal and composite building materials shall be
detailed with finished edges and have concealed fasteners.
         b.   The following materials shall not be used for cladding unless
specifically approved by the city of West Des Moines:
            (1)   Natural wood or wood paneling.
            (2)   EIFS or synthetic stucco.
            (3)   Concrete masonry units.
            (4)   Tilt-up precast concrete systems that are structural in
appearance.
            (5)   Materials that are intended for interior use.
         c.   Changes in materials should occur at either inside corners or
where a detail is drawn to specifically accommodate a transition.
   B.   Single-Family Detached Residential: Architectural design for single-
family units shall attempt to express a creative presentation of exterior
building materials, exterior details and texture, treatment of windows and
doors, and use of angles and multiplicity of planes within the wall and roof
design. Homes shall have materials such as brick, natural stone, wood shakes,
decorative molding and cornice treatments, or similar combination of material
which represents a variation of architectural styles or elements. (Ord. 2093,
6-1-2015; amd. Ord. 2468, 5-3-2021)
081-19: LAND USE AND BULK REGULATIONS:
The intent of this specific plan shall be to permit the development of a
planned community featuring a more urban look, feel and density. The
development shall be broken out among land uses in accordance with the
following:
    A maximum of 29.48 acres may be dedicated to single-family detached
residential dwellings;
    A maximum of 52.17 acres may be dedicated to multi-family residential
dwellings;
    A maximum of 7.53 acres may be dedicated to office uses; and
    A maximum of 4.66 acres may be dedicated to support commercial uses.
Overall, in compliance with the traffic study completed for the development,
the Village Of Ponderosa development shall not exceed 13.92 residential
dwellings per gross acre of residential land use (indicated as single-family or
multi-family residential on exhibit 1) or a total of one thousand one hundred
thirty seven (1,137) residential dwellings; one hundred thirty three thousand
two hundred (133,200) square feet of retail uses; and seventy six thousand nine
hundred (76,900) square feet of office uses.
To allow for response to market demand, residential dwelling types may be
shifted to other locations within the site than currently anticipated. The 2015
adoption of the amended specific plan does not guarantee that the total number
of residential dwellings indicated for inclusion within the overall development
(1,137) may be implemented. The 2015 amendment proposes five hundred (500)
active senior dwellings, four hundred eighty (480) nonage restricted market
rate apartments in combination with thirty three (33) existing attached
townhomes and a total of one hundred twenty four (124) traditional single-
family detached homes (81 existing plus 43 proposed). Due to the different
traffic generation rates of different types of residential, especially senior
housing versus market rate apartments, adjustments in the number of dwelling
units incorporated may need to be adjusted (reduced) to ensure that overall
development remains under the traffic caps established with the original 2006
study and reaffirmed with the 2015 traffic study. A traffic analysis shall be
conducted for all proposed changes in residential types. Changes that result in
a decrease in density and do not increase total traffic generated from the
entire development above that allocated in the ordinance may be
administratively approved as part of or in conjunction with the site plan
process. Changes that result in an increase in density or will result in an
increase in the total traffic generated from the development above that
allocated in the ordinance will require the appropriate city council and plan
and zoning commission approvals and may require an amendment to specific plan
ordinance. All necessary city approval of plats required to make the change
shall be obtained prior to approval of the site plan, if applicable and
construction of the alternate dwelling type.
In addition to the general conditions stated previously within this ordinance,
the following land use and bulk regulations shall apply to the specific areas
designated on the Village Of Ponderosa specific plan map (exhibits 2A and 2B).
The area development plan (exhibit 1) illustrates six (6) planning areas; the
specific plan map further divides these planning areas into parcels.
   A.   Single-Family Detached Residential:
      1.   Land Use: The following development standards and general use
regulations and provisions set forth in title 9, "Zoning", of the city code
shall apply to the following specified development parcels as shown on the
specific plan map of this ordinance unless noted otherwise in this ordinance:
         a.   Area 1A (lots 1 through 20); residential single-family (RS-11):
            (1)   Lots shall range between eleven thousand (11,000) square feet
to seventeen thousand three hundred (17,300) square feet.
            (2)   Minimum street frontage equals thirty five feet (35').
            (3)   Maximum twenty (20) dwelling units.
         b.   Area 1B (Village Of Ponderosa plat 6):
            (1)   Lots shall range between nine thousand six hundred (9,600)
square feet to fourteen thousand (14,000) square feet.
            (2)   Maximum seven (7) dwelling units.
         c.   Area 1E (Village Of Ponderosa plat 8):
            (1)   Lots shall range between seven thousand two hundred (7,200)
square feet to thirteen thousand (13,000) square feet.
            (2)   Maximum seven (7) dwelling units.
         d.   Area 5B (lots 81 through 102); residential single-family (RS-6):
            (1)   Lots shall range between five thousand nine hundred (5,900)
square feet to eleven thousand one hundred (11,100) square feet.
            (2)   Minimum street frontage equals forty five feet (45').
            (3)   Maximum twenty two (22) dwelling units.
         e.   Area 5D (lots 56 through 80); residential single-family:
            (1)   Lots shall range between two thousand eight hundred (2,800)
square feet to four thousand five hundred (4,500) square feet in size.
            (2)   Minimum street frontage equals thirty five feet (35').
            (3)   Maximum twenty five (25) dwelling units.
         f.   Area 6D:
            (1)   Lots shall range between two thousand eight hundred (2,800)
square feet to seven thousand two hundred (7,200) square feet in size.
            (2)   Minimum street frontage equals thirty five feet (35').
            (3)   Maximum forty three (43) dwelling units.
            (4)   Minimum lot width equals forty feet (40').
      2.   Building Height: The maximum height for a single-family detached
residential shall be forty feet (40').
      3.   Garage Orientation: Garages shall be sited to minimize the visual
presence to the street. Acceptable garage orientations include:
         a.   Street Oriented Garage: With the exception of area 5D and 6D and
as otherwise noted, garages that open to the street must be recessed behind the
front plane of the house a minimum of five feet (5'). However, within a given
area (1A, 1B, or 5B), up to one-fifth (1/5) of the total number of dwellings
within the given area may have street facing garages which are located less
than five feet (5') of the front plane of the dwelling. In situations where the
garage is located less than five feet (5'), the third car garage, if
applicable, must be stepped back a minimum of four feet (4') from the front of
the two (2) car garage with all garage doors to be individual one car doors.
         b.   Side Loaded Garage: Garage is entered from the side by a motor
court. This garage orientation can be located in front of the house equal to
the building setback for the house. Side loaded garages should incorporate
architectural details such as windows, doors, and other detailing on the street
facade in order to present a house appearance thus disguising the garage
function.
         c.   Rear Loaded Garage (Areas 5D And 6D): Garage is at the rear of
the house and accessed by an alley. Garages may be the first house element
encountered and visible from the alley. Garage shall abide by the building
setback requirements.
      4.   Dedicated Residential Driveways: Vehicle driveways dedicated and
adjacent to a covered parking space shall measure ten feet (10') or less in
length or nineteen feet (19') or greater in length as measured perpendicularly
from the garage opening to the closest point of the sidewalk or back of curb of
intersecting private street or drive, whichever is more restrictive. Drives
that are intended to provide for a vehicle to be parked parallel to the covered
space shall measure a minimum of nine feet (9') in length; drives intended to
allow a vehicle to be parked perpendicular to the covered space shall measure a
minimum of nineteen feet (19') in length. (Ord. 2093, 6-1-2015)
      5.   Setbacks:
         a.   Unless otherwise specifically stated, setbacks shall be measured
from the property line of parcels that abut a public street or back of curb of
adjoining private street or alley. Setbacks along boundaries that do not abut a
street shall be measured from the lot boundary; except for area 6D, easements
have been taken into account when determining setbacks, therefore, the setback
should be measured from the property line. Unless noted otherwise, in area 6D,
setbacks shall be measured from the lot line and back of curb of private
streets in accordance with area 6D table on page 53. (Ord. 2138, 2-22-2016)
         b.   Unless otherwise specified, building setbacks shall be measured
to the foundation of the dwelling structure or covered parking, whichever is
closer.
            (1)   Those single-family detached residential dwelling buildings
which front South Prairie View Drive are allowed to have building overhangs,
steps, and foundation plantings which extend into the public street right of
way easement a distance of a maximum of five feet (5') and as more particularly
illustrated in exhibit 6.
         c.   Setbacks for attached accessory structures (porches, sunrooms,
decks, etc.) shall abide by the front, side and rear yard setbacks stated, with
the exception of areas 1A and 5B. These areas are allowed to have porches which
extend into the front or side yard setback a maximum of five feet (5'), unless
otherwise noted, however, the closest element of the structure (including
overhangs and steps) shall be located no closer than five feet (5') to a
property line.
         d.   Setbacks for detached accessory structures shall be as follows:
            (1)   No detached accessory structures shall be located in the
front yard of any parcel.
   (A) Areas 1A and 5B: Shall abide by city code for the respective zoning
district.
   (B) Area 1B: No detached accessory structure allowed.
   (C) Areas 5D and 6D: Minimum of ten feet (10') from rear lot line and in
accordance with side yard setbacks as stated.
         e.   Building separations shall be a minimum of ten feet (10') as
measured between the foundations. Unless noted otherwise, overhangs, bay
windows, fireplace bump outs, etc., may extend into the setback a maximum of
two feet (2').
         f.   No fences over four feet (4') in height, except those required to
meet minimum swimming pool fencing requirements are allowed. No fences are
allowed along those property boundaries which abut a common open space.
** See exhibit 3 for lot locations.
AREA 1A
Lot Number     Front           Rear             West Side      East Side
1 and 9        20' minimum;    20'              15'            5'
               no maximum
2, 5 and 15    20' minimum;    20'              5'             15'
               30' maximum
3, 4, 6 - 8,   20' minimum;    20'              5'             5'
10, 11, and 14 30' maximum
12             20' minimum; no 20' (north line) 15'            5' (east and
               maximum                                         south lines)
               20' minimum;                     15' (southwest 15' (north
13             30' maximum     15' (west line)  line)          line); 5'
                                                               (southeast line)
               20' minimum;                                    15' (porch may
16             30' maximum     20'              5'             not encroach
                                                               into setback)
17             20' minimum;    20'              15'            5'
               30' maximum
18             20' minimum;    20'              5'             5'
               30' maximum
19             20' minimum;    20'              5'             10'
               30' maximum
20             20' minimum;    10'              10'            5'
               30' maximum
 
 
AREA 1B
Lot Number               Front                    Rear Side**
                                                       5' except when adjacent
Lots 1, 2, 5, 6 and 7 in 20' minimum; 30' maximum      to sanitary sewer
Village Of Ponderosa     from adjoining street    15'  easement, then setback
plat 6                                                 is taken from edge of
                                                       easement
                                                       5' except when adjacent
Lots 3 and 4 in Village  20' minimum; 30' maximum      to sanitary sewer
Of Ponderosa plat 6      from adjoining street    20'  easement, then setback
                                                       is taken from edge of
                                                       easement
 
**   Side yard setbacks shall be to the closest element, including window
wells, window or fireplace bumpouts, overhangs, stairs, etc.
 
AREA 1E
Lot Number              Front                    Rear Side
                                                      5' except when adjacent
Lots 1 through 5 in     15' minimum from back of      to sanitary sewer
Village Of Ponderosa    curb of adjoining street 9'   easement, then setback is
plat 8                                                taken from edge of
                                                      easement
                                                      5' except when adjacent
Lots 6 and 7 in Village 20' minimum; 30' maximum      to sanitary sewer
Of Ponderosa plat 8     from back of curb of     15'  easement, then setback is
                        adjoining street              taken from edge of
                                                      easement
 
 
AREA 5B
Lot Number Front                    Rear West Side East Side
                                                   0' (South Prairie View
                                                   Drive) (porch may not
                                                   encroach into setback:
81         20' minimum; 30' maximum 20'  5'        overhangs, steps, and
                                                   foundation plantings may
                                                   extend up to 5' into the ROW
                                                   easement)
82 through 20' minimum; 30' maximum 20'  5'        5'
101
                                                   0' (South Prairie View
                                                   Drive) (porch may not
                                                   encroach into setback:
102        20' minimum; 30' maximum 20'  5'        overhangs, steps, and
                                                   foundation plantings may
                                                   extend up to 5' into the ROW
                                                   easement)
 
AREA 5D
Lot Number    Front** Rear West Side East Side
56            0'      20'  10'       10'
57            0'      20'  15'       5'
58            0'      20'  5'        20'
59 through 65 0'      20'  5'        5'
66            0'      20'  10'       5'
67            0'      20'  20'       5'
68            5'      20'  15'       5'
69 through 72 5'      20'  5'        5'
73            5'      20'  5'        20'
74            5'      20'  15'       5'
75 through 80 5'      20'  5'        5'
 
**   Front yard setback for lots 56 through 67 = south line; lots 68 through 80
= north line.
**   Lots 56 through 67 are allowed to have building overhangs, steps, and
foundation plantings which extend into the right of way a distance of a maximum
of 5 feet.
 
AREA 6D
         Front* Rear Side
All lots 20'    20'  5'
 
*   0 feet setback for lots fronting South Prairie View Drive. Porch may not
encroach into setback: overhangs, steps, and foundation plantings may extend up
to 5 feet into the ROW easement.
   B.   Single-Family Attached Residential:
      1.   Land Use: The following development standards and general use
regulations and provisions set forth in title 9, "Zoning", of the city code for
residential medium-density (RM) shall apply to the following specified
development parcels as shown on the specific plan map of this ordinance unless
noted otherwise in this ordinance:
** See exhibit 3 for lot locations.
 
Single-Family Attached
Area Lot Number Maximum Number
                Of Dwelling Units
1C   22         4
4B   40         14
6A   50         6
6C   52         6
 
      2.   Building Height: The building height for attached residential
structures shall allow for a maximum of three (3) stories of living plus under
building parking or a maximum of sixty feet (60') in height.
      3.   Building Setbacks:
         a.   Unless otherwise specifically stated, setbacks shall be measured
from the property line of parcels that abut a public street or back of curb of
adjoining private street or alley. Setbacks along boundaries that do not abut a
street shall be measured from the lot boundary.
         b.   Building setbacks shall be measured to the foundation of the
dwelling structure or covered parking.
            (1)   Unless otherwise specified below, a minimum fifteen foot
(15') setback shall be provided from an adjoining street or perimeter lot
boundary, except when the abutting lot also contains an attached residential
structure or abuts an open space of at least twenty feet (20') in width
excluding open space comprised of public street right of way. In these
situations there shall be no minimum setback except as required by fire and
building codes. Except for Village Of Ponderosa plat 7, a minimum twenty five
foot (25') building separation shall be maintained between single-family
detached dwellings and single-family attached dwellings.
            (2)   Dwelling structures located within lot 52 which fronts South
Prairie View Drive may locate the main plane of the dwelling building at the
front property line (0 setback) and is allowed to have building overhangs,
porches, steps, and foundation plantings which extend into the public street
right-of-way easement a distance of a maximum of nine feet (9').
            (3)   The front and sides of structures located within Lot 50 which
face Bluestem Circle may locate the building at the property line (0 setback);
however, the setback shall be measured to the closest point of the dwelling
including overhangs, steps, private garden walls, etc.
            (4)   Detached garages accessed by an alley may be set back from
the alley a distance consistent with that identified in the following
"dedicated residential driveways" section.
         c.   Building separations between the same residential type (single-
family attached to single-family attached) shall be a minimum of ten feet (10')
as measured between the foundations of the outside walls. Overhangs, bay
windows, fireplace bump outs, etc., may extend into the separation area a
maximum of two feet (2'). Except for Village Of Ponderosa Plat 7, a minimum
twenty five foot (25') building separation shall be maintained between single-
family detached dwellings and single-family attached dwellings.
         d.   No detached accessory structures, excluding garages, shall be
allowed.
      4.   Garage Orientation: Acceptable covered parking orientations include:
         a.   Rear loaded garage: Garages shall be located at the rear of the
building and accessed either by an alley or off street auto court. Garages may
be the first building element encountered and visible from the alley.
         b.   Under building parking.
      5.   Dedicated Residential Driveways: Vehicle driveways dedicated and
adjacent to a covered parking space shall measure ten feet (10') or less in
length or nineteen feet (19') or greater in length as measured perpendicularly
from the garage opening to the closest point of the sidewalk or back of curb of
intersecting private street or drive, whichever is more restrictive. Drives
that are intended to provide for a vehicle to be parked parallel to the covered
space shall measure a minimum of nine feet (9') in length; drives intended to
allow a vehicle to be parked perpendicular to the covered space shall measure a
minimum of nineteen feet (19') in length.
      6.   Off Street Parking: Uncovered off street parking lots shall be set
back a minimum of twenty feet (20') from the back of curb of an adjoining
street and a minimum of fifteen feet (15') from the property line for those lot
boundaries which do not abut a street.
   C.   Multi-Family Residential (Areas 1D, 2E, 3C, And 4A):
      1.   Land Use: The following development standards and general use
regulations and provisions set forth in title 9, "Zoning", of the City Code for
Residential High Density (RH) Districts shall apply to the following specified
development parcels as shown on the specific plan map of this ordinance unless
noted otherwise in this ordinance. (Ord. 2093, 6-1-2015)
      2.   Building Height: The building height for multi-family residential
structures shall be as follows:
         a.   Senior/active adult multi-family shall not exceed sixty feet
(60') in height as measured to the top of the parapet and from the average
grade.
         b.   Buildings “F”, “G”, and “I” primary building structure (excluding
architectural detailing) shall not exceed sixty-three feet (63') in height, as
measured to the top of the parapet and from the average grade.
         c.   Building “H” primary building structure (excluding architectural
detailing) shall not exceed fifty-five feet (55') in height, as measured to the
top of the parapet and from the average grade.
         d.   Buildings “K” and “L” shall not exceed seventy two feet (72') in
height as measured to the top of the parapet and from the average grade.
      3.   Building Setbacks:
         a.   Unless otherwise specifically stated, setbacks shall be measured
from the property line of parcels that abut a public street or back-of-curb of
the thru-lanes of the adjoining private street or alley, not from parallel
parking areas or drop-off lanes. Setbacks along boundaries that do not abut a
street shall be measured from the lot boundary.
            (1)   Building setbacks in Areas 1D and 4A shall be measured to the
foundation of the dwelling structure or covered parking. Unless otherwise
specified below, a minimum thirty foot (30') setback shall be provided from an
adjoining street or perimeter lot boundary. The setback requirement along
Village View Drive (both sides within Areas 1D and 4A) shall be twenty feet
(20'). The setback requirement along Stagecoach Drive, north side only, within
Area 2E shall be ten feet (10'). (Ord. 2208, 4-3-2017)
            (2)   Building setbacks for buildings within Area 2E and 3C which
front to Market Street are measured to the main plane of the building excluding
canopies and pedestrian arcades. Buildings should be set back a minimum of
fifteen feet (15') except for main building entries which may be as close as
six feet (6') from the back of curb of Market Street.
            (3)   Building setbacks for rear and side property lines not
adjacent to streets shall be zero feet (0'). No build easements adjacent to
each property line may be required to meet applicable building code
requirements related to exterior wall and opening protection.
         b.   Setbacks for detached accessory structures, excluding garages,
shall abide by Code for the Residential High Density (RH) District.
      4.   Building Separation: A minimum thirty foot (30') building separation
shall be maintained between buildings as measured to the closest points of
buildings including canopies.
      5.   Under Building Parking: Vehicular entries into parking structures
shall not face single-family detached dwellings.
      6.   Off Street Parking: Uncovered off street parking lots shall be set
back a minimum of twenty feet (20') from the back of curb of an adjoining
street and a minimum of fifteen feet (15') from the property line for those lot
boundaries which do not abut a street.
         a.   A multi-story parking structure shall be allowed within Area 3C.
This structure shall be set back a minimum of fifty feet (50') from adjoining
street and a minimum of ten feet (10') from the property line.
   D.   Office, Commercial, And Mixed Use Buildings:
      1.   Land Use:
         a.   All general use regulations, performance standards, and
provisions set forth in title 9, "Zoning", of the City Code for Professional
Commerce Park (PCP) and Support Commercial (SC) Districts, as identified in the
following table for Areas 1, 2 and 3, shall apply to any development proposals
for the applicable areas as delineated on the specific plan map unless
otherwise noted in this ordinance:
            (1)   Permitted Uses: Permitted uses within parcels identified for
Professional Commerce Park (PCP) uses shall include the following:
               (A)   All permitted (P) uses and permitted conditional uses (Pc)
allowed within the Professional Commerce Park (PCP) and Support Commercial (SC)
Districts except those that have been prohibited by this ordinance.
               (B)   In addition:
Showrooms/display rooms and associated offices (SIC 521b).
Paint, glass, and wallpaper stores (SIC 523).
Hardware stores (SIC 525).
General merchandise stores (SIC 53 series).
Food stores (SIC 54 series) except convenience stores with or without gas.
Apparel and accessory stores (SIC 56 series).
Furniture, home furnishings, and equipment stores (SIC 57 series).
Drinking places (SIC 5813) (limit 1 within the development).
Miscellaneous retail uses (SIC 59 series) except the following which shall be
prohibited:   SIC 5961 catalog and mail order houses; SIC 5962 automatic
merchandise machine operators; SIC 5963 direct selling establishments; SIC 598
fuel dealers; SIC 5999 adult entertainment establishment, engine and motor
equipment supply stores, farm equipment and supply stores, fireworks,
insecticide, water and air purification equipment for agricultural use.
Photographic studio, portrait (SIC 722).
Beauty shop (SIC 723).
Barbershops (SIC 724).
Clothing rental services (SIC 7299-09).
Watch, clock, and jewelry repair (SIC 763).
Videotape rentals (SIC 784).
Dance studios, schools, and halls (SIC 791).
            (2)   Prohibited Uses: The following permitted and permitted
conditional uses otherwise allowed in the Professional Commerce Park (PCP)
District shall be prohibited:
Electric, gas, and sanitary services (SIC 49 series).
Automotive dealers and service stations (SIC 55 series).
Automotive repair, services, and parking (SIC 75 series).
Miscellaneous repair services (SIC 76 series) except SIC 763 watch, clock, and
jewelry repair which is allowed.
Hospitals (SIC 806 series). (Ord. 2093, 6-1-2015)
** See Exhibit 3 for lot locations.
Office, Commercial, And Mixed Use Buildings
                    Max. Sq. Ft. Max. Sq. Ft. Max. # Of             Max.
Building Area Lot # Of Retail    Of Office    Residential Max. # Of Building
                    Uses         Uses         Dwelling    Stories   Height
                    (SC)         (PCP)        Units
A        1G   25    0            15,600       0           2         45'
B        1H   24    8,210        8,460        0           2         50'
C        2B   26    12,600       0            0           2         45'
D        2B   27    8,300        19,150       0           3         55'
E        2C   28    16,280       0            0           1         35'
J        3B   34    3,760        11,630       0           1         35'
M        3D   39    0            5,000        0           1         35'
N        3D   38    0            17,110       0           2         40'
O        3G   36    8,900        0            0           3         55'
P        3F   37    75,000       0            110 rooms   5         60'
Total               133,050      76,950       0                     
 
(Ord. 2208, 4-3-2017)
      2.   Drive-Through Businesses: The intent of this development is not to
encourage the use of automobiles. However, it is recognized that drive-ups are
a key component to the functionality of certain types of businesses due to
their convenience. If, through the design review process, including an updated
traffic analysis, it can be demonstrated that such uses do not cause traffic
congestion, do not interfere with pedestrian movements and can be designed to
minimize their presence, a maximum of five (5) drive-ups may be permitted
within Areas 1, 2, and 3. Drive-up facilities may be allowed in conjunction
with, and limited to, the following types of businesses: drugstore/pharmacy,
bank/drive-up ATM (maximum 2 establishments), dry cleaner, grocery, and coffee
or ice cream related businesses (maximum 2 establishments). Walk-up or
pedestrian ATMs with no vehicle access shall be permitted as desired. In all
instances, the presence of the drive-ups shall be minimized through the
incorporation of the drive-through into the building architecture rather than
as an added on canopy component and the opaque visual screening through the use
of earth berming and vegetation placement.
      3.   Lot Size: No minimum lot size shall be required for the office/
retail area.
      4.   Building Height: The height of a building shall conform to the
limits stated previously within the table with the exception of elements such
as bell towers, clock towers, or other vertical accent architectural elements.
These elements may exceed height restrictions, as determined by the Director of
Development Services during the site plan review process.
      5.   Building Setbacks:
         a.   Unless otherwise specifically stated, setbacks shall be measured
from the property line of parcels that abut a public street or back of curb of
an adjoining private street. Setbacks along boundaries that do not abut a
street shall be measured from the lot boundary.
            (1)   Building setbacks are to the main plane of the building
excluding canopies and pedestrian arcades.
            (2)   Buildings should be set back a minimum of fifteen feet (15')
except Building D which shall be set back a minimum of six feet (6') from the
back of curb of Market Street to accommodate the pedestrian arcade and upper
stories of the building.
         b.   A minimum thirty foot (30') building separation shall be
maintained between buildings as measured to the closest points of buildings
including canopies.
         c.   Setbacks for detached accessory structures shall abide by the
City Code for the Professional Commerce Park (PCP) District.
      6.   Off Street Parking Lot Setbacks: Parking lots shall be set back a
minimum of fifteen feet (15') from the back of curb of an adjoining street
unless a similar use or an open space of at least twenty feet (20') in width
abuts the lot, in which case the parking lot setback shall be zero (0). (Ord.
2093, 6-1-2015; amd. Ord. 2468, 5-3-2021)
081-20: VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES:
Any person who violates the provisions of this ordinance upon conviction shall
be punished as set forth in section 1-4-1 of the City Code. (Ord. 2093, 6-1-
2015)
081-21: OTHER REMEDIES:
In addition to the provisions set out in the violations and penalties section
herein, the City may proceed in law or equity against any person, firm or
corporation for violation of any section or subsection of this ordinance. (Ord.
2093, 6-1-2015)
081-22: SAVINGS CLAUSE:
If any section, provision, sentence, clause, phrase or part of the ordinance
shall be adjudged invalid or unconstitutional, such adjudication shall not
affect the validity of the ordinance as a whole or any provision, section,
subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or part hereof not adjudged invalid or
unconstitutional. (Ord. 2093, 6-1-2015)
081-23: EFFECTIVE DATE:
This ordinance shall be in full force and effect after its passage, approval
and publication as provided by law. (Ord. 2093, 6-1-2015)
081-99: LEGISLATIVE HISTORY:
Ord. 1701, 7-31-2006; Ord. 1793, 12-3-2007; Ord. 1846, 10-19-2009; Ord. 2093,
6-1-2015; Ord. 2138, 2-22-2016; Ord. 2208, 4-3-2017; Ord. 2468, 5-3-2021.
PUD #82
PLAZA AT JORDAN CREEK
SECTION:
082-01: Legal Description
082-02: Intent
082-03: Required Plans
082-04: Conditions
082-05: Requirements
082-06: Architecture
082-07: Signage
082-08: Vehicle Trip Allocation
082-09: Future Drive Connections
082-10: Stormwater Management Plan
082-11: Utilities
082-12: Fire Access
082-13: Public Streetlights
082-14: Ingress/Egress And Shared Parking Agreement
082-15: Public Street Improvements And Traffic Signals
082-16: Violations And Penalties
082-99: Legislative History
082-01: LEGAL DESCRIPTION:
All of parcels A, B, and C located in a part of the northwest quarter of
section 13, township 78 north, range 26 west of the 5th P.M., West Des Moines,
Dallas County, Iowa, as described in the plat of survey recorded in book 2006
page 7582.
Said tract of land being subject to and together with all easements of record.
(Ord. 1711, 10-23-2006)
082-02: INTENT:
To create a complementary development to the surrounding area by capitalizing
upon and further promoting a mix of uses and activities. (Ord. 1711, 10-23-
2006)
082-03: REQUIRED PLANS:
The following plans shall be required as a part of the processing of any
development application for any property within the Plaza at Jordan Creek
specific plan:
   A.   Area Development Plan: An area development plan is a plan that
identifies planning units, major street patterns, master stormwater drainage
and detention concepts, utilities, shared public spaces, land use assumptions
and proposed densities. It is intended to be a tool used to promote the
communication and cooperation between adjacent property owners and developers
to ensure cohesive and unified development.
An area development plan shall be reviewed by the Plan and Zoning Commission
and approved by the City Council prior to, or in conjunction with, the review
of the specific plan for any property within said specific plan area. No change
to the area development plan shall be made without approval of an amended plan
from the appropriate reviewing bodies.
On file in the City (Exhibit I) is the City Council approved area development
plan for this property.
   B.   Specific Plan: A specific plan identifies detailed development criteria
for each planning unit indicated on the area development plan or more
specifically delineated on the specific plan map. The specific plan shall
conform to the general development intent identified in the approved area
development plan, as well as the "Town Center District Overlay Guidelines". The
specific plan shall be reviewed by the Plan and Zoning Commission and adopted
by the City Council by ordinance. (Ord. 1711, 10-23-2006)
This document shall constitute the specific plan ordinance for Plaza at Jordan
Creek. On file in the City and made a part of this ordinance is a specific plan
map that defines the planning units further discussed in this ordinance and
illustrates the overall site layout concept for Plaza at Jordan Creek (Exhibit
A). This document and the associated exhibits (on file with the City Clerk) are
intended to specify the components, parameters, and requirements to be adhered
to and implemented in order to ensure the realization of Plaza at Jordan Creek
development concept. It is recognized that modifications and changes in
building footprints and layout, including the combining of two (2) smaller
buildings into one (1) larger building, may be necessary in response to market
demands and specific tenants. Additionally, it is recognized that square
footages of one (1) building may be shifted to another or increased to
accommodate specific users' needs. These changes may be allowed with the
appropriate City approvals if the shift does not have a negative impact on the
traffic patterns for the building/area and the total number of vehicle trips
does not exceed that which has been allocated to the overall Plaza at Jordan
Creek Development. At the discretion of the Development Planning and Inspection
Manager, changes to the layout of the development that are deemed to be "major"
changes shall require an amendment to the specific plan map and/or ordinance,
whichever is applicable. Major amendments shall require the review and approval
of the Plan and Zoning Commission and City Council. (Ord. 1711, 10-23-2006;
amd. Ord. 1786, 11-19-2007; Ord. 1981, 4-1-2013; Ord. 2209, 4-3-2017)
Where the specific plan map and specific plan ordinance conflict, the specific
plan ordinance shall prevail. (Ord. 1711, 10-23-2006)
   C.   Development Applications (Overlay District Site Plans): Site plans for
all buildings within Plaza at Jordan Creek must meet the intent of the approved
specific plan. Site plans shall be submitted to the City of West Des Moines for
review and approval prior to the development of any portion of the site. Site
plans for permitted uses which comply (as determined by the Development
Planning and Inspection Manager) with the design intent as set forth in this
specific plan will be subject to administrative review and approval by the
Development Planning and Inspection Manager. A one (1) week review and comment
period by each and all available members of the Plan and Zoning Commission and
City Council shall precede the administrative approval. If upon review, two (2)
or more members of the City Council, Plan and Zoning Commission, or a
combination thereof request such; or if the Development Planning and Inspection
Manager deems the proposed site plan is not in compliance with the approved
specific plan or is potentially controversial, the site plan will be processed
through the traditional full site plan review and approval process. Site plans
for permitted conditional uses (Pc) as defined in the City Code, unless
otherwise amended within this ordinance, shall be approved by the appropriate
review body. At the discretion of the Development Planning and Inspection
Manager, an amendment to Plaza at Jordan Creek specific plan ordinance may be
required to bring consistency between the ordinance and site plan development
proposed. (Ord. 1711, 10-23-2006; amd. Ord. 1981, 4-1-2013)
   D.   Preliminary And Final Platting: Prior to or in conjunction with any
site plan submittal for proposed development; or prior to legal ownership
change of any land within Plaza at Jordan Creek, said area shall be preliminary
and final platted, in accordance with the City's subdivision ordinance, to
delineate the parcel to be developed or sold. Lots without public street
frontage, in accordance with the City Code requirements, may be allowed
provided the frontage requirements of the Code have been met by an abutting or
surrounding lot which is under common ownership under an owners' association,
or a cross parking and access easement has been executed which provides for the
unrestricted use and access of the drives and parking. Platted outlots are not
buildable.
Unless otherwise specifically restricted by City Council action, groundwork and
construction of private roads and utilities may be started, at the developer's
risk, upon approval of the preliminary plat by the City Council. Public street
and utility construction may begin, at the risk of the developer, after
approval of the preliminary plat by the City Council and construction
improvement plans by the City of West Des Moines.
Prior to approval of the final plat, unless otherwise allowed by Council, the
developer of Plaza at Jordan Creek shall provide the appropriate agreements,
easements, and sureties for all public rights-of-way and other public
improvements (utilities, sidewalks, streetlights, etc.) within and associated
with the development.
A final plat applicable to each proposed development area must be approved and
recorded with the Dallas County Recorder's Office prior to issuance of any
building permit, including footing and foundation permits, for construction of
any structure within the area proposed for development. (Ord. 1711, 10-23-2006)
082-04: CONDITIONS:
Whereas, title 9, chapter 9, "Planned Unit Development District", of the City
Code establishes certain regulations and guidelines pertaining to accompanying
information required on plat and site plan documents. Now, therefore, the
following conditions, restrictions, and regulations are adopted as part of this
approval, to wit:
In addition to the specific plan map, the following general development
criteria shall be integrated into and made a part of this planned unit
development (PUD):
   A.   General Conformance To Subdivision Ordinance: All subdivisions, public
streets, public street rights-of-way, and general development shall adhere to
the standards and design criteria set forth in the West Des Moines subdivision
ordinances and the most current design standards adopted by the City of West
Des Moines pertaining thereto unless otherwise stated within this ordinance.
   B.   General Conformance To Zoning Ordinance: Unless otherwise specified
herein, the development of the Plaza at Jordan Creek specific plan shall comply
with title 9, "Zoning", of the city code or any other applicable codes.
   C.   Flood Hazard: In all areas within a 100-year frequency flood hazard
zone, or adjoining drainageways, and detention ponding areas involving
potential flood hazards, no building shall be erected that has a lowest floor,
including basements, less than one foot (1') above the determining level of the
100-year frequency flood event, and no building shall be located within twenty
five feet (25') of any easement or property boundary of a major drainageway,
stormwater detention basin, or pond, unless said location is approved as part
of a development entitlement by the city council and said building is
structurally designed accordingly.
   D.   Developer Responsibilities: Unless otherwise specifically approved by
the city council, the developer, its successors and/or assigns, if any, shall
pay all planning, engineering, and construction costs for the development of
the planned unit development as required by this ordinance, and shall pay all
costs related to approved site plans, which may include, but is not limited to,
the cost of all streets, storm sewers, sanitary sewers, water mains and service
lines, drainageway improvements, detention basins, buffers, and other
improvements as required. No occupancy permits, either temporary or permanent,
shall be issued until all necessary improvements applicable to the area/lot or
structure requesting occupancy are installed and accepted by the city of West
Des Moines. Nothing in this ordinance shall be construed to prevent the
developer, its successors and/or assigns, if any, from entering into private
agreement(s) as it/they may desire to share the cost of improvements. (Ord.
1711, 10-23-2006)
082-05: REQUIREMENTS:
Unless provided otherwise in this ordinance, all general use regulations,
performance standards and provisions set forth in title 9, "Zoning", of the
city code for the RC regional commercial district shall apply to any
development within the Plaza At Jordan Creek specific plan area. To the extent
that the provisions of this section conflict with or are more restrictive than
similar provisions provided elsewhere in the West Des Moines zoning ordinance,
the provisions of this section shall control. The following land use design
criteria, development standards, and landscaping regulations shall apply to all
parcels within the Plaza At Jordan Creek specific plan area:
   A.   Land Use: All land uses as set forth in title 9, "Zoning", of the city
code for the regional commercial (RC) district as permitted and permitted
conditionally shall apply except as designated below:
      1.   Permitted Uses: Permitted uses shall include the following:
All permitted (P) uses allowed within the regional commercial (RC) district
except those that have been prohibited by this ordinance.
SIC 52 series - building materials, hardware, and garden supply stores shall be
allowed as a permitted use (P); except SIC 527 mobile home dealers.
All permitted conditional (Pc) uses allowed within the regional commercial (RC)
district except those that have been prohibited by this ordinance may be
allowed with the approval of the appropriate review body.
      2.   Prohibited Uses: The following permitted and permitted conditional
uses otherwise allowed in the regional commercial (RC) district shall be
prohibited:
SIC 0742 - Veterinary specialties.
SIC 0752 - Boarding services - kennels.
SIC 45 series - Transportation by air.
SIC 46 series - Pipelines.
SIC 47 series - Transportation services.
SIC 48 series - Communications.
SIC 49 series - Electric, gas and sanitary services.
SIC 541 - Convenience stores.
SIC 55 series - Automotive dealers and service stations.
SIC 5999 - Miscellaneous retail stores and adult entertainment establishments.
SIC 75 series - Automotive repair, services, and parking.
SIC 7699 - Repair shops and related services shall be prohibited, except the
following which shall be permitted (P):
Hobby and collectors services.
Leather goods and luggage repair services.
Lock and key services.
Musical instrument repair.
Photographic and optical goods equipment repair services.
Recreational sporting equipment repair services.
   B.   Lot Area: Multiple buildings separated by parking areas or drives and
lots less than sixty thousand (60,000) square feet in size may be considered
acceptable if supported by appropriate easements or a reciprocal easement
agreement; and if approved by the appropriate approval body as part of a site
plan, permitted conditional use permit, or plat.
   C.   Building Setback: Buildings shall be set back as follows unless
otherwise required by minimum building separation requirements within the
adopted building codes. The setback shall be measured from the perimeter PUD
boundary line to the primary wall of the structure.
      1.   North: Minimum of thirty feet (30').
      2.   East: Minimum of thirty feet (30').
      3.   South: Minimum eighty feet (80').
      4.   West: Minimum thirty feet (30').
      5.   No setback (0 feet) shall be required from an adjoining parcel which
is included within the overall boundaries of the Plaza At Jordan Creek specific
plan area except that no structure should be located closer than twenty five
feet (25') to the back of curb of the main east-west road between parcels A and
B.
   D.   Building Height: No part of any structure shall exceed sixty feet (60')
in height as measured from the average finished grade, except, an additional
twelve feet (12') of height shall be allowed for each additional ten feet (10')
of setback. (Ord. 1711, 10-23-2006)
   E.   Parking Ratios:
      1.   Restaurants (sit down and fast food) shall provide within the
respective lot or area immediately surrounding the proposed establishment, a
minimum of one parking space per two hundred (200) square feet of gross
leasable area (gla).
      2.   Hotels shall provide within the respective lot a minimum of one
space per guestroom.
      3.   A minimum of one space per three hundred (300) square feet of gross
leasable area (gla) shall be provided for nonresidential uses (3.3 per 1,000
square feet) with a maximum of one space per two hundred (200) square feet of
gross leasable area of nonresidential uses (5 per 1,000) shall be provided
within each lot.
      4.   At the discretion of the development planning and inspection
manager, a less stringent parking calculation may be used provided the
applicant can demonstrate a parking rate less than the above is adequate due to
the type of potential use, shared uses or off peak uses.
      5.   If not already established as a blanket easement, developers of
parcels must provide a cross access parking and ingress/egress easement. (Ord.
1981, 4-1-2013)
   F.   Parking Setbacks:
      1.   Off street parking areas shall be set back from the perimeter
boundaries of the Plaza At Jordan Creek development as follows:
         a.   North: Minimum fifteen foot (15') setback.
         b.   East: Minimum five foot (5') setback.
         c.   South: Minimum sixty foot (60') setback.
         d.   West: Minimum thirty foot (30') setback.
         e.   There shall be no minimum parking lot setback between internal
lot boundaries.
      2.   Parking stall measurements and drive aisle widths shall conform to
title 9, chapter 15 of the city code.
      3.   No portion of any parking lot or drive aisle associated with parking
may be located within a required buffer.
   G.   Vehicle Drive-Throughs: The intent of this development is not to
encourage the use of automobiles; however, it is recognized that drive-ups are
a key component to the functionality of certain types of businesses due to
their convenience. If, through the design review process, including an updated
traffic analysis, if necessary, it can be demonstrated that such uses do not
cause traffic congestion, do not interfere with pedestrian movements and can be
designed to minimize their presence, a maximum of three (3) businesses with
drive-ups may be permitted within the overall Plaza at Jordan Creek
development. Drive-up facilities may be allowed in conjunction with, but are
limited to, the following types of businesses: drugstore/pharmacy, bank, dry
cleaner, grocery, or restaurant. Walk-up or pedestrian ATMs with no vehicle
access and loading zones in which the patron exits their vehicle and loads the
merchandise/materials themselves shall be allowed as needed.
      1.   The incorporation of drive-up facilities may be limited by the type
of use in association with the available vehicle trips allowed for the entire
Plaza at Jordan Creek development.
      2.   In all instances, the presence of the drive-ups shall be minimized
through one (1) or a combination of the following methods:
         a.   Integration of the drive-through into the building architecture
in order to eliminate the appearance as an added on canopy component.
         b.   Situating the drive-through between two (2) buildings in order to
limit the number of views thereof.
         c.   Opaque visual screening through the use of earth berming to a
height of a minimum of six feet (6') combined with vegetation of a
predominately evergreen nature. (Ord. 1711, 10-23-2006)
   H.   Buffers: The provision of adequate buffering and landscaping shall be
more thoroughly evaluated and approved as part of the site plan approval.
Additional buffer and landscaping may be required at that time in response to
additional details of the use, buildings, parking, etc., to be implemented.
      1.   Buffering between districts or parcels and uses shall not be
required as set forth in title 9 of the City Code.
      2.   Buffers shall be provided along the perimeter boundaries of the
Plaza at Jordan Creek development as follows:
         a.   North: Fifteen feet (15') from property boundary line or solid
six foot (6') fence. The fifteen foot (15') buffer shall still be planted
according to the requirements of a thirty foot (30') buffer. The buffer or
fence will not be required in the event the abutting property owner to the
north provides a written covenant to waive the requirement. (Ord. 2209, 4-3-
2017)
         b.   East: None required.
         c.   South: Minimum fifty feet (50') from street right-of-way line of
Mills Civic Parkway; north line of the buffer shall be in alignment with the
north line of the buffer on the Costco site to the east.
         d.   West: Thirty feet (30') from street right-of-way line of South
Jordan Creek Parkway.
         e.   No buffers between internal parcels shall be required except to
mitigate undesirable elements and views.
      3.   The implementation of earth berming and vegetation is required as
part of buffering/screening except when implementing a fence. Buffers should be
designed to achieve the maximum amount of screening from the maximum number of
viewpoints with vegetation layered to ensure adequate blockage of views and to
create depth and a sense of naturalness. Care should be taken to ensure that
"through-views" under tree canopies are adequately blocked. (Ord. 1981, 4-1-
2013)
      4.   The minimum landscaping within required buffers shall be provided as
follows; however, berming and vegetation shall be implemented consistent in
quantity, type, and placement with that of the buffers located on the adjoining
Jordan Creek Town Center parcel in order to serve as a visual continuation of
those buffers and a unifying element between the two (2) parcels:
         a.   Thirty Foot Buffer:
            (1)   One (1) overstory tree, two (2) ornamental trees and six (6)
shrubs shall be provided per thirty five (35) linear feet of required buffer.
         b.   Fifty Foot Buffer:
            (1)   One overstory tree and three (3) shrubs shall be provided per
thirty five (35) linear feet of required buffer.
         c.   Vegetation Substitution:
            (1)   Two (2) ornamental trees, one evergreen tree, or six (6)
shrubs may be substituted for one required overstory tree; however, no more
than twenty five percent (25%) of the required number of overstory trees may be
substituted.
            (2)   A twenty five (25) square foot mass planting of perennials or
ornamental grasses may be substituted for three (3) shrubs.
         d.   Landscape Vegetation: Landscape vegetation required within buffer
areas is in addition to the landscape vegetation required of open space and
parking areas.
      5.   Ponds, lakes, wetlands, or other water features may be placed within
the buffer area given the following:
         a.   Such water features constantly contain water at a level visible
from adjoining properties and public streets;
         b.   Pond edge treatments are incorporated to enhance the
attractiveness of the element (no "wild overgrown pond edge" allowed); and
         c.   The appropriate water circulation and clarification measures are
implemented.
   I.   Landscaping: The landscaping requirements specified herein are intended
to create an aesthetically pleasing development which enhances the appearance
and character of the city of West Des Moines, while protecting the general
health, safety and welfare of the citizens. Landscaping is required to address
the following primary aspects or consequences of development:
•   Open space protection and enhancement,
•   Mitigation of paving expanses associated with off street parking,
•   Visual screening of undesirable views, activities and/or site elements, and
•   Street side enhancement ("streetscapes").
The specific plan map on file in the city illustrates the general landscaping
concept; this plan should be used as the guide for site plan development in
respect to the general locations of plant material to be provided. Additional
vegetation may be required in response to additional details of the use,
buildings, parking, etc., to be implemented. Details regarding specific
varieties, exact quantities, and the minimum size at time of planting shall be
provided and approved as part of the site plan submittal and shall meet the
general guidelines in respect to the minimum plant size traditionally applied
to development within the city. In the event that alternatives to what is shown
on the specific plan on file in the city are desired, the minimum vegetation
requirements specified within this ordinance will need to be provided and the
original intent of the required vegetation met.
      1.   Open Space: The intent of open space is to allow for a balance
between natural areas and the built environment and to provide for the overall
beautification and "greening" of the city.
         a.   A minimum of twenty percent (20%) open space shall be provided
within each parcel as identified on the specific plan map.
         b.   Open space shall be considered all areas unencumbered by
buildings or paved areas associated with parking, drive aisles, and loading
zones. Plaza areas, water features and structures such as gazebos, arbors,
pergolas, etc., that are associated with outdoor pedestrian use areas, as well
as designated and enhanced pedestrian walkways through and between parcels may
be counted towards fulfilling the minimum open space requirement.
         c.   Vegetation at a rate of two (2) trees and three (3) shrubs per
three thousand (3,000) square feet of required open space shall be provided
within the parcel.
            (1)   Minimum Size: Ten percent (10%) of all required trees shall
be a minimum of three (3) to three and one-half inch (31/2") caliper. Forty
percent (40%) of all required trees shall be a minimum of two (2) to two and
one-half inch (21/2") caliper. The balance of all required trees shall be one
and one-half inch (11/2") caliper. The minimum height for evergreens shall be
six feet (6') and may be counted as two (2) to two and one-half inch (21/2")
caliper.
            (2)   Vegetation Substitution:
   (A) One evergreen tree or six (6) shrubs may be substituted for one required
tree; however, no more than twenty five percent (25%) of the required number of
trees may be substituted.
   (B) A twenty five (25) square foot mass planting of perennials or ornamental
grasses may be substituted for three (3) shrubs.
         d.   Vegetation required as part of the open space may be placed into
off street parking areas or required buffers; however the open space vegetation
is in addition to that which would be required of buffers or parking islands/
pods and may not be counted towards fulfilling the minimum amount of vegetation
required for these areas.
      2.   Off Street Parking Areas:
         a.   All off street parking areas shall be landscaped to screen their
visibility from street rights of way and adjoining property outside of Plaza At
Jordan Creek development.
         b.   All off street parking areas shall be aesthetically improved to
reduce obtrusive characteristics that are inherent to their function. Multiple
landscape islands combined with vegetation shall be incorporated to effectively
eliminate a "sea of asphalt/concrete" and to provide shade thus decreasing heat
reflection back into the environment. Landscape islands and/or pods shall be
implemented in accordance with the following: (Ord. 1711, 10-23-2006)
            (1)   Islands or open areas shall be located at the terminus end of
all parking rows. Terminal islands shall measure at least ten feet (10') in
width and shall match, at a minimum, the stall length unless otherwise allowed
per the discretion of the development planning and inspection manager. (Ord.
1711, 10-23-2006; amd. Ord. 1981, 4-1-2013)
            (2)   Linear parking islands that run the length of the parking row
shall be implemented every six (6) rows or as otherwise shown on the specific
plan map. Said linear islands shall measure a minimum of eight feet (8') in
width and shall be heavily landscaped to provide a mass of "green" within the
parking lot. The incorporation of defined pedestrian pathways within these
linear islands is encouraged.
            (3)   Linear parking rows with greater than twelve (12) parking
stalls shall incorporate a landscape island or pod every six (6) stalls.
   (A) Islands shall measure a minimum of nine feet (9') in width and shall
match, at a minimum the stall length.
   (B) Pods shall measure a minimum of six feet (6') from the back of curb to
back of curb.
            (4)   For every twelve (12) parking stalls, one tree and two (2)
shrubs or a twenty (20) square foot massing of perennials or ornamental grasses
shall be located within the islands or pods within the parking area.
      3.   Visual Screening:
         a.   Mechanical Equipment:
            (1)   Views from public streets and adjoining property of the
negative aspects of development and land uses such as loading docks; heating,
ventilation, or air conditioning (HVAC) units; or similar electrical or
mechanical appurtenances shall be adequately screened. Said screening shall be
achieved through the use of architectural features or earth berming and
landscaping consisting of predominately evergreen material.
            (2)   All rooftop mechanical units shall be screened from views
from public streets and adjoining properties by the use of an opaque screening
material compatible with the architecture of the building or architecturally
designed screen walls, parapet walls, penthouse, or other opaque material
comprised of materials consistent with the associated primary structure.
Screening measures and materials shall be identified as part of the site plan
review process.
         b.   Trash Enclosures: Trash receptacles and dumpsters shall be
screened on all sides by the use of a permanent enclosure. Whenever possible,
the enclosure should be designed as an attached extension to the primary
structure rather than a freestanding structure and constructed on materials
consistent with the primary structure. Additionally, the enclosure should be
landscaped to minimize the visual presence and impact of the structure on
surrounding properties, businesses, and public streets.
         c.   Outdoor Storage: Unless otherwise allowed through the issuance of
a temporary use permit under the provisions of title 9, chapter 16, "Temporary
Use Permits", of the city code, all merchandise and material display and
storage shall be located within an enclosed permanent structure with opaque
screening. The placement of material and merchandise outdoors shall be limited
to that necessary during the unloading of delivery trucks and subsequent
movement of the deliveries into a designated enclosed storage area. This
"delivery time outdoor storage" shall not exceed three (3) consecutive hours in
length. All long term (3 plus hours) "open air" outside storage of merchandise
and materials shall be prohibited, including the placement of merchandise and
materials which is visible above the height of a proposed screen wall. (Ord.
1711, 10-23-2006)
         d.   Loading Docks/Service Areas: Views from public streets and
adjoining property of loading docks and service areas shall be adequately
screened. Said screening shall be achieved through the use of opaque fencing
and/or landscaping. (Ord. 1981, 4-1-2013)
      4.   Streetscaping: A landscaped edge or "streetscape" shall be provided
along all public and private streets and primary access drives which are not
required to provide a buffer. These streetscapes are intended to provide
desired green to the city, interest, comfort to pedestrians, visual softening
of pavement expanses, bring human scale to adjoining buildings, minimize heat
reflection, and provide traffic calming benefits. The streetscape should have a
noticeable pattern, design, or plant variety and should attempt to serve as a
distinguishing or identifiable landmark for the development.
         a.   Streetscaping shall be located within the first fifteen feet
(15') parallel and adjacent to private streets or primary access drives.
         b.   Vegetation within streetscape areas shall be provided at a rate
of one tree and three (3) shrubs per thirty five (35) linear feet of street or
primary access drive.
            (1)   A twenty five (25) square foot mass planting of perennials or
ornamental grasses may be substituted for three (3) shrubs.
   J.   Pedestrian Elements: The Plaza At Jordan Creek, in alignment with "Town
Center District Overlay Guidelines", aims to encourage pedestrian movement and
opportunities for pedestrian interaction through a series of interconnected
sidewalks and gathering areas. The specific plan map on file in the city
indicates the locations and type of anticipated plaza areas and pedestrian
corridors. Details for each of these plaza areas shall be submitted, reviewed,
and approved as part of the site plan for the adjoining parcel.
      1.   Usable Open Space: All parcels within the Plaza At Jordan Creek
development shall provide usable open space or activity spaces through the
integration of plazas, green spaces, interconnected and enhanced pedestrian
corridors and focal point elements.
         a.   These areas shall encourage opportunities for interaction among
pedestrians through the provision of seating opportunities (benches, chairs,
tables, planter walls, etc.). Without compromising the design intent of the
plazas, the developer is encouraged to maximize the number of furniture/seating
opportunities throughout the development. Representations of the site
amenities, including street furniture that will be provided throughout this
development are included in the exhibit packet (on file with the city clerk).
Although deviations from the illustrations are permissible, the street
furniture is intended to serve as a unifying element throughout the
development.
         b.   Open space plazas areas shall incorporate a variety of hardscape
landscape materials (stone pavers, stamped concrete, field boulders, etc.) for
visual interest and variety and shall implement landscape vegetation to soften,
enhance, and delineate the areas. All plaza/pedestrian areas are required to
incorporate "green" through the incorporation of planter beds, containers, or
raised planters. Whenever possible, elements that enrich the space (i.e.,
gazebos, art, fountains, banners, and children's play environment, etc.) should
be incorporated.
         c.   Appropriate lighting should be incorporated into the plaza areas
for safety reasons and to extend the usability of the area into the evening
hours.
         d.   Plaza areas associated with establishments which serve alcoholic
beverages shall provide a definable boundary (change in material, unmovable
signage, physical feature, etc.) between the private establishments in which
alcohol consumption is allowed and the public area in which it is not. A
physical barrier (fencing, railing, landscaping, etc.) should prohibit access
into the patio area from the public area; all access into the patio area should
be through the interior of the establishment. The barrier specifications shall
be reviewed and approved as part of the alcohol permit application.
         e.   Unless otherwise specified, the installation of these pedestrian
elements shall be by the developer of Plaza At Jordan Creek in conjunction with
or before the development of the adjoining building or area.
      2.   Pedestrian Connections: The overall development shall integrate
interconnected pedestrian walkways to allow and encourage pedestrian movement
from one establishment to another within the Plaza At Jordan Creek development,
as well as to the adjoining Jordan Creek Town Center mall development and other
surrounding developments. Multiple connections shall be provided from internal
pedestrian pathways to the public trail located along the eastern side of South
Jordan Creek Parkway.
         a.   Pedestrian pathways internal to the development and across
parking areas and drive aisles shall be constructed with contrasting color and
pavement patterns to the adjoining paving in order to provide a definable and
highly visible crosswalk.
   K.   Lighting:
      1.   Fixtures used within off street parking areas shall be consistent
with those illustrated in the exhibits packet (on file with the city clerk).
Although deviations from the illustrations are permissible, the fixtures are
intended to serve as a unifying element between parcels within the development.
      2.   Said fixtures shall not exceed twenty five feet (25') in height as
measured from the ground to the top of the light structure.
      3.   No wall packs or floodlighting are allowed. In addition to cutoff
fixtures, particular attention shall be given to eliminate hot spots and light
glare. To achieve this, additional measures may include, but are not limited
to, lowering parking lot light levels after business hours, turning off lights
not necessary for security purposes, and use of landscaping for light
screening/blockage.
      4.   As a part of the review of each site plan, a photometric plan must
be submitted. During the review, the applicant must demonstrate how lighting
will not adversely affect adjoining properties. (Ord. 1711, 10-23-2006)
   L.   Cart Corrals: Cart corrals shall be permanent fixtures and constructed
with masonry, stone, or block. Design and materials of cart corrals shall be
consistent throughout the development. No tenant or product identification
signage for advertising purposes may be located on the cart corrals. (Ord.
1981, 4-1-2013)
082-06: ARCHITECTURE:
The architectural design of any building within this development shall be
acceptable to the city. The architecture shall attempt to express a creative
presentation of exterior building materials, exterior details and texture,
treatment of windows and doors, and use of angles and multiplicity of planes
within the wall and roof design to lessen the plainness of appearance which can
be characteristic of large commercial buildings. Building design, materials,
and colors shall provide continuity amongst buildings to unite all structures
within the development into one project concept. All sides to each building
shall receive high quality materials, finishes, and details (360 degree
architectural treatment). There are no "backs" to a building. Materials should
be durable, economically maintained and of a quality that will maintain their
appearance over a prolonged time. (Ord. 1711, 10-23-2006)
It is anticipated that a strong architectural style or theme will be created
between the buildings located north of parcel X and a more limited connection
with the larger building located in parcel A. A visual connection will need to
be created between all buildings within the development through the use of
complementary architectural components, details, materials, and colors.
On file with the city are conceptual architectural illustrations which identify
architectural elements and materials to be implemented on buildings within the
development. (Ord. 1981, 4-1-2013)
   A.   All buildings within this development shall accommodate or incorporate
the following in building design and materials:
      1.   Corporate architecture shall be prohibited.
      2.   Buildings shall be organized to create a logical and identifiable
relationship with the site and other buildings, open spaces, pedestrian
circulation paths.
      3.   The use of building articulation which breaks up the building mass
into modules that reflects proportions similar to other buildings within the
development.
      4.   The building's design should meet context and site objectives such
as providing gateways, creating visual and physical linkages and framing or
terminating views.
      5.   Variation in building height, mass and roof forms shall be provided
while still maintaining an overall building continuity. Roofs should not be
designed as attention getting devices related to the reinforcement of signage
or as an identifiable corporate image.
      6.   Variation in horizontal planes through the use of materials, color
and projecting forms should be implemented to signify an entry, create
protection for the pedestrian, and creates interest.
      7.   Shifts in building planes/facades and variation in exterior
materials shall be incorporated to minimize long expanses of wall.
      8.   Ground floor tenant areas should provide the maximum possible
glazing toward sidewalks to provide pedestrians with visual interest.
      9.   The use of brick, stone, architectural concrete or masonry
acceptable to the city shall be incorporated. The use of EIFS or synthetic
stucco shall be used in moderation and primarily used as an accent or trim
material.
      10.   Variation in materials, material modules, expressed joints,
textures, colors and details should be used to break up the mass of the
buildings. (Ord. 1711, 10-23-2006)
082-07: SIGNAGE:
All proposed exterior signage requires the review and approval of a sign permit
by the city of West Des Moines. Signage shall abide by the standards and
regulations as set forth in title 9, chapter 18, "Signs", of the city code for
the regional commercial (RC) district with the following exceptions:
   A.   Ground Monument Signs:
      1.   Development Identification:
         a.   A maximum of two (2) ground monument "development identification"
signs shall be allowed.
         b.   The sign structure shall not exceed ten feet (10') in height and
one hundred twenty five feet (125') in overall size. The copy portion of said
sign shall not exceed thirty (30) square feet in size. The name of the
development shall be the predominate copy on the sign. No more than one tenant
name shall be allowed on the sign with said tenant copy consisting of less than
fifty percent (50%) of the allowable sign copy area.
         c.   Design of the sign shall incorporate architectural elements that
are consistent with the architectural theme of the development such as brick,
stone, medallions, trim elements, etc.
         d.   Cabinet signs which illuminate the background of the copy (panel
signs) shall be prohibited. Copy shall be designed as individual letters which
may be channel letters, routed face with push through letters, reverse channel,
halo lit or an acceptable design approved by the sign and zoning administrator.
         e.   Said signs shall be set back a minimum of twenty feet (20') from
ultimate right of way lines (south and west) and fifteen feet (15') from the
east and north property boundary. Sign shall not obstruct vehicular or
pedestrian visibility at intersections.
         f.   Development identification signs shall be required to incorporate
landscaping at the base of the sign. No additional mounding of soil or berming
shall be allowed to elevate the sign except as required as part of a site plan
for visual screening purposes.
      2.   Business Identification: These signs are intended to provide for
signage along South Jordan Creek Parkway even though the tenants may not be
located directly adjacent to the public street. These ground monument signs
shall be designed to identify the names of multiple businesses located within
the development.
         a.   There shall be a maximum of two (2) "business identification"
signs located along the Jordan Creek Parkway frontage. Said signs shall be
spaced a minimum of one hundred fifty feet (150') from development
identification signs and other business identification signs. Two (2)
additional business identification signs shall be allowed along the east side
of the development at the driveway connections to the Jordan Creek Town Center
property.
         b.   The sign structure shall be allowed a maximum height of eleven
feet (11'); however the top one foot (1') shall be utilized as a decorative
top, incorporating design elements of the development to unify the signs within
the development. No tenant identification shall be placed more than ten feet
(10') above the ground. The design of the sign structure shall incorporate
shorter elements, such as columns of lower elements along the street side of
the sign to present a more human scale along the street. The maximum height of
the front edge of the sign adjacent to the street shall not exceed six feet
(6') in height.
         c.   The maximum copy area of the sign shall not exceed forty five
(45) square feet. A single tenant may be identified on no more than two (2)
different business identification signs.
         d.   Said signs shall be set back a minimum of twenty feet (20') from
the ultimate street right of way lines (south and west) and fifteen feet (15')
from the east and north property boundary. Signs shall not obstruct vehicular
or pedestrian visibility at intersections.
         e.   Cabinet signs which illuminate the background of the copy (panel
signs) shall be prohibited. Copy shall be designed as individual letters which
may be channel letters, routed face with push through letters, reverse channel,
halo lit or an acceptable design approved by the sign and zoning administrator.
         f.   No additional mounding of soil or berming shall be allowed to
elevate the sign except as required as part of a site plan for visual screening
purposes.
      3.   Directional Signs: A maximum of two (2) directional signs may be
allowed interior to the development to assist in directing patrons through the
development. The intent of directional signage is not to draw people off of the
public street, so letter size and sign location shall be designed to minimize
visibility and readability from the exterior of the property.
         a.   Said signs shall be a maximum of eight feet (8') in height with a
maximum sign area, including the structure of forty (40) square feet.
         b.   Design of the sign shall incorporate architectural elements that
are consistent with the architectural theme of the development such as brick,
stone, medallions, trim elements, etc.
         c.   Signs shall not obstruct vehicle or pedestrian visibility at
intersections.
   B.   Wall Signage:
      1.   All wall signage shall consist of individual three-dimensional
letters attached directly to the building. No cabinet or panel signs shall be
allowed except for contoured cabinet signs necessary to display logos. In the
event cabinet signs are implemented, every measure possible shall be
implemented to minimize the amount of illuminated background.
      2.   Signage for single-tenant buildings may be located on any wall
facade. Signage for tenants within a multi-tenant building shall be located
immediately adjacent to and above the tenant space. If a tenant has adequate
allowable square footage of wall signage, a secondary sign may be located along
the east facade of the buildings within parcels B and C.
      3.   Wall signage located above a roof element shall be allowed at the
discretion of the development planning and inspection manager provided that the
signage is located on a flat wall. Any illumination of a sign located above
roof elements shall be by reverse lighting to project the light back toward the
wall to create a "halo" effect; no front illumination is allowed. The
individual letters shall have returns to screen the lighting source and shall
be placed so the space between the wall plane and back of the letter is no
greater than two inches (2").
      4.   Total wall signage allowed per building or tenant shall be
calculated as per city code.
   C.   Fiber Optic Signs:   LED, neon or fiber optic signs may be permitted at
the discretion of the development planning and inspection manager. No moving or
blinking lights shall be allowed.
   D.   Plaza At Jordan Creek Identification Markers: Signage, medallions,
keystones, banners, pavement markings, etc., that displays the development's
logo, initials, or name may be integrated into the development to further
enhance the character of the development. Any illumination of these plaza
identification markers shall be exterior or halo lit. No tenant identification
is allowed as part of Plaza At Jordan Creek identification markers. Regulations
for said markers shall not be interpreted to prevent freestanding ground signs
as allowed elsewhere within this ordinance. (Ord. 1981, 4-1-2013)
082-08: VEHICLE TRIP ALLOCATION:
Per the traffic analysis completed by Snyder & Associates (2006), the Plaza At
Jordan Creek has been allocated nineteen thousand seven hundred five (19,705)
average daily trips (ADT); two thousand one hundred eighty (2,180) A.M. peak;
and one thousand nine hundred twenty one (1,921) P.M. peak vehicle trips. As
development proposals are approved the number of vehicle trips generated by the
proposed development (based upon the number of square feet of a proposed
specific use or number of dwelling units, in conjunction with any parameters
established in the traffic analysis) will be subtracted from the overall total
trips allocated to the development. Approval of this proposed specific plan
does not constitute a guarantee that the proposed plan can be implemented.
Development of all parcels and implementation of desired land uses, including
specific high traffic generating tenants, will be limited by the available
number of trips. Should anticipated traffic exceed the total trips allocated
for the Plaza At Jordan Creek development prior to full build-out, further
development of parcels may be limited or prohibited. Alternate uses to those
planned for within the traffic analysis and approved as part of Plaza At Jordan
Creek specific plan ordinance may be allowed, following completion of an
amendment to the approved traffic study analyzing the proposed alternative and
appropriate city approval of an amendment to the respective specific plan
ordinance and/or map, if necessary, if the existing uses and the proposed
change(s) collectively do not exceed the nineteen thousand seven hundred five
(19,705) average daily trips (ADT); two thousand one hundred eighty (2,180)
A.M. peak; and one thousand nine hundred twenty one (1,921) P.M. peak trips.
(Ord. 1711, 10-23-2006)
082-09: FUTURE DRIVE CONNECTIONS:
The developer of the Plaza At Jordan Creek specific plan area shall illustrate
as part of said plan the location and details of potential future access drive
connections to the adjoining Jordan Creek Town Center property. Private
ingress/egress easements for a future access connection drive shall be
established by the developer of the property included within the Plaza At
Jordan Creek specific plan at the time of recordation of the final plat. (Ord.
1711, 10-23-2006)
082-10: STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN:
A master stormwater management plan for the entire development which governs
the overall stormwater management of the development shall be submitted to and
approved by the city of West Des Moines. Specific stormwater management plans
demonstrating compliance with the approved Plaza At Jordan Creek master
stormwater management plan, on file with the city's public works department,
will be required with the development of each site plan. The specific
stormwater plans shall be prepared at the developer's expense, by a
professional engineer licensed in the state of Iowa. All specific stormwater
management plans shall comply with the city's applicable design standards for
stormwater management existing at the time each development (site plan) is
approved. (Ord. 1711, 10-23-2006)
082-11: UTILITIES:
The developer, its successors or assigns, if any, shall construct at its cost,
and if for general public use, dedicate to the city all sanitary sewer mains,
water mains, and storm sewers associated with the Plaza At Jordan Creek as
required by the city of West Des Moines' subdivision ordinance in accordance
with applicable city design standards. All necessary easements to allow city
access to public utilities for maintenance and repair purposes shall be
executed prior to approval and recordation of the final plat for each
respective area or shall be executed as a blanket access agreement prior to the
approval and recordation of the first final plat. Unless otherwise specified
within a specific easement document, the city shall not be responsible for
reimbursement, restoration and/or replacement of any improvements located
within the public easements should the city be required to excavate the public
utilities for normal city operations.
The placement of public utility easements within buffer parks is discouraged
due to the potential conflict between trees and the need to access the lines
for repair. Overstory and understory trees should be placed off utility lines a
minimum distance equal to the one to one (1:1) excavation trench necessary for
the deepest utility. Adequate access for maintenance vehicles shall be provided
into and through the easement areas. (Ord. 1711, 10-23-2006)
082-12: FIRE ACCESS:
   A.   All internal drive aisles and parking lots shall permit the travel of
the fire department's largest vehicle, including adequate accommodation of the
vehicle's turning needs. Approval of unique design solutions to accommodate
fire access may be granted by the city council, if the solutions proposed are
recommended by the West Des Moines fire department.
   B.   At the discretion of the city's fire marshal, "no parking fire lane"
areas may be established as necessary to ensure efficient movement and access
of the firetrucks. The developer of specific lots on which the fire lanes are
located shall be responsible for the procurement and erection of approved fire
lane signage.
   C.   All access drives and drive aisles shall maintain a minimum of twenty
feet (20') of clear pavement.
   D.   A minimum of fourteen feet (14') of vertical clearance over the travel
portion shall be maintained at all times over all vehicle travelways.
   E.   The developer or its designee shall be responsible for enforcement of
no parking lanes and maintaining adequate clearance of structures and
vegetation along and above all vehicle travelways regardless if public or
private. (Ord. 1711, 10-23-2006)
082-13: PUBLIC STREETLIGHTS:
At the time of final platting, the developer shall enter into an agreement with
Mid American Energy for the installation of public streetlights along all
public streets within and abutting the specific plan area. Surety to ensure
installation of the public streetlights shall be provided to the City prior to
approval and recordation of the first final plat. Installation of public
streetlights shall occur in conjunction with construction of the adjoining
parcel. (Ord. 1711, 10-23-2006)
082-14: INGRESS/EGRESS AND SHARED PARKING AGREEMENT:
A public access easement or easements in favor of the City of West Des Moines
allowing unrestricted public access over and through the land within the
specific plan area shall be executed prior to the approval and recordation of
the first final plat and in conjunction with the approval and recordation of
any future plat(s). (Ord. 1711, 10-23-2006)
082-15: PUBLIC STREET IMPROVEMENTS AND TRAFFIC SIGNALS:
An agreement and waiver for improvements and modifications to adjoining public
roads, including the installation of traffic signals, as identified within the
traffic study shall be executed by the developer prior to approval and
recordation of the first final plat. Dedication of permanent right-of-way to
accommodate the placement of future signal poles and controller boxes shall be
provided as necessary. In addition, adequate easements to accommodate detector
loops and interconnect cabling shall be provided as necessary. Temporary right-
of-way required during the construction/installation shall be provided as
necessary. (Ord. 1711, 10-23-2006)
082-16: VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES:
Any person who violates the provisions of this ordinance upon conviction shall
be punished as set forth in section 1-4-1 of the City Code. (Ord. 1711, 10-23-
2006)
082-99: LEGISLATIVE HISTORY:
Ord. 1711, 10-23-2006; Ord. 1786, 11-19-2007; Ord. 1981, 4-1-2013; Ord. 2209,
4-3-2017.
PUD #83
JORDAN CREEK BUSINESS PARK
SECTION:
083-01: Legal Description
083-02: Required Plans
083-03: Conditions
083-04: Land Use
083-05: Requirements
083-06: Architecture
083-07: Signage
083-08: Vehicle Trip Allocation
083-09: Storm Water Management Plan
083-10: Utilities
083-11: Fire Access
083-12: Public Streetlights
083-13: Ingress/Egress
083-14: Public Street Improvements And Traffic Signals
083-15: Violations And Penalties
083-99: Legislative History
083-01: LEGAL DESCRIPTION:
Lots 1 through 8 and Outlot Z, Jordan Creek Business Park, an official Plat in
the City of West Des Moines, Dallas County, Iowa. (Ord. 1712, 10-23-2006; amd.
Ord. 2490, 9-20-2021)
083-02: REQUIRED PLANS:
The following plans shall be required as a part of the processing of any
development application for any property within the Jordan Creek Business Park
specific plan:
   A.   Area Development Plan: An area development plan is a plan that
identifies planning units, major street patterns, master storm water drainage
and detention concepts, utilities, shared public spaces, land use assumptions
and proposed densities. It is intended to be a tool used to promote the
communication and cooperation between adjacent property owners and developers
to ensure cohesive and unified development.
An area development plan shall be reviewed by the plan and zoning commission
and approved by the city council prior to, or in conjunction with, the review
of the specific plan for any property within said specific plan area. No change
to the area development plan shall be made without approval of an amended plan
from the appropriate reviewing bodies.
On file in the city (exhibit A) is the city council approved area development
plan for this property.
   B.   Specific Plan: A specific plan identifies detailed development criteria
for each planning unit indicated on the area development plan or more
specifically delineated on the specific plan map. The specific plan shall
conform to the general development intent identified in the approved area
development plan, as well as the "Town Center District Overlay Guidelines". The
specific plan shall be reviewed by the plan and zoning commission and adopted
by the city council by ordinance.
This document shall constitute the specific plan ordinance for Jordan Creek
Business Park. On file in the city and made a part of this ordinance is a
specific plan map that defines the planning units further discussed in this
ordinance and illustrates the overall site layout concept for Jordan Creek
Business Park (exhibits B and C). This document and the associated exhibits (on
file with the city clerk) are intended to specify the components, parameters,
and requirements to be adhered to and implemented in order to ensure the
realization of Jordan Creek Business Park development concept. It is recognized
that modifications and changes in building footprints and layout, including the
combining of two (2) smaller buildings into one larger building, may be
necessary in response to market demands and specific tenants. Additionally, it
is recognized that square footages of buildings may either be shifted from one
building to another or increased to accommodate specific users' needs. These
square footage changes and/or increases may be allowed with the appropriate
city approvals if the shift does not have a negative impact on the traffic
patterns for the building/area and the total number of vehicle trips does not
exceed that which has been allocated to the overall Jordan Creek Business Park
development. At the discretion of the director of community development,
changes to the layout of the development that are deemed to be "major" changes
shall require an amendment to the specific plan map and/or ordinance, whichever
is applicable. Major amendments shall require the review and approval of the
plan and zoning commission and city council.
Where the specific plan map and specific plan ordinance conflict, the specific
plan ordinance shall prevail.
   C.   Development Applications (Overlay District Site Plans): Site plans for
all buildings within Jordan Creek Business Park must meet the intent of the
approved specific plan. Site plans shall be submitted to the city of West Des
Moines for review and approval prior to the development of that portion of the
site. Site plans for permitted uses which comply (as determined by the director
of community development) with the design intent as set forth in this specific
plan will be subject to administrative review and approval by the director of
community development. A one week review and comment period by each and all
available members of the plan and zoning commission and city council shall
precede the administrative approval. If upon review, two (2) or more members of
the city council, plan and zoning commission, or a combination thereof request
such; or if the director of community development deems the proposed site plan
is not in compliance with the approved specific plan or is potentially
controversial, the site plan will be processed through the traditional full
site plan review and approval process. Site plans for permitted conditional
uses (PC) as defined in the city code, unless otherwise amended within this
ordinance, shall be approved by the appropriate review body. At the discretion
of the director of community development, an amendment to Jordan Creek Business
Park specific plan ordinance may be required to bring consistency between the
ordinance and site plan development proposed.
   D.   Preliminary And Final Platting: Prior to or in conjunction with any
site plan submittal for proposed development; or prior to legal ownership
change of any land within Jordan Creek Business Park, said area shall be
preliminary and final platted, in accordance with the city's subdivision
ordinance, to delineate the parcel to be developed or sold. Lots without public
street frontage, in accordance with the city code requirements, may be allowed
provided the frontage requirements of the code have been met by an abutting or
surrounding lot which is under common ownership under an owners' association,
or a cross parking and access easement has been executed which provides for the
unrestricted use and access of the drives and parking. Outlots are not
buildable.
Unless otherwise specifically restricted by city council action, ground work
and construction of private roads and utilities may be started, at the
developer's risk, upon approval of the preliminary plat by the city council.
Public street and utility construction may begin, at the risk of the developer,
after approval of the preliminary plat by the city council and construction
improvement plans by the city of West Des Moines.
Prior to approval of the final plat, unless otherwise allowed by council, the
developer of the Jordan Creek Business Park shall provide the appropriate
agreements, easements, and sureties for all public rights of way and other
public improvements (utilities, sidewalks, streetlights, etc.) within and
associated with the development.
A final plat applicable to each proposed development area must be approved and
recorded with the Dallas County recorder's office prior to issuance of any
building permit, including footing and foundation permits, for construction of
any structure within the area proposed for development. (Ord. 1712, 10-23-2006)
083-03: CONDITIONS:
Whereas, title 9, chapter 9, "Planned Unit Development District", of the city
code establishes certain regulations and guidelines pertaining to accompanying
information required on plat and site plan documents. Now, therefore, the
following conditions, restrictions, and regulations are adopted as part of this
approval, to wit:
In addition to the specific plan map, the following general development
criteria shall be integrated into and made a part of this planned unit
development (PUD):
   A.   General Conformance To Subdivision Ordinance: All subdivisions, public
streets, public street rights of way, and general development shall adhere to
the standards and design criteria set forth in the West Des Moines subdivision
ordinances and the most current design standards adopted by the city of West
Des Moines pertaining thereto unless otherwise stated within this ordinance.
   B.   General Conformance To Zoning Ordinance: Unless otherwise specified
herein, the development of the Jordan Creek Business Park specific plan shall
comply with title 9, "Zoning", of the city code or any other applicable codes.
   C.   Flood Hazard: In all areas within a 100-year frequency flood hazard
zone, or adjoining drainageways, and detention ponding areas involving
potential flood hazards, no building shall be erected that has a lowest floor,
including basements, less than one foot (1') above the determining level of the
100-year frequency flood event, and no building shall be located within twenty
five feet (25') of any easement or property boundary of a major drainageway,
storm water detention basin, or pond, unless said location is approved as part
of a development entitlement by the city council and said building is
structurally designed accordingly.
   D.   Developer Responsibilities: Unless otherwise specifically approved by
the city council, the developer, its successors and/or assigns, if any, shall
pay all planning, engineering, and construction costs for the development of
the planned unit development as required by this ordinance, and shall pay all
costs related to approved site plans, which may include, but is not limited to,
the cost of all streets, storm sewers, sanitary sewers, water mains and service
lines, drainageway improvements, detention basins, buffers, and other
improvements as required. No occupancy permits, either temporary or permanent,
shall be issued until all necessary improvements applicable to the area/lot or
structure requesting occupancy are installed and accepted by the city of West
Des Moines. Nothing in this ordinance shall be construed to prevent the
developer, its successors and/or assigns, if any, from entering into private
agreement(s) as it/they may desire to share the cost of improvements. (Ord.
1712, 10-23-2006)
083-04: LAND USE:
Unless provided otherwise in this ordinance, all general use regulations and
provisions set forth in title 9, "Zoning", of the city code for the specified
zoning district shall apply to development within the designated parcel within
the Jordan Creek Business Park specific plan area (in addition to the
regulations found in subsection
083-05G, "Vehicle Drive-Throughs", of this ordinance).
   A.   Parcel A: Parcel A shall include only Lot 1 as defined on the Jordan
Creek Business Park final plat recorded in Book 2007, Page 11985, Dallas
County, Iowa.
      1.   Land Use: All land uses as set forth in title 9, "Zoning", of the
city code for the regional commercial (RC) district as permitted and permitted
conditionally shall apply except as indicated below:
         a.   Permitted Uses: Permitted uses shall include the following:
            (1)   All permitted (P) uses allowed within the regional commercial
(RC) district except those otherwise adjusted or prohibited by this ordinance:
   (A) SIC 701 - Hotels and motels shall be considered a permitted conditional
use (PC) requiring the appropriate city approvals.
            (2)   All permitted conditional (PC) uses allowed within the
regional commercial (RC) district except those that have been prohibited by
this ordinance may be allowed with the approval of the appropriate review body.
         b.   Prohibited Uses: The following permitted and permitted
conditional uses otherwise allowed in the regional commercial (RC) district
shall be prohibited:
SIC 0752 - Boarding services with kennels.
SIC 45 series - Transportation by air.
SIC 46 series - Pipelines.
SIC 49 series - Electric, gas and sanitary services.
SIC 55 series - Automotive dealers and service stations (including gas stations
and convenience stores).
SIC 593 - Used merchandise stores and used buildings materials.
SIC 5999 - Adult entertainment establishments.
SIC 7211 - Power laundries, family and commercial.
SIC 726 - Crematories.
SIC 75 series - Automotive repair, services, and parking.
SIC 7699 - Repair shops and related services shall be prohibited, except the
following which shall be permitted (P):
Hobby and collectors services.
Leather goods and luggage repair services.
Lock and key services.
Musical instrument repair.
Photographic and optical goods equipment repair services.
Recreational sporting equipment repair services.
   B.   Parcel B: Parcel B shall include Lots 2, 3 and 4, as defined on the
Jordan Creek Business Park final plat recorded in Book 2007, Page 11985, Dallas
County, Iowa.
      1.   Land Use: All land uses as set forth in title 9, "Zoning", of the
City Code for the Professional Commerce Park (PCP) District as permitted and
permitted conditionally shall apply except as indicated below:
         a.   Permitted Uses: Permitted uses shall include the following:
            (1)   All permitted (P) uses allowed within the Professional
Commerce Park (PCP) District except those otherwise adjusted or prohibited by
this ordinance:
   (A) SIC 484 - Wall mounted antennas and/or dishes shall be considered a
permitted conditional use (Pc) requiring the appropriate City approvals.
            (2)   All permitted conditional (Pc) uses allowed within the
Professional Commerce Park (PCP) District except those otherwise adjusted or
prohibited by this ordinance may be allowed with the approval of the
appropriate review body:
   (A) SIC 5812 series - Eating places shall be considered a permitted use (P).
(Ord. 2271, 1-22-2018)
         b.   Prohibited Uses: The following permitted and permitted
conditional uses otherwise allowed in the Professional Commerce Park (PCP)
District shall be prohibited:
SIC 42 series - Trucking and warehousing, except a maximum of one SIC 4225,
self-service storage facility - interior unit access with no outside storage
yard, shall be permitted within the Jordan Creek Business Park development
area. Reuse of all or part of the indoor storage building shall be limited by
available parking within the site: the reuse of the full building may not be
possible.
SIC 46 series - Pipelines.
SIC 49 series - Electric, gas, and sanitary services.
   C.   Parcel C: Parcel C shall include Lots 5, 6, 7, 8 and Outlot Z as
defined on the Jordan Creek Business Park final plat recorded in Book 2007,
Page 11985, Dallas County, Iowa.
      1.   Land Use: All land uses as set forth in title 9, "Zoning", of the
City Code for the Residential High Density (RH-18) District as permitted and
permitted conditionally shall apply except as indicated below:
         a.   Permitted Uses: Permitted uses shall include the following:
            (1)   All permitted (P) uses allowed within the Residential High
Density (RH-18) district.
            (2)   All permitted conditional (PC) uses allowed within the
Residential High Density (RH-18) district may be allowed with the approval of
the appropriate review body. (Ord. 1712, 10-23-2006; amd. Ord. 2271, 1-22-2018;
Ord. 2490, 9-20-2021)
083-05: REQUIREMENTS:
To the extent that the provisions of this section conflict with or are more
restrictive than similar provisions provided elsewhere in the West Des Moines
zoning ordinance, the provisions of this section shall control. The following
design criteria, development standards, and landscaping regulations shall apply
to all parcels within the Jordan Creek Business Park specific plan area:
   A.   Lot Area: Multiple buildings separated by parking areas or drives and
lots less than two (2) acres in size may be considered acceptable if supported
by appropriate easements or a reciprocal easement agreement; and if approved by
the appropriate approval body as part of an overlay district site plan,
permitted conditional use permit, or plat.
   B.   Building Setback: Buildings shall be set back as follows unless
otherwise required by minimum building separation requirements within the
adopted building codes.
      1.   North: Minimum of sixty feet (60'); however, no structure or portion
of any structure shall be located within the wetland area as designated on the
specific plan map.
      2.   South, east, and west: Minimum of twenty five feet (25').
      3.   No setback (0 feet) shall be required from an adjoining parcel which
is included within the overall boundaries of the Jordan Creek Business Park
specific plan area except that no structure should be located closer than
twenty five feet (25') from the right-of-way line of Village View Drive.
      4.   Structures such as pergolas, arbors, gazebos, etc., that are a part
of plaza areas may be placed within the defined setbacks; however, they shall
be located no closer than ten feet (10') from the perimeter property boundary
or the right-of-way line of Village View Drive.
   C.   Building Separation: Unless physically attached to the adjoining
building, a minimum building separation of twenty five feet (25') shall be
provided along with complying with all building and fire code requirements for
separation.
   D.   Building Height: No part of any structure, including place making
elements and landmarks such as clock towers shall exceed sixty feet (60') in
height as measured from the average finished grade, except, an additional
twelve feet (12') of height shall be allowed for each additional ten feet (10')
of setback from the perimeter PUD boundary line or the right-of-way line of
Village View Drive.
   E.   Parking Ratios:
      1.   A minimum of one space per three hundred fifty (350) square feet of
gross leasable area (gla) of nonresidential uses (2.9 per 1,000 square feet)
with a maximum of one space per two hundred fifty (250) square feet of gla of
nonresidential uses (4 per 1,000) shall be provided within each lot. Senior
living facilities (assisted and memory care) shall provide one parking space
for every three (3) beds plus one space per employee on maximum shift. All
other residential uses, including active adult senior living facilities, shall
provide the minimum number of parking spaces according to current City Code
requirements.
         a.   If a higher parking ratio is desired, the applicant shall be
restricted to implementing initial parking in compliance with one space per two
hundred fifty (250) square feet of gla, with additional parking to be
implemented at such time that it is proven to the satisfaction of the Director
of Community Development that the additional spaces are needed to accommodate
the patrons of the business. The potential additional parking stalls/area shall
be identified on the approved site plan for the parcel. Including the
additional proposed parking, said site must be in compliance with all other
open space, buffer, screening, landscaping, and setback requirements. At the
time of implementation of the additional parking, a minor modification request
shall be submitted to the City. Said minor modification request shall be for
notification purposes only and shall not be used as a trigger to require
changes to the site, except to bring the site into compliance with the
initially approved site plan. The minor modification request shall be
administratively approved.
         b.   Reuse of all or part of the one SIC 4225, self-service storage
facility - interior unit access with no outside storage yard allowed within the
Jordan Creek Business Park shall be limited by available parking within the
parcel. Parking required shall be calculated as follows: office uses at one
space per three hundred fifty (350) square feet of gla and basement storage for
a tenant(s) with office space within the building at one space per five hundred
(500) square feet of gla for the first ten thousand (10,000) square feet and
one space per five thousand (5,000) square feet of gla for each ten thousand
(10,000) square feet thereafter. Parking for all other uses not otherwise
regulated under this ordinance shall abide by City Code. Based on site layout
information provided at time of drafting this ordinance, use of the building
would be limited to the 2nd and 3rd floors (approximately 60,000 square feet of
the gla of the building) being used as an office and the basement
(approximately 30,000 square feet gla) for storage of office related materials,
supplies, documents, etc., of office tenants occupying space within the
building. The storage area may not be rented by a business or person not
occupying offices within the building. The remaining building square footage
(main level) is designated for indoor parking for the office and storage
tenants. (Ord. 2271, 1-22-2018)
      2.   At the discretion of the Community Development Director, a less
stringent parking calculation may be used provided the applicant can
demonstrate a parking rate less than the above is adequate due to the type of
potential use, shared uses or off peak uses.
      3.   If not already established as a blanket easement, developers of
parcels must provide a cross access parking and ingress/egress easement.
   F.   Parking Setbacks:
      1.   Whenever possible, off street parking lots shall be located behind
the building to the interior of the property rather than adjacent to the
street, unless views thereof are properly mitigated.
      2.   Off street parking areas shall be set back from the perimeter
boundary line of the Jordan Creek Business Park development as follows:
         a.   North: Minimum fifty foot (50') setback.
         b.   East: Minimum sixty foot (60') setback.
         c.   South: Minimum twenty foot (20') setback.
         d.   West: Minimum thirty foot (30') setback.
         e.   East-west public road: Minimum of twenty five foot (25') setback.
         f.   There shall be no minimum parking lot setback between internal
lot boundaries.
      3.   Parking stall measurements and drive aisle widths shall conform to
title 9, chapter 15 of the City Code.
      4.   No portion of any parking lot or drive aisle associated with parking
may be located within a required buffer or streetscape.
   G.   Vehicle Drive-Throughs: The intent of this development is not to
encourage the use of automobiles; however, it is recognized that drive-ups are
a key component to the functionality of certain types of businesses due to
their convenience. If, through the design review process, including an updated
traffic analysis, if necessary, it can be demonstrated that such uses do not
cause traffic congestion, do not interfere with pedestrian movements and can be
designed to minimize their presence, a maximum of three (3) businesses with
drive-ups may be permitted within the overall Jordan Creek Business Park
development. Drive-up facilities may be allowed in conjunction with, but are
limited to, the following types of businesses: drugstore/pharmacy, bank, dry
cleaner, or restaurant. Walk-up or pedestrian ATMs with no vehicle access shall
be allowed with proper city approval.
      1.   The incorporation of drive-up facilities may be limited by the type
of use in association with the available vehicle trips allowed for the entire
Jordan Creek Business Park development.
      2.   In all instances, the presence of the drive-ups shall be minimized
through one or a combination of the following methods:
         a.   Integration of the drive-through into the building architecture
in order to eliminate the appearance as an added on canopy component.
         b.   Situating the drive-through between two (2) buildings in order to
limit the number of views thereof.
         c.   Opaque visual screening through the use of earth berming to a
height of a minimum of six feet (6') combined with vegetation of a
predominately evergreen nature.
   H.   Buffers: The provision of adequate buffering and landscaping shall be
more thoroughly evaluated and approved as part of the site plan approval.
Additional buffer and landscaping may be required at that time in response to
additional details of the use, buildings, parking, etc., to be implemented.
      1.   Buffering between districts or parcels and uses shall not be
required as set forth in title 9, chapter 3 of the city code.
      2.   Buffers shall be installed within each lot at the time of
development of the first building within that lot.
      3.   Buffers shall be provided along and measured from the perimeter
boundaries of the Jordan Creek Business Park development as follows:
         a.   North: One hundred feet (100').
         b.   East: Streetscape required in lieu of buffer.
         c.   South: Twenty five feet (25').
         d.   West: Streetscape required in lieu of buffer.
         e.   No buffers between internal parcels shall be required except to
mitigate undesirable elements and views.
      4.   Buffers should be designed to achieve the maximum amount of
screening from the maximum number of viewpoints with vegetation layered to
ensure adequate blockage of views and to create depth and a sense of
naturalness. Care should be taken to ensure that "through-views" under tree
canopies are adequately blocked.
      5.   Unless otherwise fulfilled through the presence of existing
vegetation of an acceptable variety consistent with the type (overstory,
evergreen, understory, and/or shrubs) and minimum size required at time of
planting, the minimum landscaping within required buffers shall be provided as
follows:
         a.   One overstory tree and three (3) shrubs shall be provided per
thirty five (35) linear feet of required buffer.
         b.   Vegetation substitution:
            (1)   Two (2) ornamental trees, one evergreen tree, or six (6)
shrubs may be substituted for one required overstory tree; however, no more
than twenty five percent (25%) of the required number of overstory trees may be
substituted.
            (2)   A twenty five (25) square foot mass planting of perennials or
ornamental grasses may be substituted for three (3) shrubs.
         c.   Landscape vegetation required within buffer areas is in addition
to the landscape vegetation required of open space and parking areas.
      6.   Created storm water management facilities or other water features
may be placed within the buffer area given the following:
         a.   Such water features constantly contain water at a level visible
from adjoining properties and public streets;
         b.   Pond edge treatments are incorporated to enhance the
attractiveness of the element (no "wild overgrown pond edge" allowed); and
         c.   The appropriate water circulation and clarification measures are
implemented.
   I.   Landscaping: The landscaping requirements specified herein are intended
to create an aesthetically pleasing development which enhances the appearance
and character of the city of West Des Moines, while protecting the general
health, safety and welfare of the citizens. Landscaping is required to address
the following primary aspects or consequences of development:
•   Open space protection and enhancement,
•   Mitigation of paving expanses associated with off street parking,
•   Visual screening of undesirable views, activities and/or site elements, and
•   Street side enhancement ("streetscapes").
The specific plan map on file in the city illustrates the general landscaping
concept; this plan should be used as the guide for site plan development in
respect to the general locations of plant material to be provided. Additional
vegetation may be required to be implemented to meet the requirements specified
within this ordinance and in response to additional details of the use,
buildings, parking, etc. Details regarding specific varieties, exact
quantities, and the minimum size at time of planting shall be provided and
approved as part of the site plan submittal and shall meet the general
guidelines in respect to the minimum plant size traditionally applied to
development within the city. In the event that alternatives to what is shown on
the specific plan on file in the city are desired, the minimum vegetation
requirements specified within this ordinance will need to be provided and the
original intent of the required vegetation met.
      1.   Open Space: The intent of open space is to allow for a balance
between natural areas and the built environment and to provide for the overall
beautification and "greening" of the city.
         a.   A minimum of twenty percent (20%) open space shall be provided
within each lot.
         b.   Open space shall be considered all areas unencumbered by
buildings or paved areas associated with parking, drive aisles, and loading
zones. Plaza areas, water features and structures such as gazebos, arbors,
pergolas, etc., that are associated with outdoor pedestrian use areas, as well
as designated pedestrian walkways through and between parcels may be counted
towards fulfilling the minimum open space requirement.
         c.   Vegetation at a rate of two (2) trees and three (3) shrubs per
three thousand (3,000) square feet of required open space shall be provided
within the parcel.
            (1)   Minimum Size: Ten percent (10%) of all required trees shall
be a minimum of three (3) to three and one-half inch (31/2") caliper. Forty
percent (40%) of all required trees shall be a minimum of two (2) to two and
one-half inch (21/2") caliper. The balance of all required trees shall be one
and one-half inch (11/2") caliper. The minimum height for evergreens shall be
six feet (6') and may be counted as two (2) to two and one-half inch (21/2")
caliper.
            (2)   Vegetation Substitution:
   (A) Six (6) shrubs may be substituted for one required tree; however, no
more than twenty five percent (25%) of the required number of trees may be
substituted.
   (B) A twenty five (25) square foot mass planting of perennials or ornamental
grasses may be substituted for three (3) shrubs.
         d.   Vegetation required as part of the open space may be placed into
off street parking areas or required buffers; however the open space vegetation
is in addition to that which would be required of buffers or parking islands/
pods and may not be counted towards fulfilling the minimum amount of vegetation
required for these areas.
      2.   Off Street Parking Areas:
         a.   All off street parking areas shall be landscaped to screen their
visibility from street rights of way and adjoining property outside of Jordan
Creek Business Park development.
         b.   All off street parking areas shall be aesthetically improved to
reduce obtrusive characteristics that are inherent to their function. Multiple
landscape islands combined with vegetation shall be incorporated to effectively
eliminate a "sea of asphalt/concrete" and to provide shade thus decreasing heat
reflection back into the environment. Landscape islands and/or pods shall be
implemented in accordance with the following:
            (1)   Islands or open areas shall be located at the terminus end of
all parking rows. Terminal islands shall match, at a minimum, the stall length
and measure at least ten feet (10') in width unless otherwise allowed per the
discretion of the director of community development.
            (2)   Linear parking islands that run the length of the parking row
shall be implemented every six (6) rows or as otherwise shown on the specific
plan map. Said linear islands shall measure a minimum of eight feet (8') in
width and shall be landscaped to provide a mass of "green" within the parking
lot. The incorporation of defined pedestrian pathways within these linear
islands is encouraged.
            (3)   Linear parking rows with greater than twelve (12) parking
stalls shall incorporate a landscape island every twelve (12) stalls and
landscape pods every six (6) stalls.
   (A) Islands shall measure a minimum of nine feet (9') in width and shall
match, at a minimum the stall length.
   (B) Pods shall measure a minimum of six feet (6') from the back of curb to
back of curb.
            (4)   One tree shall be located in every nine foot by nineteen foot
(9' x 19') stall island and six foot by six foot (6' x 6') pod. In addition,
for every twelve (12) parking stalls, two (2) shrubs or a twenty (20) square
foot massing of perennials or ornamental grasses shall be located within the
islands or pods within the parking area. Perennials and grasses located within
the islands or pods shall be a minimum of three feet (3') in height in order to
be visible between the cars.
      3.   Visual Screening:
         a.   Mechanical Equipment:
            (1)   Views from public streets and adjoining property of the
negative aspects of development and land uses such as loading docks; heating,
ventilation, or air conditioning (HVAC) units; or similar electrical or
mechanical appurtenances shall be adequately screened. Said screening shall be
achieved through the use of architectural features or earth berming and
landscaping consisting of predominately evergreen material.
            (2)   All rooftop mechanical units shall be screened from views
from public streets and adjoining properties by the use of an opaque screening
material compatible with the architecture of the building or architecturally
designed screen walls, parapet walls, penthouse, or other opaque material
comprised of materials consistent with the associated primary structure.
Screening measures and materials shall be identified as part of the site plan
review process.
         b.   Trash Enclosures: Trash receptacles and dumpsters shall be
screened on all sides by the use of a permanent enclosure. Whenever possible,
the enclosure should be designed as an attached extension to a primary
structure rather than a freestanding structure and constructed on materials
consistent with the primary structure. Additionally, the enclosure should be
landscaped to minimize the visual presence and impact of the structure on
surrounding properties, businesses, and public streets.
      4.   Streetscaping: A landscaped edge or "streetscape" shall be provided
along all public and private streets which are not required to provide a
buffer. These streetscapes are intended to provide desired green to the city,
interest, comfort to pedestrians, visual softening of pavement expanses, bring
human scale to adjoining buildings, minimize heat reflection, and provide
traffic calming benefits. The streetscape should have a noticeable pattern,
design, or plant variety and should attempt to serve as a distinguishing or
identifiable feature for the development.
         a.   Streetscaping shall be located within the first fifteen feet
(15') parallel and adjacent to the right of way line of public streets and back
of curb of private streets.
         b.   Vegetation within streetscape areas shall be provided at a rate
of one tree and three (3) shrubs per thirty five (35) linear feet of street.
            (1)   A twenty five (25) square foot mass planting of perennials or
ornamental grasses may be substituted for three (3) shrubs.
   J.   Pedestrian Elements: The Jordan Creek Business Park, in alignment with
"Town Center District Overlay Guidelines", aims to encourage pedestrian
movement and opportunities for pedestrian interaction through a series of
interconnected sidewalks and gathering areas. The specific plan map on file in
the city indicates the minimum number, location, and type of anticipated plaza
areas and pedestrian corridors; additional plaza areas may be required. Details
for each of these plaza areas shall be submitted, reviewed, and approved as
part of the site plan for the adjoining parcel.
      1.   Usable Open Space: The overall Jordan Creek Business Park
development shall provide usable open space or activity spaces through the
integration of plazas, green spaces, interconnected pedestrian corridors and
focal point elements.
         a.   These areas shall encourage opportunities for interaction among
pedestrians through the provision of seating opportunities (benches, chairs,
tables, planter walls, etc.). Without compromising the design intent of the
plazas, the developer is encouraged to maximize the number of furniture/seating
opportunities throughout the development. Representations of the site
amenities, including street furniture that will be provided throughout this
development are included in the exhibit packet (on file with the city clerk).
Although deviations from the illustrations are permissible, the street
furniture is intended to serve as a unifying element throughout the
development.
         b.   Open space plazas areas shall incorporate a variety of hardscape
landscape materials (stone pavers, stamped concrete, field boulders, etc.) for
visual interest and variety and shall implement landscape vegetation to soften,
enhance, and delineate the areas. All plaza/pedestrian areas are required to
incorporate "green" through the incorporation of planter beds, containers, or
raised planters. Whenever possible, elements that enrich the space (i.e.,
gazebos, pergolas, arbors, art, fountains, banners, and children's play
environment, etc.) should be incorporated.
         c.   Appropriate lighting should be incorporated into the plaza areas
for safety reasons and to extend the usability of the area into the evening
hours.
         d.   Plaza areas associated with establishments which serve alcoholic
beverages shall provide a definable boundary (change in material, unmovable
signage, physical feature, etc.) between the private establishments in which
alcohol consumption is allowed and the public area in which it is not. A
physical barrier (fencing, railing, landscaping, etc.) should prohibit access
into the patio area from the public area; all access into the patio area should
be through the interior of the establishment. The barrier specifications shall
be reviewed and approved as part of the alcohol permit application.
         e.   Unless otherwise arranged through private agreements, the
installation of these pedestrian elements shall be by the developer of the
overall Jordan Creek Business Park in conjunction with or before the
development of the adjoining building or area.
      2.   Pedestrian Connections: The overall development shall integrate
interconnected pedestrian walkways to allow and encourage pedestrian movement
from one building to another within the Jordan Creek Business Park development,
as well as to the adjoining developments and neighborhood.
         a.   Pedestrian pathways internal to the development and across
parking areas and drive aisles shall be constructed with contrasting color and
pavement patterns to the adjoining paving in order to provide a definable and
highly visible crosswalk.
   K.   Lighting:
      1.   Fixtures used within off street parking areas shall be consistent
with those illustrated in the exhibits included as part of this ordinance (on
file with the city clerk). Although deviations from the illustrations are
permissible, the fixtures are intended to serve as a unifying element between
parcels within the development.
      2.   Said fixtures shall not exceed twenty five feet (25') in height as
measured from the ground to the top of the light structure.
      3.   No wall packs or floodlighting are allowed. In addition to cutoff
fixtures, particular attention shall be given to eliminate hot spots and light
glare. To achieve this, additional measures may include, but are not limited
to, lowering parking lot light levels after business hours, turning off lights
not necessary for security purposes, and use of landscaping for light
screening/blockage.
      4.   As a part of the review of each site plan, a photometric plan must
be submitted. During the review, the applicant must demonstrate how lighting
will not adversely affect adjoining properties, especially the residential
properties to the north and east. (Ord. 1712, 10-23-2006; amd. Ord. 2271, 1-22-
2018, Ord. 2490, 9-20-2021)
083-06: ARCHITECTURE:
The architectural design of any building within this development shall be
acceptable to the city. The architecture shall attempt to express a creative
presentation of exterior building materials, exterior details and texture,
treatment of windows and doors, and use of angles and multiplicity of planes
within the wall and roof design to lessen the plainness of appearance which can
be characteristic of large buildings. Building design, materials, and colors
within each parcel shall provide continuity amongst buildings to unite all
structures within the parcel into one project concept. Additionally, although
the architectural style may be different between the commercial (parcel A),
office (parcel B), and the residential (parcel C) portions of the site, a sense
of connectivity between the three (3) areas should still be created. All sides
to each building shall receive high quality materials, finishes, and details
(360 degree architectural treatment). There are no "backs" to a building.
Materials should be durable, economically maintained and of a quality that will
maintain their appearance over a prolonged time.
On file with the City Clerk are conceptual architectural illustrations
illustrating the general architectural style and materials to be implemented
(see exhibit C).
   A.   All buildings within this development shall accommodate or incorporate
the following in building design and materials:
      1.   Corporate architecture shall be prohibited.
      2.   Buildings shall be oriented to create a logical and identifiable
relationship with the site and other buildings, open spaces, and pedestrian
circulation paths.
      3.   The use of building articulation which breaks up the building mass
into modules that reflects proportions similar to other buildings within the
development.
      4.   The building's design should meet context and site objectives such
as providing gateways, creating visual and physical linkages and framing or
terminating views.
      5.   Variation in building height, mass and roof forms shall be provided
while still maintaining an overall building continuity. Roofs should not be
designed as attention getting devices related to the reinforcement of signage
or as an identifiable corporate image.
      6.   Variation in horizontal planes through the use of materials, color
and projecting forms should be implemented to signify an entry, create
protection for the pedestrian, and creates interest.
      7.   Shifts in building planes/facades and variation in exterior
materials shall be incorporated to minimize long expanses of wall.
      8.   Ground floor tenant areas should provide the maximum possible
glazing toward sidewalks to provide pedestrians with visual interest.
      9.   The use of brick, stone, architectural concrete or masonry
acceptable to the city shall be incorporated. The use of EIFS or synthetic
stucco shall be used in moderation and primarily as an accent or trim material.
      10.   Variation in materials, material modules, expressed joints,
textures, colors and details should be used to break up the mass of the
buildings.
      11.   Architectural design for multi-family units shall include:
         a.   Unit design should incorporate elements such as balconies and
patios to reinforce the connection between the residents and the activities
within the development. A minimum of eighty percent (80%) of the multi-family
units within the development must provide a balcony or porch/patio with a
minimum usable area of forty (40) square feet and a minimum usable dimension of
five feet (5') deep in either direction. In lieu of outdoor living area for
individual units, area(s) of common defined and enhanced outdoor living space
can be provided.
         b.   Accessory Buildings:
            (1)   The exterior design for a clubhouse that is accessory to the
primary use, and detached accessory buildings such as garages (should they be
pursued) shall incorporate the architectural design and treatments of the
principal residential buildings, such as windows, doors, trim and materials on
all sides of the building.
            (2)   For parking incorporated within the primary building, the
design should place the garage doors on a non-street side facade and on facades
not facing single-family residential development unless appropriately detailed
to minimize the dominance of garage doors on the facade. (Ord. 1712, 10-23-
2006; amd. Ord. 2490, 9-20-2021)
083-07: SIGNAGE:
All proposed exterior signage requires the review and approval of a sign permit
by the city of West Des Moines. Signage shall abide by the standards and
regulations as set forth in title 9, chapter 18, "Signs", of the city code for
the professional commerce park (PCP) district with the following exceptions:
   A.   Ground Monument Signs:
      1.   Development Identification:
         a.   Ground monument signs which identify the name of the development
only, no tenant identification shall be allowed as indicated on the specific
plan map (S-1).
         b.   The copy portion of said sign shall not exceed thirty (30) square
feet in size.
         c.   Said signs shall be set back a minimum of ten feet (10') from
right of way lines.
      2.   Business Identification:
         a.   Ground monument signs which list the names of businesses located
within each building may be located as indicated on the specific plan map (S-
2).
         b.   Sign copy shall consist of the name of the business and building
number, but shall not display business logos. The font for the sign copy shall
be consistent in size, style and color.
         c.   Said signs shall not exceed thirty five (35) square feet in size
as measured to the extremes edges of the structure and shall not exceed five
feet (5') in height.
         d.   Said signs shall be set back a minimum of ten feet (10') from
right of way lines.
   B.   Wall Signage:
      1.   All wall signage shall consist of individual three-dimensional
letters attached directly to the building. No cabinet or panel signs shall be
allowed except for contoured cabinet signs necessary to display logos. In the
event cabinet signs are implemented, every measure possible shall be
implemented to minimize the amount of illuminated background.
      2.   Signage for single tenant buildings may be located on any wall
facade. Signage for tenants within a multi-tenant building shall be located on
the same floor as and immediately adjacent to and above the tenant space.
      3.   No wall signage shall be located on the northern facade of those
buildings immediately adjacent to the wetland area.
      4.   Wall signage located above a roof element shall be allowed at the
discretion of the director of community development provided that the signage
is located on a flat wall. Any illumination of the sign shall be by reverse
lighting to project the light back towards the wall to create a "halo" effect;
no front illumination is allowed. The individual letters shall have returns to
screen the lighting source and shall be placed so the space between the wall
plane and back of the letter is no greater than two inches (2").
      5.   Total wall signage allowed per building or tenant shall be
calculated as per city code.
   C.   Jordan Creek Business Park Identification: Signage, medallions,
keystones, banners, pavement markings, etc., that displays the development's
logo, initials, or name may be integrated into the development to further
enhance the character of the development. No tenant identification is allowed.
(Ord. 1712, 10-23-2006; amd. Ord. 2490, 9-20-2021)
083-08: VEHICLE TRIP ALLOCATION:
Per the traffic analysis completed by Snyder & Associates (2006), the Jordan
Creek Business Park has been allocated four thousand four (4,004) average daily
trips (ADT), five hundred ninety eight (598) A.M. peak, and five hundred sixty
four (564) P.M. peak vehicle trips. As development proposals are approved the
number of vehicle trips generated by the proposed development (based upon the
number of square feet of a proposed specific use or number of dwelling units,
in conjunction with any parameters established in the traffic analysis) will be
subtracted from the overall total trips allocated to the development. Approval
of this proposed specific plan does not constitute a guarantee that the
proposed plan can be implemented. Development of all parcels and implementation
of desired land uses, including specific high traffic generating tenants, will
be limited by the available number of trips. Should anticipated traffic exceed
the total trips allocated for the Jordan Creek Business Park development prior
to full build-out, further development of parcels may be limited or prohibited.
Alternate uses to those planned for within the traffic analysis and approved as
part of Jordan Creek Business Park specific plan ordinance may be allowed,
following completion of an amendment to the approved traffic study analyzing
the proposed alternative and appropriate city approval of an amendment to the
respective specific plan ordinance and/or map, if necessary, if the existing
uses and the proposed change(s) collectively do not exceed the four thousand
four (4,004) average daily trips (ADT), five hundred ninety eight (598) A.M.
peak, and five hundred sixty four (564) P.M. peak trips. (Ord. 1712, 10-23-
2006)
083-09: STORM WATER MANAGEMENT PLAN:
A master storm water management plan for the entire development which governs
the overall storm water management of the development shall be submitted to and
approved by the city of West Des Moines. Specific storm water management plans
demonstrating compliance with the approved Jordan Creek Business Park master
storm water management plan, on file with the city's public works department,
will be required with the development of each site plan. The specific storm
water plans shall be prepared at the developer's expense, by a professional
engineer licensed in the state of Iowa. All specific storm water management
plans shall comply with the city's applicable design standards for storm water
management existing at the time each development (site plan) is approved. (Ord.
1712, 10-23-2006)
083-10: UTILITIES:
The developer, its successors or assigns, if any, shall construct at its cost,
and if for general public use, dedicate to the city all sanitary sewer mains,
water mains, and storm sewers associated with the Jordan Creek Business Park as
required by the City of West Des Moines' subdivision ordinance in accordance
with applicable City design standards. All necessary easements to allow City
access to public utilities for maintenance and repair purposes shall be
executed prior to approval and recordation of the final plat for each
respective area or shall be executed as a blanket access agreement prior to the
approval and recordation of the first final plat. Unless otherwise specified
within a specific easement document, the City shall not be responsible for
reimbursement, restoration and/or replacement of any improvements located
within the public easements should the City be required to excavate the public
utilities for normal City operations.
The placement of public utility easements within required buffer parks and
streetscape areas is discouraged due to the potential conflict between trees
and the need to access the lines for repair. To the greatest extent possible,
overstory, understory, and evergreen trees should be placed off utility lines a
minimum distance equal to the one to one (1:1) excavation trench necessary for
the deepest utility. Adequate access for maintenance vehicles shall be provided
into and through the easement areas. (Ord. 1712, 10-23-2006)
083-11: FIRE ACCESS:
   A.   All internal drive aisles and parking lots shall permit the travel of
the Fire Department's largest vehicle, including adequate accommodation of the
vehicle's turning needs. Approval of unique design solutions to accommodate
fire access may be granted by the City Council, if the solutions proposed are
recommended by the West Des Moines Fire Department.
   B.   At the discretion of the City's Fire Marshal, "no parking fire lane"
areas may be established as necessary to ensure efficient movement and access
of the firetrucks. The developer of specific lots on which the fire lanes are
located shall be responsible for the procurement and erection of approved fire
lane signage.
   C.   All access drives and drive aisles shall maintain a minimum of twenty
feet (20') of clear pavement.
   D.   A minimum of fourteen feet (14') of vertical clearance over the travel
portion shall be maintained at all times over all vehicle travelways.
   E.   The developer or its designee shall be responsible for enforcement of
no parking lanes and maintaining adequate clearance of structures and
vegetation along and above all vehicle travelways regardless if public or
private. (Ord. 1712, 10-23-2006)
083-12: PUBLIC STREETLIGHTS:
At the time of final platting, the developer shall enter into an agreement with
Mid American Energy for the installation of public streetlights along all
public streets within and abutting the specific plan area. Documentation,
including surety if required, to ensure installation of the public streetlights
shall be provided to the City prior to approval and recordation of the first
final plat. Installation of public streetlights shall occur in conjunction with
construction of the adjoining parcel. (Ord. 1712, 10-23-2006)
083-13: INGRESS/EGRESS:
A public access easement or easements allowing unrestricted public access over
and through the land within the specific plan area shall be executed prior to
the approval and recordation of the first final plat and in conjunction with
the approval and recordation of any future plat(s). (Ord. 1712, 10-23-2006)
083-14: PUBLIC STREET IMPROVEMENTS AND TRAFFIC SIGNALS:
An agreement and waiver for improvements and modifications to adjoining public
roads, including the installation of traffic signals, as identified within the
traffic study shall be executed by the developer prior to approval and
recordation of the first final plat. Dedication of permanent right-of-way to
accommodate the placement of future signal poles and controller boxes shall be
provided as necessary. In addition, adequate easements to accommodate detector
loops and interconnect cabling shall be provided as necessary. Temporary right-
of-way required during the construction/installation shall be provided as
necessary. (Ord. 1712, 10-23-2006)
083-15: VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES:
Any person who violates the provisions of this ordinance upon conviction shall
be punished as set forth in section 1-4-1 of the City Code. (Ord. 1712, 10-23-
2006)
083-99: LEGISLATIVE HISTORY:
Ord. 1712, 10-23-2006; Ord. 2271, 1-22-2018; Ord. 2490, 9-20-2021.
PUD #84
MERCY WEST LAKES
SECTION:
084-01: Legal Description
084-02: Sketch Plan
084-03: Conditions
084-04: Land Use And Design Criteria
084-05: Architecture
084-06: Signage
084-07: Traffic Study
084-08: Vehicle Interconnectivity To Adjoining Properties
084-09: Violations And Penalties
084-99: Legislative History
084-01: LEGAL DESCRIPTION:
Mercy West Lakes plat 2 an official plat in West Des Moines, Polk County, Iowa
and lot 13, West Lakes office park plat 1, and official plat in West Des
Moines, Dallas County, Iowa. (Ord. 1750, 5-7-2007)
084-02: SKETCH PLAN:
On file in the city and made a part of this rezoning approval, for concept
description and delineation is the sketch plan document for the Mercy West
Lakes PUD marked exhibit A. Wherever conflict occurs between the written text
in this document and the notations on the sketch plan, the written text shall
prevail. The sketch plan is a graphic representation of the property included
in the PUD delineating the approximate location and configuration of the
parcels for the purpose of easier reference for the applicable regulations of
this ordinance. (Ord. 1721, 1-2-2007)
084-03: CONDITIONS:
Whereas, title 9, chapter 9, "Planned Unit Development District", of the city
code, establishes certain regulations and guidelines pertaining to accompanying
information required on plat and site plan documents. Now, therefore, the
following conditions, restrictions, and regulations are adopted as part of this
approval:
   A.   General Conditions: In addition to the PUD sketch plan map, the
following general development criteria shall be integrated into and made a part
of this planned unit development:
      1.   General Conformance To Subdivision Ordinance: All subdivisions,
public and private streets, public or private street rights of way and general
development shall adhere to the standards and design criteria set forth in the
West Des Moines subdivision ordinance and/or established city policies
pertaining thereto, unless otherwise stated within this ordinance. Any
regulation, standard, provision or requirement that is not specifically
addressed within this document that is regulated elsewhere in the city code,
the requirements of the city code are applicable and shall be enforced.
      2.   General Conformance To Zoning Ordinance: Unless otherwise specified
herein, the development of Mercy West Lakes shall comply with title 9,
"Zoning", of the city code or any other applicable codes.
      3.   Flood Hazard: In all areas within a 100-year frequency flood hazard
zone, or adjoining drainageways, and detention ponding areas involving
potential flood hazards, no building shall be erected which has a lowest level
floor, including basements, less than two feet (2') above the determined level
of the 100-year frequency flood event.
      4.   Developer Responsibilities: Unless otherwise specifically approved
by the city council, the developer, its successors and/or assigns, if any,
shall pay all planning, engineering, and construction costs for the development
of the planned unit development as required by this ordinance, and shall pay
all costs related to approved site plans, which may include, but is not limited
to, the cost of all streets, storm sewers, sanitary sewers, water mains and
service lines, drainageway improvements, detention basins, buffers, and other
improvements as required. No final occupancy shall be issued until all
necessary improvements applicable to the area/lot or structure requesting
occupancy are installed and accepted by the city of West Des Moines. Nothing in
this ordinance shall be construed to prevent the developer, its successors and/
or assigns, if any, from entering into private agreement(s) as it/they may
desire to share the cost of improvements.
      5.   Storm Water Management: Specific storm water management plans (SWMP)
shall be required for each lot developed within the PUD. The developer shall
have said storm water management plans prepared by a professional engineer
licensed in the state of Iowa. All specific storm water management plans shall
comply with the city's current design standards for storm water management. The
method of storm water management and the storm water conveyance system shall be
determined prior to city approval of any development within any portion of the
property within the PUD. At time of platting or development, ownership and
responsibility for all storm water detention areas and private storm water
detention outlet structures will need to be established.
      6.   Public Street Improvements And Right Of Way Dedication: At time of
subdivision platting or site plan approval for a parcel within the PUD, the
applicant shall be responsible for construction and/or installation of all
required public infrastructure improvements associated with the developing area
in accordance with the city's subdivision ordinance, as indicated herein, and/
or as indicated on the approved PUD sketch proposal. With any subdivision plat
or site plan within the PUD, the applicant shall be responsible for
constructing and/or installing the public infrastructure necessary to support
development in a manner that will assure that the public infrastructure
functions at an acceptable level of service (per the city's comprehensive plan)
and that complies with all city ordinances.
      7.   Sanitary Sewer: Any proposed use will require an analysis of the
sanitary sewer capacity to assure that adequate capacity is available for the
proposed development. Additionally, title 7, chapter 8, article F, "Industrial
Waste", of the city code, limitations on fats, oils, and grease (FOG) requires
that any building or facility, including food service establishments (FSE),
likely to discharge FOG to the sanitary sewer must install an approved exterior
grease interceptor and thereafter operate and maintain the grease interceptor
as provided in the ordinance.
      8.   Street Lighting: The developer shall be responsible for all costs
associated with the installation of public streetlights within or adjacent to
any area proposed to be platted or included within a development associated
with this PUD. (Ord. 1721, 1-2-2007)
084-04: LAND USE AND DESIGN CRITERIA:
Unless provided otherwise in this ordinance, all general use regulations and
provisions set forth in title 9, "Zoning", of the city code for the
professional commerce park (PCP) district shall apply to development of any
parcel within the Mercy West Lakes PUD area.
   A.   Land Use: All land uses as set forth in title 9, "Zoning", of the city
code for the professional commerce park (PCP) district as permitted and
permitted conditionally shall apply except as indicated below:
      1.   Permitted Uses: Permitted uses shall include the following:
         a.   All permitted (P) uses allowed within the professional commerce
park (PCP) district except those otherwise limited or prohibited by this
ordinance.
         b.   The following permitted conditional uses (PC) allowed in a
professional commerce park (PCP) district shall be considered permitted uses
(P):
SIC 4522 - Helistop/helipad, not including heliport, shall be considered a
permitted use (P) when implemented as part of a general medical and surgical
hospital (SIC 8062). Heliports shall remain as a permitted conditional use (PC)
requiring the approval of the appropriate review body.
SIC 489 - Wall mounted antennas and/or dishes when implemented as part of a
general medical and surgical hospital if needed for typical hospital
operations.
One maximum freestanding seven thousand (7,000) square foot sit down eating
place (SIC 5812) or maximum five thousand (5,000) square foot depository
institute (SIC 60 series) shall be allowed within parcel D.
Ancillary uses to the general medical and surgical hospital such as florist,
medical supply, cafeteria/restaurant, etc., shall be allowed when fully
included within the hospital building. No exterior signage or dedicated
entrances to these uses shall be allowed.
         c.   The following permitted uses (P) allowed within the professional
commerce park (PCP) district shall be considered permitted conditional (PC)
uses and may be allowed with the approval of the appropriate review body:
SIC 701 - Hotels and motels.
         d.   All other permitted conditional (PC) uses allowed within the
professional commerce park (PCP) district except those that have been limited
or prohibited by this ordinance may be allowed with the approval of the
appropriate review body.
      2.   Prohibited Uses: The following permitted and permitted conditional
uses otherwise allowed in the professional commerce park (PCP) district shall
be prohibited:
SIC 78 series - Motion pictures.
   B.   Design Criteria: To the extent that the provisions of this section
conflict with or are more restrictive than similar provisions provided
elsewhere in the West Des Moines zoning ordinance, the provisions of this
section shall govern. The following design criteria, development standards, and
landscaping regulations shall apply to all parcels as indicated within the
Mercy West Lakes PUD area:
      1.   Lot Area:
         a.   Parcels A, B, C, and D: Minimum of two (2) acres.
         b.   No minimum lot size standard shall apply to parcel E; however,
parcel E shall be limited in use to vehicle parking unless it is legally tied
to either adjoining parcel B or parcel C. Upon legally tying parcel E to either
parcel B or parcel C, it shall be considered a part of the respective parcel
and use and development of the parcel for building expansion or an alternate
use shall be controlled by the restrictions and regulations stated within this
PUD ordinance.
      2.   Open Space: With the exception of parcel E, a minimum of thirty
percent (30%) open space shall be provided within each parcel. At the time that
parcel E is legally tied to another parcel, the tied parcel including the
parcel E land area shall provide the minimum thirty percent (30%) open space.
"Open space" shall be defined as those areas unencumbered by buildings or paved
areas associated with parking, drive aisles, and loading zones. Plaza areas,
water features and structures such as gazebos, arbors, pergolas, etc., that are
associated with common outdoor pedestrian use areas available for use by the
general public, as well as designated pedestrian walkways through and between
parcels may be counted towards fulfilling the minimum open space requirement.
(Ord. 1721, 1-2-2007)
      3.   Setbacks:
         a.   Primary Structure: Buildings shall be set back as follows unless
otherwise required by minimum building separation requirements within the
adopted building codes:
            (1)   A minimum setback of fifty feet (50') shall be provided from
the south, east and west perimeter PUD boundaries. The setback shall be
measured from the PUD boundary to the closest point/element of the primary
building structures, including canopies, awnings, building bump outs, etc.
            (2)   A forty foot (40') setback shall be provided along the
northern PUD boundary as measured from the ultimate street right of way line
(82.5 feet from street centerline) to the closest point/element of the primary
building structures, including canopies, awnings, building bump outs, etc.
            (3)   No setback (0 feet) shall be required along internal parcel
boundaries.
         b.   Accessory Structures: Freestanding accessory structures (trash
receptacles, maintenance buildings, power plant/chilling towers, etc.) shall be
set back a minimum of twenty five feet (25') from the perimeter PUD boundary as
measured to the closest point/element of the structure.
         c.   Building Separation: Unless physically attached to the adjoining
building, minimum building separations shall be as required by building and/or
fire codes. (Ord. 1750, 5-7-2007)
      4.   Building Height:
         a.   Parcels A, C, and D: No part of any structure, including place
making elements and landmarks such as clock towers, shall exceed sixty feet
(60') in height as measured from the average finished grade, except, an
additional twelve feet (12') of height shall be allowed for each additional ten
feet (10') of setback from the perimeter PUD boundary line.
         b.   Parcel B: No part of any structure shall exceed one hundred
thirty five feet (135') in height as measured from the average finished grade,
except, an additional twelve feet (12') of height shall be allowed for each
additional ten feet (10') of setback from the perimeter PUD boundary line.
      5.   Parking:
         a.   For all uses, parking shall be provided on the same parcel as the
primary building structure unless a reciprocal parking and ingress/egress
easement is executed with a lot contiguous to the structure to be served.
         b.   A minimum of one space per three hundred (300) square feet of
gross floor area (gfa) shall be provided for all uses except hospitals.
Hospitals shall provide a minimum of four (4) parking spaces per hospital bed.
("Hospital" being defined as an institution where medical or surgical care and
overnight accommodations are provided to nonambulatory and ambulatory patients.
Ancillary uses to a hospital which are located within the hospital structure
itself shall not be required to provide additional parking above that required
of the hospital. Medical clinics shall be considered those businesses that
provide diagnosis and outpatient care only.)
         c.   Off street surface parking lots shall be set back a minimum of
twenty feet (20') from the perimeter PUD boundary except along the northern
boundary of parcels C and D which shall be set back a minimum of ten feet (10')
from the perimeter PUD boundary. Aboveground parking structures shall abide by
the setbacks set forth for the primary building structure. There shall be no
minimum parking lot setback between internal lot boundaries.
         d.   Drive aisles and interior circulation drives shall be located no
closer than five feet (5') to the perimeter PUD boundary unless otherwise
agreed upon by an adjoining property owner for the purposes of sharing the
drives and when a reciprocal ingress/egress easement is executed between the
two (2) properties.
         e.   Parking stall measurements and drive aisle widths shall conform
to title 9, chapter 15 of the city code.
      6.   Vehicle Drive-Through/Drop Off Canopies:
         a.   Drive-through facilities in the form of patron drop off canopies
and ambulance garages shall be allowed as desired within all parcels of the PUD
as long as they are sited within the primary building setback restrictions
previously stated.
         b.   A maximum of one vehicle drive-through for a retail bank or
coffee shop shall be allowed within the boundaries of the PUD with such being
located within parcel D if, through the design review process, including an
updated traffic analysis, if necessary, it can be demonstrated that drive-up
facilities do not cause traffic congestion, do not interfere with pedestrian
movements and can be designed to minimize their presence. The incorporation of
drive-through facilities may be limited by the type of use in association with
the available vehicle trips allowed for the entire Mercy West Lakes
development.
            (1)   With the exception of freestanding ATMs as allowed with city
approval, the presence of the drive-up shall be minimized through one or a
combination of the following methods:
               (A) Integration of the drive-through into the building
architecture in order to eliminate the appearance as an added on canopy
component;
               (B) Situating the drive-through to the interior of the site in
order to minimize its visibility from adjoining public street thoroughfares and
adjoining properties not included within this PUD; and/or
               (C) Opaque visual screening through the use of earth berming to
a height of a minimum of six feet (6') combined with vegetation of a
predominately evergreen nature.
      7.   Landscaping: The landscaping requirements specified herein are
intended to create an aesthetically pleasing development which enhances the
appearance and character of the city of West Des Moines, while protecting the
general health, safety and welfare of the citizens. Landscaping is required to
address the following primary aspects or consequences of development:
•   Open space protection and enhancement,
•   Mitigation of paving expanses associated with off street parking, and
•   Visual screening of undesirable views, activities and/or site elements.
         a.   Open Space: The intent of open space is to allow for a balance
between natural areas and the built environment and to provide for the overall
beautification and "greening" of the city.
            (1)   Vegetation:
               (A) Vegetation at a minimum rate of two (2) trees and three (3)
shrubs per three thousand (3,000) square feet of required open space shall be
provided within each parcel.
               (B) Ten percent (10%) of all required trees shall be a minimum
of three (3) to three and one-half inch (31/2") caliper. Forty percent (40%) of
all required trees shall be a minimum of two (2) to two and one-half inch (21/
2") caliper. The balance of all required trees shall be one and one-half inch
(11/2") caliper. The minimum height for evergreens shall be six feet (6') and
may be counted as two (2) to two and one-half inch (21/2") caliper.
            (2)   Substitutions: Substitution allowed:
               (A) Two (2) ornamental trees, one evergreen tree, or six (6)
shrubs may be substituted for one required overstory tree; however, no more
than twenty five percent (25%) of the required number of overstory trees may be
substituted.
   (B) A twenty (20) square foot mass planting of perennials or ornamental
grasses may be substituted for three (3) shrubs.
            (3)   Off Street Parking Areas Or Buffers: Vegetation required as
part of the open space may be placed into off street parking areas or required
buffers; however the open space vegetation is in addition to that which would
be required of buffers or parking islands/pods and may not be counted towards
fulfilling the minimum amount of vegetation required for these areas.
         b.   Off Street Parking Areas:
            (1)   All off street parking areas shall be landscaped to screen
their visibility from public street rights of way and adjoining property which
are not part of the Mercy West Lakes PUD.
            (2)   All off street parking areas shall be aesthetically improved
to reduce obtrusive characteristics that are inherent to their function.
Multiple landscape islands combined with vegetation shall be incorporated to
effectively eliminate a "sea of asphalt/concrete" and to provide shade thus
decreasing heat reflection back into the environment. Landscape islands and/or
pods shall be implemented in accordance with the following:
               (A) Islands or open areas shall be located at the terminus end
of all parking rows. Terminal islands shall match, at a minimum, the stall
length and measure at least ten feet (10') in width unless otherwise allowed
per the discretion of the director of community development.
               (B) Linear parking islands that run the length of the parking
row shall be implemented every six (6) rows. Said linear islands shall measure
a minimum of eight feet (8') in width and shall be landscaped to provide
"green" within the parking lot. When appropriate, the incorporation of defined
pedestrian pathways within these linear islands is encouraged.
               (C) Linear parking rows with greater than thirteen (13) parking
stalls shall incorporate a landscape island every thirteen (13) stalls and
landscape pods every six (6) stalls.
               (D) Islands shall measure a minimum of nine feet (9') in width
and shall match, at a minimum the stall length.
               (E) Pods shall measure a minimum of six feet (6') from the back
of curb to back of curb.
               (F) With the exception of upper levels of structured parking,
one tree shall be located in every nine foot by nineteen foot (9' x 19') stall
island and six foot by six foot (6' x 6') pod. In addition, for every twelve
(12) parking stalls, two (2) shrubs or a twenty (20) square foot massing of
perennials or ornamental grasses shall be located within the islands or pods
within the parking area. Perennials and grasses located within the islands or
pods shall be a minimum of three feet (3') in height in order to be visible
between the cars.
         c.   Visual Screening:
            (1)   Ground Mechanical Equipment: Views from public streets and
adjoining property of the negative aspects of development and land uses such as
loading docks; heating, ventilation, or air conditioning (HVAC) units;
electrical transformers; or similar electrical or mechanical appurtenances
shall be adequately screened. Said screening shall be achieved through the use
of architectural features and/or earth berming and landscaping consisting of
predominately evergreen material.
            (2)   Rooftop Mechanical Units: All rooftop mechanical units shall
be screened from views from public streets and adjoining properties by the use
of an opaque screening material compatible with the architecture of the
building or architecturally designed screen walls, parapet walls, penthouse, or
other opaque material comprised of materials consistent with the associated
primary structure. Screening measures and materials shall be identified as part
of the site plan review process.
            (3)   Trash Enclosures: Trash receptacles, compactors, and
dumpsters shall be screened on all sides by the use of a permanent enclosure.
Whenever possible, the enclosure should be designed as an attached extension to
a primary structure rather than a freestanding structure and constructed of
materials consistent with the primary structure. Additionally, the enclosure
should be landscaped to minimize the visual presence and impact of the
structure on surrounding properties, businesses, and views from public streets.
            (4)   Outdoor Storage: Outdoor storage shall be allowed when said
storage areas are fully enclosed by a permanent and opaque structure.
      8.   Lighting:
         a.   Light fixtures shall not exceed thirty feet (30') in height as
measured from the ground to the top of the light structure.
         b.   All light fixtures shall be of a cutoff type to eliminate glare
and spillover lighting beyond its intended target.
         c.   As a part of the review of each site plan, a photometric plan
must be submitted. During the review, the applicant must demonstrate how
lighting will not adversely affect adjoining properties. (Ord. 1721, 1-2-2007)
084-05: ARCHITECTURE:
The design of buildings within the PUD shall be designed in such a manner to
present an overall architecturally unified development through the use of
similar materials, colors, architectural elements, etc. The architectural
design of any building shall be acceptable to the city. Three hundred sixty
degree (360°) architecture is required of all primary building structures. No
wood, masonite, visible asphaltic exterior wall or roof material, aluminum
siding, nonarchitectural sheet metal, concrete block, precast concrete panels,
Dryvit, EIFS, or other similar materials shall constitute a portion of any
building except as a trim material, unless the city council of West Des Moines,
after having received a recommendation from the plan and zoning commission of
West Des Moines shall determine said material when used as a primary element,
enhances the physical appearance. (Ord. 1721, 1-2-2007)
084-06: SIGNAGE:
Signage restrictions shall be imposed to limit and reduce the negative impacts
of sign clutter. All signs shall comply with all provisions of the city sign
code unless otherwise provided herein.
   A.   Wall: All wall signs shall be composed of solid individual letters
attached to the building fascia, or individual letters of anodized aluminum,
galvanized metal, or illuminated self- contained with translucent or opaque
plastic faces set in anodized aluminum returns and trim. Allowable wall signage
shall be calculated in accordance with the parameters set forth for the
professional commerce park (PCP) district within title 9, chapter 18, "Signs",
of the city code.
   B.   Ground:
      1.   Building/Tenant Identification Signs: One ground sign in accordance
with the professional commerce park (PCP) district standards shall be permitted
at each public street entrance drive provided that a minimum one hundred fifty
foot (150') separation between any other ground sign is maintained.
Identification of any tenant or building located within the boundaries of the
PUD shall be allowed on the ground signs regardless if they are located within
the same parcel as the sign.
      2.   Complex Identification Signs: One ground monument sign which is
limited to displaying only the name of the complex or development ("Mercy West
Lakes" or as otherwise named) shall be allowed at each of the corners of
University Avenue and West Lakes Parkway; 59th Place and University Avenue;
59th Place and 60th Street; and Westown Parkway and 60th Street. Said signs
shall be designed as a landscape sign and shall not exceed ten feet (10') in
height with a minimum setback of fifteen feet (15') from the street right of
way. These signs and associated landscaping shall be designed to respect sight
triangles so as to not block visibility at the intersections. (Ord. 1750, 5-7-
2007)
084-07: TRAFFIC STUDY:
A traffic study has been completed and approved by the city for the purpose of
determining traffic impacts and required improvements that would be necessary
for the safe and orderly movement of vehicles into and around the proposed PUD
development. The development or redevelopment of each parcel within the PUD
boundaries shall abide by and accommodate the recommendations of the approved
traffic study. The developer, his successors or assigns shall be responsible
for their pro rata share of public road improvements deemed necessary to
accommodate the intended development, as well as the dedication of all
necessary street right of way to accommodate such improvement. Prior to, or in
conjunction with the development or redevelopment of any parcel, or portion of
a parcel, the developer shall have the traffic report reviewed by the city to
ensure that the provisions and assumptions of the original traffic report are
still valid and applicable.
Per the traffic analysis completed by Snyder & Associates (2006), Mercy West
Lakes PUD has been allocated eight thousand three hundred forty eight (8,348)
average daily trips (ADT); five hundred forty seven (547) A.M. peak; and seven
hundred twenty nine (729) P.M. peak vehicle trips. As development proposals are
approved the number of vehicle trips generated by the proposed development will
be subtracted from the overall total trips allocated to the development.
Approval of this proposed PUD does not constitute a guarantee that the proposed
plan can be implemented. Development of all parcels and implementation of
desired land uses, including specific high traffic generating tenants, will be
limited by the available number of trips. Should anticipated traffic exceed the
total trips allocated for the Mercy West Lakes PUD prior to full build-out,
further development of parcels may be limited or prohibited. Alternate uses to
those planned for within the traffic analysis and approved as part of Mercy
West Lakes PUD may be allowed, following completion of an amendment to the
approved traffic study analyzing the proposed alternative and appropriate city
approval of an amendment to the respective specific plan ordinance and/or map,
if necessary, if the existing uses and the proposed change(s) collectively do
not exceed the eight thousand three hundred forty eight (8,348) average daily
trips (ADT); five hundred forty seven (547) A.M. peak; and seven hundred twenty
nine (729) P.M. peak trips. (Ord. 1721, 1-2-2007)
084-08: VEHICLE INTERCONNECTIVITY TO ADJOINING PROPERTIES:
Drive interconnectivity between property within this PUD and the property to
the east is required in order to allow for the distribution of traffic to
alternate public roads. At the time of final platting, an ingress/egress/cross
access agreement shall be executed to allow for the adjoining parcel to connect
to and utilize interior circulation drives within the PUD boundaries. At such
time as directed by the city, the applicant shall work with the adjoining
property to the east to identify and construct all drive interconnect
locations. (Ord. 1721, 1-2-2007)
084-09: VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES:
Any person who violates the provisions of this ordinance upon conviction shall
be punished as set forth in section 1-4-1 of the city code. (Ord. 1750, 5-7-
2007)
084-99: LEGISLATIVE HISTORY:
Ord. 1721, 1-2-2007; Ord. 1750, 5-7-2007.
PUD #85
LUTHERAN-MYERS
(Rep. by Ord. 1814, 9-22-2008)
PUD #86
COUNTRY CLUB DENTAL
SECTION:
086-01: Legal Description
086-02: Sketch Plan
086-03: Conditions
086-04: Access
086-05: Traffic Study Required
086-06: Streetlights
086-07: Building Restrictions, Easements And Covenants
086-08: Violations And Penalties
086-99: Legislative History
086-01: LEGAL DESCRIPTION:
Lots 3, 4, 5 Timothy Heights, except the west 17 feet thereof, now included in
and forming a part of the city of West Des Moines, Polk County, Iowa. (Ord.
1744, 4-9-2007)
086-02: SKETCH PLAN:
On file in the city and made a part of this rezoning approval, for concept
description and delineation is the sketch plan document for the Country Club
Dental PUD marked exhibit A. It is recognized that minor shifts or realignments
of driveways may be necessary and compatible with the need to acquire workable
access patterns, grades and usable building sites, but the general plan layout,
including the relationship of uses to each other and the relationship of land
use to the general plan framework, traffic layout, and development requirements
shall be used as the implementation guide. Wherever conflict occurs between the
written text in this document and the notations on the sketch plan, the written
text shall prevail. The sketch plan is a graphic representation of the property
included in the PUD delineating the approximate location and configuration of
the parcels for the purpose of easier reference for the applicable regulations
of this ordinance. (Ord. 1744, 4-9-2007)
086-03: CONDITIONS:
Whereas, title 9, chapter 9, "Planned Unit Development District", of the city
code, establishes certain regulations and guidelines pertaining to accompanying
information required on plat and site plan documents. Now, therefore, the
following conditions, restrictions, and regulations are adopted as part of this
approval:
   A.   General Conditions: In addition to the PUD sketch plan map, the
following general development criteria shall be integrated into and made a part
of this planned unit development:
      1.   General Conformance To Subdivision Ordinance: All subdivisions,
public and private streets, public or private street rights of way and general
development shall adhere to the standards and design criteria set forth in the
West Des Moines subdivision ordinance and/or established city policies
pertaining thereto, unless otherwise stated within this ordinance. Any
regulation, standard, provision or requirement that is not specifically
addressed within this document that is regulated elsewhere in the city code,
the requirements of the city code are applicable and shall be enforced.
      2.   Flood Hazard: In all areas within a 100-year frequency flood hazard
zone, or adjoining drainageways, and detention ponding areas involving
potential flood hazards, no building shall be erected which has a lowest level
floor, including basements, less than two feet (2') above the determined level
of the 100-year frequency flood event. Buildings shall only be permitted within
twenty five feet (25') of any easement or property boundary of a major
drainageway, storm water detention basin or pond if the applicant can
demonstrate during the development review process that potential flooding from
extraordinary flood events have been mitigated through site design or building
design and approval is granted by the city council.
      3.   Developer Responsibilities: The developer, their successors and/or
assigns, if any, shall pay all planning, engineering, and construction costs
for the development of the planned unit development, in accordance with the
city policies current at the time of development, as required by this
ordinance, the subdivision ordinance, and the Des Moines metropolitan design
standards as adopted by the city of West Des Moines for all streets, storm
sewers, sanitary sewers, drainage improvements, detention basins, water mains,
buffers and other improvements as required within the PUD or by city codes.
      4.   Storm Water Management: A master storm water management plan will be
required with the development of the Country Club Dental PUD. Specific storm
water management plans will then be required for each parcel developed within
the Country Club Dental PUD master storm water management plan. The developer
will have said storm water management plans prepared by a professional engineer
licensed in the state of Iowa. All specific storm water management plans shall
comply with the city's current design standards for storm water management. The
method of storm water management and the storm water conveyance system shall be
determined prior to city approval of any development within any portion of the
property within the PUD. At time of platting or development, ownership and
responsibility for all storm water detention areas and private storm water
detention outlet structures will need to be established.
      5.   Public Street Improvements And Right Of Way Dedication: At time of
subdivision platting or site plan approval within the PUD, the applicant shall
be responsible for construction and/or installation of all required public
infrastructure improvements in accordance with the city's subdivision
ordinance, as indicated herein, and/or as indicated on the approved PUD sketch
proposal. With any subdivision plat or site plan within the PUD, the applicant
shall be responsible for constructing and/or installing the public
infrastructure necessary to support development in a manner that will assure
that the public infrastructure functions at an acceptable level of service (per
the city's comprehensive plan) and that complies with all city ordinances. The
developer will be required to provide comprehensive plan right of way for 60th
Street fee title to the city of West Des Moines at the time of platting or
development.
      6.   Sanitary Sewer: Any proposed change in approved land use densities
for the PUD will require an analysis of the downstream sanitary sewer capacity
to assure that adequate capacity is available for the proposed change in
approved land use densities.
      7.   Food Service Establishments: If zoning on all or portions of the
land covered by this application would ever allow operation of food service
establishments (FSEs) title 7, chapter 8, article F, "Industrial Waste", of the
city code, limitations on fats, oils, and grease (FOG) requires that any
building or facility if any, including food service establishments (FSE),
likely to discharge FOG to the sanitary sewer must install an approved grease
interceptor and to thereafter operate and maintain the grease interceptor as
provided in the ordinance.
      8.   Street Lighting: The developer shall be responsible for all costs
associated with the installation of public streetlights within or adjacent to
any area proposed to be platted or included within a development.
      9.   Platted: Prior to, or in conjunction with development or transfer of
ownership of any portion of the PUD, said area shall be platted in accordance
with the city's subdivision ordinance to delineate within a plat the parcel to
be developed or sold separately or any portion thereof.
   B.   Land Use Design Criteria: In addition to the general conditions as
stated in subsection A of this section, the following land use design criteria
shall apply to the development areas designated by parcel on the sketch plan.
The following development standards and use regulations shall apply to each of
the individual parcels:
      1.   For All Parcels: All general use regulations, performance standards
and provisions set forth in title 9, "Zoning", of the city code for the office
district (OF) shall apply to any development proposal for the property as shown
on the sketch plan except as shall be further provided herein and shall comply
with all performance standards and provisions including, but not limited to,
open space, landscaping, building setbacks, and other bulk regulations for the
OF office district.
         a.   Platting: Multiple use of the site by more than one building
shall be permitted only if said buildings are consistent in architectural
design and use of materials and organized utilizing a compatible planned open
space, landscape plan, and parking plan to serve and maintain a unified master
plan concept.
All lots shall be developed to meet all office (OF) zoning district standards
for parking, open space, parking lot open space, setbacks, and all other
development standards for the OF district unless otherwise stated hereafter.
Cross access easements will be established to provide for the unrestricted use
and access of the drives.
         b.   Uses: Allowed uses in each parcel shall be limited by the
approved traffic study for the Country Club Dental PUD dated September 2006.
Allowed uses within all parcels shall include all office uses within the OF
office district except for the following uses which shall not be permitted in
their entirety:
Child daycare services (SIC 835).
Depository institutions (SIC 60).
Eating and drinking places (SIC 58).
Educational services (SIC 82).
Massage therapy establishments and steam bath services (SIC 7299-02).
News dealers and newsstands (SIC 5994).
Nursing and personal care facilities (SIC 805).
Physical fitness facilities (SIC 7991).
Shoe repair and shoeshine parlors (SIC 725).
         c.   Setbacks: All lots shall be developed to meet all office (OF)
bulk regulations and standards with the following conditions:
The setback is zero if it abuts a similar district.
         d.   Building Height: All buildings shall be one story with a maximum
height of twenty four feet (24').
   C.   Legal Conforming Use: Any existing single-family detached residential
dwelling within the planned unit development (PUD) (subject to the general use
regulations, performance standards and provisions set forth in the city code
pertaining to residential single-family - 10 (RS-10) district), shall be a
permitted conforming use. Conforming use (as set forth in this planned unit
development (PUD) and the city code) shall be as defined by the city code. The
single-family use may continue in existence with the ability to rebuild and
expand within the regulations of the residential single-family (RS-10) zoning
district. However, if the single-family home is converted for the sole purpose
of an office use for any period of time or if the single-family residence is
vacant for a period longer than one year, the legal conforming status will be
voided and the property can only be occupied by the uses allowed within the
PUD.
   D.   Architecture: Architecture for any development shall be acceptable to
the city and shall be residential in appearance and be and accomplished in a
manner compatible with the adjoining residential uses in the neighborhood.
Architectural design for office buildings shall attempt to express a creative
presentation of exterior building materials, exterior details and texture,
treatment of windows and doors, and use of angles and multiplicity of planes
within the wall and roof design to lessen the plainness of appearance which can
be characteristic of office and commercial buildings. Generally, franchise
style architecture, including trademark building colors and lighting, shall be
prohibited.
Brick and stone shall be the primary element on all sides of any buildings. The
use of EFIS, Dryvit, precast materials, vinyl or metal siding or paneling,
shall be prohibited except as accent or trim material that constitutes less
than ten percent (10%) of the building surface area. A significant quantity of
window openings shall be incorporated into the buildings' surfaces that face
the public street rights of way. All roofs shall be pitched and surfaced with
shingles or standing seam metal roofing material. Glass on the east side of the
buildings shall be one-way type glass and light filtering/blocking from inside
to outside.
All uninterruptible power supply, generators, heating, ventilation, and air
conditioning mechanical units and facilities shall be screened with shrubs at
least as high as the units themselves. No rooftop units can be used. All walls
of any building within the property shall be compatible in design and use of
materials. Any storage or loading area and loading docks shall be sufficiently
buffered from adjoining properties, public streets and general public view.
   E.   Trash Enclosures: Trash enclosures shall be built with material that
will match the building architecture. Trash containers themselves will have
nonmetal lids.
   F.   Buffering: All development within the Country Club Dental PUD shall
comply with the buffering provisions of the buffer ordinance of the city code.
In situations where this PUD specifies the provision of a buffer park, the
buffer may be included within the setback. With the phasing of this development
the following buffering requirements will be required at the following stages:
      1.   Phase 1 (Construction Of 2 Office Buildings At 1025 And 1035 60th
Street):
         a.   Screening shall be required between the phase 1 development and
the existing single-family house at 1045 60th Street until such time phase 2 is
developed. Opaque screening shall be obtained through a thirty foot (30')
buffer park planted to the specifications required by city code and a privacy
fence. The fence shall be six feet (6') in height at the side yard of the
residential property. The fence shall be tapered to four feet (4') in height at
a distance no closer than thirty feet (30') from the right of way line of 60th
Street. No fence may be constructed in the vision triangle of the driveway for
phase 1 development. The width of the buffer park as well as the amount of
landscaping may be reduced to a lesser standard if agreed to in writing by the
owner of the single-family house at 1045 60th Street.
         b.   A thirty foot (30') landscape buffer is also required along the
east line of the PUD as well as the following fencing requirement.
         c.   The owners of any parcel in the Country Club Dental PUD shall
build a fence (see specifications below) to replace the existing fences in
disrepair on the properties locally known as 5816 Orchard Drive, 1024 59th
Street, 1028 59th Street and legally described as follows:
Lots 4, 5, and 6, Barrington Estates Plat 2, an official plat, West Des Moines,
Polk County Iowa.
The developer may build a fence on the adjacent owners' land subject to the
owners of the properties agreeing to provide a written easement for both
construction and maintenance. The fence will be six feet (6') in height with
continuous pickets placed on both sides as needed and installed at the time of
occupancy of the first building in the PUD. A gate shall be provided into lot 6
if requested by said owner. Ongoing repair and replacement of the fence will be
responsibility of the current office owner and/or developer.
      2.   Phase 2 (Construction Of An Office Building At 1045 60th Street):
         a.   Screening shall be required between the phase 2 development and
the existing single-family house at 1055 60th Street at such time phase 2 is
developed. Opaque screening shall be obtained through a thirty foot (30')
buffer park planted to the specifications required by city code and a privacy
fence. The fence shall be six feet (6') in height at the side yard of the
residential property. The fence shall be tapered to four feet (4') in height at
a distance no closer than thirty feet (30') from the right of way line of 60th
Street. No fence may be constructed in the vision triangle of any driveway.
         b.   A thirty foot (30') landscape buffer shall be required along the
east line of the PUD.
      3.   Landscaping: The landscape design shall fulfill the intent of the
required buffer parks to create opaque screening within twenty four (24) months
between the proposed use and existing adjacent single-family. Elements to
obtaining said screening may include, but not limited to, berming, coniferous
overstory trees, and fencing. Strong effort shall be made to retain existing
healthy and mature trees currently within the buffer park. The buffer park
landscape plan shall be reviewed at time of site plan approval. These evergreen
trees will be planted with the initial height aboveground at a minimum of six
feet (6'). Installation screening elements shall occur before any occupancy
permit is issued. Additional screening consideration shall be provided in the
southeast corner of the PUD. Maintenance and replacement of dead landscaping in
the buffer park will be the ongoing responsibility of the office owner/
developer.
   G.   Lighting: Parking lot fixtures will be a maximum twenty four foot (24')
height and/or not to exceed the height of the building. Parking lot lights to
be turned off no later than ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. All light fixtures shall
be of a cutoff type to eliminate glare and spillover lighting beyond the
property line. No wall pack lights are allowed. A photometric plan must be
submitted during site plan review. (Ord. 1744, 4-9-2007)
086-04: ACCESS:
The access to this site will be the only full access to/from 60th Street from
Ashworth Road to the north boundary of this sketch plan. An interim full access
location off of 60th Street may be allowed adjacent to this north property line
without encroaching on the property at 1045 60th Street. At the time of phase 2
development, the driveway for phase 1 shall be relocated to align with Woodland
Avenue. If a raised median on 60th Street is constructed prior to phase 2
development, the interim phase 1 driveway shall be either relocated to align
with Woodland Avenue on the property located at 1045 60th Street or relocated
to another interim location to the south approximately midway between the
permanent location of the driveway and the Kum & Go's 60th entrance.
The future developer will be required to provide reciprocal ingress-egress
easements between all lots internal to the Country Club Dental PUD sketch plan
and externally, to the north and south of the PUD prior to site plan approval.
Access to the property south of the approved sketch plan shall be provided
prior to the future 60th Street median construction that will close the full
access to the Kum & Go site. Access to the north shall be provided at such time
that future development may occur north of the approved sketch plan. (Ord.
1744, 4-9-2007)
086-05: TRAFFIC STUDY REQUIRED:
A traffic study has been completed and approved by the city for the purpose of
determining traffic impacts and required improvements that would be necessary
for the safe and orderly movement of vehicles into and around the proposed
development. The future developer will be required to comply with the
requirements outlined in the traffic impact study being prepared for this site.
The requirements may include, but are not limited to, auxiliary lanes, access
locations, allowable throat distances at accesses, lane configurations,
alignment, agreements to pay for applicant's share of possible future traffic
signals, etc. This study accommodated thirteen thousand four hundred (13,400)
square feet of dental/medical office use. Prior to, or in conjunction with the
development of any parcel, or portion of a parcel, the developer shall have the
traffic report reviewed by the city's traffic consultant to ensure that the
provisions and assumptions of the original traffic report are still valid and
applicable. The future developer will be required to comply with the
requirements outlined in the traffic impact study being prepared for this site.
The maximum P.M. peak hour trips that may be generated is fifty (50). (Ord.
1744, 4-9-2007)
086-06: STREETLIGHTS:
At such time that underground electric service becomes available, the developer
will be required to construct streetlights (steel poles with underground
electric). (Ord. 1744, 4-9-2007)
086-07: BUILDING RESTRICTIONS, EASEMENTS AND COVENANTS:
The developer shall with the approval of the city council adopt building
restrictions, easements and covenants pertaining to each parcel developed where
the developer and the city deem appropriate. (Ord. 1744, 4-9-2007)
086-08: VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES:
Any person who violates the provisions of this ordinance upon conviction shall
be punished as set forth in section 1-4-1 of the city code. (Ord. 1744, 4-9-
2007)
086-99: LEGISLATIVE HISTORY:
Ord. 1744, 4-9-2007.
PUD #87
JORDAN WEST
SECTION:
087-01: Legal Description
087-02: Required Plans
087-03: Conditions
087-04: Requirements
087-05: Architecture
087-06: Signage
087-07: Vehicle Trip Allocation
087-08: Future Drive Connections
087-09: Stormwater Management Plan
087-10: Utilities
087-11: Fire Access
087-12: Park Land And Greenway Dedication Requirements
087-13: Public Streetlights
087-14: Ingress/Egress
087-15: Street Improvements And Traffic Signals
087-16: Violations And Penalties
087-17: Savings Clause
087-18: Effective Date
087-99: Legislative History
087-01: LEGAL DESCRIPTION:
Parcel A of the survey of parcel Z in the SE 1/4 of section 11, township 78
north, range 26 west of the 5th P.M., city of West Des Moines, as shown in book
2002, page 17509 in the office of the recorder of Dallas County, Iowa, except
that part of said parcel A conveyed to the city of West Des Moines in deed
filed in book 2004, page 3761.
Said property is more particularly described as follows:
Commencing as a point of reference at the E 1/4 corner of section 11-78-26;
thence S00°00'07"W, 855.09 feet along the east line of section 11 to a point;
thence N89°59'59"W, 82.67 feet to the point of beginning on the west right-of-
way line of Jordan Creek Parkway; thence S00°00'07"W, 1105.69 feet along said
west right-of-way line to a point on the north line of lot 33, Bridgewood plat
1, an official plat; thence N89°59'53"W, 592.24 feet along said north line to a
point; thence S45°05'04"W, 94.76 feet to a point; thence N45°01'53"W, 126.89
feet to a point; thence N69°32'48"W, 204.69 feet to a point; thence
N44°10'53"W, 1027.22 feet to a point on the south line of Bridgewood School, an
official plat; thence N40°54'26"E, 186.35 feet along said south line to a
point; thence N12°58'12"W, 276.547 feet along the east line of Bridgewood
School to a point; thence N25°57'55"E, 204.18 feet along said east line to a
point on the south right-of-way line of E.P. True Parkway; thence S62°11'29"E,
371.10 feet along said south right-of-way line to a point of curvature; thence
easterly along a curve to the left having a radius of 960.00 feet, an arc
length of 465.91 feet and a chord bearing of S76°05'41"E to a point of
tangency; thence S89°59'53"E, 696.41 feet along said south right-of-way line to
a point; thence S44°52'19"E, 49.61 feet to the point of beginning and
containing 37.246 acres more or less.
(Ord. 2097, 6-29-2015)
087-02: REQUIRED PLANS:
The following plans shall be required as a part of the processing of any
development application for any property within the Jordan West specific plan:
   A.   Area Development Plan: An area development plan is a plan that
identifies planning units, major street patterns, master stormwater drainage
and detention concepts, utilities, shared public spaces, land use assumptions
and proposed densities. It is intended to be a tool used to promote the
communication and cooperation between adjacent property owners and developers
to ensure cohesive and unified development.
An area development plan shall be reviewed by the plan and zoning commission
and approved by the city council prior to, or in conjunction with, the review
of the specific plan for any property within said specific plan area. No change
to the area development plan shall be made without approval of an amended plan
from the appropriate reviewing bodies.
On file in the city (exhibit I) is the city council approved area development
plan for this property.
   B.   Specific Plan: A specific plan identifies detailed development criteria
for each planning unit indicated on the area development plan or more
specifically delineated on the specific plan map. The specific plan shall
conform to the general development intent identified in the approved area
development plan, as well as the "Town Center Overlay District Guidelines". The
specific plan shall be reviewed by the plan and zoning commission and adopted
by the city council by ordinance.
This document shall constitute the specific plan ordinance for Jordan West. On
file in the city and made a part of this ordinance is a specific plan map that
defines the planning units further discussed in this ordinance and illustrates
the overall site layout concept for Jordan West (exhibit II). This document and
the associated exhibits (on file in the city) are intended to specify the
components, parameters, and requirements to be adhered to and implemented in
order to ensure the realization of Jordan West development concept. It is
recognized that modifications and changes in building footprints and layout may
be necessary in response to market demands and specific tenants. Additionally,
it is recognized that square footages of one building may be shifted to another
or increased to accommodate specific users' needs. These changes may be allowed
with the appropriate city approvals if the shift does not have a negative
impact on the traffic patterns for the building/area and the total number of
vehicle trips does not exceed that which has been allocated to the overall
Jordan West development. At the discretion of the director of development
services, changes to the layout of the development that are deemed to be
"major" changes shall require an amendment to the specific plan map and/or
ordinance, whichever is applicable. Major amendments shall require the review
and approval of the plan and zoning commission and city council.
Where the specific plan map and specific plan ordinance conflict, the specific
plan ordinance shall prevail.
   C.   Development Applications (Overlay District Site Plans): Site plans for
all buildings within Jordan West must meet the intent of the approved specific
plan. Site plans shall be submitted to the city of West Des Moines for review
and approval prior to the development of any portion of the site. Site plans
for permitted uses which comply (as determined by the director of development
services) with the design intent as set forth in this specific plan will be
subject to administrative review and approval by the director of development
services. A one week review and comment period by each and all available
members of the plan and zoning commission and city council shall precede the
administrative approval. If upon review, two (2) or more members of the city
council, plan and zoning commission, or a combination thereof request such; or
if the director of development services deems the proposed site plan is not in
compliance with the approved specific plan or is potentially controversial, the
site plan will be processed through the traditional full site plan review and
approval process. Site plans for permitted conditional uses (Pc) as defined in
the city code, unless otherwise amended within this ordinance, shall be
approved by the appropriate review body. At the discretion of the director of
development services, an amendment to Jordan West specific plan ordinance may
be required to bring consistency between the ordinance and site plan
development proposed.
   D.   Operation And Easement Declaration: An operation and easement
declaration (OEA) shall be established by the developer for the property
encompassing Jordan West. The OEA shall identify requirements for the ongoing
upkeep and maintenance of any privately owned common grounds, structures and
signs and any other specific development improvements required by the developer
in this ordinance.
Unless otherwise specifically noted or delineated, the developer and individual
lot owners shall have equal responsibility for the obligations specifically set
forth in this section or as generally noted in this ordinance.
Said OEA is hereby made a part of this specific plan ordinance by reference.
   E.   Preliminary And Final Platting: Prior to or in conjunction with any
site plan submittal for proposed development of any land within Jordan West,
said area shall be preliminary and final platted, in accordance with the city's
subdivision ordinance, to delineate the parcel to be developed or sold. Lots
without public street frontage, in accordance with the city code requirements,
may be allowed provided the frontage requirements of the code have been met by
an abutting or surrounding lot which is under common ownership under an owners'
association, or a cross parking and access easement has been executed which
provides for the unrestricted use and access of the drives and parking. Platted
outlots are not buildable until such time that they are replatted through the
city's subdivision process.
All private streets shall be identified as easements on the preliminary plat.
Said easements shall provide for public ingress and egress for vehicular and
pedestrian traffic.
Unless otherwise specifically restricted by city council action, groundwork and
construction of private roads and utilities may be started, at the developer's
risk, upon approval of the preliminary plat by the city council. Public street
and utility construction may begin, at the risk of the developer, after
approval of the preliminary plat by the city council and construction
improvement plans by the city of West Des Moines.
Prior to approval of the final plat, unless otherwise allowed by council, the
developer of Jordan West shall provide the appropriate agreements, easements,
and sureties for all public rights of way and other public improvements
(utilities, sidewalks, streetlights, etc.) within and associated with the
development.
A final plat applicable to each proposed development area must be approved and
recorded with the Dallas County recorder's office prior to approval of an
overlay district site plan or issuance of any building permit, including
footing and foundation permits, for construction of any structure within the
area proposed for development. (Ord. 2097, 6-29-2015)
087-03: CONDITIONS:
Whereas, title 9, chapter 9, "Planned Unit Development District", of the city
code establishes certain regulations and guidelines pertaining to accompanying
information required on plat and site plan documents. Now, therefore, the
following conditions, restrictions, and regulations are adopted as part of this
approval, to wit:
In addition to the specific plan map, the following general development
criteria shall be integrated into and made a part of this specific plan
ordinance:
   A.   General Conformance To Subdivision Ordinance: All subdivisions, public
streets, public street rights of way, and general development shall adhere to
the standards and design criteria set forth in the West Des Moines subdivision
ordinances and the most current design standards adopted by the city of West
Des Moines pertaining thereto unless otherwise stated within this ordinance.
   B.   General Conformance To Zoning Ordinance: Unless otherwise specified
herein, the development of the Jordan West specific plan shall comply with
title 9, "Zoning", of the city code or any other applicable codes.
   C.   Flood Hazard: In all areas within a 100-year frequency flood hazard
zone, or adjoining drainageways, and detention ponding areas involving
potential flood hazards, no building shall be erected that has a lowest floor,
including basements, less than one foot (1') above the determining level of the
100-year frequency flood event, and no building shall be located within twenty
five feet (25') of any easement or property boundary of a major drainageway,
stormwater detention basin, or pond, unless said location is approved as part
of a development entitlement by the city council and said building is
structurally designed accordingly.
   D.   Developer Responsibilities: Unless otherwise specifically approved by
the city council, the developer, its successors and/or assigns, if any, shall
pay all planning, engineering, and construction costs for the development of
the planned unit development as required by this ordinance, and shall pay all
costs related to approved site plans, which may include, but are not limited
to, the cost of all streets, storm sewers, sanitary sewers, water mains and
service lines, drainageway improvements, detention basins, buffers, and other
improvements as required. No occupancy permits, either temporary or permanent,
shall be issued until all necessary improvements applicable to the area/lot or
structure requesting occupancy are installed and accepted by the city of West
Des Moines. Nothing in this ordinance shall be construed to prevent the
developer, its successors and/or assigns, if any, from entering into private
agreement(s) as it/they may desire to share the cost of improvements.
   E.   Common Areas: Prior to approval of the Jordan West preliminary plat,
the developer shall put in place the OEA that shall identify responsibility for
the maintenance of all common areas in perpetuity. (Ord. 2097, 6-29-2015)
087-04: REQUIREMENTS:
Unless provided otherwise in this ordinance, all general use regulations,
performance standards and provisions set forth in title 9, "Zoning", of the
city code for the support commercial (SC), regional commercial (RC) and
residential medium-density (RM) districts shall apply to any development within
the Jordan West specific plan area. To the extent that the provisions of this
section conflict with or are more restrictive than similar provisions provided
elsewhere in the West Des Moines zoning ordinance, the provisions of this
section shall control. The following land use design criteria, development
standards, and landscaping regulations shall apply to all parcels within the
Jordan West specific plan area:
   A.   Land Use:
      1.   Parcels 1-7: All land uses as set forth in title 9, "Zoning", of the
city code for the support commercial (SC) district as permitted and permitted
conditionally shall apply in parcels 1-7 as identified on the approved Jordan
West specific plan map except as designated below:
         a.   Permitted Uses: All permitted (P) uses within the support
commercial (SC) district shall be allowed except those that have been
prohibited by this ordinance. The following uses shall also be permitted:
 
SIC 5712 Furniture stores
SIC 5731 Radio, television, consumer electronics stores
SIC 5941 Sporting goods stores and bicycle shops
SIC 5944 Jewelry stores
SIC 5999 Packing materials, boxes, padding
SIC 5999 Art, picture frames, and decoration stores
SIC 5999 Banners, flags, decals, and poster stores
 
         b.   Permitted Conditional Uses: All permitted conditional (Pc) uses
within the support commercial (SC) district shall be allowed with the approval
of the appropriate review body except those that have been prohibited by this
ordinance.
         c.   Prohibited Uses: The following permitted and permitted
conditional uses otherwise allowed in the support commercial (SC) district
shall be prohibited:
 
SIC 4925 Mixed, manufactured, or liquefied petroleum gas production and/or
         distribution
 
      2.   Parcel 8: All land uses as set forth in title 9, "Zoning", of the
city code for the residential medium-density (RM-12) district as permitted and
permitted conditionally shall apply to parcel 8 as identified on the approved
Jordan West Specific Plan sketch map:
         a.   The calculation of dwelling unit density permitted on parcel 8
shall also include in the calculation the greenway acres situated along the
west side of the property. A total of fifteen (15) acres (parcel 8 acreage
(10.5) + greenway acreage (4.5)) shall be used to calculate the number of
dwelling units permitted on parcel 8. The permitted number of units on parcel 8
shall not exceed twelve (12) dwelling units per acre. The total number of units
permitted is one hundred eighty (180) dwelling units (15 acres x 12 dwelling
units per acre).
      3.   Parcel 9: All land uses as set forth in title 9, "Zoning", of the
city code for the regional commercial (RC) district as permitted and permitted
conditionally shall apply in parcel 9 as identified on the approved Jordan West
Specific Plan sketch map, except as designated below:
         a.   Only use SIC 7999: Amusement and Recreational Services, Not
Elsewhere Classified, for the development of a family-oriented entertainment
venue comprised of a combination of any of the following recreational
activities shall be allowed in parcel 9:
            (1)   Bowling
            (2)   Video arcade
            (3)   Laser tag
            (4)   Billiards
            (5)   Escape Rooms
         A Restaurant Class 1 or 2 shall be allowed as an ancillary use in
conjunction with the family entertainment venue, but at no time shall the
establishment become a standalone Restaurant Class 2 or Bar/Restaurant or have
a drive-through.
   B.   Reserved.
   C.   Reserved.
   D.   Building Setback: Buildings shall be set back as follows: The setback
shall be measured from the perimeter PUD boundary line to the primary wall of
the structure. Intermittent encroachment into the setback shall be allowed for
bumpouts, roof overhangs, and pedestrian elements as long as minimum building
code and fire code requirements for building separations are provided.
      1.   North: Minimum of thirty feet (30').
      2.   East: Minimum of thirty feet (30').
      3.   South:
         a.   Along the south boundary of parcels 4 and 5 as indicated on the
specific plan map not otherwise adjacent to lots 12 through 19, Bridgewood plat
2: Minimum of twenty five feet (25').
         b.   Along the south boundary of parcels 5 and 6 as indicated on the
specific plan map (portions adjacent to the lots 12 through 19, Bridgewood plat
2): Minimum eighty feet (80').
         c.   Along the south boundary of parcel 8 adjacent to the greenbelt:
Minimum sixty feet (60').
      4.   West: Minimum twenty five feet (25').
      5.   No setback (0 feet) shall be required from an adjoining parcel which
is included within the overall boundaries of the Jordan West specific plan
area, except that no structure should be located closer than fifteen feet (15')
to the back of curb of any interior private drive, nor shall any building be so
located so as to block visibility at vehicle drive intersections and driveways.
      6.   Unless physically connected, all buildings shall maintain a minimum
separation of twenty five feet (25') unless otherwise required to be larger per
adopted building and fire codes.
      7.   Detached accessory structures shall not be located in the front yard
of a lot fronting a public street and shall be set back a minimum of thirty
feet (30') from perimeter boundaries and fifteen feet (15') from interior
boundaries.
   E.   Building Height:
      1.   Buildings within planning unit A as indicated on the approved Jordan
West area development plan shall not exceed thirty six feet (36') in height, as
measured from the average finished grade to the top of the parapet wall, except
as follows:
         a.   The building located on parcel 5 as indicated on the specific
plan map shall be allowed to exceed thirty six feet (36'); however, shall be no
greater than five (5) stories in height as measured from the average finished
grade to the top of the parapet wall.
         b.   Building(s) located on parcel 6 as indicated on the specific plan
map shall not exceed two (2) stories in height as measured from the average
finished grade to the top of the parapet wall.
      2.   Buildings within planning unit B as indicated on the approved Jordan
West area development plan shall not exceed three (3) visible stories of living
space. The building may be a four-story building with one level of parking
generally recessed below grade.
   F.   Parking Ratios:
      1.   Parking ratios shall conform to title 9, chapter 15 of the city
code.
      2.   At the discretion of the director of development services, a less
stringent parking calculation may be used provided the applicant can
demonstrate a parking rate less than the above is adequate due to the type of
potential use, shared uses or off peak uses.
      3.   The OEA will establish blanket ingress/egress easement benefiting
all lots.
      4.   It is the intent of the developer that limited cross parking
easements will be established. Lot owners will permit cross parking on an
occasional and incidental basis.
   G.   Parking Setbacks:
      1.   Off street parking areas shall be set back from the perimeter
boundaries of the Jordan West development as follows:
         a.   North: Minimum thirty foot (30') setback.
         b.   East: Minimum thirty foot (30') setback.
         c.   South:
            (1)   Along the south boundary of parcels 4 and 5 as indicated on
the specific plan map (adjacent to planning unit C as indicated on the approved
area development plan): Minimum five foot (5') setback unless the parking field
is shared between developments with written consent of both property owners.
            (2)   Along the south boundary of parcels 5 and 6 as indicated on
the specific plan map those portions of the lots adjacent to lots 12 through
19, Bridgewood plat 2: Minimum fifty foot (50') setback.
            (3)   Along the south boundary of parcel 8 as indicated on the
specific plan map: Minimum thirty foot (30') setback.
         d.   West: Minimum twenty five foot (25') setback.
         e.   There shall be no minimum parking lot setback between internal
lot boundaries except that parking areas should be set back a minimum of five
feet (5') from the back of curb of internal private drives or as otherwise
necessary to accommodate the incorporation of landscape vegetation for visual
screening and mitigation of paving expanses associated with off street parking.
      2.   Parking stall measurements and drive aisle widths shall conform to
title 9, chapter 15 of the city code.
      3.   No portion of any parking lot or drive aisle associated with parking
may be located within a required buffer or streetscape.
      4.   Care should be taken to ensure that parking does not block
visibility at vehicle drive intersections and driveways.
   H.   Vehicle Drive-Throughs And Canopy Areas: The intent of this development
is not to encourage the use of automobiles; however, it is recognized that
drive-ups are a key component to the functionality of certain types of
businesses due to their convenience. If, through the design review process,
including an updated traffic analysis, if necessary, it can be demonstrated
that such uses do not cause traffic congestion, do not interfere with
pedestrian movements and can be designed to minimize their presence, a maximum
of four (4) businesses with drive-ups may be permitted within the overall
Jordan West development. Drive-up facilities may be allowed in conjunction
with, but are limited to, the following types of businesses: bank, coffee shop,
dry cleaner, pharmacies, and fast food restaurants. Walk-up or pedestrian ATMs
with no vehicle access; and loading zones in which the patron exits their
vehicle and loads the merchandise/materials themselves shall be allowed as
needed.
      1.   Association With Available Vehicle Trips: The incorporation of
drive-up facilities may be limited by the type of use in association with the
available vehicle trips allowed for the entire Jordan West development.
      2.   Drive-Ups Minimized: In all instances, the presence of the drive-
ups shall be minimized through one or a combination of the following methods:
         a.   Integration of the drive-through into the building architecture
in order to eliminate the appearance as an added on canopy component.
         b.   Situating the drive-through between two (2) buildings in order to
limit the number of views thereof.
         c.   Opaque visual screening through the use of earth berming to a
height of a minimum of six feet (6') combined with vegetation of a
predominately evergreen nature.
      3.   Canopies, Including Gas: Pump stations and other drive-through
canopies must be designed to incorporate the building's architecture through
the use of similar building materials, roof design, and earth tone colors so as
to blend with environment rather than draw attention to the element. The
application of brick or stone to a minimum of two-thirds (2/3) of the height of
canopy support columns is required. When possible, canopies should be designed
as an extension of the building rather than an added on element. Gasoline
canopies shall be situated along the side of the store or interior to the site
so as to minimize the visible presence of the vehicle use element. Canopies
shall not be located parallel with and adjacent to public streets; however, may
be located adjacent to internal or private streets as long as measures such as
earthen berming and landscaping are implemented to minimize the presence
thereof.
   I.   Buffers: The provision of adequate buffering and landscaping shall be
more thoroughly evaluated and approved as part of the site plan approval. A
master landscaping plan for all buffers shall be designed and approved
concurrent with the first site plan approval requested so as to create
cohesiveness amongst the buffers. Landscape plans for each lot containing a
buffer area shall include buffer landscaping consistent with the approved
master landscaping plan. Buffering between districts or parcels and uses shall
not be required as set forth in title 9, chapter 19 of the city code.
      1.   Along Perimeter Boundaries: Buffers shall be provided along the
perimeter boundaries of the Jordan West development as follows:
         a.   North: Thirty feet (30') from perimeter PUD boundary.
         b.   East: Thirty feet (30') from the perimeter PUD boundary.
         c.   South:
            (1)   Along the south boundary of parcels 4 and 5 as indicated on
the specific plan map: No buffer required.
            (2)   Along the south boundary of parcels 5 and 6 as indicated on
the specific plan map (adjacent to lots 12 through 19, Bridgewood plat 2):
Fifty feet (50') from the PUD boundary.
            (3)   Along the south boundary of parcel 8 as indicated on the
specific plan map: Fifty feet (50') from the PUD boundary.
         d.   West: No buffer required; however, views of negative site
elements visible from the greenbelt/trail area shall be mitigated.
         e.   No buffers between internal parcels shall be required except to
mitigate undesirable elements and views.
      2.   Thirty Foot Buffers:
         a.   Required Plantings:
            (1)   One overstory tree, two (2) ornamental trees and six (6)
shrubs shall be provided per thirty five (35) linear feet of required buffer.
         b.   Vegetation Substitution:
            (1)   Two (2) ornamental trees, one evergreen tree, or six (6)
shrubs may be substituted for one required overstory tree; however, no more
than twenty five percent (25%) of the required number of overstory trees may be
substituted.
            (2)   A twenty five (25) square foot mass planting of perennials or
ornamental grasses may be substituted for three (3) shrubs.
            (3)   Plantings shall be a mix of deciduous and evergreen to ensure
year round color.
         c.   Views: It is recognized that some views of businesses are
desired; therefore, buffer vegetation may be clustered to open up view windows
to the businesses.
      3.   Fifty Foot Buffers:
         a.   Required Plantings:
            (1)   Two (2) overstory trees or two (2) evergreen, four (4)
ornamental trees and ten (10) shrubs shall be provided per thirty five (35)
linear feet of required buffer.
            (2)   At least sixty percent (60%) of plant materials provided
shall be evergreen.
         b.   Vegetation Substitution:
            (1)   Two (2) ornamental trees or eight (8) shrubs may be
substituted for one overstory tree or one evergreen.
            (2)   A twenty five foot (25') mass planting of perennials may be
substituted for three (3) shrubs.
            (3)   All overstory trees in this buffer area shall be three inch
(3") caliper minimum.
            (4)   All evergreen trees in this buffer area shall be a minimum of
six feet (6') in height when installed.
         c.   Berming:
            (1)   Along the south boundary of parcels 5 and 6 as indicated on
the specific plan map (that portion adjacent to lots 12 through 19, Bridgewood
plat 2) the earthen berming shall continue to the maximum height possible.
            (2)   Along the south boundary of parcel 8 as indicated on the
specific plan map (west of the Bridgewood Drive extension) the earthen berm
shall be undulating between three feet (3') and eight feet (8') for a distance
of fifty (50) yards from Bridgewood Drive to create a natural appearance and
aid in providing visual screening of the adjacent multi-family apartment
buildings.
            (3)   Landscaping shall be installed on top of berms in natural
appearing groupings to enhance the screening effectiveness of the berms. Berms
must include groupings of evergreens to increase their screening effectiveness.
            (4)   Said berms shall be designed in such a way as to not
negatively impact stormwater drainage or the approved stormwater management
plan for Jordan West.
         d.   Timing:
            (1)   The fifty foot (50') buffer adjacent to lots 12 through 19,
Bridgewood plat 2 shall be installed in its entirety, including berming and
plantings, with the first development application in Jordan West regardless of
said development application's location within the overall Jordan West
development.
      4.   Water Features: Ponds, lakes, wetlands, or other water features may
be placed within buffer areas given the following:
         a.   Such water features constantly contain water at a level visible
from adjoining properties and public streets;
         b.   Pond edge treatments are incorporated to enhance the
attractiveness of the element (no "wild overgrown pond edge" allowed);
         c.   The appropriate water circulation and clarification measures are
implemented and when possible, visible thus creating visual interest; and
         d.   Parking lot areas and other negative site elements are
effectively screened from views from the right of way line. Whenever possible,
vegetation for screening purposes shall be placed as close to the roadway as
possible.
   J.   Landscaping: The landscaping requirements specified herein are intended
to create an aesthetically pleasing development which enhances the appearance
and character of the city of West Des Moines, while protecting the general
health, safety and welfare of the citizens. Landscaping is required to address
the following primary aspects or consequences of development:
      • Open space protection and enhancement,
      • Mitigation of paving expanses associated with off street parking,
      • Visual screening of undesirable views, activities and/or site elements,
and
      • Street side enhancement ("streetscapes").
      The attached specific plan map illustrates the general landscaping
concept: This plan should be used as the guide for site plan development in
respect to the general locations of plant material to be provided. Additional
vegetation may be required in response to additional details of the use,
buildings, parking, etc., to be implemented. Details regarding specific
varieties, exact quantities, and the minimum size at time of planting shall be
provided and approved as part of the site plan submittal and shall meet the
general guidelines in respect to the minimum plant size traditionally applied
to development within the city. In the event that alternatives to what is shown
on the attached specific plan are desired, the minimum vegetation requirements
specified within this ordinance will need to be provided and the original
intent of the required vegetation met.
      1.   Open Space: The intent of open space is to allow for a balance
between natural areas and the built environment and to provide for the overall
beautification and "greening" of the city.
         a.   A minimum of twenty percent (20%) open space shall be provided
within each parcel as identified on the specific plan map.
         b.   Open space shall be considered all areas unencumbered by
buildings or paved areas associated with parking, drive aisles, and loading
zones. Plaza areas, water features and structures such as gazebos, arbors,
pergolas, etc., that are associated with outdoor pedestrian use areas, as well
as designated and enhanced pedestrian walkways through and between parcels may
be counted toward fulfilling the minimum open space requirement.
         c.   Vegetation at a rate of two (2) trees and three (3) shrubs per
three thousand (3,000) square feet of required open space shall be provided
within the parcel.
            (1)   Caliper: Ten percent (10%) of all required trees shall be a
minimum of three (3) to three and one-half inch (31/2") caliper. Forty percent
(40%) of all required trees shall be a minimum of two (2) to two and one-half
inch (21/2") caliper. The balance of all required trees shall be one and one-
half inch (11/2") caliper. The minimum height for evergreens shall be six feet
(6') and may be counted as two (2) to two and one-half inch (21/2") caliper.
            (2)   Vegetation Substitution:
               (A)   One evergreen tree or six (6) shrubs may be substituted
for one required tree; however, no more than twenty five percent (25%) of the
required number of trees may be substituted.
               (B)    A twenty five (25) square foot mass planting of
perennials or ornamental grasses may be substituted for three (3) shrubs.
         d.   Vegetation required as part of the open space may be placed into
off street parking areas or required buffers; however the open space vegetation
is in addition to that which would be required of buffers or parking islands/
pods and may not be counted toward fulfilling the minimum amount of vegetation
required for these areas.
      2.   Off Street Parking Areas:
         a.   All off street parking areas shall be landscaped to screen their
visibility from street rights of way and adjoining property outside of Jordan
West development.
         b.   All off street parking areas shall be aesthetically improved to
reduce obtrusive characteristics that are inherent to their function. Multiple
landscape islands combined with vegetation shall be incorporated to effectively
eliminate a "sea of asphalt/concrete" and to provide shade thus decreasing heat
reflection back into the environment. Landscape islands and/or pods shall be
implemented in accordance with the following:
            (1)   Islands or open areas shall be located at the terminus end of
all parking rows. Terminal islands shall measure at least ten feet (10') in
width and shall match, at a minimum, the stall length unless otherwise allowed
per the discretion of the director of development services.
            (2)   Linear parking islands that run the length of the parking row
shall be implemented as shown on the specific plan map. Said linear islands
shall measure a minimum of eight feet (8') in width and shall be heavily
landscaped to provide a mass of "green" within the parking lot. The
incorporation of defined pedestrian pathways within linear islands is
encouraged.
            (3)   Linear parking rows with greater than twelve (12) parking
stalls shall incorporate a landscape island or pod every six (6) stalls. At a
minimum, islands shall match the dimensions of one parking stall and pods shall
measure a minimum of six feet (6') from back of curb to back of curb.
            (4)   For every nine foot by seventeen foot (9' x 17') landscape
island and landscape pod, one tree shall be required within the parking area.
      3.   Visual Screening:
         a.   Mechanical Equipment:
            (1)   Views from public streets and adjoining property of the
negative aspects of development and land uses such as loading docks; heating,
ventilation, or air conditioning (HVAC) units; or similar electrical or
mechanical appurtenances shall be adequately screened. Said screening shall be
achieved through the use of architectural features or earth berming and
landscaping consisting of predominately evergreen material.
            (2)   All rooftop mechanical units shall be screened from views
from public and private streets and adjoining properties by the use of an
opaque screening material compatible with the architecture of the building or
architecturally designed screen walls, parapet walls, penthouse, or other
opaque material comprised of materials consistent with the associated primary
structure. Screening measures and materials shall be identified as part of the
site plan review process.
         b.   Trash Enclosures: Trash receptacles and dumpsters shall be
screened on all sides by the use of a permanent enclosure. Whenever possible,
the enclosure should be designed as an attached extension to the primary
structure rather than a freestanding structure. Enclosures shall be constructed
of materials consistent with or complementary to the primary structure.
Additionally, the enclosure should be landscaped to minimize the visual
presence and impact of the structure on surrounding properties, businesses, and
public streets.
         c.   Outdoor Storage: Unless otherwise allowed through the issuance of
a temporary use permit under the provisions of title 9, chapter 16, "Temporary
Use Permits", of the city code or the site plan review process, all outdoor
display and storage shall be prohibited.
      4.   Streetscaping: A landscaped edge or "streetscape" shall be provided
along all public and private streets and primary access drives which are not
otherwise required to provide a buffer. These streetscapes are intended to
provide desired green to the city, interest, comfort to pedestrians, visual
softening of pavement expanses, bring human scale to adjoining buildings,
minimize heat reflection, and provide traffic calming benefits. The streetscape
should have a noticeable pattern, design, or plant variety and should attempt
to serve as a distinguishing or identifiable landmark for the development.
         a.   Streetscaping shall be located within the first fifteen feet
(15') parallel and adjacent to private streets or primary access drives. The
streetscaping area may contain pedestrian sidewalks.
         b.   Vegetation within streetscape areas shall be provided at a rate
of one tree and three (3) shrubs per thirty five (35) linear feet of street or
primary access drive.
            (1)   A twenty five (25) square foot mass planting of perennials or
ornamental grasses may be substituted for three (3) shrubs.
   K.   Pedestrian Elements: Jordan West, in alignment with "Town Center
Overlay District Guidelines", aims to encourage pedestrian movement and
opportunities for pedestrian interaction through a series of interconnected
sidewalks and gathering areas. The attached specific plan map indicates the
locations and type of anticipated plaza areas and pedestrian corridors. There
are a total of four (4) anticipated plaza areas as shown on the specific plan.
Details for each of these plaza areas shall be submitted, reviewed, and
approved as part of the site plan for the adjoining parcel.
      1.   Usable Open Space: All parcels within the Jordan West development
shall provide usable open space or activity spaces through the integration of
plazas, green spaces, interconnected and enhanced pedestrian corridors and
focal point elements.
         a.   These areas shall encourage opportunities for interaction among
pedestrians through the provision of seating opportunities (benches, chairs,
tables, planter walls, etc.). Without compromising the design intent of the
plazas, the developer is encouraged to maximize the number of furniture/seating
opportunities throughout the development. Representations of the site
amenities, including street furniture that will be provided throughout this
development are included in the exhibit packet (on file in the city). Although
deviations from the illustrations are permissible, the street furniture is
intended to serve as a unifying element throughout the development.
         b.   Open space plazas areas shall incorporate a variety of hardscape
landscape materials (stone pavers, stamped concrete, field boulders, etc.) for
visual interest and variety and shall implement landscape vegetation to soften,
enhance, and delineate the areas. All plaza/pedestrian areas are required to
incorporate "green" through the incorporation of planter beds, containers, or
raised planters.
         c.   Appropriate lighting should be incorporated into the plaza areas
and along pedestrian pathways for safety reasons and to extend the usability of
the area into the evening hours. Such lighting may be provided by either pole
mounted fixtures or bollard style lighting. Primary pedestrian pathways (those
5 feet and greater in width) and plaza areas identified on the specific plan
map shall be lit to a minimum level of 0.50 foot-candle.
         d.   Plaza areas associated with establishments which serve alcoholic
beverages shall provide a definable boundary (change in material, unmovable
signage, physical feature, etc.) between the private establishments in which
alcohol consumption is allowed and the public area in which it is not. A
physical barrier (fencing, railing, landscaping, etc.) shall prohibit access
into the patio area from the public area; all access into the patio area shall
be through the interior of the establishment. The barrier specifications shall
be reviewed and approved as part of the alcohol permit application.
         e.   Unless otherwise specified, the installation of these pedestrian
elements shall be by the developer of Jordan West in conjunction with the
development of a specific lot and shall be completed prior to occupancy.
      2.   Pedestrian Connections: The overall development shall integrate
interconnected pedestrian walkways to allow and encourage pedestrian movement
from one establishment to another within the Jordan West development, as well
as to other surrounding developments. Multiple connections shall be provided
from internal pedestrian pathways to the public trail located within the
greenway west of Jordan West.
         a.   Pedestrian pathways internal to the development and across
parking areas and drive aisles shall be constructed with contrasting color,
paving material or pavement patterns to the adjoining paving in order to
provide a definable and highly visible crosswalk. Simply striping pedestrian
crosswalks shall not meet the intent of this section.
   L.   Lighting:
      1.   Fixtures used within off street parking areas shall be consistent
with those illustrated in the exhibits packet (on file in the city). Although
deviations from the illustrations are permissible, the fixtures are intended to
serve as a unifying element between parcels within the development.
      2.   Said fixtures greater than one hundred fifty feet (150') from the
existing Bridgewood residential lots shall not exceed twenty eight feet (28')
in height as measured from the ground to the top of the light structure.
      3.   Said fixtures greater than one hundred feet (100') but less than one
hundred fifty feet (150') from the existing Bridgewood residential lots shall
not exceed twenty two feet (22') in height as measured from the ground to the
top of the light structure.
      4.   Said fixtures greater than fifty feet (50') but less than one
hundred feet (100') from the existing Bridgewood residential lots shall not
exceed sixteen feet (16') in height.
      5.   No fixtures shall be located closer than fifty feet (50') to the
existing Bridgewood residential lots.
      6.   The foot-candle level at the property line adjacent to the existing
Bridgewood residential lots shall be zero.
      7.   The foot-candle level one foot (1') at all other property lines
shall be less than one.
      8.   Said fixtures are to be downcast, cutoff variety to direct lighting
to parking areas and pedestrian pathways and eliminate glare to neighboring
properties. Bulbs shall not be exposed or extend down past the fixture.
      9.   No wall packs or floodlighting are allowed. In addition to cutoff
fixtures, particular attention shall be given to eliminate hot spots and light
glare. To achieve this, additional measures may include, but are not limited
to, lowering parking lot light levels after business hours, turning off lights
not necessary for security purposes, and use of landscaping for light
screening/blockage.
      10.   As a part of the review of each site plan, a photometric plan must
be submitted. During the review, the applicant must demonstrate how lighting
will not adversely affect adjoining properties.
      11.   Fixtures located one hundred fifty feet (150') or less from the
existing Bridgewood residential lots shall be turned off no later than nine
o'clock (9:00) P.M. each night, except those lights necessary for security
purposes. Operational hours of fixtures located more than one hundred fifty
feet (150') from the existing Bridgewood residential lots shall be governed by
the OEA.
   M.   Cart Corrals: Shall be permanent fixtures and constructed with masonry,
stone or block. No signage identifying a tenant or products shall be located on
the cart corrals. Cart corrals shall be anchored to the ground to prevent
movement and misalignment due to vehicle and maintenance equipment hitting the
corral. (Ord. 2097, 6-29-2015; Ord. 2384, 10-21-2019)
087-05: ARCHITECTURE:
The intent is to create building facades throughout this development that are
varied and articulated to provide visual interest to pedestrians and to
establish a unique identity for the development. The architectural design of
any building within this development shall be acceptable to the city. The
architecture shall attempt to express a creative presentation by careful
attention to exterior building materials and details, use of fenestration, and
change in building mass within the plan and roof design to lessen the plainness
of appearance which can be characteristic of large commercial buildings.
Building design, materials, and colors shall provide continuity amongst
buildings to unite all structures within the development into one project
concept. All sides to each building shall receive high quality materials,
finishes, and details (360 degree architectural treatment). There are no
"backs" to a building. Materials should be durable, economically maintained and
of a quality that will maintain their appearance over a prolonged time.
On file with the city are conceptual architectural illustrations to be
implemented illustrating the general architectural style and materials. Once
city approval is gained on a particular building design, any changes in design
before or during construction must be reviewed and approved by the city's
development services department.
   A.   All buildings within this development shall accommodate or incorporate
the following in building design and materials:
      1.   Corporate architecture shall be prohibited.
      2.   Buildings shall be organized to create a logical and identifiable
relationship with the site and other buildings, open spaces, pedestrian
circulation paths.
      3.   The use of building articulation and materials which break up the
building mass into modules that respect a pedestrian scale and reflects
proportions similar to other buildings within the development.
      4.   The building's design should meet context and site objectives such
as providing gateways, creating visual and physical linkages and framing or
terminating views.
      5.   Variation in building height, mass and roof forms shall be provided
to create interest while still maintaining an overall building continuity.
Roofs should not be designed as attention getting devices related to the
reinforcement of signage or as an identifiable corporate image.
      6.   Entrances into buildings should be easily identified through the use
of building design and detailing. Projected or recessed entryways, change in
rooflines, addition of awnings or changes in building material are examples
that can create this effect.
      7.   Shifts in building planes/facades and variation in exterior
materials shall be incorporated to minimize long expanses of wall. Long blank
walls shall be prohibited.
      8.   Ground floor tenant areas should provide the maximum possible
glazing toward sidewalks to provide pedestrians with visual interest. Use of
reflective glass or mirrored glass is discouraged. Efforts should be made to
use clear glass on storefronts, windows and doors to promote the linkage of the
interior and exterior of buildings.
      9.   Natural materials such as brick and stone shall be used as the major
elements of the facade, architectural concrete or metal acceptable to the city
can be incorporated in the design. The use of EIFS or synthetic stucco shall be
used in moderation and primarily used as an accent or trim material and not
within six feet (6') of grade. Use of vinyl materials is prohibited.
      10.   Variation in materials, material modules, expressed joints,
textures, colors and details should be used to break up the mass of the
buildings. Materials should change with the change in building planes.
      11.   Trim and structural elements such as posts or columns shall be
sized to the scale of the building.
   B.   Architectural design for multi-family buildings shall express a
creative presentation of exterior building materials, details and treatment of
windows and doors. All facades of the building in public view or which are
visible from parcels surrounding the development shall be treated with the same
level of architectural style and detail. Design strategies to lessen the
plainness of appearance which can be characteristic of large residential
buildings shall be incorporated in the building design.
      1.   Building design shall incorporate changes in building plane, wall
heights and roof forms that break up the building into modules which reflect
the individual dwelling units within the building. Strategies include:
         a.   Facade modulation: stepping back or extending forward a portion
of the building;
         b.   Changing the roof height and form by alternating dormers, stepped
roofs, gables, or other roof elements organized with the changes in plan or to
identify individual dwelling units;
         c.   Easily identifiable entrances achieved through changes in
building form, materials and details.
      2.   Building form and materials should provide unique treatment of the
individual units, but still maintain the cohesive design of the development.
Designs that are repetitive in form and material use should be avoided. Unit
design should incorporate elements such as balconies and roof decks to
reinforce the connection between the residents and the activities within the
development. A minimum of eighty percent (80%) of the multi-family units within
the development must provide a balcony or porch to provide a usable outdoor
space of at least five feet (5') deep.
      3.   Building design shall incorporate durable and substantial buildings
materials such as brick, stone, on all sides of the building primarily on the
base (lowest) story of the building. Vertical or lap siding, shakes and stucco
can encompass the remaining area, combining a variety of colors and textures
along with trim and details to provide visual interest within the development.
Use of natural materials is encouraged, composite materials such as fiber
cement and wood composites are appropriate substitutions. Vinyl siding may be
used only with appropriately scaled trim and not as the majority cladding
material. Asphaltic shingles shall be allowed provided the shingle materials
are of a heavier grade that produces a shake or shadowing effect and is
consistent with the color and materials used for the development. Materials
should change with the change in building plane and be arranged to have the
appearance of three-dimensional elements. Trim and structural elements such as
posts or columns shall be sized to the scale of the building. Door and window
openings shall be incorporated on all sides of the building.
      4.   The architectural details of detached garages should incorporate the
materials and treatments of the dwelling unit, such as windows, doors, trim and
materials and the architectural style of the dwelling unit. Building design
should minimize the dominance of garage doors on the facade. Design options
that can mitigate the dominant appearance of garages are as follows:
         a.   Enhanced garage facade design such as the addition of engaged
columns, secondary roof forms or decorative garage doors.
         b.   For garages included in the primary building, recessing the
garage door from the surrounding facade a minimum of twelve inches (12").
         c.   Providing side entry garages for end units of primary buildings.
         d.   Limiting the detached garage building size to no more than one
hundred feet (100') in length. In addition, for every eight (8) garage bays,
there must be a total garage building separation of twenty feet (20'). (Ord.
2097, 6-29-2015)
087-06: SIGNAGE:
All proposed exterior signage requires a sign permit issued by the city of West
Des Moines through normal sign review procedures. Unless otherwise prescribed
herein, signage shall abide by the standards and regulations as set forth in
title 9, chapter 18, "Signs", of the city code for the support commercial (SC)
district and the residential medium-density (RM) district, as applicable to the
allowed land uses specified for each respective parcel.
   A.   Ground Signs:
      1.   Development Identification Signage:
         a.   A maximum of two (2) development identification signs, one per
public street frontage, which identify the name of the development shall be
allowed. Said signs shall not exceed ten feet (10') in height and one hundred
twenty five (125) square feet in overall size.
         b.   The name of the development shall be the predominate copy on the
sign with no more than three (3) tenant names displayed on the development
sign. The total copy area dedicated to tenant identification shall not exceed
sixty four (64) square feet. The tenant copy area shall be comprised of
individually attached and illuminated letters, routered sign face with push
through letters, or opaque vinyl backing to limit the illumination to the copy
of the sign and eliminated backlighting of the background areas.
         c.   Said signs shall be set back a minimum of twenty feet (20') from
ultimate public street right of way lines and out of vision triangles at
intersections.
         d.   Said signs shall be landscaped at the base of the structure and
shall have a noticeable base and/or column element comprised of brick or stone.
Ground signs throughout the Jordan West development shall be a unifying
element, consistent in design and materials. No additional mounding of soil or
berming shall be allowed to elevate the sign except as required as part of a
site plan for screening purposes.
      2.   Tenant Monument Signs:
         a.   A maximum of two (2) tenant monument signs which list the
development name and names of businesses located within the development shall
be allowed. There shall be no limit on the number of tenants identified on a
sign.
         b.   Tenant monument signs shall be a minimum of twenty feet (20')
from the public street right of way line or fifteen feet (15') from the curb of
a private street. The sign structure shall be a maximum of seven and one-half
feet (71/2') in height and no greater than sixty five (65) square feet in
overall size. If located adjacent to a private street or drive, the sign
structure shall be a maximum of six and one-half feet (61/2') in height and no
greater than forty five (45) square feet in overall size.
         c.   The tenant copy area shall be comprised of individually attached
and illuminated letters, routered sign face with push through letters, or
opaque vinyl backing to limit the illumination to the copy of the sign and
eliminated backlighting of the background areas.
         d.   Said signs shall be landscaped at the base of the structure and
shall have a noticeable base and/or column element comprised of brick or stone.
Ground signs throughout the Jordan West development shall be a unifying
element, consistent in design and materials. No additional mounding of soil or
berming shall be allowed to elevate the sign except as required as part of a
site plan for screening purposes.
      3.   Residential Identification Signs (Parcel 8 As Indicated On The
Specific Plan Map): One ground monument sign identifying the name of the
residential development shall be allowed at each vehicle access drive into
parcel 8. Said sign shall be set back a minimum of ten feet (10') back from the
back of curb of any private street and fifteen feet (15') from any public
street right of way. The maximum height for the residential monument sign shall
be five feet (5') and the maximum size of the structure shall be thirty five
(35) square feet. Said signs shall be landscaped at the base of the structure
and shall have a noticeable base and/or column element comprised of brick or
stone. Ground signs throughout the Jordan West development shall be a unifying
element, consistent in design and materials. No additional mounding of soil or
berming shall be allowed to elevate the sign except as required as part of a
site plan for screening purposes.
      4.   Directional Signage: To help facilitate vehicular movement and
provide direction to patrons to various public streets and private internal
access drives, directional signage may be permitted within the Jordan West
development at the discretion of the director of development services or their
designee. The primary intent of directional signage is not to draw people off
of the public streets but rather direct them through the streets and drives
within the development. Sign locations are generally intended to be at interior
locations within the development, thus letter size is intended to be only large
enough for a vehicle in close proximity to read it and not such that it is
legible from the exterior of the property and/or public streets. Directional
signs shall not be larger than eight (8) square feet and a maximum of four feet
(4') in height. Tenant identification may be allowed on the directional signs
if it is determined by the director of development services that identification
of a tenant is necessary and beneficial for orientation purposes. Tenant
identification is not intended as a marketing tool as part of lease agreements.
Said signs may only be located on private property within the Jordan West
development; shall not be located within public utility easements and shall be
located outside of both pedestrian and vehicle vision triangles at
intersections. A sign permit shall be issued by the city prior to installation
of any direction signs.
   B.   Wall Signage: The regulations and provisions set forth in title 9,
chapter 18, “Signs”, of the city code for the designated zoning classification
for the respective parcel shall govern sign design and placement with the
exception of the following: Parcels 5 and 6 and any individual tenant space
within Parcel 4 that does not have public street frontage shall be allowed one
square foot of wall signage per linear foot of tenant frontage which contains
the building’s primary public entrance. No wall signage shall be allowed on any
wall facing single- family residential properties. Tenant signage shall
generally be placed on the wall area of the tenant’s location within the
building, however, the management of a multi-tenant building may allow a tenant
to place a sign on another wall area of the building so long as the sign
allocations for that wall will not be exceeded and the total allowed sign area
for the building based upon the earned sign formula contained within will not
be exceeded (i.e. 1 sf per linear foot for the building frontage facing the
public street and ½ sf per linear foot of building frontage containing the
majority of the primary public entrances).
      1.   Parcel 7 shall be allowed one and one-half (11/2) square feet of
wall signage per linear foot of tenant frontage which contains the building’s
primary public entrance. No wall signage shall be allowed on any wall facing a
residential property.
      2.   All wall signage within the Jordan West development shall
incorporate aesthetic features compatible with the overall character of the
development. All wall signs will be composed of either solid individual letters
of anodized aluminum or galvanized metal or plastic attached to the building
fascia, illuminated self-contained individual letters with translucent plastic
faces set in anodized aluminum returns and trim or solid metal panels with
routed letters illuminated by recessed cabinets. To the greatest extent
possible, signs shall be contoured to minimize the excess unused area of a sign
and to minimize the amount of glow. Logos may be incorporated into wall signage
and shall not be larger than one and one-half (11/2) times that size of the
largest letter in the sign. A contoured panel sign may be allowed for logo
signs but shall be designed so that only the logo is illuminated and background
areas are covered with opaque vinyl or a routed face design. The sign
administrator shall work with the applicant to accomplish a sign for the logo
that allows for the tenant’s identity to be recognized but minimizes the
background illumination and addresses the intent of this ordinance. (Ord. 2097,
6-29-2015; amd. Ord. 2554, 1-3-2023)
087-07: VEHICLE TRIP ALLOCATION:
As part of the 2015 amendments to the area development plan, comprehensive
plan, and specific plan approved for this site and consistent with the original
traffic analysis completed by Snyder & Associates (February 12, 2007), the
traffic analysis (April 2, 2007) and the updated traffic analysis completed by
the city (May, 2015), the area included within the associated Jordan West
specific plan has been allocated one thousand four hundred seventy six (1,476)
P.M. peak hour trips. As development proposals are approved the number of
vehicle trips generated by the proposed development (based upon the number of
square feet of a proposed specific use or number of dwelling units, in
conjunction with any parameters established in the traffic report) will be
subtracted from the overall total trips allocated to the development. Approval
of this proposed specific plan does not constitute a guarantee that the
proposed plan can be implemented. Development of all parcels and implementation
of desired land uses, including specific high traffic generating tenants, will
be limited by the available number of trips. Should anticipated traffic exceed
the total trips allocated for the Jordan West development prior to full build-
out, further development of parcels may be limited or prohibited. Alternate
uses to those planned within the traffic report and approved as part of Jordan
West specific plan ordinance may be allowed, following completion of an amended
traffic study analyzing the proposed alternative and appropriate city approval
of an amendment to the respective specific plan ordinance and/or map, if
necessary, if the existing uses and the proposed change(s) collectively do not
exceed the one thousand four hundred seventy six (1,476) P.M. peak period
trips. (Ord. 2097, 6-29-2015)
087-08: FUTURE DRIVE CONNECTIONS:
The developer of the Jordan West specific plan area shall illustrate as part of
said plan the location and details of potential future access drive connections
to the adjoining lot 33, Bridgewood plat 1 property to the south. Private
ingress/egress easements for a future access connection drive shall be
established by the developer of the property included within the Jordan West
specific plan at the time of recordation of the final plat for parcels 4, 5 and
6. (Ord. 2097, 6-29-2015)
087-09: STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN:
A master stormwater management plan for the entire Jordan West development
which governs the overall stormwater management shall be submitted to and
approved by the city of West Des Moines. Specific stormwater management plans
demonstrating compliance with the approved Jordan West master stormwater
management plan, on file with the city, will be required with the development
of each site plan. The specific stormwater plans shall be prepared at the
developer's expense, by a professional engineer licensed in the state of Iowa.
All specific stormwater management plans shall comply with the city's
applicable design standards for stormwater management existing at the time each
site plan is approved. (Ord. 2097, 6-29-2015)
087-10: UTILITIES:
The developer, its successors or assigns, if any, shall construct at its cost,
and if for general public use, dedicate to the city all public sanitary sewer
mains, water mains, and storm sewers associated with Jordan West as required by
the city of West Des Moines' subdivision ordinance in accordance with
applicable city design standards. All necessary easements to allow city access
to public utilities for maintenance and repair purposes shall be executed prior
to approval and recordation of the final plat for each respective area or shall
be executed as a blanket access agreement prior to the approval and recordation
of the first final plat. Unless otherwise specified within a specific easement
document, the city shall not be responsible for reimbursement, restoration and/
or replacement of any improvements located within the public easements should
the city be required to excavate the public utilities for normal city
operations. No occupancy permits, either temporary or permanent, shall be
issued until all necessary improvements applicable to the area/lot or structure
requesting occupancy are installed and accepted by the city of West Des Moines.
Nothing in this ordinance shall be construed to prevent the developer, its
successors and/or assigns, if any, from entering into private agreement(s) as
it/they may desire to share the cost of improvements.
The placement of public utility easements within buffer parks is discouraged
due to the potential conflict between trees and the need to access the lines
for repair. Overstory and understory trees should be placed off utility lines a
minimum distance equal to the one to one (1:1) excavation trench necessary for
the deepest utility. Adequate access for maintenance vehicles shall be provided
into and through the easement areas. (Ord. 2097, 6-29-2015)
087-11: FIRE ACCESS:
   A.   All internal drive aisles and parking lots shall permit the travel of
the fire department's largest vehicle, including adequate accommodation of the
vehicle's turning needs. Approval of unique design solutions to accommodate
fire access may be granted by the city council if, the solutions proposed are
recommended by the West Des Moines fire department.
   B.   At the discretion of the city's fire marshal, "no parking fire lane"
areas may be established as necessary to ensure efficient movement and access
of the firetrucks. The developer of specific lots on which the fire lanes are
located shall be responsible for the procurement and erection of approved fire
lane signage.
   C.   All access drives and drive aisles shall maintain a minimum of twenty
feet (20') of clear pavement.
   D.   A minimum of fourteen feet (14') of vertical clearance over the travel
portion shall be maintained at all times over all vehicle travelways.
   E.   The developer or its designee shall be responsible for enforcement of
no parking lanes and maintaining adequate clearance of structures and
vegetation along and above all vehicle travelways regardless if public or
private.
   F.   Adequate fire access as determined by the city of West Des Moines fire
marshal shall be provided to built areas and to those under construction in
Jordan West at all times. (Ord. 2097, 6-29-2015)
087-12: PARK LAND AND GREENWAY DEDICATION REQUIREMENTS:
All new residential uses are subject to park land dedication requirements as
per section 10-1-4 of the city code. The original Bridgewood PUD provided the
Jordan Creek greenway located within this site to fulfill the park land
requirements for the overall Bridgewood development. The original Bridgewood
PUD, approved under the old park land dedication ordinance, included
residential uses in the NE corner of the site. If the total number of
residential dwelling units proposed on parcel 8, as identified on the specific
plan map, is equal to or less than the number of dwelling units listed in the
original Bridgewood PUD, then there will be no additional park land dedication
requirements of the Jordan West development. Park land dedication will only be
required for additional dwelling units over that anticipated and included in
the original approved Bridgewood PUD.
The greenway portion of this site still needs to be formally deeded to the city
per an existing irrevocable offer of dedication, Dallas County book 2007, page
10387. This is part of the original park land requirements for the Bridgewood
PUD. Deeding of the greenway portion of the property to the city shall be
completed with the platting of the property and prior to any issuance of a
building permit for any parcel within the Jordan West development. (Ord. 2097,
6-29-2015)
087-13: PUBLIC STREETLIGHTS:
At the time of final platting of public streets, the developer shall enter into
an agreement with MidAmerican Energy for the installation of public
streetlights along all public streets within and abutting the specific plan
area. Proof of payment to ensure installation of the public streetlights shall
be provided to the city prior to approval and recordation of a final plat
containing public streets. Installation of public streetlights shall occur in
conjunction with construction of the adjoining parcel. (Ord. 2097, 6-29-2015)
087-14: INGRESS/EGRESS:
A public access easement or easements in favor of the city of West Des Moines
allowing unrestricted public access over and through the land within the
specific plan area shall be executed prior to the approval and recordation of
the first final plat and in conjunction with the approval and recordation of
any future plat(s). (Ord. 2097, 6-29-2015)
087-15: STREET IMPROVEMENTS AND TRAFFIC SIGNALS:
   A.   Traffic Reports: A traffic report has been prepared for this
development that outlines the ultimate traffic circulation requirements for the
roadways in the vicinity of the Jordan West development. Prior to, or in
conjunction with the development of any parcel, or portion of a parcel, the
developer shall ensure that the development is constructed in accordance with
the assumptions for, and the results of, the traffic report.
Increases in land use density and/or other changes to the PUD ordinance that
would alter the original traffic analysis (i.e., change in street layout or
access locations), will require an amended traffic report, to be completed by
the city.
   B.   Related Public Street Improvements And Right Of Way Dedication: Street
improvements identified in the traffic report that are necessary to mitigate
any impacts from traffic generated by the Jordan West development are listed
below (refer to the traffic report for specific details pertaining to lane
configuration or required geometric details):
      1.   Bridgewood Drive Along The Common Boundary Of Planning Units A And B
As Indicated On The Jordan West Area Development Plan (Public/Private Street):
This street is classified as a minor collector. The developer is responsible to
construct a thirty one foot (31') back to back street (and all associated
appurtenances) with a designated northbound left turn lane (widen to 37 feet)
at E.P. True Parkway. It is intended that the public portion of this street
will terminate at the north line of the existing Bridgewood Drive and Beechtree
Lane intersection. The Bridgewood Drive extension north of this point will be
private, but shall function as a public street. Traffic calming measures shall
be permitted on the private portion of the street at the existing trail
crossing. Such measures shall be reviewed by the city engineer and the fire
marshal for safety and access.
      2.   East/West Street (Private Street): This street is classified as a
minor collector. Developer is responsible to construct a thirty one foot (31')
back to back street from the western terminus at Bridgewood Drive to the
eastern north/south street with a widened access drive from the eastern north/
south street to South Jordan Creek Parkway (1 inbound lane and 2 outbound lanes
as indicated in the approved traffic impact study for this development). No
driveways shall be located on the east/west street between Jordan Creek Parkway
and the eastern north/south street running through the development. The east/
west street shall function as a public street. The developer will be one
hundred percent (100%) responsible for any future signalization cost at the
east/west street and Jordan Creek Parkway.
      3.   North/South Street Along East Boundary Of Parcel 7 (Private Street):
This street is classified as a local street. Developer is responsible to
construct a twenty six foot (26') wide back to back street. This street must
function as a two (2) lane public street. Developer is responsible to
coordinate with the adjacent property owner to the south of Jordan West to
determine the location of this street at the south property line.
      4.   E.P. True Parkway (Public Street): This street is classified as a
minor arterial street. Ultimate street paving improvements include widening
E.P. True Parkway to have two (2) westbound lanes, two (2) eastbound lanes, a
one hundred fifty foot (150') minimum westbound left turn lane at Bridgewood
Drive, and a one hundred seventy five foot (175') minimum eastbound right turn
lane at Jordan Creek Parkway. The developer shall be responsible to extend the
existing raised median to Bridgewood Drive as part of constructing the
westbound left turn lane at Bridgewood Drive. Additionally, the developer shall
modify the existing paving to include the eastbound right turn lane at Jordan
Creek Parkway and two (2) eastbound through lanes adjacent to the Jordan West
development (this includes the area over Jordan Creek that will be deeded to
the city of West Des Moines). The developer shall deed additional right of way
to the city of West Des Moines necessary to provide, at minimum, sixty feet
(60') of comprehensive plan right of way measured from the centerline of E.P.
True Parkway adjacent to the Jordan West development. At auxiliary lanes and
intersections, the developer shall provide additional right of way necessary to
maintain a minimum of seven feet (7') clear space between the back of public
street curb to street side edge of the sidewalk or trail.
      5.   Jordan Creek Parkway (Public Street): This street is classified as a
major arterial street. The developer is responsible to construct a right turn
lane at the right in only entrance off Jordan Creek Parkway and a one hundred
foot (100') southbound right turn lane at the east/west street. Additionally,
the developer shall be responsible to modify the Jordan Creek Parkway median
projections at the intersections with the east/west street if necessary to
accommodate turning movements at the proposed access. Developer shall deed
additional right of way to the city of West Des Moines necessary to provide
82.5 feet measured from the centerline of Jordan Creek Parkway. At auxiliary
lanes, additional right of way may be required to maintain a minimum of seven
feet (7') clear space between the back of public street curb to street side
edge of the sidewalk or trail.
      6.   Private Streets: The design of all private roads within the
development shall be consistent with the recommendations of the traffic report
and shall be private in ownership. It is the intent of the developer and the
city that all private roads within Jordan West shall not subsequently be
conveyed to the city as public streets but shall remain private in perpetuity.
         a.   Twenty five foot (25') sight distance triangles shall be
maintained at all intersections to allow vehicles and pedestrians approaching
intersections to identify and anticipate potential interaction and conflicts
with other vehicles and pedestrians.
         b.   Streets shall be maintained and function (including timely snow
removal) in a fashion similar to the public expectations of a public street.
         c.   No road closures are allowed without prior permission of the
chief of police of the city of West Des Moines.
         d.   Lane configuration shall be as identified in the traffic
analysis.
         e.   Signage on private streets shall be procured and installed
consistent with the "Manual Of Uniform Traffic Control Devices (MUTCD)" and the
signing/pavement marking conventions of the city. Maintenance and replacement
of private street signage shall be the responsibility of the developer.
   C.   Construction Phasing Of Street Improvements: In accordance with the
traffic report, the developer will be required to have the improvements listed
below complete prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy for each
building.
      1.   Developer is responsible to construct all improvements to Jordan
Creek Parkway in conjunction with the construction of the east/west street
through the site, except that the Jordan Creek Parkway improvements required
for the right in access shall not be required until the right in access is
constructed.
      2.   Improvements to E.P. True Parkway may be completed in phases. If the
E.P. True Parkway and Bridgewood Drive intersection is constructed first, the
minimum improvements needed to E.P. True Parkway are from the west property
line through the intersection of E.P. True Parkway and Bridgewood Drive. If the
E.P. True RI/RO is constructed first, the minimum improvements needed are from
the future E.P. True Parkway and Bridgewood Drive intersection to Jordan Creek
Parkway. When the last intersection is constructed on E.P. True Parkway, the
remaining improvements will be required if they were not all constructed at
once. All improvements are required no later than when the north side of E.P.
True Parkway is widened.
      3.   Development of parcel 1:
         a.   The eastern north/south street shall be constructed from E.P.
True Parkway to the southern boundary of the Jordan West property.
         b.   The east/west street shall be constructed from Jordan Creek
Parkway to the eastern north/south street.
      4.   Development of parcel 2 or 3:
         a.   The eastern north/south street shall be constructed from E.P.
True Parkway to the southern boundary of the Jordan West property.
         b.   The east/west street shall be constructed from Jordan Creek
Parkway to the eastern north/south street.
         c.   The right in only road from Jordan Creek Parkway shall be
constructed.
      5.   Development of parcel 4:
         a.   The eastern north/south street shall be constructed from the
east/west street to the southern boundary of the Jordan West property.
         b.   The east/west street shall be constructed from Jordan Creek
Parkway to the Bridgewood Drive.
      6.   Development of parcel 5 or 6:
         a.   The eastern north/south street shall be constructed from the
east/west street to the southern boundary of the Jordan West property.
         b.   The east/west street shall be constructed from Jordan Creek
Parkway to Bridgewood Drive.
      7.   Development of parcel 7:
         a.   The Bridgewood Drive extension shall be constructed from the
Bridgewood Drive terminus to E.P. True Parkway.
         b.   The east/west street shall be constructed from Jordan Creek
Parkway to Bridgewood Drive.
         c.   The eastern north/south street shall be constructed from E.P.
True Parkway to the southern boundary of the Jordan West property.
      8.   Development of parcel 8:
         a.   The Bridgewood Drive extension shall be constructed from the
Bridgewood Drive terminus to E.P. True Parkway.
   D.   Access Management: To provide logical and orderly development within
the proposed development, allowable street access locations are defined on the
specific plan map and have been provided to the city for review and approval.
All development within the specific plan shall comply with the allowable
locations indicated in the approved Jordan West specific plan. Any opposing
driveway locations shall be located to directly align with each other.
   E.   Traffic Signal At Jordan Creek Parkway And E.P. True Parkway: Developer
shall not be responsible for any cost associated with the previous construction
or future modifications of the existing traffic signal at the intersection of
Jordan Creek Parkway and E.P. True Parkway.
   F.   Traffic Signal At Jordan Creek Parkway And East/West Street: Developer
shall fund one hundred percent (100%) of the cost of the possible future
traffic signal at this intersection. No city funds will be contributed toward
the financing of this traffic signal and the applicant shall obtain approval
from the city of West Des Moines prior to the signal's installation. Said
signal shall be installed with the construction of the east/west street through
the site. For northbound traffic on Jordan Creek Parkway, pavement markings
need to be added to designate a single left turn lane adjacent to the raised
median, with the area between the turn lane and the northbound through lanes
hatched out.
   G.   Traffic Signal At E.P. True Parkway And Bridgewood Drive: Development
shall fund one hundred percent (100%) of the cost of the possible future
traffic signal at this intersection. No city funds will be contributed toward
the financing of this traffic signal and the applicant shall obtain approval
from the city of West Des Moines prior to the signal's installation. Said
signal shall not be installed until the intersection meets traffic signal
warrants as contained in the "Manual On Uniform Traffic Control Devices". (Ord.
2097, 6-29-2015)
087-16: VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES:
Any person who violates the provisions of this ordinance upon conviction shall
be punished as set forth in section 1-4-1 of the city code. (Ord. 2097, 6-29-
2015)
087-17: SAVINGS CLAUSE:
If any section, provision, sentence, clause, phrase or part of the ordinance
shall be adjudged invalid or unconstitutional, such adjudication shall not
affect the validity of the ordinance as a whole or any provision, section,
subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or part hereof not adjudged invalid or
unconstitutional. (Ord. 2097, 6-29-2015)
087-18: EFFECTIVE DATE:
This ordinance shall be in full force and effect after its passage, approval
and publication as provided by law. (Ord. 2097, 6-29-2015)
   087-99: LEGISLATIVE HISTORY:
Ord. 1749, 5-21-2007; Ord. 2097, 6-29-2015; Ord. 2384, 10-21-2019.
PUD #88
PARADISE POINTE
SECTION:
088-01: Legal Description
088-02: Intent
088-03: Required Plans
088-04: Conditions
088-05: Requirements
088-06: Architecture
088-07: Signage
088-08: Vehicle Trip Allocation
088-09: Future Drive Connections
088-10: Stormwater Management Plan
088-11: Utilities
088-12: Fire Access
088-13: Public Streetlights
088-14: Ingress/Egress
088-15: Public Street Improvements
088-16: Traffic Signals
088-17: Violations And Penalties
088-99: Legislative History
088-01: LEGAL DESCRIPTION:
Outlot W, Davis Estates plat 1, an official plat, city of West Des Moines,
Dallas County, Iowa. (Ord. 1765, 7-16-2007)
088-02: INTENT:
To develop a planned commercial development which complements other
developments in the surrounding area by capitalizing upon and further promoting
a mix of uses and activities. (Ord. 1765, 7-16-2007)
088-03: REQUIRED PLANS:
The following plans shall be required as a part of the processing of any
development application for any property within the Paradise Pointe specific
plan:
   A.   Area Development Plan: An area development plan is a plan that
identifies planning units, major street patterns, master stormwater drainage
and detention concepts, utilities, shared public spaces, land use assumptions
and proposed densities. It is intended to be a tool used to promote the
communication and cooperation between adjacent property owners and developers
to ensure cohesive and unified development.
An area development plan shall be reviewed by the plan and zoning commission
and approved by the city council prior to, or in conjunction with, the review
of the specific plan for any property within said specific plan area. No change
to the area development plan shall be made without approval of an amended plan
from the appropriate reviewing bodies.
On file in the city (exhibit I) is the city council approved area development
plan for this property.
   B.   Specific Plan: A specific plan identifies development intent for each
planning unit indicated on the area development plan or more specifically
delineated on the specific plan map. The specific plan shall conform to the
general development intent identified in the approved area development plan, as
well as the "Town Center Overlay District Guidelines". The specific plan shall
be reviewed by the plan and zoning commission and adopted by the city council
by ordinance. (Ord. 1765, 7-16-2007)
This document shall constitute the specific plan ordinance for Paradise Pointe.
On file in the city and made a part of this ordinance is a specific plan map
that illustrates the overall site layout concept for Paradise Pointe (exhibit
II). This document and the associated exhibits (on file with the city clerk)
are intended to specify the components, parameters, and requirements to be
adhered to and implemented in order to ensure the realization of Paradise
Pointe development concept. It is recognized that modifications and changes in
building footprints and layout, including the combining of two (2) smaller
buildings into one larger building, may be necessary in response to market
demands and specific tenants. Additionally, it is recognized that square
footages of one building may be shifted to another or increased to accommodate
specific user's needs. These changes may be allowed with the appropriate city
approvals if the shift does not have a negative impact on the traffic patterns
for the building/area and the total number of vehicle trips does not exceed
that which has been allocated to the overall Paradise Pointe development. At
the discretion of the director of development services changes to the layout of
the development that are deemed to be "major" changes shall require an
amendment to the specific plan map and/or ordinance, whichever is applicable.
Major amendments shall require the review and approval of the plan and zoning
commission and city council. (Ord. 1765, 7-16-2007; amd. Ord. 1921, 5-31-2011;
Ord. 2127, 11-30-2015)
Where the specific plan map and specific plan ordinance conflict, the specific
plan ordinance shall prevail. (Ord. 1765, 7-16-2007)
   C.   Development Applications (Overlay District Site Plans): Site plans for
all buildings and land area within the Paradise Pointe development must meet
the intent of the approved specific plan. Site plans shall be submitted to the
city of West Des Moines for review and approval prior to the development of any
portion of the associated supporting lot. Site plans for permitted uses which
comply (as determined by the director of development services) with the design
intent as set forth in this specific plan will be subject to administrative
review and approval by the director of development services. A one week review
and comment period by each and all available members of the plan and zoning
commission and city council shall precede the administrative approval. If upon
review, two (2) or more members of the city council, plan and zoning
commission, or a combination thereof request such; or if the director of
development services deems the proposed site plan is not in compliance with the
approved specific plan or is potentially controversial, the site plan will be
processed through the traditional full site plan review and approval process.
Site plans for permitted conditional uses (Pc) as defined in the city code,
unless otherwise amended within this ordinance, shall be approved by the
appropriate review body. At the discretion of the director of development
services, an amendment to Paradise Pointe specific plan ordinance may be
required to bring consistency between the ordinance and site plan development
proposed. (Ord. 1765, 7-16-2007; amd. Ord. 1921, 5-31-2011; Ord. 2127, 11-30-
2015)
   D.   Development Improvements, Agreement: An agreement shall be established
by the developer for the property encompassed by the Paradise Pointe
development. This agreement shall identify requirements for the ongoing upkeep
and maintenance of any privately owned common grounds, structures and signs and
any other specific development improvements required by the developer in this
ordinance.
Said agreement is hereby made a part of this specific plan ordinance by
reference.
   E.   Preliminary And Final Platting: Prior to or in conjunction with any
site plan submittal for proposed development of any land within Paradise
Pointe, said area shall be preliminary and final platted, in accordance with
the city's subdivision ordinance, to delineate the parcels or lots to be
developed or sold. Lots without public street frontage, in accordance with the
city code requirements, may be allowed provided the frontage requirements of
the code have been met by an abutting or surrounding lot which is under common
ownership under an owners' association, or a cross parking and access easement
has been executed which provides for the unrestricted use and access of the
drives and parking. Platted outlots are not buildable.
Unless otherwise specifically restricted by city council action, groundwork and
construction of private roads and utilities may be started, at the developer's
risk, upon approval of the preliminary plat by the city council. Public street
and utility construction may begin, at the risk of the developer, after
approval of the preliminary plat by the city council and construction
improvement plans by the city of West Des Moines.
Prior to approval of the final plat, unless otherwise allowed by council, the
developer of Paradise Pointe shall provide the appropriate agreements,
easements, and sureties for all public rights of way and other public
improvements (utilities, sidewalks, streetlights, etc.) within and associated
with the development.
A final plat applicable to each proposed development area must be approved and
recorded with the Dallas County recorder's office prior to approval of an
overlay district site plan or issuance of any building permit, including
footing and foundation permits, for construction of any structure within the
area proposed for development. (Ord. 1765, 7-16-2007)
088-04: CONDITIONS:
Whereas, title 9, chapter 9, "Planned Unit Development District", of the city
code establishes certain regulations and guidelines pertaining to accompanying
information required on plat and site plan documents. Now, therefore, the
following conditions, restrictions, and regulations are adopted as part of this
approval, to wit:
In addition to the specific plan map, the following general development
criteria shall be integrated into and made a part of this specific plan
ordinance:
   A.   General Conformance To Subdivision Ordinance: All subdivisions, public
streets, public street rights of way, and general development shall adhere to
the standards and design criteria set forth in the West Des Moines subdivision
ordinances and the most current design standards adopted by the city of West
Des Moines pertaining thereto unless otherwise stated within this ordinance.
   B.   General Conformance To Zoning Ordinance: Unless otherwise specified
herein, the development of the Paradise Pointe specific plan shall comply with
title 9, "Zoning", of the city code or any other applicable codes.
   C.   Flood Hazard: In all areas within a 100-year frequency flood hazard
zone, or adjoining drainageways, and detention ponding areas involving
potential flood hazards, no building shall be erected that has a lowest floor,
including basements, less than one foot (1') above the determining level of the
100-year frequency flood event, and no building shall be located within twenty
five feet (25') of any easement or property boundary of a major drainageway,
stormwater detention basin, or pond, unless said location is approved as part
of a development entitlement by the city council and said building is
structurally designed accordingly.
   D.   Developer Responsibilities: Unless otherwise specifically approved by
the city council, the developer, its successors and/or assigns, if any, shall
pay all planning, engineering, and construction costs for the development of
the planned unit development as required by this ordinance, and shall pay all
costs related to approved site plans, which may include, but is not limited to,
the cost of all streets, storm sewers, sanitary sewers, water mains and service
lines, drainageway improvements, detention basins, buffers, and other
improvements as required. No occupancy permits, either temporary or permanent,
shall be issued until all necessary improvements applicable to the area/lot or
structure requesting occupancy are installed and accepted by the city of West
Des Moines. Nothing in this ordinance shall be construed to prevent the
developer, its successors and/or assigns, if any, from entering into private
agreement(s) as it/they may desire to share the cost of improvements.
   E.   Common Areas: Prior to approval of the Paradise Pointe final plat, the
developer shall put in place the OEA that shall identify responsibility for the
maintenance of all common areas in perpetuity. (Ord. 1765, 7-16-2007)
088-05: REQUIREMENTS:
Unless provided otherwise in this ordinance, all general use regulations,
performance standards and provisions set forth in title 9, "Zoning", of the
city code for the regional commercial (RC) district shall apply to any
development within the Paradise Pointe specific plan area. To the extent that
the provisions of this section conflict with or are more restrictive than
similar provisions provided elsewhere in the West Des Moines zoning ordinance,
the provisions of this section shall control. The following land use design
criteria, development standards, and landscaping regulations shall apply to all
parcels within the Paradise Pointe specific plan area:
   A.   Land Use: All land uses as set forth in title 9, "Zoning", of the city
code for the regional commercial (RC) district as permitted and permitted
conditionally shall apply except as designated below: (Ord. 1765, 7-16-2007)
      1.   Permitted Uses: Permitted uses shall include the following:
         a.   All permitted (P) uses allowed within the regional commercial
(RC) district except those that have been prohibited by this ordinance.
         b.   All permitted conditional (Pc) uses allowed within the regional
commercial (RC) district except those that have been prohibited by this
ordinance may be allowed with the approval of the appropriate review body.
(Ord. 1921, 5-31-2011)
         c.   The following size and use limitations shall apply to allowed
uses:
 
         Packing and crating: Intended for establishments which provide mail
SIC 4783 and package drop off services to the general public and businesses on
         a small scale; therefore, shall not exceed three thousand (3,000)
         square feet gfa of occupancy space.
SIC 531  Box department and grocery stores: Maximum of one hundred twenty eight
and 541  thousand (128,000) square feet gross sales floor area shall be
         allowed.
         Sit down eating places; no drive-throughs: Maximum of eighteen
SIC 5812 thousand two hundred fifty (18,250) square feet gfa total; may be
         divided among multiple establishments with a maximum of six (6)
         establishments.
         Eating places with drive-throughs, including coffee shops: Maximum of
SIC 5812 sixteen thousand (16,000) square feet gfa; maximum of three (3)
         restaurant associated drive- throughs within the development.
         Depository institutions (banks): Maximum of nine thousand (9,000)
SIC 60   square feet gfa; may be divided between a maximum of two (2)
         establishments.
 
(Ord. 2127, 11-30-2015)
      2.   Prohibited Uses: The following permitted and permitted conditional
uses otherwise allowed in the regional commercial (RC) district shall be
prohibited:
SIC 0742 Veterinary services for animal specialties with outdoor runs or
         overnight animal boarding.
SIC 0752 Boarding services with kennels and grooming services.
SIC 4522 Heliport/helistop.
SIC 541  Convenience stores.
SIC 554  Gasoline service stations with or without repair services.
SIC 75   Automotive repair, services, and parking.
SIC 7699 Recreational vehicle repair services.
SIC 7699 Household appliance repair services.
SIC 7699 Miscellaneous automotive repair services.
SIC 7832 Motion picture theaters, including drive-in.
SIC 806x Hospitals of any kind or service (general, psychiatric, respiratory,
         etc.).
 
   B.   Lot Area: Lot area less than sixty thousand (60,000) square feet may be
considered acceptable if supported by shared parking arrangements, and if
approved by the city council as part of a final plat. (Ord. 1765, 7-16-2007)
   C.   Building Setback: Buildings shall be set back as follows. The setback
shall be measured from the perimeter PUD boundary line, unless otherwise
indicated, to the visible vertical foundation wall. Intermittent encroachment
into the setback for canopies, awnings, building bump outs, outdoor dining
areas, etc., may be allowed at the discretion of the director of development
services. (Ord. 1765, 7-16-2007; amd. Ord. 1921, 5-31-2011; Ord. 2127, 11-30-
2015)
      1.   North:
         a.   Minimum of twenty five feet (25') along Coachlight Drive.
         b.   Minimum of fifty feet (50') along that portion of the boundary
which does not abut a public street.
      2.   East: Minimum of twenty five feet (25').
      3.   South: Minimum sixty feet (60').
      4.   West: Minimum twenty five feet (25').
      5.   No setback (0 feet) shall be required between internal lots unless
otherwise required by building separation requirements within adopted building
and fire codes.
   D.   Building Height:
      1.   Regulations: Except as indicated below and except for a hotel/motel,
all buildings shall abide by the maximum height restrictions of the regional
commercial (RC) district as measured from the average finished grade to the top
of the parapet wall.
      2.   Hotel/Motel: The height of any structure measured from the average
finished grade to the top of the parapet wall shall not exceed sixty five feet
(65').
      3.   Architectural Features: Vertical architectural features upon the
building itself and freestanding place making elements and landmarks such as
clock towers may exceed the maximum allowable height of the regional commercial
(RC) district to a maximum height of forty five feet (45').
   E.   Parking Ratios:
      1.   Parking ratios for restaurants (sit down and fast food) shall
provide within each lot a minimum of one space per two hundred (200) square
feet of gross leasable area (gla).
      2.   Parking ratios for all other uses shall provide within each lot a
minimum of one space per three hundred (300) square feet of gross leasable area
(gla) with a maximum of one space per two hundred (200) square feet of gla.
(Ord. 1765, 7-16-2007)
         a.   If a higher parking ratio is desired, the applicant shall be
restricted to implementing initial parking in compliance with one space per two
hundred (200) gla, with additional parking to be implemented at such time that
it is proven to the satisfaction of the director of development services that
the additional spaces are needed to accommodate the patrons of the business.
The potential additional parking stalls/area shall be identified on the
approved site plan for the parcel. Including the additional proposed parking,
said site plan must be in compliance with all other open space, buffer,
screening, landscaping, stormwater and setback requirements. At the time of
implementation of the additional parking, a minor modification request shall be
submitted to the city. Said minor modification request shall be for
notification purposes only and shall not be used as a trigger to require
changes to the site, except to bring the site into compliance with the
initially approved site plan. The minor modification request shall be
administratively approved at the discretion of the director of development
services.
      3.   At the discretion of the director of development services, a less
stringent parking calculation may be used provided the applicant can
demonstrate a parking rate less than the above is adequate due to the type of
potential use, shared uses or off peak uses. (Ord. 1765, 7-16-2007; amd. Ord.
1921, 5-31-2011; Ord. 2127, 11-30-2015)
      4.   If not already established as a blanket easement, developers of
parcels must provide a cross access parking and ingress/egress easement.
   F.   Parking Setbacks:
      1.   Off street parking areas shall be set back from the perimeter
boundaries of the Paradise Pointe development as follows:
         a.   North: Minimum twenty five feet (25').
         b.   East: Minimum twenty five feet (25').
         c.   South: Minimum sixty feet (60').
         d.   West: Minimum twenty five feet (25').
         e.   There shall be no minimum parking lot setback between internal
lot boundaries.
      2.   Minimum parking stall measurements and drive aisle widths shall
conform to title 9, chapter 15 of the city code.
      3.   No portion of any parking lot or drive aisle associated with parking
may be located within a required buffer or streetscape. (Ord. 1765, 7-16-2007)
   G.   Vehicle Drive-Throughs: The intent of this development is not to
encourage the use of automobiles; however, it is recognized that drive-ups are
a key component to the functionality of certain types of businesses due to
their convenience. If, through the design review process, including an updated
traffic analysis, if necessary, it can be demonstrated that such uses do not
cause traffic congestion, do not interfere with pedestrian movements and can be
designed to minimize their presence, a maximum of three (3) establishments with
drive-ups may be permitted within the overall Paradise Pointe development.
Drive-up facilities may be allowed in conjunction with, but are limited to, the
following types of businesses: bank, coffee shop, dry cleaners, and
restaurants. Walk-up or pedestrian ATMs with no vehicle access; and loading
zones in which the patron exits their vehicle and load merchandise/materials
themselves shall be allowed as needed with the appropriate visual screening
measures, subject to required site plan review and approval.
      1.   The incorporation of drive-up facilities may be limited by the type
of use in association with the available vehicle trips allowed for the entire
Paradise Pointe development.
      2.   In all instances, the presence of the drive-ups and queuing lanes
shall be minimized through one or a combination of the following methods:
         a.   Integration of the drive-through into the building architecture
in order to eliminate the appearance as an added on canopy component.
         b.   Situating the drive-through between two (2) buildings in order to
limit the number of views thereof.
         c.   Opaque visual screening through implementation of earthen berms
in combination with vegetation, decorative walls, fencing, etc., to a minimum
height of four feet (4') as measured from the top of curb of an adjoining
public street. (Ord. 1921, 5-31-2011)
   H.   Buffers: The provision of adequate buffering and landscaping shall be
more thoroughly evaluated and approved as part of the site plan approval for
individual lots. Additional buffer and landscaping may be required at that time
in response to additional details of the use, buildings, parking, loading
docks, mechanical equipment, etc., to be implemented.
      1.   Buffering between districts or parcels and uses shall not be
required as set forth in title 9, chapter 3 of the city code.
      2.   Buffers shall be provided along the perimeter boundaries of the
Paradise Pointe development as follows:
         a.   North: Thirty feet (30') from property boundary line along that
portion that does not abut a public street.
         b.   East and west: None required; streetscape required in lieu of.
         c.   South: Minimum sixty feet (60') from ultimate street right of way
line of Mills Civic Parkway.
         d.   No buffers between internal parcels shall be required except to
mitigate undesirable elements and views.
      3.   The implementation of vegetation as indicated below shall be
required. Earth berming shall be implemented whenever possible to enhance
buffering and screening of otherwise negative site elements, but is not
required. Buffers should be designed to achieve the maximum amount of screening
of negative elements from the maximum number of viewpoints with vegetation
layered to ensure adequate blockage of views and to create depth and a sense of
naturalness. Care should be taken to ensure that "through views" under tree
canopies are adequately blocked. It is recognized that some views of businesses
are desired; therefore, buffer vegetation may be clustered and situated to
screen parking and drive-throughs associated with the businesses and other
negative site elements such as trash enclosures, transformers, loading docks,
etc.
      4.   The minimum landscaping within required buffers shall be provided as
follows. Buffers on adjacent parcels shall be so designed so as to serve as a
visual continuation of the buffers and a unifying element between the two (2)
parcels. Buffers adjacent to streetscapes shall make a natural transition in
order to be visually cohesive.
         a.   Thirty foot (30') buffer:
            (1)   One overstory tree, two (2) ornamental or evergreen trees,
and six (6) shrubs shall be provided per thirty five (35) linear feet of
required buffer.
         b.   Sixty foot (60') buffer:
            (1)   One overstory tree and three (3) ornamental or evergreen
trees, and three (3) shrubs shall be provided per thirty five (35) linear feet
of required buffer.
         c.   Vegetation substitution:
            (1)   Two (2) ornamental trees, one evergreen tree, or six (6)
shrubs may be substituted for one required overstory tree; however, no more
than twenty five percent (25%) of the required number of overstory trees may be
substituted.
            (2)   A twenty five (25) square foot mass planting of perennials or
ornamental grasses may be substituted for three (3) shrubs.
         d.   Landscape vegetation required within buffer areas is in addition
to the landscape vegetation required of open space and parking areas.
      5.   Ponds, lakes, wetlands, or other water features may be placed within
the buffer area given the following:
         a.   Such water features constantly contain water at a level visible
from adjoining properties and public streets;
         b.   Pond edge treatments are incorporated to enhance the
attractiveness of the element (no "wild overgrown pond edge" allowed); and
         c.   The appropriate water circulation and clarification measures are
implemented.
   I.   Landscaping: The landscaping requirements specified herein are intended
to create an aesthetically pleasing development which enhances the appearance
and character of the city of West Des Moines, while protecting the general
health, safety and welfare of the citizens. Landscaping is required to address
the following primary aspects or consequences of development:
•   Open space protection and enhancement,
•   Mitigation of paving expanses associated with off street parking,
•   Visual screening of undesirable views, activities and/or site elements, and
•   Street side enhancement ("streetscapes").
At the time of site plan review for each lot, landscaping shall be evaluated to
ensure achievement of the standards stated within this specific plan ordinance.
Additional vegetation beyond that required herein may be required to be
implemented in response to additional details of the use, buildings, parking,
site layout, etc. Details regarding specific varieties, exact quantities, and
the minimum size at time of planting shall be provided and approved as part of
the site plan submittal for each lot and shall meet the general guidelines in
respect to the minimum plant size traditionally applied to development within
the city.
      1.   Open Space: The intent of open space is to allow for a balance
between natural areas and the built environment and to provide for the overall
beautification and "greening" of the city.
         a.   A minimum of twenty percent (20%) open space shall be provided
within each parcel as identified on the specific plan map.
         b.   Open space shall be considered all areas unencumbered by
buildings or paved areas associated with parking, drive aisles, and loading
docks or zones. Plaza areas, water features and structures such as gazebos,
arbors, pergolas, etc., that are associated with outdoor pedestrian use areas,
as well as designated and enhanced pedestrian walkways through and between
parcels may be counted toward fulfilling the minimum open space requirement.
         c.   Vegetation at a rate of two (2) trees and three (3) shrubs per
three thousand (3,000) square feet of required open space shall be provided
within the parcel.
            (1)   Ten percent (10%) of all required trees shall be a minimum of
three (3) to three and one-half inch (31/2") caliper. Forty percent (40%) of
all required trees shall be a minimum of two (2) to two and one-half inch (21/
2") caliper. The balance of all required trees shall be one and one-half inch
(11/2") caliper. The minimum height for evergreens shall be six feet (6') and
may be counted as two (2) to two and one-half inch (21/2") caliper. (Ord. 1765,
7-16-2007)
            (2)   Vegetation substitution:
   (A) One evergreen tree or six (6) shrubs may be substituted for one required
tree; however, no more than twenty five percent (25%) of the required number of
trees may be substituted unless specifically approved by the director of
development services in order to meet a defined design intent. (Ord. 1765, 7-
16-2007; amd. Ord. 1921, 5-31-2011; Ord. 2127, 11-30-2015)
   (B) A twenty five (25) square foot mass planting of perennials or ornamental
grasses may be substituted for three (3) shrubs.
         d.   Vegetation required as part of the open space may be placed into
off street parking areas, streetscapes or required buffers; however the open
space vegetation is in addition to that which would be required of buffers or
parking islands/pods and may not be counted toward fulfilling the minimum
amount of vegetation required for these areas.
      2.   Off Street Parking Areas:
         a.   All off street parking areas shall be landscaped to screen their
visibility from street rights of way and adjoining property outside of Paradise
Pointe development.
         b.   All off street parking areas shall be aesthetically improved to
reduce obtrusive characteristics that are inherent to their function. Multiple
landscape islands combined with vegetation shall be incorporated to effectively
eliminate a "sea of asphalt/concrete" and to provide shade thus decreasing heat
reflection back into the environment. Landscape islands and/or pods shall be
implemented in accordance with the following: (Ord. 1765, 7-16-2007)
            (1)   Islands or open areas shall be located at the terminus end of
all parking rows. Terminal islands shall measure at least ten feet (10') in
width and shall match, at a minimum, the stall length unless otherwise allowed
per the discretion of the director of development services. (Ord. 1765, 7-16-
2007; amd. Ord. 1921, 5-31-2011; Ord. 2127, 11-30-2015)
            (2)   Linear parking islands that run the length of the parking row
shall be implemented every six (6) rows of parking. Said linear islands shall
measure a minimum of eight feet (8') in width and shall be landscaped to
provide "green" within the parking lot. The incorporation of defined pedestrian
pathways within these linear islands is encouraged.
            (3)   Linear parking rows with greater than twelve (12) parking
stalls shall incorporate a landscape island or pod every six (6) stalls. At a
minimum, islands shall match the dimensions of one parking stall and pods shall
measure a minimum of six feet (6') from back of curb to back of curb.
            (4)   For every twelve (12) parking stalls, one tree and two (2)
shrubs or a twenty (20) square foot massing of perennials or ornamental grasses
shall be located within the islands or pods within the parking area.
      3.   Visual Screening:
         a.   Mechanical Equipment:
            (1)   Ground level views from public streets and adjoining
properties of the negative aspects of development and land uses such as loading
docks; heating, ventilation, or air conditioning (HVAC) units; or similar
electrical or mechanical appurtenances shall be adequately screened. Said
screening shall be achieved through the use of architectural enclosures and/or
earth berming and landscaping consisting of evergreen material for year round
screening.
            (2)   All rooftop mechanical units shall be screened from ground
level views from public streets and adjoining properties through
architecturally incorporated opaque screen walls, raised parapet walls,
penthouse feature, or other opaque material comprised of materials consistent
with the associated primary structure. Screening measures and materials shall
be reviewed as part of the site plan review process. Due to variation in
building heights at and adjacent to the northern end of the development, it is
recognized that complete opaque screening of views from the taller buildings of
rooftop equipment on single story or lower buildings may not be achievable.
         b.   Trash Enclosures: Trash receptacles and dumpsters shall be
screened by the use of a permanent enclosure. Whenever possible, the enclosure
should be designed as an attached extension to the primary structure rather
than a freestanding structure. Enclosures shall be constructed of materials
consistent with or complementary to the primary structure. Additionally, the
enclosure should be landscaped to minimize the visual presence and impact of
the structure on surrounding properties, businesses, and public streets.
      4.   Streetscaping: A landscaped edge or "streetscape" shall be provided
along all public streets which are not required to provide a buffer. These
streetscapes are intended to provide desired green to the city, interest,
comfort to pedestrians, visual softening of pavement expanses, bring human
scale to adjoining buildings, minimize heat reflection, and provide traffic
calming benefits. The streetscape should have a noticeable pattern, design, or
plant variety and should attempt to serve as a distinguishing or identifiable
landmark for the development.
         a.   Streetscaping shall be located within the first fifteen feet
(15') parallel and adjacent to the public street right of way or back of curb
of private streets and primary access drives.
         b.   Vegetation within streetscape areas shall be provided at a rate
of one tree and three (3) shrubs per thirty five (35) linear feet of
streetscape. A twenty five (25) square foot mass planting of perennials or
ornamental grasses may be substituted for three (3) shrubs.
         c.   Vegetation required of streetscapes shall be in addition to
vegetation required of parking and open space. Vegetation required as part of
open space may be placed into streetscapes; however the open space vegetation
may not be counted toward fulfilling the minimum amount of vegetation required
for the streetscape.
   J.   Pedestrian Elements: The Paradise Pointe development, in alignment with
"Town Center Overlay District Guidelines", aims to encourage pedestrian
movement and opportunities for pedestrian interaction through a series of
interconnected sidewalks and gathering areas. The specific plan map on file in
the city indicates the locations and type of anticipated plaza areas and
pedestrian corridors. Conceptual illustrations for the plaza areas indicated
are included in the exhibit packet (on file with the city clerk). Specific
details and final materials and layouts for each of these plaza areas shall be
submitted, reviewed, and approved as part of the site plan for the associated
lot.
      1.   Usable Open Space: All parcels within the Paradise Pointe
development shall provide usable open space or activity spaces through the
integration of plazas, green spaces, interconnected and enhanced pedestrian
corridors and focal point elements.
         a.   These areas shall encourage opportunities for interaction among
pedestrians through the provision of seating opportunities (benches, chairs,
tables, planter walls, etc.). Without compromising the design intent of the
plazas, the developer is encouraged to maximize the number of furniture/seating
opportunities throughout the development. Representations of the site
amenities, including street furniture that will be provided throughout this
development are included in the exhibit packet (on file with the city clerk).
Although deviations from the illustrations are permissible, the street
furniture is intended to serve as a unifying element throughout the
development.
         b.   Open space plaza areas shall incorporate a variety of hardscape
landscape materials (stone pavers, stamped concrete, field boulders, etc.) for
visual interest and variety and shall implement landscape vegetation to soften,
enhance, and delineate the areas. All plaza/pedestrian areas are required to
incorporate "green" through the incorporation of planter beds, containers, or
raised planters.
         c.   Appropriate lighting should be incorporated into the plaza areas
and along pedestrian pathways for safety reasons and to extend the usability of
the area into the evening hours. Such lighting may be provided by either pole
mounted fixture or bollard style lighting.
         d.   Plaza areas associated with establishments which serve alcoholic
beverages shall provide a definable boundary (change in material, unmovable
signage, physical feature, etc.) between the private establishments in which
alcohol consumption is allowed and the public area in which it is not. A
physical barrier (fencing, railing, landscaping, etc.) shall prohibit access
into the patio area from the public area; all access into the patio area shall
be through the interior of the establishment. The barrier specifications shall
be reviewed and approved as part of the alcohol permit application.
         e.   Unless provided prior to site development, the installation of
these pedestrian elements shall occur in conjunction with the development of a
specific lot and shall be completed prior to issuance of a final occupancy
permit.
      2.   Pedestrian Connections: The overall development shall integrate
interconnected pedestrian walkways to allow and encourage pedestrian movement
from one establishment to another within the Paradise Pointe development, as
well as to other surrounding developments.
         a.   Pedestrian pathways internal to the development and across
parking areas and drive aisles shall be constructed with contrasting color,
paving material or pavement patterns to the adjoining paving in order to
provide a definable and highly visible crosswalk. Simply striping pedestrian
crosswalks shall not meet the intent of this section.
   K.   Lighting:
      1.   Fixtures used within off street parking areas shall be consistent
with those illustrated in the exhibits packet (on file with the city clerk).
Although deviations from the illustrations are permissible, the fixtures are
intended to serve as a unifying element between parcels within the development.
      2.   Fixtures used within off street parking areas shall be consistent
with those illustrated in the exhibits packet (on file with the city clerk).
Although deviations from the illustrations are permissible, the fixtures are
intended to serve as a unifying element between parcels within the development.
      3.   Said fixtures shall not exceed twenty five feet (25') in height as
measured from the ground to the top of the light structure.
      4.   No wall packs without shields to direct the light to a defined
target are allowed. No floodlighting is allowed. In addition to cutoff
fixtures, particular attention shall be given to eliminate hot spots and light
glare. To achieve this, additional measures may include, but are not limited
to, lowering parking lot light levels after business hours, turning off lights
not necessary for security purposes, and use of landscaping for light
screening/blockage.
      5.   As a part of the review of each site plan, a photometric plan must
be submitted. During the review, the applicant must demonstrate how lighting
will not adversely affect adjoining properties.
   L.   Cart Corrals: If implemented, cart corrals shall be permanent fixtures
and constructed with masonry, stone, or block. No tenant or product
identification signage for advertising purposes may be located on the cart
corrals. (Ord. 1765, 7-16-2007)
088-06: ARCHITECTURE:
The intent is to create building facades throughout this development that are
varied and articulated to provide visual interest to pedestrians and to
establish a unique identity for the development. The architectural design of
any building within this development shall be acceptable to the city. The
architecture shall attempt to express a creative presentation by careful
attention to exterior building materials and details, use of fenestration, and
change in building mass within the plane and roof design to lessen the
plainness of appearance which can be characteristic of large retail buildings,
hotels, and typical multi-tenant "strip" buildings. Building design, materials,
trim, detailing, and colors shall provide continuity amongst buildings to unite
all structures within the development into one project concept. All sides to
each building shall receive high quality materials, finishes, and details (360
degree architectural treatment). There are no "backs" to a building. Materials
should be durable, economically maintained and of a quality that will maintain
their appearance over a prolonged time.
On file with the city are conceptual architectural illustrations of the general
building style and material options. Once city approval is gained on a
particular building design, any alteration in design before or during
construction must be reviewed and approved by the city's development services
department.
   A.   All buildings within this development shall accommodate or incorporate
the following in building design and materials: (Ord. 1765, 7-16-2007)
      1.   Corporate architecture shall be prohibited. Limited use of
architectural elements characteristic of prototypical architecture may be
allowed at the discretion of the director of development services or the
appropriate reviewing and approval body. Implementation of these architectural
elements shall be minimized and whenever possible modified to give a unique
image to the establishment. No standard corporate building design without
modifications shall be implemented. (Ord. 1765, 7-16-2007; amd. Ord. 1921, 5-
31-2011; Ord. 2127, 11-30-2015)
      2.   Buildings shall be organized to create a logical and identifiable
relationship with the site and other buildings, open spaces, and pedestrian
circulation paths.
      3.   The use of building articulation and materials which break up the
building mass into modules that respect a pedestrian scale and reflects
proportions similar to other buildings within the development.
      4.   The building's design should meet context and site objectives such
as providing gateways, creating visual and physical linkages and framing or
terminating views.
      5.   Variation in building height, mass and roof forms shall be provided
to create interest while still maintaining an overall building continuity.
Roofs should not be designed as attention getting devices related to the
reinforcement of signage or as an identifiable corporate image.
      6.   Entrances into buildings should be easily identified through the use
of building design and detailing. Projected or recessed entryways, change in
rooflines, addition of awnings or changes in building material are examples
that can create this effect.
      7.   Shifts in building planes/facades and variation in exterior
materials shall be incorporated to minimize long expanses of wall. Long blank
walls shall be prohibited.
      8.   Variation in materials, material modules, expressed joints,
textures, colors and details should be used to break up the mass of the
buildings. Materials should change with the change in building planes.
      9.   Trim and structural elements such as posts or columns shall be sized
to the scale of the building.
      10.   Whenever possible, ground floor tenant areas should provide the
maximum possible glazing toward sidewalks to provide pedestrians with visual
interest. Use of reflective glass or mirrored glass is discouraged. Efforts
should be made to use clear glass on storefronts, windows and doors to promote
the linkage of the interior and exterior of buildings.
      11.   Natural materials such as brick and stone shall be used as the
major elements of the facade. Architectural concrete or metal acceptable to the
city may be incorporated in the design. CMU shall have integrated color rather
than surface applied paint/staining and should generally be of a split face
texture for interest; smooth CMU may be used in conjunction with split face for
accent purposes. The use of EIFS or synthetic stucco shall be used in
moderation and primarily used as an accent or trim material; EIFS or synthetic
stucco may not be the predominate building material. Use of vinyl materials is
prohibited. (Ord. 1765, 7-16-2007)
088-07: SIGNAGE:
All proposed ground and exterior wall signage requires a sign permit issued by
the city of West Des Moines through normal sign review procedures. Unless
otherwise prescribed herein, signage shall abide by the standards and
regulations as set forth in title 9, chapter 18, "Signs", of the city code for
the regional commercial (RC) district.
   A.   Ground Signs:
      1.   Project Entry Signage:
         a.   A maximum of two (2) project entry signs which identify the name
of the development and a maximum of two (2) tenants within the development
shall be allowed.
         b.   The sign structure shall not exceed ten feet (10') in height and
one hundred twenty five (125) square feet in overall size.
         c.   The name of the development shall be the predominate copy on the
sign with the tenant copy smaller and secondary to the development
identification copy. The tenant identification copy area shall not exceed fifty
percent (50%) of the total sign structure area. The tenant copy area shall be
comprised of individually attached and illuminated letters or a panel sign
sized and treated (opaque vinyl or router face) to minimize the amount of the
sign area that illuminates.
         d.   Said signs shall be set back a minimum of twenty feet (20') from
ultimate public street right of way lines and out of vision triangles at
intersections.
         e.   Said signs shall be landscaped at the base of the sign. No
additional mounding of soil or berming shall be allowed to elevate the sign
except as required as part of a site plan for screening purposes.
      2.   Tenant Monument Signs:
         a.   A maximum of three (3) tenant monument signs which list the
development name and names of businesses located within the development shall
be allowed.
         b.   The sign structure shall not exceed ten feet (10') in height and
sixty five (65) square feet in overall size. The tenant copy area shall not
exceed thirty five (35) square feet. The tenant copy area shall be comprised of
a router face panel to minimize the amount of the sign area that illuminates
and gives the appearance of individual letters.
         c.   Said signs shall be set back a minimum of twenty feet (20') from
ultimate public street right of way lines and out of vision triangles at
intersections.
         d.   Said signs shall be landscaped at the base of the sign. No
additional mounding of soil or berming shall be allowed to elevate the sign
except as required as part of a site plan for screening purposes.
      3.   Directional Signs:
         a.   Directional signs may be allowed interior to the development to
assist in directing patrons through the site. The intent of directional signage
is not to draw people off of the public street, so letter size and sign
location shall be designed to minimize visibility and readability from the
exterior of the property.
         b.   Said signs shall be a maximum height of four feet (4') and
maximum square footage of eight (8) square feet. (Ord. 1765, 7-16-2007)
   B.   Wall Signage:
      1.   Regulations: All wall signage shall consist of individual three-
dimensional letters attached directly to the building. No cabinet or panel
signs shall be allowed except for contoured cabinet signs necessary to display
logos. In the event cabinet signs are necessary to accommodate a logo, said
cabinets shall be contoured to the logo shape and every measure possible shall
be implemented to minimize the amount of illuminated background. Raceways shall
be prohibited.
The use of projecting signs (which may also be referred to as blade signs)
shall be allowed within the PUD as part of the wall signage allowed for a
tenant. Any projecting sign shall comply with the applicable regulations in the
West Des Moines sign code and the following unless noted otherwise elsewhere in
this PUD ordinance:
         a.   Only one projecting sign allowed per tenant space.
         b.   The projecting sign shall be counted as part of the allowed wall
signage for the tenant space and shall not be greater than one-half (1/2) of
the total allowed wall signage earned by the wall on which the sign will be
mounted.
         c.   The sign may have two (2) faces but only one side of the sign
will be counted to determine the size of the sign. No projecting sign shall
extend further away from the wall than five feet (5') to the furthest edge.
         d.   All projecting signs shall be designed in such a manner that only
the text, or graphic is illuminated, not the entire background of the sign,
such as routered face or individual channel letters on an opaque backer.
         e.   The thickness measured between the principal faces of any
projecting sign shall not exceed eighteen inches (18").
         f.   The projecting sign shall not be permitted to extend above the
building roof more than one-half (1/2) the height of the sign. (Ord. 2116, 10-
5-2015)
      2.   Location:
         a.   Single-tenant buildings: Wall signage may be located on any
facade; however no sign on one facade may be greater in square footage than
that facade is long (i.e., a 50 foot wall plane may place up to 50 square feet
on said plane).
         b.   Multi-tenant buildings: Wall signage shall only be located on a
wall plane associated with and contiguous to the tenant's leased space.
         c.   Wall signage located above a roof element shall be allowed at the
discretion of the director of community development provided that the signage
is located on a flat wall. Any illumination of the sign shall be by reverse
lighting to project the light back towards the wall to create a "halo" effect;
no front illumination is allowed. The individual letters shall have returns to
screen the lighting source and shall be placed so the space between the wall
plane and back of the letter is no greater than two inches (2").
      3.   Allowed Per Building Or Tenant: Wall signage allowed per building or
tenant shall be allowed as follows:
         a.   Those tenants located at the north end of the development and
towards the interior of the site (lots 9 and 10, Paradise Pointe plat 1):
Allowed two (2) square feet of wall signage per every one linear foot of
southern store facade (2:1 ratio).
         b.   Single-tenant building: Allowed one square foot per one linear
foot based on the longest side.
         c.   Multi-tenant building: Allowed one square foot per one linear
foot of facade which contains the main public entry into the tenant lease area.
In addition, one-half (1/2) square foot per one linear foot of facade which
contains a secondary public entry into the tenant lease area shall be allowed.
The signage may be divided between front and back wall planes; however, no sign
on one facade may be greater in square footage than that facade is long (i.e.,
for a 20 foot tenant bay, up to 20 square feet may be placed on each side of
the building).
   C.   LED, Neon, Or Other Fiber Optic Signs:   LED, neon, or other fiber
optic signs may be permitted at the discretion of the sign administrator. No
moving or blinking lights or electronic reader boards shall be allowed.
   D.   Paradise Pointe Identification: Nonilluminated signage, medallions,
keystones, banners, pavement markings, etc., that displays the development's
logo, initials, or name may be integrated into the development to further
enhance the character of the development. No tenant identification shall be
allowed in conjunction with this type of Paradise Pointe identification.
      1.   No tenant identification is allowed.
      2.   These identifiers will not count towards signage and will need to be
identified and reviewed at the time of site plan or permitted conditional use
reviews. (Ord. 1765, 7-16-2007)
088-08: VEHICLE TRIP ALLOCATION:
A traffic impact study (traffic report) dated March 16, 2007, has been prepared
by Snyder & Associates and approved by the development services department
engineering division of the city of West Des Moines for the Paradise Pointe
development. Per the traffic impact study, the Paradise Pointe development has
been allocated one thousand five hundred ninety two (1,592) P.M. peak hour
trips; one thousand sixty four (1,064) A.M. peak hour trips; and twenty
thousand five hundred forty nine (20,549) ADT trips. As development proposals
are approved the number of vehicle trips generated by the proposed development
(based upon the number of square feet of a proposed specific use in conjunction
with any parameters established in the traffic impact study) will be subtracted
from the total trips allocated to the development. Approval of this proposed
specific plan does not constitute a guarantee that the proposed plan can be
implemented. Development of all parcels and implementation of desired land
uses, including specific high traffic generating tenants, will be limited by
the available number of trips. Should anticipated traffic exceed the total
trips allocated for the Paradise Pointe development prior to full build out,
further development of parcels may be limited or prohibited. Alternate uses to
those planned within the traffic impact study and approved as part of this
Paradise Pointe specific plan ordinance may be allowed, following completion of
an amended approved traffic study analyzing the proposed alternative and
appropriate city approval of an amendment to the respective specific plan
ordinance and/or map, if necessary, if the existing uses and the proposed
change(s) collectively do not exceed the total trips allocated to the
development. (Ord. 1765, 7-16-2007)
088-09: FUTURE DRIVE CONNECTIONS:
The developer of lot 11, Paradise Pointe plat 1 shall provide at the time of
site development an access drive connection to the adjoining eastern property.
Private ingress/egress easements to allow this future access connection drive
shall be executed by the developer of the overall Paradise Pointe development
at the time of recordation of the final plat. Additionally, the developer shall
execute an agreement with the city of West Des Moines which establishes that
the construction/paving of that connection drive portion that is located on lot
11 will be constructed/paved by the developer or subsequent owner lot 11,
Paradise Pointe plat 1. (Ord. 1765, 7-16-2007)
088-10: STORM WATER MANAGEMENT PLAN:
A master storm water management plan for the entire development which governs
the overall storm water management of the development shall be submitted to and
approved by the city of West Des Moines. Specific storm water management plans
demonstrating compliance with the approved Paradise Pointe master storm water
management plan, on file with the city will be required with the development of
the site plan for each lot. The specific storm water plans shall be prepared at
the developer's expense, by a professional engineer licensed in the state of
Iowa. All specific storm water management plans shall comply with the city's
applicable design standards for storm water management existing at the time
each site plan is approved.
Design of the Paradise Point storm sewer routes water from city streets through
private storm sewer and detention facilities. The city of West Des Moines shall
assume no maintenance responsibility or liability of the private detention
facilities, storm sewer pipes or structures on the Paradise Point property.
(Ord. 1765, 7-16-2007)
088-11: UTILITIES:
The developer, its successors or assigns, if any, shall construct at its cost,
and if for general public use, dedicate to the city all sanitary sewer mains,
water mains, and storm sewers associated with the Paradise Pointe development
as required by the city of West Des Moines' subdivision ordinance in accordance
with applicable city design standards. All necessary easements to allow city
access to public utilities for maintenance and repair purposes shall be
executed prior to approval and recordation of the final plat for each
respective area or shall be executed as a blanket access agreement prior to the
approval and recordation of the first final plat. Unless otherwise specified
within a specific easement document, the city shall not be responsible for
reimbursement, restoration and/or replacement of any improvements located
within the public easements should the city be required to excavate the public
utilities for normal city operations. No occupancy permits, either temporary or
permanent, shall be issued until all necessary improvements applicable to the
area/lot or structure requesting occupancy are installed and accepted by the
city of West Des Moines. Nothing in this ordinance shall be construed to
prevent the developer, its successors and/or assigns, if any, from entering
into private agreement(s) as it/they may desire to share the cost of
improvements.
The placement of public utility easements within buffer parks and landscape
islands within parking areas is discouraged due to the potential conflict
between trees and the need to access the lines for repair. Overstory and
understory trees should be placed off utility lines a minimum distance equal to
the one to one (1:1) excavation trench necessary for the deepest utility.
Adequate access for maintenance vehicles shall be provided into and through the
easement areas. (Ord. 1765, 7-16-2007)
088-12: FIRE ACCESS:
   A.   All internal drive aisles and parking lots shall permit the travel of
the fire department's largest vehicle, including adequate accommodation of the
vehicle's turning needs. Approval of unique design solutions to accommodate
fire access may be granted by the city council, if the solutions proposed are
recommended by the West Des Moines fire department.
   B.   At the discretion of the city's fire marshal, "no parking fire lane"
areas may be established as necessary to ensure efficient movement and access
of the firetrucks. The developer of specific lots on which the fire lanes are
located shall be responsible for the procurement and erection of approved fire
lane signage.
   C.   All access drives and drive aisles shall maintain a minimum of twenty
feet (20') of clear pavement.
   D.   A minimum of fourteen feet (14') of vertical clearance over the travel
portion shall be maintained at all times over all vehicle travelways.
   E.   The developer or its designee shall be responsible for enforcement of
no parking lanes and maintaining adequate clearance of structures and
vegetation along and above all vehicle travelways regardless if public or
private.
   F.   Adequate fire accesses as determined by the city's fire marshal shall
be provided at all times to those areas under construction. (Ord. 1765, 7-16-
2007)
088-13: PUBLIC STREETLIGHTS:
At the time of final platting, the developer shall enter into an agreement with
MidAmerican Energy for the installation of public streetlights along all public
streets within and abutting the specific plan area. Surety to ensure
installation of the public streetlights shall be provided to the city prior to
approval and recordation of the first final plat. Installation of public
streetlights shall occur in conjunction with construction of the adjoining
parcel. (Ord. 1765, 7-16-2007)
088-14: INGRESS/EGRESS:
A public access easement or easements in favor of the city of West Des Moines
allowing unrestricted public access over and through the land within the
specific plan area shall be executed prior to the approval and recordation of
the first final plat and in conjunction with the approval and recordation of
any future plat(s). (Ord. 1765, 7-16-2007)
088-15: PUBLIC STREET IMPROVEMENTS:
Improvements and modifications to adjoining public roads as identified within
the traffic study shall be constructed and accepted by the city council or the
developer may petition the city council to provide surety in lieu of public
improvement acceptance prior to approval and recordation of the first final
plat. Dedication of permanent right of way to accommodate public road
improvements shall be provided as necessary upon request. Temporary right of
way required during the construction/installation shall be provided as
necessary. (Ord. 1765, 7-16-2007)
088-16: TRAFFIC SIGNALS:
An agreement and waiver for the installation of traffic signals shall be
required prior to the approval and recordation of the first final plat.
Dedication of permanent right of way to accommodate the placement of signal
poles and controller boxes shall be provided as necessary upon request. In
addition, adequate easements to accommodate detector loops and interconnect
cabling shall be provided as necessary. (Ord. 1765, 7-16-2007)
088-17: VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES:
Any person who violates the provisions of this ordinance upon conviction shall
be punished as set forth in section 1-4-1 of the city code. (Ord. 1765, 7-16-
2007)
088-99: LEGISLATIVE HISTORY:
Ord. 1765, 7-16-2007; Ord. 1921, 5-31-2011; Ord. 2032, 5-19-2014; Ord. 2116,
10-5-2015; Ord. 2127, 11-30-2015.
PUD #89
SILVERWOOD
SECTION:
089-01: Legal Description
089-02: Required Plans
089-03: Conditions
089-04: Landscaping
089-05: Land Use Design Criteria
089-06: Architecture
089-07: Signage
089-08: Park Land Dedication
089-09: Master Property Owners' Association
089-10: Traffic Reports
089-11: Vehicle Interconnectivity To Adjoining Properties
089-99: Legislative History
089-01: LEGAL DESCRIPTION:
The west half of the northwest quarter of section 14, township 78 north, range
26 west of the fifth principal meridian, Dallas County, Iowa except parcel F as
shown on plat of survey recorded in book 2006, page 11211 and parcel G as shown
on plat of survey recorded in book 2006, page 11213 and parcel H as shown on
plat of survey recorded in book 2006, page 11212, containing 78.60 acres
(3,423,642 square feet). (Ord. 1783, 10-8-2007)
089-02: REQUIRED PLANS:
   A.   All Parcels; Preliminary Plat/Final Plat: Prior to or in conjunction
with development of any portion of the property covered by this PUD, said area
shall be platted in accordance with the city's subdivision ordinance.
   B.   Parcels B, C, and E; Site Plan: Prior to or in conjunction with
development of any portion of parcel B, C, or E within this PUD, said area
shall be site planned and shall receive approval of the city council after
receiving a recommendation from the plan and zoning commission.
   C.   Parcel D: No plans required. (Ord. 1783, 10-8-2007; amd. Ord. 2517, 5-
15-2022)
089-03: CONDITIONS:
Whereas, subsection 9-4-3A25, "PUD-Planned Unit Development District", of the
city code, establishes certain regulations and guidelines pertaining to
accompanying information required on plat and site plan documents. Now,
therefore, the following conditions, restrictions, and regulations are adopted
as part of this approval:
   A.   General Conditions: In addition to the PUD sketch plan map (exhibit I
on file with the city), the following general development criteria shall be
integrated into and made a part of this planned unit development.
      1.   General Conformance To Subdivision Ordinance: All subdivisions,
public and private streets, public or private street rights of way and general
development shall adhere to the standards and design criteria set forth in the
West Des Moines subdivision ordinance and/or established city policies
pertaining thereto, unless otherwise stated within this ordinance.
      2.   General Conformance To Zoning Ordinance: Unless otherwise specified
herein, the development of the Silverwood PUD shall comply with the provisions
of the West Des Moines zoning ordinance. For the purposes of section 9-9-5 of
the city code, planned unit development district, final plan submittal, the
submittal of plat, site plan, permitted conditional use permit, or master plan
documents for any parcel or part of any parcel of the Silverwood PUD within two
(2) years after approval and publication of this ordinance, shall be considered
to satisfy the terms and requirements of such section.
      3.   Flood Hazard: In all areas within a 100-year frequency flood hazard
zone, or adjoining drainageways, and detention ponding areas involving
potential flood hazards, no building shall be erected which has a lowest level
floor, including basements, less than two feet (2') above the determined level
of the 100-year frequency flood event. Buildings shall only be permitted within
twenty five feet (25') of any easement or property boundary of a major
drainageway, storm water detention basin or pond if the applicant can
demonstrate during the development review process that potential flooding from
extraordinary flood events have been mitigated through site design or building
design and approval is granted by the city council.
      4.   Developer Responsibilities: The developer, their successors and/or
assigns, if any, shall pay all planning, engineering, and construction costs
for the development of the planned unit development, as required by this
ordinance and approved site plans and the cost of all streets, storm sewers,
sanitary sewers, drainageway improvements, detention basins, water mains,
buffers and other improvements as required for rights of way or public
easements within the Silverwood PUD, unless otherwise approved by the city
council.
      5.   Storm Water Management: Storm water management plans will be
required with the development of the Silverwood PUD. The developer shall have
said storm water management plans prepared by a professional engineer licensed
in the state of Iowa. All storm water management plans shall comply with the
city's current design standards for storm water management. The method of storm
water management and the storm water conveyance system shall be determined
prior to city approval of any development within any portion of the property
within the Silverwood PUD.
The design of Silverwood's storm sewer routes water from city streets through
private storm sewer and detention facilities: The city of West Des Moines shall
assume no maintenance responsibility or liability of the private detention
facilities, storm sewer pipes or structures on the Paradise Point property.
      6.   Utilities: The developer, its successors or assigns, if any, shall
construct at its cost, and if for general public use, dedicate to the city all
sanitary sewer mains, water mains, and storm sewers associated with the
Silverwood development as required by the city of West Des Moines' subdivision
ordinance in accordance with applicable city design standards. All necessary
easements to allow city access to public utilities for maintenance and repair
purposes shall be executed prior to approval and recordation of the final plat
for each respective area or shall be executed as a blanket access agreement
prior to the approval and recordation of the first final plat. Unless otherwise
specified within a specific easement document, the city shall not be
responsible for reimbursement, restoration and/or replacement of any
improvements located within the public easements should the city be required to
excavate the public utilities for normal city operations. No occupancy permits,
either temporary or permanent, shall be issued until all necessary improvements
applicable to the area/lot or structure requesting occupancy are installed and
accepted by the city of West Des Moines. Nothing in this ordinance shall be
construed to prevent the developer, its successors and/or assigns, if any, from
entering into private agreement(s) as it/they may desire to share the cost of
improvements.
The placement of public utility easements within buffer parks and landscape
islands within parking areas is discouraged due to the potential conflict
between trees and the need to access the lines for repair. Overstory and
understory trees should be placed off utility lines a minimum distance equal to
the one to one (1:1) excavation trench necessary for the deepest utility or
thirty feet (30'), whichever is greater. Adequate access for maintenance
vehicles shall be provided into and through the easement areas.
      7.   Streets: At time of subdivision platting within the Silverwood PUD,
the subdivider shall be responsible for construction and/or installation of all
required street improvements in accordance with the city's subdivision
ordinance, the recommendations of the Silverwood traffic analysis, as indicated
herein, and/or as indicated on the approved Silverwood PUD sketch proposal.
With any subdivision plat within the Silverwood PUD, the subdivider shall be
responsible for constructing and/or installing the streets necessary to support
development within the subdivision in a manner that will assure that the public
infrastructure functions at an acceptable level of service (per the city's
comprehensive plan) and that complies with all city ordinances. Public roads as
indicated on the plats shall be constructed and accepted by the city council or
the developer may petition the city council to provide surety in lieu of public
improvement acceptance prior to approval and recordation of the first final
plat. Dedication of one-half (1/2) of the ultimate road right of way for Mills
Civic Parkway and S88th Street, including right of way necessary to accommodate
turn lanes as indicated in the traffic analysis shall be provided upon request.
Temporary right of way required during the construction/installation shall be
provided as necessary.
      8.   Sanitary Sewer: Any proposed change in approved land use densities
for the Silverwood PUD will require an analysis of the downstream sanitary
sewer capacity to assure that adequate capacity is available for the proposed
change in approved land use densities.
      9.   Street Lighting: The developer shall be responsible for all costs
associated with the installation of public streetlights within or adjacent to
any area proposed to be platted or included within a development.
      10.   All construction must abide by current adopted building and fire
codes. (Ord. 1783, 10-8-2007; amd. Ord. 2517, 5-15-2022)
089-04: LANDSCAPING:
   A.   Buffers: Buffer screening between districts or parcels and uses shall
be required as set forth in section 9-3-10, "Buffers", of the city code, except
as noted otherwise in this ordinance. Buffers shall be established in
accordance with the following:
      1.   Parcel A:
         a.   All double frontage lots shall provide a thirty foot (30') buffer
along the rear lot line. Rear building setbacks shall be measured from the
buffer park. Said buffer shall be located in an outlot with maintenance the
responsibility of the homeowners' association. Fencing or structures, with the
exception of ground monument signs as allowed by city code shall not be located
within the buffers. Landscape planting within the buffer outlots shall be in
accordance with city code requirements for thirty foot (30') buffer parks.
Additional landscaping may be installed at the discretion of the association;
however living vegetation may not be removed without city consent. In
conjunction with the approval of the preliminary plat, a landscaping plan shall
be submitted and approved by the city for the buffers.
   B.   Lot Trees: One overstory tree per lot is required within the front yard
of all residential lots within this PUD to provide for the visual softening,
shading, and enhancement of streets. Lot trees shall be installed by the home
builder prior to the initial occupancy of the structure on the property. Tree
maintenance shall be the responsibility of the individual homeowner or the
homeowners' association.
Trees that will encroach into any vehicle or pedestrian use area or travel lane
shall be of a variety that will accommodate pruning to allow for the minimum
clearance height (14 feet over vehicle travel lanes; 8 feet over pedestrian
travel lanes) without adversely affecting the overall natural shape of the
variety. Maintaining trees to these clearance levels is the responsibility of
the property owner.
Trees shall not be planted closer than five feet (5') to a sidewalk as measured
from the center of the tree or shrub trunk. The planting of trees on corner
lots within the area bounded by the street or alley lines of such lots and a
line adjoining points along said street or alley lines twenty five feet (25')
from the point of intersection of the public right of way lines shall be
prohibited. This area is defined as the sight triangle. No tree shall be
permitted within the sight triangle of a public street intersection. No trees
shall be permitted in any public utility easement. (Ord. 1783, 10-8-2007)
089-05: LAND USE DESIGN CRITERIA:
In addition to the general criteria as stated above, the following land use
design criteria shall apply to the development areas designated on the sketch
plan. The PUD sketch plan which is made a part of this rezoning action and on
file in the city delineates four (4) parcels for application of specific
development standards (Parcel D is road right of way). The following
development standards and use regulations shall apply to each of the following
development parcels:
   A.   Parcel A: Unless otherwise provided for within this ordinance, the use
regulations and provisions set forth in title 9 of the city code for
residential single- family (RS-6) district shall apply to any development
proposal for parcel A as shown on the PUD sketch plan (on file in the city as
exhibit I). Parcel A shall be no more than 29.33 net acres and shall not exceed
one hundred nineteen (119) dwelling units.
      1.   Building setbacks:
         a.   Front yard: Twenty five feet (25').
         b.   Rear yard:
            (1)   Thirty five feet (35') on those lots which abut the back yard
of another residential lot.
            (2)   Twenty feet (20') on those lots which abut an open space
consisting of buffer or greenway platted as an outlot and part of a homeowners'
association.
         c.   Side yard: Minimum seven feet (7'); total of fifteen feet (15').
Setback shall be measured to the foundation; a maximum two foot (2') overhang
shall be allowed; however no point of the building shall be closer than five
feet (5') to the property line.
      2.   No driveway access from an individual dwelling unit shall be
permitted directly onto Bridgewood Boulevard.
      3.   Outlot X in parcel A (or as otherwise indicated on the final plat
for parcel A) shall be dedicated to the city for park use.
      4.   Outlots P, Q, R, and Y in parcel A (or as otherwise indicated on the
final plat for parcel A) are designated as buffer parks and will be owned by
and wholly the responsibility of the homeowners' association.
   B.   Parcel B: Unless otherwise provided for within this ordinance, the use
regulations and provisions set forth in title 9 of the city code for
residential high density residential (RH-18) district shall apply to any
development proposal for parcel B as shown on the PUD sketch plan (on file in
the city as exhibit I). Parcel B shall be no more than 12.04 net acres and
shall not exceed two hundred seventeen (217) dwelling units.
   C.   Parcel C: Unless otherwise provided for within this ordinance, the use
regulations and provisions set forth in title 9 of the city code for the office
(OF) district shall apply to any development proposal for parcel C as shown on
the PUD sketch plan (on file in the city as exhibit I).
      1.   Lot Size: Minimum lot size shall be ten thousand (10,000) square
feet.
      2.   Uses:
         a.   Permitted Uses: Permitted uses shall include the following:
            (1)   All permitted (P) uses allowed within the office (OF)
district as set forth in title 9 of the city code, except the following:
SIC 58 series - Eating and drinking places.
SIC 60 series - Depository institutions (banks).
            (2)   All permitted conditional (Pc) uses allowed within the office
(OF) district except those that have been prohibited by this ordinance may be
allowed with the approval of the appropriate review body.
   D.   Parcel D: One-half (1/2) of the ultimate road right of way for Mills
Civic Parkway and S88th Street, including right of way necessary to accommodate
turn lanes as indicated in the traffic analysis shall be dedicated at no cost
to the city upon request. The remaining one-half (1/2) of the necessary right
of way and any remnant land south and west of realigned Mills Civic Parkway or
S88th Street, minus existing road right of way held in easement shall be
purchased by the city at the land price (prior to improvements) as originally
paid by the developer.
   E.   Parcel E: Unless otherwise provided for within this ordinance, the use
regulations and provisions set forth in title 9 of the city code for the
Residential Medium Density (RM-12) district shall apply to any development
proposal for parcel E as shown on the PUD sketch plan.
      1.   Uses:
         a.   Permitted Uses: Permitted uses shall include the following:
            (1)   All permitted (P) uses allowed within the Residential Medium
Density (RM-12) district as set forth in title 9 of the city code, except the
following:
Recreational amenities open to the general public
SIC 7997 Membership golf and country club
SIC 805 Nursing and personal care
SIC 8211 Elementary and secondary school
            (2)   All permitted conditional (Pc) uses allowed within the
Residential Medium Density (RM-12) district as set forth in title 9 of the city
code are prohibited:
      2.   Setback: Primary and accessory structures shall be setback a minimum
of twenty-five feet (25') from the perimeter development boundary if sidewalks
are constructed on both sides of the internal private streets within the
parcel. Such sidewalks shall be located a minimum of five feet (5') from the
back of curb of the private street. If sidewalks are constructed on only one
side of the private street, as described above, the primary and accessory
structure setback shall be a minimum of thirty feet (30'). If no sidewalks are
constructed along internal private streets within the parcel, primary and
accessory structures shall be setback a minimum of thirty-five feet (35') from
the perimeter development boundary. 
      3.   Buffers: The following shall be required:
         a.   Adjacent to Mills Civic Parkway, S. 88th Street and the west side
of S. 85th Street rights of way: A minimum thirty foot (30') wide buffer is
required unless the primary and accessory structure perimeter setback is
reduced to twenty-five feet (25') as described above in which case, the buffer
width shall match the minimum setback width required:
            (1)   Earthen berming shall abide by city code standards (Title 9,
Chapter 19, Section 8C), shall be undulating to create a more natural
appearance and generally be of a minimum height of three feet (3'), except
earthen berming may be provided, but shall not be required within the buffer
along S. 85th Street within the area immediately adjacent to the proposed
detention basin situated in the northeast corner of the site.
            (2)   Minimum vegetation types, sizes and quantities will need to
abide by city code standards for a thirty foot (30') wide buffer (Title 9,
Chapter 19, Section 8E) regardless of buffer width.
         b.   Adjacent to Coachlight Drive: A minimum thirty foot (30') wide
buffer is required to mitigate views from the single-family homes on the north
side of Coachlight Drive of individual buildings adjacent to Coachlight Drive
within the development unless the primary and accessory structure perimeter
setback is reduced to twenty-five feet (25') as described above in which case,
the buffer width shall match the minimum setback width required:
            (1)   Earthen berming shall abide by city code standards (Title 9,
Chapter 19, Section 8C) except earthen berming may be provided, but shall not
be required within the buffer along Coachlight Drive within the area
immediately adjacent to the proposed detention basin situated in the northeast
corner of the site.
            (2)   In addition to required buffer vegetation, a maximum six foot
(6') high opaque fence shall be located at the top of the berm. Said fence
shall generally extend from the west property boundary to a point approximately
twenty-five feet (25') past the easternmost wall of the east dwelling
structure.
            (3)   Minimum vegetation types, sizes and quantities will need to
abide by city code standards for a thirty foot (30') wide buffer (Title 9,
Chapter 19, Section 8E) regardless of buffer width. For that portion of the
Coachlight Drive buffer which extends from the west property boundary to
twenty-five feet (25') past the easternmost wall of the east dwelling
structure, the height of vegetation at time of planting shall be the maximum
possible while maintaining typical nursery warranties. It is preferred that
vegetation be grown in 'root pruned' or 'root controlled' bags. If utilized,
vegetation heights at time of planting may be reduced; however, conifer trees
shall not be less than four feet (4') in height.
            (4)   Visibility of headlights from vehicles circulating within the
site, including traversing to and from the garages of the dwelling units
immediately adjacent to Coachlight Drive shall be opaquely blocked from the
single-family homes along Coachlight Drive.
         c.   No buffer shall be required along the eastern boundary of the
single-family lots located on the east side of S. 85th Street.
         d.   With the exception of ground monument sign structures as allowed
by city code, utilities, and the fence required within the Coachlight Drive
buffer, no other fencing or any other type of structures shall be located
within a required buffer.
         e.   Per written acknowledgement from the property owner of PUD Parcel
C, no buffer shall be required within Parcel E along the common property line
with Parcel C.
      4.   Outdoor Use Area: Each dwelling must be provided an outdoor use
area. A minimum of eighty percent (80%) of the dwelling units shall be provided
a dedicated outdoor porch, patio or deck/balcony as part of the individual
dwelling unit with a minimum usable area of forty (40) square feet and a
minimum usable dimension of six feet (6') deep in either direction. In lieu of
a usable outdoor living area for individual dwellings, area(s) of defined and
enhanced common outdoor living space can be provided on site with a minimum
area of forty (40) square feet per each dwelling without an outdoor living area
that meets the usable living area requirements. (Ord. 1783, 10-8-2007; amd.
Ord. 2517, 5-16-2022; Ord. 2580, 9-5-2023)
089-06: ARCHITECTURE:
The intent is to create building facades throughout this development that are
varied and articulated to provide visual interest.
   A.   Parcel A and Parcel E: Architectural design should pay careful
attention to exterior building materials and details, use of windows and doors,
and change in building mass within the plan and roof design. Materials and trim
used on the front facade shall be continued around all sides of the building.
However, the level of detail can be reduced on the facades not facing a street.
Homes shall use materials such as brick, stone, lap siding or shakes,
decorative trim or similar combination of material which represents a variation
of architectural styles or elements. Use of natural materials is encouraged,
composite materials such as fiber cement and wood composites are appropriate
substitutions. Vinyl siding may be used only with appropriately scaled trim.
Materials should change with the change in building planes; however, all
material should keep within the chosen style. Trim and structural elements such
as posts or columns shall be sized to the scale of the building and detailed
appropriately to the style. When used, masonry materials shall have the
appearance of three-dimensional elements. Fenestration (door and window
openings) shall be sized to the scale of the building and be compatible to the
chosen architectural style.
Garages or accessory structures shall incorporate architectural details of the
primary building with the use of roof forms, windows, doors and other facade
detailing.
      1.   Attached Garages: Garage doors shall not be the predominate feature
of a home. Garage doors facing the street shall be set back so as to minimize
the dominance of their appearance and provide adequate space between the street
or sidewalk and the garage to accommodate additional parking. Therefore any
residential structure with a garage which projects in front of the front facade
equal to or greater than three feet (3') will be required to provide a minimum
five foot (5') deep covered front porch, or stoop with a width that extends a
minimum of twenty five percent (25%) of the front facade. Any residential
structure with a garage which projects less than three feet (3') or is recessed
behind the front facade does not need to meet this requirement. In addition,
the garage width shall not exceed sixty percent (60%) of the primary facade.
      2.   Detached Garage: Detached garages or accessory structures should be
clad in the same materials and incorporate similar architectural details of the
primary buildings with the use of roof forms, windows, doors and other facade
detailing. Those portions of accessory buildings visible from any street or
adjacent property shall incorporate same level of architectural detail as the
primary buildings.
   B.   Parcel B: Architectural design for multi-family buildings shall express
a creative presentation of exterior building materials, exterior details and
texture, treatment of windows and doors, and use of angles and multiplicity of
planes within the wall and roof design to lessen the plainness of appearance
which can be characteristic of large residential buildings. The suggestion of
building articulation that breaks up the building mass into modules shall be
required. Methods used to create intervals which reflect and promote
compatibility and which respect the scale of the single-family detached
residential dwellings include:
      1.   Facade modulation - stepping back or extending forward a portion of
the facade.
      2.   Repeating the window patterns.
      3.   Providing the porch, patio, deck, or covered entry.
      4.   Changing the rooflines by alternating dormers, stepped roofs,
gables, or other roof elements.
      5.   Changing materials with the change in building plane.
      6.   Using paint and materials that blend with the single-family
residential areas.
Asphaltic shingles shall be allowed provided the shingle materials are of a
heavier grade that produces a shake or shadowing effect.
   C.   Parcel C; office: The architectural design of any office building
within the PUD shall be acceptable to the city, provided acceptance shall not
be unreasonably held, and all buildings shall have as a primary element being
fascia glass, brick, or stone with consistency of design and use of materials
on all sides of any building. The design of any building shall incorporate
elements that provide a common theme or compatibility with residential uses in
the neighborhood. The use of brick shall be incorporated into the building
architecture on all sides of the structure, unless the city council of West Des
Moines, after review by the plan and zoning commission of West Des Moines,
determines that the use of alternate building materials enhances the physical
appearance and accomplishes a compatible structure with the residential uses in
the neighborhood. No wood, masonite, visible asphaltic exterior wall or roof
material, aluminum siding, nonarchitectural sheet metal, concrete block, EIFS,
stucco, or other similar materials shall constitute a portion of any building
except as trim material, unless the city council of West Des Moines after
having receive a recommendation from the plan and zoning commission of West Des
Moines, determines said material when used as a primary element, enhances the
physical appearance, or provides continuity to unite all structures within the
parcel together into one project concept. (Ord. 1783, 10-8-2007; amd. Ord.
2517, 5-16-2022)
089-07: SIGNAGE:
Signage restrictions shall be imposed to limit and reduce the negative impacts
of sign clutter. Signage shall comply with all provisions and standards of the
city sign code of the applicable zoning district for each parcel.
All signage constructed as wall signage on building fascia within parcel C
shall consist of individual three-dimensional letters attached directly to the
building. No cabinet or panel signs shall be allowed except for contoured
cabinet signs necessary to display logos. In the event cabinet signs are
necessary to accommodate a logo, said cabinets shall be contoured to the logo
shape and every measure possible shall be implemented to minimize the amount of
illuminated background. Illumination of signs on facades which face a
residential property shall be by reverse lighting to project the light back
towards the wall to create a "halo" effect; no front illumination is allowed.
The individual letters shall have returns to screen the lighting source and
shall be placed so the space between the wall plane and back of the letter is
no greater than two inches (2"). Raceways shall be prohibited. (Ord. 1783, 10-
8-2007)
089-08: PARK LAND DEDICATION:
An area calculated by a set formula based upon the size and density of the
proposed residential development will be required to be provided for purposes
of a public park and greenbelt areas. A letter of agreement, acceptable to the
park and recreation department, detailing the specifics related to the park
land dedication requirements for the development of any area contained within
the PUD will be required to be submitted prior to the submittal of any
development proposal. (Ord. 1783, 10-8-2007)
089-09: MASTER PROPERTY OWNERS' ASSOCIATION:
When the first plat within parcel A of this development is recorded, proper
action shall be taken to establish a master property owners' association with
said property into the Silverwood property owners' association and all building
restrictions, covenants, and other associated conditions attached to the
Silverwood PUD shall be made to also apply to said property. The Silverwood
property owners' association shall be responsible for the ongoing upkeep and
maintenance of any privately owned common grounds such as the buffer parks,
greenbelts, parks and other common space, as outlined in the association
documents and any other specific development improvements noted as their
responsibility in this ordinance. (Ord. 1783, 10-8-2007)
089-10: TRAFFIC REPORTS:
A traffic report has been prepared by Kirkham Michael & Associates, Inc. (March
30, 2007) and the City of West Des Moines (April 2022) for this area that
outlines what the ultimate paving requirements will be for the major roadways
through and in the vicinity of the Silverwood development.
Prior to, or in conjunction with the development of any parcel, or portion of a
parcel, the developer shall have the traffic report reviewed by the city to
ensure that the provisions and assumptions of the original traffic report are
still valid and applicable.
The development or redevelopment of each parcel within the PUD boundaries shall
abide by and accommodate the recommendations of the approved traffic study. The
developer, his successors or assigns shall be responsible for their pro rata
share of public road improvements deemed necessary to accommodate the intended
development. Additionally, the dedication of all permanent public street rights
of way within the Silverwood PUD and remnant land south and west of Mills Civic
Parkway and S88th Street shall be provided as necessary upon request. Temporary
right of way required during the construction/installation shall be provided as
necessary.
Per the traffic analysis the following vehicle trips have been allocated:
 
Parcel A 1,139 average daily trips (ADT); 89 A.M. peak; and 120 P.M. peak
         vehicle trips.
Parcel B 1,458 average daily trips (ADT); 111 A.M. peak; and 135 P.M. peak
         vehicle trips.
Parcel C 909 average daily trips (ADT); 246 A.M. peak; and 198 P.M. peak
         vehicle trips.
Parcel E 1,678 average daily trips (ADT); 118 A.M. peak; and 152 P.M. peak
         vehicle trips
 
As development proposals are approved for each parcel, the number of vehicle
trips generated by the proposed development will be subtracted from the overall
total trips allocated to that parcel. Approval of this proposed PUD does not
constitute a guarantee that the proposed plan can be implemented as currently
intended. Development of all parcels and implementation of desired land uses,
including specific high traffic generating tenants, will be limited by the
available number of trips. Should anticipated traffic exceed the total trips
allocated to a parcel and the overall development prior to full build-out,
further development of parcels may be limited or prohibited. Alternate uses to
those planned for within the traffic analysis and approved as part of this
ordinance may be allowed, following completion of an amendment to the approved
traffic study analyzing the proposed alternative and appropriate city approval
of an amendment to the PUD ordinance and/or PUD Sketch, if necessary. (Ord.
1783, 10-8-2007; amd. Ord. 2517, 5-16-2022; Ord. 2580, 9-5-2023)
089-11: VEHICLE INTERCONNECTIVITY TO ADJOINING PROPERTIES:
Drive interconnectivity between properties within parcel C and E is required in
order to allow for the distribution of traffic to alternate public roads.
Parcel E shall accommodate a city acceptable connection drive from Parcel C to
the mid-block access from S 88th Street with said access aligning with the
roadway on the west side of S 88th Street. At the time of final platting of
parcel E, an ingress/egress/cross access agreement for the benefit of parcel C
shall be executed. (Ord. 1783, 10-8-2007; amd. Ord. 2517, 5-16-2022)
089-99: LEGISLATIVE HISTORY:
Ord. 1783, 10-8-2007; Ord. 2517, 5-15-2022; Ord. 2580, 9-5-2023.
PUD #90
BROADMOOR APARTMENTS AT JORDAN CREEK
SECTION:
090-01: Legal Description
090-02: Intent
090-03: Required Plans
090-04: Conditions
090-05: Requirements
090-06: Architecture
090-07: Signage
090-08: Vehicle Trip Allocation
090-09: Public Street Improvements
090-10: Future Drive Connections
090-11: Public Streetlights
090-12: Stormwater Management Plan
090-13: Utilities
090-14: Fire Access
090-15: Violations And Penalties
090-99: Legislative History
090-01: LEGAL DESCRIPTION:
Broadmoor Apartments at Jordan Creek plat 1, an official plat, city of West Des
Moines, Dallas County, Iowa.
And
Parcel 'Y' being described as part of parcel "P" & "O" of the plat of survey
recorded in book 1998, page 5450 of the Dallas County recorder's office in the
northwest quarter of the southeast quarter (NW1/4 SE1/4) of section 12,
township 78 north, range 26 west of the 5th P.M., in Dallas County, Iowa, as
shown in plat of survey recorded in book 2006, page 16764, that is more
particularly described as follows:
Commencing at a point of reference at the southwest corner of the said
northwest quarter of the southeast quarter of section 12; thence north
83°19'11" east, 75.58 feet, to the point of beginning, said point being on the
east right-of-way line of 68th Street; thence north 00°22'38" east, 187.60
feet, along said right-of-way line, to a point of curvature; thence northerly,
along a curve to the left having a radius of 1,075.00 feet and a chord bearing
of north 03°05'14" west, an arc length of 130.01 feet, along said east right-
of-way line, to a point on the south right-of-way line of E.P. True Parkway;
thence north 28°41'36" east, 50.64 feet, along said right-of-way line, to a
point; thence north 65°01'19" east, 137.81 feet, along said south right- of-way
line, to a point of curvature; thence easterly, along a curve to the right
having a radius of 920.00 feet and a chord bearing north 74°33'41" east, an arc
length of 306.25 feet, along said south right-of-way line, to a point of
tangency; thence north 84°06'02" east, 151.75 feet, along said south right-of-
way line, to the northwest corner of lot 1, King's Pointe, an official plat;
thence S00°15'14" west, 447.03 feet, along the west line of said King's Pointe;
thence south 83°13'07" west, 590.50 feet, along the south line of said parcel
"O" and "P", to the point of beginning.
(Ord. 1922, 5-31-2011)
090-02: INTENT:
To develop a planned residential development which provides the necessary
population densities to capitalize on and support other nonresidential
developments in the surrounding area. (Ord. 1801, 4-21-2008)
090-03: REQUIRED PLANS:
The following plans shall be required as a part of the processing of any
development application for any property within the Broadmoor Apartments at
Jordan Creek specific plan:
   A.   Area Development Plan: An area development plan is a plan that
identifies planning units, major street patterns, master stormwater drainage
and detention concepts, utilities, shared public spaces, land use assumptions
and proposed densities. It is intended to be a tool used to promote the
communication and cooperation between adjacent property owners and developers
to ensure cohesive and unified development.
An area development plan shall be reviewed by the plan and zoning commission
and approved by the city council prior to, or in conjunction with, the review
of the specific plan for any property within said specific plan area. No change
to the area development plan shall be made without approval of an amended plan
from the appropriate reviewing bodies.
On file in the city (exhibit A) is the city council approved area development
plan for this property.
   B.   Specific Plan: A specific plan identifies development intent for each
planning unit indicated on the area development plan or more specifically
delineated on the specific plan map. The specific plan shall conform to the
general development intent identified in the approved area development plan, as
well as the "Town Center Overlay District Guidelines". The specific plan shall
be reviewed by the plan and zoning commission and adopted by the city council
by ordinance. (Ord. 1801, 4-21-2008)
This document shall constitute the specific plan ordinance for Broadmoor
Apartments at Jordan Creek. On file in the city and made a part of this
ordinance is a specific plan map (exhibit B) that illustrates the site layout
concept for parcel A (a.k.a.: outlot Q, Davis Estates final plat 1) of
Broadmoor Apartments at Jordan Creek. This specific plan also includes land
known as parcel B (a.k.a.: outlot P, Davis Estates final plat 1 and
subsequently established as outlot Z, apartments at Jordan Creek plat 1),
however, parcel B is not being developed or planned for at this time. At such
time that development is desired, the applicant will need to amend this
specific plan ordinance and the specific plan map to provide development
details and establish regulations applicable to parcel B. This document and the
associated exhibits (on file in the city) are intended to specify the
components, parameters, and requirements to be adhered to and implemented in
order to ensure the realization of Broadmoor Apartments at Jordan Creek
Development concept. It is recognized that modifications and changes in
building footprints and layout may be necessary in response to market demands.
These changes may be allowed with the appropriate city approvals if the shift
does not have a negative impact on the overall concept for the development and
traffic patterns and the total number of vehicle trips does not exceed that
which has been allocated to the overall Broadmoor Apartments at Jordan Creek
Development. At the discretion of the development planning and inspection
manager, changes to the layout of the development that are deemed to be "major"
changes shall require an amendment to the specific plan map and/or ordinance,
whichever is applicable. Major amendments shall require the review and approval
of the plan and zoning commission and city council. (Ord. 1801, 4-21-2008; amd.
Ord. 1922, 5-31-2011)
Where the specific plan map and specific plan ordinance conflict, the specific
plan ordinance shall prevail. (Ord. 1801, 4-21-2008)
   C.   Development Applications (Overlay District Site Plans): Site plans for
all buildings and land area within the Broadmoor Apartments at Jordan Creek
Development must meet the intent of the approved specific plan. Site plans
shall be submitted to the city of West Des Moines for review and approval prior
to the development of any portion of the associated supporting lot. Site plans
for permitted uses which comply (as determined by the development planning and
inspection manager) with the design intent as set forth in this specific plan
will be subject to administrative review and approval by the development
planning and inspection manager. A one week review and comment period by each
and all available members of the plan and zoning commission and city council
shall precede the administrative approval. If upon review, two (2) or more
members of the city council, plan and zoning commission, or a combination
thereof request such; or if the development planning and inspection manager
deems the proposed site plan is not in compliance with the approved specific
plan or is potentially controversial, the site plan will be processed through
the traditional full site plan review and approval process. Site plans for
permitted conditional uses (Pc) as defined in the city code, unless otherwise
amended within this ordinance, shall be approved by the appropriate review
body. At the discretion of the development planning and inspection manager, an
amendment to Broadmoor Apartments at Jordan Creek specific plan ordinance may
be required to bring consistency between the ordinance and site plan
development proposed. (Ord. 1801, 4-21-2008; amd. Ord. 1922, 5-31-2011)
   D.   Preliminary And Final Platting: Prior to or in conjunction with any
site plan submittal for proposed development of any land within Broadmoor
Apartments at Jordan Creek, said area shall be preliminary and final platted,
in accordance with the city's subdivision ordinance, to delineate the parcels
or lots to be developed or sold. All necessary code (building, fire, and
zoning) requirements, unless amended elsewhere in this ordinance, for the type
of residential development and intended ownership shall be accommodated.
Platted outlots are not buildable.
Unless otherwise specifically restricted by city council action, ground work
and construction of private roads, drives and utilities may be started, at the
developer's risk, upon approval of the preliminary plat by the city council.
Public street and utility construction may begin, at the risk of the developer,
after approval of the preliminary plat by the city council and construction
improvement plans by the city of West Des Moines.
Prior to approval of the final plat, unless otherwise allowed by council, the
developer of Broadmoor Apartments at Jordan Creek shall provide the appropriate
agreements, easements, and sureties for all public rights of way and other
public improvements (utilities, sidewalks, streetlights, etc.) within and
associated with the development.
A final plat applicable to each proposed development area must be approved and
recorded with the Dallas County recorder's office prior to issuance of any
building permit, including footing and foundation permits, for construction of
any structure within the area proposed for development. (Ord. 1801, 4-21-2008)
090-04: CONDITIONS:
Whereas, title 9, chapter 9, "Planned Unit Development District", of the city
code includes and establishes certain regulations and guidelines pertaining to
accompanying information required on plat and site plan documents. Now,
therefore, the following conditions, restrictions, and regulations are adopted
as part of this approval, to wit:
In addition to the specific plan map, the following general development
criteria shall be integrated into and made a part of this specific plan
ordinance:
   A.   General Conformance To Subdivision Ordinance: All subdivisions, public
streets, public street rights of way, and general development shall adhere to
the standards and design criteria set forth in the West Des Moines subdivision
ordinances and the most current design standards adopted by the city of West
Des Moines pertaining thereto unless otherwise stated within this ordinance.
   B.   General Conformance To Zoning Ordinance: Unless otherwise specified
herein, the development of the Broadmoor Apartments at Jordan Creek specific
plan shall comply with title 9, "Zoning", of the city code or any other
applicable codes.
   C.   Flood Hazard: In all areas within a 100-year frequency flood hazard
zone, or adjoining drainageways, and detention ponding areas involving
potential flood hazards, no building shall be erected that has a lowest floor,
including basements, less than one foot (1') above the determining level of the
100-year frequency flood event, and no building shall be located within twenty
five feet (25') of any easement or property boundary of a major drainageway,
stormwater detention basin, or pond, unless said location is approved as part
of a development entitlement by the city council and said building is
structurally designed accordingly.
   D.   Developer Responsibilities: Unless otherwise specifically approved by
the city council, the developer, its successors and/or assigns, if any, shall
pay all planning, engineering, and construction costs for the development of
the planned unit development as required by this ordinance, and shall pay all
costs related to approved site plans, which may include, but is not limited to,
the cost of all streets, storm sewers, sanitary sewers, water mains and service
lines, drainageway improvements, detention basins, buffers, and other
improvements as required. No occupancy permits, either temporary or permanent,
shall be issued until all necessary improvements applicable to the area/lot or
structure requesting occupancy are installed and accepted by the city of West
Des Moines. Nothing in this ordinance shall be construed to prevent the
developer, its successors and/or assigns, if any, from entering into private
agreement(s) as it/they may desire to share the cost of improvements.
   E.   Common Areas: Prior to approval of the final plat and if applicable,
the developer shall put in place covenants that shall identify responsibility
for the maintenance of all common areas in perpetuity. (Ord. 1801, 4-21-2008)
090-05: REQUIREMENTS:
Unless provided otherwise in this ordinance, all general use regulations,
performance standards and provisions set forth in title 9, "Zoning", of the
city code for the residential high- density (RH) district shall apply to
development of parcels A and B within the Broadmoor Apartments at Jordan Creek
specific plan area. To the extent that the provisions of this section conflict
with or are more restrictive than similar provisions provided elsewhere in the
West Des Moines zoning ordinance, the provisions of this section shall control.
The following land use design criteria, development standards, and landscaping
regulations shall apply to all parcels within the Broadmoor Apartments at
Jordan Creek specific plan area: (Ord. 1801, 4-21-2008)
   A.   Land Use: Land use within parcels A and B shall be limited to multiple
single-family attached dwellings (multi-family) within multiple buildings. A
maximum density of eighteen (18) dwelling units per gross acre shall be allowed
based on the acreages indicated on the final plat, Davis Estates plat 1 for
outlots P (parcel B of this development) and Q (parcel A of this development)
in combination with the 5.72 acre portion immediately to the north (parcel Y of
parcel P and O as recorded in book 2006, page 16764, Dallas County, Iowa). A
maximum of five hundred sixty (560) dwelling units shall be allowed within
parcels A and B. A clubhouse type facility which provides limited
entertainment, gathering area, fitness or childcare services shall be allowed
as an ancillary use to the development. Said facility should be intended for
use by the residents of the development and shall not be geared toward use by
the general public. Said facility, including parking shall be wholly located
within the development boundaries.
   B.   Building Setback:
      1.   Buildings shall be set back a minimum of twenty five feet (25') from
the perimeter development boundary or ultimate street right of way line,
whichever is more restrictive. The setback shall be measured from the
appropriate boundary line to the closest point on the visible vertical
foundation wall. Intermittent encroachment into the setback for canopies and
awnings may be allowed at the discretion of the development planning and
inspection manager.
      2.   Detached accessory structures shall be set back a minimum of twenty
five feet (25') from perimeter boundaries adjacent to a public street; and
shall be set back a minimum of ten feet (10') from perimeter boundaries not
adjacent to a public street unless required to be set back further due to the
presence of a required buffer.
      3.   No structures shall be allowed within a required buffer. (Ord. 1922,
5-31-2011)
   C.   Building Separation:
      1.   Principal structures shall be separated by a minimum of thirty feet
(30') or as otherwise required by building and fire codes, whichever is more
restrictive.
      2.   A minimum twenty feet (20') of separation shall be maintained
between primary and detached accessory structures and between two (2) detached
accessory structures.
   D.   Building Height:
      1.   Primary dwelling buildings shall not exceed three (3) stories unless
an additional ten feet (10') of building setback is provided for each story
above three (3) stories.
      2.   Ancillary use buildings, as allowed (clubhouse facility) shall not
exceed one story.
      3.   Freestanding place making elements and landmarks such as clock
towers shall not exceed a maximum height of forty five feet (45').
   E.   Parking Ratios:
      1.   Parking shall be provided as follows:
         a.   Dwelling Units:
            (1)   Efficiency apartment units shall provide 1.5 spaces per unit.
            (2)   One to two (2) bedroom apartment units shall provide 2.0
spaces per unit.
            (3)   Three (3) plus bedroom apartment units shall provide 2.5
spaces per unit.
            (4)   Garage stalls attached to and incorporated into a dwelling
building shall count one hundred percent (100%) toward fulfillment of the
minimum required number of parking spaces. A maximum of 0.67 of detached garage
stalls may be counted toward fulfilling the minimum required number of parking
stalls.
            (5)   Uncovered parking stalls shall count one hundred percent
(100%) toward fulfillment of the minimum required number of parking spaces.
            (6)   Tandem parking stalls located in front of garages
incorporated or attached to dwelling buildings may be counted one hundred
percent (100%) toward fulfilling the minimum required number of parking spaces.
Tandem stalls located in front of detached garages shall not be counted toward
fulfilling the minimum required number of parking spaces.
            (7)   For any single-family attached dwelling intended as owner
occupied, a minimum of one of the required spaces for each unit shall be as an
enclosed parking space. This parking space shall be a minimum of nineteen feet
by nine feet (19' x 9') and may be designed as a freestanding garage, attached
garage or multiple garage spaces within an enclosure.
            (8)   Minimum parking stall measurements and drive aisle widths
shall conform to title 9, chapter 15 of the city code.
         b.   Ancillary/Clubhouse Facility:
            (1)   One space per one hundred fifty (150) square feet of gfa of
that portion of the development's clubhouse that is to be utilized by patrons
visiting the site and not residing within the development (complex leasing
offices, gathering/party rooms, etc.) shall be provided on site and within
walking proximity to the building. Space within the development's clubhouse
that is intended for use by the resident's only and not individuals that must
drive to the site (fitness rooms, restrooms/pool locker rooms, etc.) shall not
be included in the square footage utilized to calculate clubhouse parking
requirements.
      2.   If developed as multiple legal parcels a blanket easement shall be
executed providing cross access parking and ingress/egress. (Ord. 1801, 4-21-
2008)
   F.   Parking Setbacks:
      1.   Off street parking areas shall be set back from the ultimate right
of way line a minimum of thirty feet (30'). Off street parking areas shall be
set back from property boundaries not adjacent to a public or private street a
minimum of fifteen feet (15').
      2.   Minimum parking stall measurements and drive aisle widths shall
conform to title 9, chapter 15 of the city code.
      3.   No portion of any parking lot or internal circulation drive may be
located within a required streetscape or buffer. (Ord. 1922, 5-31-2011)
   G.   Fences:
      1.   Perimeter fencing shall be allowed in accordance with all of the
following provisions, but shall be located no closer than fifteen feet (15') to
the property boundary. Perimeter fencing is allowed within the required twenty
five foot (25') streetscape area. Swimming pool fencing shall be located and
designed consistent with typical pool enclosure standards and regulations.
      2.   Pedestrian access by residents of the apartment complex through
gates in the fence shall be provided at multiple locations. Residents of the
complex must be able to both exit and enter at all gate locations (gates shall
not be exit only with residents required to access the site at the main vehicle
access drives).
      3.   Shall be a maximum of six feet (6') in height except swimming pool
enclosures which must meet minimum height requirements as otherwise governed.
Stone columns (see below) shall be allowed to exceed the maximum fence height
by no more than twelve inches (12"). Pedestrian entry features which include
arbors, arched entries, arcades or finials shall be a maximum of ten feet (10')
in height.
      4.   Shall be constructed of decorative metal and shall maintain a
consistency of fifty percent (50%) openness.
      5.   For strength and stability, brick or stone support columns twenty
four inches (24") or greater in width and depth shall be incorporated and
spaced no greater than sixty feet (60') on center. Typical fence posts of the
same material as the fence may be utilized as necessary in between the support
columns.
      6.   Development identification plaques that display the development's
logo, initials or name may be incorporated into or attached to the major
support columns. Said signage plaques may not exceed one and one-half (11/2)
square feet in size. Said signage shall be in addition to signage allowed
elsewhere in this ordinance. (Ord. 1801, 4-21-2008)
   H.   Buffers: No buffers shall be required along the perimeter boundaries of
the Broadmoor Apartments at Jordan Creek Development which abut a public or
private street. In lieu of buffers, a twenty five foot (25') streetscape shall
be provided along those parcel boundaries which are adjacent to a public or
private street (see landscaping - streetscape requirements within this
ordinance). A fifteen foot (15') buffer area shall be provided along the
eastern boundary of that parcel B. Landscape vegetation requirements shall be
the equivalent of that required of a sixty foot (60') buffer as provided within
city code. (Ord. 1922, 5-31-2011)
   I.   Landscaping: The landscaping requirements specified herein are intended
to create an aesthetically pleasing development which enhances the appearance
and character of the city of West Des Moines, while protecting the general
health, safety and welfare of the citizens. Landscaping is required to address
the following primary aspects or consequences of development:
•   Open space protection and enhancement,
•   Mitigation of paving expanses associated with off street parking,
•   Visual screening of undesirable views, activities and/or site elements, and
•   Street side enhancement ("streetscapes").
At the time of site plan review, landscaping shall be evaluated to ensure
achievement of the standards stated within this specific plan ordinance.
Additional vegetation beyond that required herein may be required to be
implemented in response to additional details of the use, buildings, parking,
site layout, etc. Details regarding specific varieties, exact quantities, and
the minimum size at time of planting shall be provided and approved as part of
the site plan submittal and shall meet the general guidelines in respect to the
minimum plant size traditionally applied to development within the city.
      1.   Open Space: The intent of open space is to allow for a balance
between natural areas and the built environment and to provide for the overall
beautification and "greening" of the city.
         a.   A minimum of twenty percent (20%) open space shall be provided
within each parcel A and B.
         b.   Open space shall be considered all areas unencumbered by
buildings or paved areas associated with parking, drive aisles, and loading
docks or zones. Plaza areas, water features and structures such as gazebos,
arbors, pergolas, etc., that are associated with outdoor pedestrian use areas,
as well as designated and enhanced pedestrian walkways through and between
parcels may be counted toward fulfilling the minimum open space requirement.
         c.   Vegetation at a rate of two (2) trees and three (3) shrubs per
three thousand (3,000) square feet of required open space shall be provided
within each parcel.
            (1)   Ten percent (10%) of all required trees shall be a minimum of
three (3) to three and one-half inch (31/2") caliper. Forty percent (40%) of
all required trees shall be a minimum of two (2) to two and one-half inch (21/
2") caliper. The balance of all required trees shall be one and one-half inch
(11/2") caliper. The minimum height for evergreens shall be six feet (6') and
may be counted as two (2) to two and one-half inch (21/2") caliper.
            (2)   Vegetation substitution: (Ord. 1801, 4-21-2008)
   (A) One evergreen tree or six (6) shrubs may be substituted for one required
tree; however, no more than twenty five percent (25%) of the required number of
trees may be substituted unless specifically approved by the development
planning and inspection manager in order to meet a defined design intent. (Ord.
1801, 4-21-2008; amd. Ord. 1922, 5-31-2011)
   (B) A twenty five (25) square foot mass planting of perennials or ornamental
grasses may be substituted for two (2) shrubs.
            (3)   Vegetation required as part of the open space may be placed
into off street parking areas, streetscapes or required buffers; however the
open space vegetation is in addition to that which would be required of
buffers, streetscapes or parking islands/pods and may not be counted toward
fulfilling the minimum amount of vegetation required for these areas.
      2.   Off Street Parking Areas:
         a.   All off street parking areas shall be landscaped to screen their
visibility from street rights of way and adjoining property outside of
Broadmoor Apartments at Jordan Creek Development.
         b.   Whenever possible, the appearance of numerous smaller parking
areas shall be created versus one larger parking expanse.
         c.   All off street parking areas shall be aesthetically improved to
reduce obtrusive characteristics that are inherent to their function. Multiple
landscape islands combined with vegetation shall be incorporated to effectively
eliminate a "sea of asphalt/concrete" and to provide shade thus decreasing heat
reflection back into the environment. Landscape islands and/or pods shall be
implemented in accordance with the following: (Ord. 1801, 4-21-2008)
            (1)   Islands or open areas shall be located at the terminus end of
all parking rows. Terminal islands shall equal a typical parking stall width
and shall match, at a minimum, the stall length unless otherwise allowed per
the discretion of the development planning and inspection manager. (Ord. 1801,
4-21-2008; amd. Ord. 1922, 5-31-2011)
            (2)   Linear parking rows with greater than twelve (12) parking
stalls shall incorporate a landscape island or pod every six (6) stalls. At a
minimum, islands shall match the dimensions of one parking stall and pods shall
measure a minimum of six feet (6') from back of curb to back of curb.
            (3)   One overstory or ornamental tree shall be implemented in
every landscape island and pod except for those islands or pods in which
vegetation placement would interfere with utility or fire hydrant access.
            (4)   For every twelve (12) parking stalls, two (2) shrubs or a
twenty five (25) square foot massing of perennials or ornamental grasses shall
be located within the islands or pods within the parking areas. Whenever
possible, ornamental grasses and perennials shall be of a variety which reaches
a minimum of three feet (3') in height in order to be visible between vehicles.
      3.   Visual Screening:
         a.   Detached Accessory Structures (Garages): Views from public
streets and property outside of the development of the "backs" of garages and
other detached accessory structures shall be mitigated through a combination of
the following:
            (1)   Architectural enhancement to visually break wall plane and
roof expanses and to "disguise" the function of the building.
            (2)   Incorporation of vegetation, with or without berming to
visually screen and aid in anchoring the structure to the site.
         b.   Mechanical Equipment:
            (1)   Ground level views from public streets and adjoining
properties of the negative aspects of development and land uses such as
heating, ventilation, or air conditioning (HVAC) units or similar electrical or
mechanical appurtenances shall be adequately screened. Said screening shall be
achieved through the use of architectural enclosures and/or earth berming and
landscaping consisting of predominately evergreen material for year round
screening.
            (2)   All rooftop mechanical units shall be screened from ground
level views from public streets and adjacent properties through architecturally
incorporated opaque screen walls, raised parapet walls, penthouse features, or
other opaque material comprised of materials consistent with the associated
primary structure. Screening measures and materials shall be provided and
reviewed as part of the site plan review process.
            (3)   Utility meters and equipment shall be visually screened to
minimize their presence through the use of berming, vegetation, fencing or
building "wing walls". The use of building wing walls or other architecturally
integrated building extensions is encouraged to screen utility meters and
equipment visible from views from the perimeter streets and adjacent
properties.
         c.   Trash Enclosures: Trash receptacles and dumpsters shall be
screened by the use of a permanent enclosure. Enclosures shall be constructed
of materials consistent with or complementary to the primary structure.
Additionally, the enclosure should be landscaped to minimize the visual
presence and impact of the structure on surrounding properties, businesses, and
public streets.
      4.   Streetscaping: A landscaped edge or "streetscape" shall be provided
along all public streets which are not required to provide a buffer. These
streetscapes are intended to provide desired green to the city, interest,
comfort to pedestrians, visual softening of pavement expanses, bring human
scale to adjoining buildings, minimize heat reflection, and provide traffic
calming benefits. The streetscape should have a noticeable pattern, design, and
plant varieties and should attempt to serve as a distinguishing or identifiable
landmark for the development.
         a.   The streetscape area shall consist of the first twenty five feet
(25') parallel and adjacent to the street right of way of public streets or
back of curb of private streets. As much as possible, streetscape landscaping
shall be located within the first fifteen feet (15') adjacent to the street.
         b.   Vegetation within streetscape areas shall be provided at a rate
of one tree and three (3) shrubs per thirty five (35) linear feet of
streetscape. A twenty five (25) square foot mass planting of perennials or
ornamental grasses may be substituted for two (2) shrubs.
         c.   Vegetation required of streetscapes shall be in addition to
vegetation required of parking, buffers and open space. Vegetation required as
part of open space or buffers may be placed into streetscapes; however the open
space or buffer vegetation may not be counted towards fulfilling the minimum
amount of vegetation required for the streetscape.
   J.   Pedestrian Elements: The Broadmoor Apartments at Jordan Creek
development, in alignment with "Town Center Overlay District Guidelines", aims
to encourage pedestrian movement and opportunities for pedestrian interaction
through a series of interconnected sidewalks, central greenbelt/open area and
community pool and clubhouse. The attached specific plan map indicates the
locations and type of anticipated plaza areas and pedestrian corridors;
however, it should be realized that additional areas may be required to
adequately serve the proposed development. Conceptual illustrations for the
plaza areas indicated are included in the exhibit packet (on file in the city).
Specific details and final materials and layouts for each of these plaza areas
shall be submitted, reviewed, and approved as part of the site plan for the
associated area.
      1.   Usable Open Space: The Broadmoor Apartments at Jordan Creek
development shall provide usable open space or activity spaces through the
integration of plazas, green spaces, interconnected and enhanced pedestrian
corridors and focal point elements. Each area shall incorporate usable open
space of a size and number proportionate to the number of intended dwellings in
that area. Fulfillment of this provision shall be at the discretion of the plan
and zoning commission and city council at the time of their one week review and
comment.
         a.   These areas shall encourage opportunities for interaction among
pedestrians through the provision of seating opportunities (benches, chairs,
tables, planter walls, etc.). Without compromising the design intent of the
plazas, the developer is encouraged to maximize the number of furniture/seating
opportunities throughout the development. Representations of the site
amenities, including street furniture that will be provided throughout this
development are included in the exhibit packet (on file in the city). Although
deviations from the illustrations are permissible, the street furniture is
intended to serve as a unifying element throughout the development.
         b.   Open space plazas areas shall incorporate a variety of hardscape
landscape materials (stone pavers, colored and/or stamped concrete, field
boulders, etc.) for visual interest and variety and shall implement landscape
vegetation to soften, enhance, and delineate the areas. All plaza/pedestrian
areas are required to incorporate "green" through the incorporation of planter
beds, containers, raised planters or landscaping within or immediately adjacent
to the plaza area.
         c.   Appropriate lighting should be incorporated into the plaza areas
and along pedestrian pathways for safety reasons and to extend the usability of
the area into the evening hours. Such lighting may be provided by either pole
or building mounted fixtures or bollard style lighting.
         d.   Plaza areas shall be located within walking proximity to nearby
dwellings. If necessary, identifiable pedestrian plaza areas may be located
within the specified streetscape area as long as appropriate landscaping and
other plaza enhancements are incorporated.
         e.   The installation of these pedestrian elements shall occur in
conjunction with the development of adjacent buildings and shall be completed
prior to issuance of a final occupancy permit for the last building within an
area and to which the pedestrian elements are intended to serve.
      2.   Pedestrian Connections: The overall development shall integrate
interconnected pedestrian walkways to allow and encourage pedestrian movement
within and through the Broadmoor Apartments at Jordan Creek development, as
well as provide more direct paths to other surrounding developments.
         a.   Pedestrian pathways internal to the development and across
parking areas and drive aisles shall be constructed with contrasting color,
paving material or pavement patterns to the adjoining paving in order to
provide a definable and highly visible crosswalk. Simply striping pedestrian
crosswalks shall not meet the intent of this section.
   K.   Lighting:
      1.   Fixtures used within off street parking areas shall be consistent
with those illustrated in the exhibits packet (on file in the city). Although
deviations from the illustrations are permissible, the fixtures are intended to
serve as a unifying element throughout the development.
      2.   Fixtures shall not be mounted higher than twenty five feet (25') as
measured from the ground to the top of the light structure.
      3.   No floodlighting is allowed. No unshielded wall packs are allowed.
Wall mounted lights shall be directional in nature or shall incorporate the
necessary shields to direct the light to a defined target area. Building
uplighting for architectural interest may be allowed provided it does not
produce light spillover or pollution.
      4.   Utilitarian wall mounted light fixtures should be of a color to
blend with the adjacent building materials in order to minimize their presence.
Decorative wall fixtures need not blend and may be of a contrasting color in
order to increase their presence if so desired.
      5.   In addition to cutoff fixtures, particular attention shall be given
to eliminate hot spots and light glare. To achieve this, additional measures
may include, but are not limited to, lowering parking lot light levels after
certain hours, turning off lights not necessary for security purposes, and use
of landscaping for light screening/blockage.
      6.   As a part of the review of a site plan, a photometric plan shall be
submitted. During the review, the applicant must demonstrate how lighting will
not adversely affect adjoining properties. (Ord. 1801, 4-21-2008)
090-06: ARCHITECTURE:
The intent is to create building facades throughout this development that are
varied and articulated to provide visual interest to pedestrians and to
establish a unique identity for the development. The architectural design of
any building within this development shall be acceptable to the city. The
architecture shall attempt to express a creative presentation by careful
attention to exterior building materials and details, use of fenestration and
change in building mass within the plane and roof design to lessen the
plainness of appearance which can be characteristic of large buildings.
Building design, materials, trim, detailing, and colors shall provide
continuity and cohesiveness amongst buildings. All sides to each building shall
receive high quality materials, finishes, and details (360 degree architectural
treatment). There are no "backs" to a building. Materials should be durable and
of a quality that will maintain their appearance over a prolonged time.
On file with the city are conceptual architectural illustrations of the general
building style and material options. Once city approval is gained on a
particular building design, any alteration in design or materials, before or
during construction must be reviewed and approved by the city's development
services department.
   A.   All buildings within this development shall accommodate or incorporate
the following in building design and materials:
      1.   Buildings shall be organized to create a logical and identifiable
relationship with the site and other buildings, open spaces, and pedestrian
circulation paths.
      2.   The use of building articulation and materials which break up the
building mass into modules that respect a pedestrian scale and reflects
proportions similar to other residential buildings.
      3.   The building's design should meet context and site objectives such
as providing gateways, creating visual and physical linkages and framing or
terminating views.
      4.   Variation in building height, mass and roof forms shall be provided
to create interest while still maintaining an overall building continuity.
Roofs should not be designed as attention getting devices.
      5.   Entrances into buildings should be easily identified through the use
of building design and detailing. Projected or recessed entryways, change in
rooflines, addition of awnings or changes in building material are examples
that can create this effect.
      6.   Shifts in building planes/facades and variation in exterior
materials shall be incorporated to minimize long expanses of wall. Long blank
walls shall be prohibited.
      7.   Variation in materials, material modules, expressed joints,
textures, colors and details should be used to break up the mass of the
buildings. Materials should change with the change in building planes.
      8.   Trim and structural elements such as posts or columns shall be sized
to the scale of the building.
      9.   Natural materials such as brick and stone shall be incorporated.
Architectural concrete or metal acceptable to the city may be incorporated in
the design. Whenever possible, the highest grade and type of siding material
should be implemented in order to provide an upscale appearance and extend the
attractiveness and life of the material. The use of EIFS or synthetic stucco
shall be used in moderation and primarily used as an accent or trim material;
EIFS or synthetic stucco may not be the predominate building material. (Ord.
1801, 4-21-2008)
090-07: SIGNAGE:
All proposed ground signage requires a sign permit issued by the city of West
Des Moines through normal sign review procedures. Unless otherwise provided
herein, signage shall abide by the standards and regulations as set forth in
title 9, chapter 18, "Signs", of the city code for the residential high-density
(RH) district.
   A.   Monument/Ground Sign:
      1.   One ground/monument sign shall be allowed per parcel frontage to a
public street. Of the total allowable number of signs, a maximum of two (2) of
the signs may be located along the same frontage on each side of an access
drive.
      2.   The overall sign structure shall not exceed eight feet (8') in
height.
      3.   The development identification copy area shall not exceed thirty
(30) square feet.
   B.   Building Directory Sign: Building directory signs shall be implemented
interior to the development to assist in directing patrons and emergency
response crews through the site. Size, design and location of said signs shall
be worked out with the city's fire marshal.
   C.   Fences: See subsection
090-05G, "Fences", of this ordinance for allowed development identification
plaques incorporated/attached to major fence support columns. (Ord. 1801, 4-21-
2008)
090-08: VEHICLE TRIP ALLOCATION:
A traffic impact study dated December 11, 2007, has been prepared by the
development services department, traffic engineering division of the city of
West Des Moines for the Broadmoor Apartments at Jordan Creek Development. A
secondary study dated December, 2010, was performed which evaluated the
original Broadmoor Development along with the addition of the 5.72 acre parcel
of ground immediately to the north. Per the second traffic impact study, the
Broadmoor Apartments at Jordan Creek Development, including the 5.72 acre
property immediately to the north has been allocated two hundred eighty three
(283) A.M. peak, three hundred fifty six (356) P.M. peak, and three thousand
seven hundred eighty nine (3,789) average daily trips. (Ord. 1922, 5-31-2011)
090-09: PUBLIC STREET IMPROVEMENTS:
Improvements and modifications to adjoining public roads as identified as
necessary within the traffic study shall be constructed and accepted by the
city council; or the developer may petition the city council to provide surety
in lieu of public improvement acceptance prior to approval and recordation of
the first final plat. Dedication of permanent right of way to accommodate
public road improvements shall be provided as necessary upon request. Temporary
right of way required during the construction/installation shall be provided as
necessary. (Ord. 1801, 4-21-2008)
090-10: FUTURE DRIVE CONNECTIONS:
Private ingress/egress easements to allow for future access connection drives
between parcel B and the adjoining east property shall be executed by the
developer of parcel B at the time of recordation of a final plat which
establishes parcel B as one or more buildable lots. If a connection drive
between Broadmoor and the parcel to the east is identified to be necessary for
traffic movement, said connection drives shall be constructed at the time of
development of parcel B by the developer of parcel B or sooner by the developer
of the adjacent properties should those properties develop first and require
said connection drives. (Ord. 1922, 5-31-2011)
090-11: PUBLIC STREETLIGHTS:
At the time of final platting, the developer shall enter into an agreement with
MidAmerican Energy for the installation of public streetlights along all public
streets adjoining the land being platted into buildable lots. Surety to ensure
installation of the public streetlights shall be provided to the city prior to
approval and recordation of the associated final plat. Installation of public
streetlights shall occur in conjunction with construction of the adjoining
parcel. (Ord. 1801, 4-21-2008)
090-12: STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN:
A master stormwater management plan for the entire development which governs
the overall stormwater management of the development shall be submitted to and
approved by the city of West Des Moines. Specific stormwater management plans
demonstrating compliance with the approved Broadmoor Apartments at Jordan Creek
master stormwater management plan, on file with the city, will be required with
the development of each phase and/or site plan. The specific stormwater plans
shall be prepared at the developer's expense, by a professional engineer
licensed in the state of Iowa. All specific stormwater management plans shall
comply with the city's applicable design standards for stormwater management
existing at the time each site plan is approved.
In addition, title 7, chapter 8, article G, "Postconstruction Stormwater
Management", of the city code must be adhered to. The following is a summary of
the requirements of said ordinance; however the summary is not all inclusive.
Refer directly to the ordinance for more details.
At the time of site plan approval, the developer of the site plan associated
property shall execute a stormwater management facility maintenance covenant
and permanent easement agreement. The agreement shall provide for access to the
facility at reasonable times for periodic inspection by the city to ensure that
the facility is maintained in proper working condition and meets design
standards. In addition, the agreement shall identify the parties responsible
for maintenance of any stormwater facilities as well as plans for periodic
inspection and maintenance of said facilities to ensure proper performance. The
agreement shall be binding on all subsequent owners of land served by the
facility and subject to review by the city. The agreement shall be recorded
into the land record at the time of final plat or site plan approval. (Ord.
1801, 4-21-2008)
090-13: UTILITIES:
The developer, its successors or assigns, if any, shall construct at its cost,
and if for general public use, dedicate to the city all sanitary sewer mains,
water mains, and storm sewers associated with parcels A and B within the
Broadmoor Apartments at Jordan Creek Development as required by the city of
West Des Moines' subdivision ordinance in accordance with applicable city
design standards. All necessary easements to allow city access to public
utilities for maintenance and repair purposes shall be executed prior to
approval and recordation of the final plat for each respective area or shall be
executed as a blanket access agreement prior to the approval and recordation of
the first final plat. Unless otherwise specified within a specific easement
document, the city shall not be responsible for reimbursement, restoration and/
or replacement of any improvements located within the public easements should
the city be required to excavate the public utilities for normal city
operations. No occupancy permits, either temporary or permanent, shall be
issued until all necessary improvements applicable to the area/lot or structure
requesting occupancy are installed and accepted by the city of West Des Moines.
Nothing in this ordinance shall be construed to prevent the developer, its
successors and/or assigns, if any, from entering into private agreement(s) as
it/they may desire to share the cost of improvements.
The placement of public utility easements within buffer parks, streetscapes and
under landscape islands or pods within parking areas is discouraged due to the
potential conflict between trees and the need to access the lines for repair.
Overstory trees should be placed off utility lines a minimum distance equal to
the one to one (1:1) excavation trench necessary for the deepest utility.
Adequate access for maintenance vehicles shall be provided into and through the
easement areas. (Ord. 1801, 4-21-2008)
090-14: FIRE ACCESS:
   A.   All access drives, internal drive aisles and parking lots shall permit
the travel of the fire department's largest vehicle, including adequate
accommodation of the vehicle's turning needs. Approval of unique design
solutions to accommodate fire access may be granted by the city council if the
solutions proposed are recommended by the West Des Moines fire department.
   B.   At the discretion of the city's fire marshal, "no parking fire lane"
areas may be established as necessary to ensure efficient movement and access
of the firetrucks. The developer shall be responsible for the procurement and
erection of approved fire lane signage.
   C.   A minimum of fourteen feet (14') of vertical clearance over the travel
portion shall be maintained at all times over all vehicle travelways.
   D.   The developer or its designee shall be responsible for enforcement of
no parking lanes and maintaining adequate clearance of structures and
vegetation along and above all vehicle travelways regardless if public or
private.
   E.   Adequate fire accesses as determined by the city's fire marshal shall
be provided at all times to those areas under construction. (Ord. 1801, 4-21-
2008)
090-15: VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES:
Any person who violates the provisions of this ordinance upon conviction shall
be punished as set forth in section 1-4-1 of the city code. (Ord. 1801, 4-21-
2008)
090-99: LEGISLATIVE HISTORY:
Ord. 1801, 4-21-2008; Ord. 1922, 5-31-2011.
PUD #91
AVIVA USA
SECTION:
091-01: Legal Description
091-02: Definitions
091-03: Required Plans
091-04: Development Agreement
091-05: General Requirements
091-06: Land Use
091-07: Site Design Criteria
091-08: Architecture
091-09: Signage
091-10: Vehicle Trip Allocation
091-11: Public Improvements
091-12: Street Right Of Way
091-13: Stormwater Management Plan
091-14: Violations And Penalties
091-99: Legislative History
091-01: LEGAL DESCRIPTION:
Parcel "A" and parcel "B" of the plat of survey of part of the SE 1/4 of
section 14, township 78 north, range 26 west of the 5th P.M., West Des Moines,
Dallas County, Iowa, as recorded at book 2008, page 93 in the Dallas County
recorder's office. (To be platted as lots 1 and 2, Aviva USA plat 1.)
(Ord. 1810, 8-11-2008)
091-02: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of clarification within this ordinance, the following
definitions shall apply:
BIOSWALE: A long, shallow, vegetated swale designed to retain and slowly
filter, absorb, and evaporate, as well as convey, stormwater through dense
vegetation comprised of wetland type grasses and other water tolerant plants,
shrubs, and ornamental trees.
CENTRAL PARK: The area generally at the center of the site with special
hardscape elements, wet ponds, trails, an amphitheater and other outdoor site
furnishings and amenities to serve the employees.
DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENT: The written agreement between Aviva USA and the city of
West Des Moines dated February 11, 2008, which identifies the obligations of
each party and the general design regulations and guidelines of the proposed
Aviva USA West Des Moines campus.
HARDSCAPE: Nonliving materials used to augment the beauty or naturalness of a
landscaped area. Hardscape may include, but is not limited to: brick, stone,
rock walls, fountains, ponds, pools, planters or retaining walls, but it
excludes all forms of artificial and live vegetation.
SPEED TABLE: A pedestrian crossing identified by a raised area of paving with
special paving treatments that is located within the roadway and specifically
designed to identify it as a pedestrian crossing and slow down vehicular
traffic. Speed tables shall be designed to provide adequate clearance for large
public safety vehicles. (Ord. 1810, 8-11-2008)
091-03: REQUIRED PLANS:
The following plans shall be required as a part of the processing of any
development application for any property within the Aviva USA specific plan:
   A.   Area Development Plan: An area development plan is a plan that
identifies infrastructure, planning units, major street patterns, drainage and
detention, utilities, shared public spaces, vehicular traffic impacts, proposed
densities, and land use assumptions. It is intended to promote the
communication and cooperation between adjacent property owners and developers
to encourage cohesive, unified development. An area development plan must be
approved by the city council prior to, or in conjunction with, the review of
the specific plan for any property within said specific plan. No change to the
area development plan shall be made without approval from the appropriate
reviewing bodies.
On file in the city as exhibit A is the city council approved area development
plan for this property which is known as area 4 on the map identifying the area
development plans within the town center overlay district as adopted by the
West Des Moines city council.
   B.   Specific Plan: A specific plan identifies detailed development criteria
for each planning unit identified in the area development plan. The specific
plan will conform to the general intent of the area development plan and the
"Town Center Overlay District Guidelines" and shall be adopted by the city
council by ordinance. This ordinance shall constitute the specific plan for the
Aviva USA West Des Moines campus specific plan. On file in the city and made a
part of this rezoning as exhibit B is a specific plan map for the Aviva USA
West Des Moines campus. It is recognized that slight modifications and changes
to the development illustrated on the map may be necessary due to changes in
building footprints or details; however, the intent is that the development
shall adhere to the major elements illustrated and may not be altered without
the approval of the city council. It is further recognized that development of
the western portion of the Aviva USA specific plan area has not been planned
and no speculative details have been illustrated. At such time that development
of the western portion of the site is pending and prior to site plan submittal,
the specific plan map and ordinance, if necessary will need to be amended to
illustrate the overall development intent for the undeveloped portion (area 1)
of the Aviva USA site. Said amendment shall require the approval of the city
council upon review and recommendation of the plan and zoning commission.
Where the specific plan map and specific plan language conflict, the specific
plan language shall prevail.
   C.   Development Applications (Overlay District Site Plans): Site plans for
all buildings and land area within the Aviva development must meet the intent
of the approved specific plan. Site plans shall be submitted to the city of
West Des Moines for review and approval prior to the development of any portion
of the associated supporting lot. Site plans for permitted uses which comply
(as determined by the director of development services) with the design intent
as set forth in this specific plan will be subject to administrative review and
approval by the director of development services. A one week review and comment
period by each and all available members of the plan and zoning commission and
city council shall precede the administrative approval. If upon review, two (2)
or more members of the city council, plan and zoning commission, or a
combination thereof request such; or if the director of development services
deems the proposed site plan is not in compliance with the approved specific
plan or is potentially controversial, the site plan will be processed through
the traditional full site plan review and approval process. Site plans for
permitted conditional uses (PC) as defined in the city code, unless otherwise
amended within this ordinance, shall be approved by the appropriate review
body. At the discretion of the director of development services, an amendment
to Aviva USA specific plan ordinance may be required to bring consistency
between the ordinance and site plan development proposed. (Ord. 1810, 8-11-
2008)
091-04: DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENT:
In addition to the requirements and guidelines found within this ordinance, the
development of this site shall be governed by and must also comply with the
requirements and guidelines found within the Aviva USA-city of West Des Moines
development agreement. Should a conflict arise between the development
agreement and this specific plan ordinance, the requirements or guidelines
found within the development agreement shall prevail. (Ord. 1810, 8-11-2008)
091-05: GENERAL REQUIREMENTS:
Whereas, title 9 of the city code includes chapter 9, PUD planned unit
development district and establishes certain regulations and guidelines
pertaining to accompanying information required on plat and site plan
documents. Now, therefore, the following conditions, restrictions, and
regulations are adopted as part of this approval, to wit:
In addition to the specific plan map, the following general development
criteria shall be integrated into and made a part of this planned unit
development (PUD):
   A.   General Conformance To Subdivision Ordinance: All subdivisions, public
streets, public street rights of way, and general development shall adhere to
the standards and design criteria set forth in the West Des Moines subdivision
ordinances and the most current design standards adopted by the city of West
Des Moines pertaining thereto unless otherwise stated within this ordinance.
   B.   General Conformance To Zoning Ordinance: Unless otherwise specified
herein, the development of the Aviva USA specific plan shall comply with title
9, "Zoning", of the city code or any other applicable codes.
   C.   Flood Hazard: In all areas within a 100-year frequency flood hazard
zone, or adjoining drainageways, and detention ponding areas involving
potential flood hazards, no building shall be erected that has a lowest floor,
including basements, less than one foot (1') above the determining level of the
100-year frequency flood event, and no building shall be located within twenty
five feet (25') of any easement or property boundary of a major drainageway,
stormwater detention basin, or pond, unless said location is approved as part
of a development entitlement by the city council and said building is
structurally designed accordingly.
   D.   Improvements: Unless otherwise specifically established in the Aviva
USA-city of West Des Moines development agreement or otherwise approved by the
city council, the developer, its successors and/or assigns, if any, shall pay
all planning, engineering, and construction costs for the development of the
planned unit development as required by this ordinance, and shall pay all costs
related to approved site plans, which may include, but are not limited to, the
cost of all streets, storm sewers, sanitary sewers, water mains and service
lines, drainageway improvements, detention basins, buffers, and other
improvements as required. No occupancy permits, either temporary or permanent,
shall be issued until all necessary improvements applicable to the area/lot or
structure requesting occupancy are installed and accepted by the city of West
Des Moines. Nothing in this ordinance shall be construed to prevent the
developer, its successors and/or assigns, if any, from entering into private
agreement(s) as it/they may desire to share the cost of improvements.
   E.   Fire Access:
      1.   All access drives, internal drive aisles and parking lots shall
permit the travel of the fire department's largest vehicle, including adequate
accommodation of the vehicle's turning needs. Approval of unique design
solutions to accommodate fire access may be granted by the city council if the
solutions proposed are recommended by the West Des Moines fire department.
      2.   At the discretion of the city's fire marshal, "no parking fire lane"
areas may be established as necessary to ensure efficient movement and access
of the fire trucks. The developer shall be responsible for the procurement and
erection of approved fire lane signage.
      3.   A minimum of fourteen feet (14') of vertical clearance over the
travel portion shall be maintained at all times over all vehicle travelways.
      4.   The developer or its designee shall be responsible for enforcement
of no parking lanes and maintaining adequate clearance of structures and
vegetation along and above all vehicle travelways regardless if public or
private.
      5.   Adequate fire accesses as determined by the city's fire marshal
shall be provided at all times to those areas under construction.
   F.   Private Internal Roads: The design of the private internal roads and
drives may include speed tables at pedestrian crossings to provide safe
pedestrian connections from the parking lots to the building entrances. These
speed tables shall be designed to fully accommodate emergency vehicle access
through and around the site. All internal roads and drives shall also
accommodate the turning radius needs of all fire apparatus and must be reviewed
and approved by the fire department prior to installation. (Ord. 1810, 8-11-
2008)
091-06: LAND USE:
In addition to the general requirements as stated in this ordinance and unless
provided otherwise in this ordinance, all general use regulations and
provisions and all land uses set forth in title 9, "Zoning", of the city code
for the professional commerce park (PCP) district as permitted and permitted
conditionally shall apply to the areas designated as areas "1" and "2" on the
specific plan map included in this ordinance (see exhibit B on file in the
city). The land uses to be implemented, the maximum allowable square footage
for uses and special provisions required to allow development of said uses
shall be governed by and must comply with the requirements and guidelines found
within the Aviva USA-city of West Des Moines development agreement. (Ord. 1810,
8-11-2008)
091-07: SITE DESIGN CRITERIA:
Unless provided otherwise in this ordinance, all site development regulations
and provisions set forth in title 9, "Zoning", of the city code for the
professional commerce park (PCP) district shall apply to the areas designated
as areas "1" and "2" on the specific plan map included in this ordinance (see
exhibit B on file in the city). To the extent that the provisions of this
section conflict with or are more restrictive than similar provisions provided
elsewhere in the West Des Moines zoning ordinance, the provisions of this
section shall control.
   A.   Lot Area: Multiple buildings separated by parking areas or drives and
lots less than two (2) acres in size may be considered acceptable if supported
by appropriate easements or a reciprocal easement agreement; and if approved by
the appropriate reviewing body as part of an overlay district site plan,
permitted conditional use permit, or plat.
   B.   Setbacks:
      1.   Building:
         a.   A minimum fifty foot (50') setback shall be provided along all
perimeter boundaries of the Aviva USA site except that an additional ten feet
(10') of setback shall be required for every twelve feet (12') of building
height beyond the maximum building heights allowed per the PCP district
standards.
         b.   Setbacks along internal parcel boundaries between like uses (such
as, office to office) shall be zero.
         c.   Setbacks along internal parcel boundaries between dissimilar uses
(such as, office to retail) shall be a minimum of thirty feet (30').
      2.   Parking:
         a.   A minimum twenty foot (20') setback shall be provided along all
perimeter boundaries of the Aviva USA site.
         b.   Setbacks along internal parcel boundaries which abut another
parcel shall be zero to allow for parking lot interconnection. Setbacks along
internal parcel boundaries which abut a primary drive or are not designed as
interconnecting parking lots shall provide a minimum of twenty feet (20') of
setback from the parcel boundary.
         c.   Parking structures shall abide by the aforementioned building
setback requirements.
         d.   No portion of any parking lot or drive aisle associated with
parking may be located within a required buffer or streetscape.
   C.   Building Heights: Building height limitations shall be controlled by
the restrictions set forth in the professional commerce park (PCP) district.
   D.   Building Separation: Building separation distances shall be governed by
applicable building and fire code regulations.
   E.   Parking Ratios:
      1.   A minimum of one parking stall per two hundred fifty (250) square
feet gfa shall be provided for office uses.
      2.   Minimum parking requirements for all other uses shall abide by city
code.
      3.   At the discretion of the director of development services, a less
stringent parking calculation may be used provided the applicant can
demonstrate a parking rate less than the above is adequate due to the type of
potential use, shared uses or off peak uses.
      4.   Parking stall and drive dimensions shall comply with city code. All
parking lots and drives, including private roads, shall be constructed to city
code including integrally attached PCC curbing a minimum four inches (4") tall.
Curbing is not required adjacent to the parking lot bioswales. Instead, the
bioswales will be treated as appropriate in order to permit the infiltration of
parking lot surface water as desired.
   F.   Vehicle Drive-Throughs: It is recognized that drive-ups are a key
component to the functionality of certain types of businesses due to their
convenience. If, through the design review process, including an updated
traffic analysis it can be demonstrated that such uses do not cause traffic
congestion, do not interfere with pedestrian movements and can be designed to
minimize their presence, drive-ups may be permitted within area "1" of the
Aviva USA development with proper city approval.
      1.   The incorporation of drive-up facilities may be limited by the type
of use in association with the available vehicle trips allowed for the entire
Aviva USA development.
      2.   In all instances, the presence of the drive-ups shall be minimized
through one or a combination of the following methods:
         a.   Integration of the drive-through into the building architecture
in order to eliminate the appearance as an added on canopy component.
         b.   Situating the drive-through between two (2) buildings in order to
limit the number of views thereof.
         c.   Opaque visual screening through the use of earth berming to a
height of a minimum of six feet (6') combined with vegetation of a
predominately evergreen nature.
   G.   Pedestrian Connections: The overall development shall integrate
interconnected pedestrian walkways to allow and encourage pedestrian movement
from one building to another within the Aviva USA development, as well as to
the perimeter public sidewalks. Pedestrian pathways internal to the development
and across parking areas and drive aisles shall be constructed with contrasting
color and pavement patterns to the adjoining paving in order to provide a
definable and highly visible crosswalk.
   H.   Buffers: Buffering between districts or parcels and uses shall be
required as set forth in title 9, chapter 3 of the city code. Buffers shall be
provided as follows:
      1.   Along Mills Civic Parkway, South Jordan Creek Parkway and that
portion of Cascade Drive within area 2 - none required; however, adequate
parking lot and negative element screening shall be required in accordance with
section 9-10-4 of the city code.
      2.   South 81st Street and that portion of Cascade Drive within area 1 -
minimum thirty feet (30') measured from the perimeter boundaries (ultimate
street right of way line) of the Aviva USA development. If at the time of
development of land along these streets, the current land use or the land use
designation identified on either the city's comprehensive plan or zoning map
has changed to a nonresidential use, said buffers shall not be required;
adequate parking lot and negative element screening requirements remain in
effect regardless of adjoining uses.
      3.   No buffers shall be required along internal parcel boundaries except
to mitigate undesirable elements, views and parking.
      4.   Buffers shall be installed within each lot at the time of
development of the first building within that lot.
      5.   No parking lots, fences, or structures are permitted within the
buffer parks. Sidewalks, trails, landscape features, pedestrian furniture, and
permitted signage may be located within the buffer parks.
      6.   Buffers should be designed to achieve the maximum amount of
screening from the maximum number of viewpoints with vegetation layered to
ensure adequate blockage of views and to create depth and a sense of
naturalness. Care should be taken to ensure that "through-views" under tree
canopies are adequately blocked.
         a.   The minimum landscaping within required buffers shall be provided
as follows:
            (1)   One overstory tree and three (3) shrubs shall be provided per
thirty five (35) linear feet of required buffer.
            (2)   Vegetation substitution as per city code.
         b.   Landscape vegetation required within buffer areas is in addition
to the landscape vegetation required of open space and parking areas.
      7.   Ponds, lakes, wetlands, or other water features may be placed within
the buffer area given the following:
         a.   Such water features constantly contain water at a level visible
from adjoining properties and public streets;
         b.   Pond edge treatments are incorporated to enhance the
attractiveness of the element (no "wild overgrown pond edge" allowed); and
         c.   The appropriate water circulation and clarification measures are
implemented.
   I.   Landscaping: The landscaping requirements specified herein are intended
to create an aesthetically pleasing development which enhances the appearance
and character of the city of West Des Moines, while protecting the general
health, safety and welfare of the citizens. Landscaping is required to address
the following primary aspects or consequences of development:
•   Open space protection and enhancement.
•   Mitigation of paving expanses associated with off street parking.
•   Visual screening of undesirable views, activities and/or site elements.
The specific plan map illustrates the general landscaping concept and this plan
should be used as the guide for site plan development in respect to the general
locations of plant material to be provided. Additional vegetation may be
required to be implemented to meet the requirements specified within this
ordinance and in response to additional details of the use, buildings, parking,
etc. Details regarding specific varieties, exact quantities, and the minimum
size at time of planting shall be provided and approved as part of the site
plan submittal and shall meet the general guidelines in respect to the minimum
plant size traditionally applied to development within the city. In the event
that alternatives to what is shown on the attached specific plan are desired,
the minimum vegetation requirements specified within this ordinance will need
to be provided and the original intent of the required vegetation met.
      1.   General Open Space: The intent of open space is to allow for a
balance between natural areas and the built environment and to provide for the
overall beautification and "greening" of the city. The overall landscape of the
Aviva USA West Des Moines campus will consist of native and nonnative
overstory, understory, shrub, and perennial plantings forming a parklike
setting. Grasses and flowers, including a low maintenance turf, will be
utilized to reflect Iowa's landscape heritage as well as reduce the amount of
turf maintenance on site. Rock or similar inorganic type mulch shall not be
considered an acceptable ground cover.
         a.   Minimum: The minimum open space requirement of the site area
which includes buildings owned by and used as Aviva USA corporate offices shall
be thirty five percent (35%). Any individual parcels of the site not owned by
Aviva or an entity of Aviva and which contains nonoffice uses shall provide a
minimum of thirty five percent (35%) open space within each individual parcel.
The land area encompassed by the primary internal private road network shall
not be included in the total site area for the calculation of the open space
requirements.
         b.   Vegetation: The minimum required landscaping within each parcel
shall be based upon the amount of required open space, not amount of provided
open space. A minimum two (2) trees and three (3) shrubs shall be required for
every three thousand (3,000) square feet of required open space with the
following plant material size requirements:
            (1)   Trees:
 
10 percent  3 inch to 3.5 inch caliper
30 percent  2 inch to 2.5 inch caliper
Balance     1.5 inch caliper
 
Minimum height for evergreens shall be six feet (6') and may be counted as a
two inch (2") to 2.5 inch caliper tree.
            (2)   Shrubs: Eighteen inches (18") to twenty four inches (24")
tall or five (5) gallon size.
            (3)   Vegetation: Vegetation required as part of the open space may
be placed into off street parking areas or required buffers; however the open
space vegetation is in addition to that which would be required of buffers or
parking islands/pods and may not be counted towards fulfilling the minimum
amount of vegetation required for these areas.
      2.   Off Street Parking Areas:
         a.   All parking areas shall be landscaped to screen their visibility
from public rights of way or from any adjoining property outside the Aviva USA
campus through the use of plant materials and/or berming. Effectiveness of
proposed screening shall be reviewed at the time of review of the site plan for
the development of the parcel.
         b.   All off street parking areas shall be aesthetically improved to
reduce obtrusive characteristics that are inherent to their function. Landscape
islands combined with vegetation shall be incorporated to effectively eliminate
a "sea of asphalt/concrete" and to provide shade, thus decreasing heat
reflection back into the environment. A minimum amount equal to ten percent
(10%) of the paved parking areas shall be provided as open space. These open
spaces may be counted towards meeting the overall open space requirements for
parcels (not 10 percent in addition to the stated open space percentage).
         c.   No parking space shall be farther than seventy five feet (75')
from a bioswale, landscaped island, or landscaped open space area. Parking lot
islands shall be a minimum eight feet (8') wide and landscaped with an organic
ground cover or plant material - no rock or paving.
         d.   Islands or open areas shall be located at the terminus end of all
parking rows. Terminal islands shall match, at a minimum, the stall length and
measure at least ten feet (10') in width unless otherwise allowed per the
discretion of the director of community development.
      3.   Visual Screening:
         a.   Mechanical Equipment:
            (1)   Views from public streets and adjoining property of the
negative aspects of development and land uses such as loading docks; heating,
ventilation, or air conditioning (HVAC) units; or similar electrical or
mechanical appurtenances shall be adequately screened. Said screening shall be
achieved through the use of architectural features or earth berming and
landscaping consisting of predominately evergreen material.
            (2)   All rooftop mechanical units shall be screened from view from
public streets and adjoining properties by the use of an opaque screening
material compatible with the architecture of the building or architecturally
designed screen walls, parapet walls, penthouse, louvers, grilles or other
opaque material comprised of materials consistent with the associated primary
structure. Screening measures and materials shall be consistent with the
primary building.
         b.   Trash Enclosures: Trash receptacles and dumpsters shall be
screened on all sides by an enclosure designed as an attached extension to a
primary structure rather than a freestanding structure and constructed of
materials consistent with the primary structure. Additionally, the enclosure
should be landscaped as necessary to minimize the visual presence and impact of
the structure on surrounding area.
   J.   Site Furniture: On file in the city are representations of the site
furniture and fixtures that shall be installed throughout the Aviva campus.
Slight deviations from what is indicated are permissible; however, the intent
is to provide common furniture and fixtures throughout the Aviva site in order
for continuity and cohesiveness between parcels and individual buildings/
developments.
   K.   Lighting Standards: It is intended that lighting for development within
the Aviva USA specific plan shall be designed to provide a safe environment,
yet mitigate light pollution onto adjoining properties. The Aviva USA campus
will have a family of light fixtures ranging from parking lot lights and
roadway fixtures to pathway lights.
      1.   All lights shall be cutoff fixtures; no wall pack or flood lighting
is allowed. As part of the review of each site plan, a photometric plan must be
submitted.
      2.   In addition to cutoff fixtures, particular attention shall be given
to eliminate hotspots or light glare. To achieve this additional measures may
include, but are not limited to, lowering parking lot light levels after
business hours, turning off lights not necessary for security purposes, and use
of landscaping for light screening.
      3.   The parking light fixtures shall be a maximum twenty five feet (25')
in height, the roadway lights will be a maximum of eighteen feet (18') in
height, and the pathway lights will be a maximum fourteen feet (14') in height.
Bollard lighting will also be utilized for pedestrian level lighting. (Ord.
1810, 8-11-2008)
091-08: ARCHITECTURE:
The intent is to create a campus environment that engages exterior and interior
spaces to create a comfortable sense of community for its employees. The campus
includes a primary seven (7) story office tower flanked on two (2) sides by
multi-story commons building and a central plant/maintenance building. The
building facades will utilize similar materials for cohesiveness, but yet will
vary enough in design to be discernible from each other. See exhibit B for
sketches (on file in the city).
The architecture for all office development within this specific plan must also
comply with the "Architectural Guidelines For Office Use" as found in exhibit
"B" of the development agreement. It is the intent of these guidelines that all
buildings constructed be carefully designed to ensure their individual
attractiveness, their compatibility with each other and the environment. The
exterior materials shall be of a type and quality to convey strength and
permanence. The following is a list of acceptable materials:
   A.   Building Exterior:
      1.   Architectural cast in place concrete with an approved finish
(sandblasted, board formed or other approved finish).
      2.   Architectural precast concrete and/or cast stone.
      3.   Precast concrete insulated core panels with approved sandblasted or
color integrated finish.
      4.   Brick masonry.
      5.   Natural stone masonry.
      6.   Architectural prefinished metal panels.
      7.   Natural or aluminum (limited use to trim, storefront, doors,
windows, curtain wall and sunscreens).
      8.   Insulated glass - clear or tinted (use of highly reflective coatings
to be limited).
      9.   Sheet metal (limited to copings, roof edge, flashings, trim and
soffits).
      10.   Plaster, gypsum board, EIFS (limited to soffits).
   B.   Roofing Materials:
      1.   Copper and/or prefinished metal standing seam or bermuda metal roof
and accessories (i.e., trim, cap, ice and snow guards).
      2.   Built up or single ply membranes with natural gravel ballast, fully
adhered or mechanically fastened.
      3.   Earth covered roof with plant material.
      4.   Slate or concrete shingles. (Ord. 1810, 8-11-2008)
091-09: SIGNAGE:
All signage shall comply with the West Des Moines sign code regulations for the
professional commerce park (PCP) district, as set forth in title 9 of the city
code, except as herein modified:
   A.   Ground Monument Signs:
      1.   Primary Monument Entrance Sign: Two (2) monument signs shall be
allowed at the primary entrances off of South Jordan Creek Parkway and Mills
Civic Parkway as identified on the specific plan map. The sign structure itself
shall not exceed twenty two feet six inches (22'6") in height, a maximum size
for the total structure of two hundred twenty five (225) square feet and a
maximum copy area of forty five (45) square feet. One monument sign shall be
allowed at the entrance drive on the south side of the site along Cascade
Drive. The sign structure at this entrance shall not exceed twelve feet (12')
in height, and a maximum size of the total structure of seventy two (72) square
feet and a maximum copy area of thirty five (35) square feet.
      2.   Secondary Monument Entrance Sign: With the exception of the primary
entrance locations noted above, one monument sign shall be permitted per access
entry off of all adjacent perimeter streets. These signs shall not exceed six
feet (6') in height and a total sign structure size of twenty four (24) square
feet.
      3.   Sign Setbacks And Other Requirements:
         a.   Primary And Secondary Monument Entrance Signs:
            (1)   Shall be set back a minimum of twenty feet (20') from the
ultimate right of way line of any adjacent public streets except where the
right of way jogs into the property at driveway intersections, said setback may
be reduced to ten feet (10') from the jog in the right of way. Monument signs
located within a center median at the primary entrances off of Mills Civic
Parkway and S. Jordan Creek Parkway may be placed at a one foot (1') setback
from the jog in the right of way. In addition to providing for minimum setback
from rights of way, signs shall also be located out of vision triangles at
vehicle-vehicle and vehicle-pedestrian intersections.
            (2)   Shall be incorporated into a landscaped entry feature/area.
            (3)   Any illumination of the signs shall be either through
exterior lighting, routered face letters or halo lit lettering. Exterior lights
shall include the appropriate shields to direct the light at the sign while
preventing light spillover and glare.
      4.   Landscape Wall Sign: One landscape sign shall be allowed at the
corner of each perimeter public street intersection. These signs shall be
comprised of a low wall integrated into the surrounding topography and
landscape. Said walls may be singular or terraced, however the maximum height
of any wall, or combination of walls, shall not exceed eight feet (8') in
height at the highest point. A maximum copy area of forty five (45) square feet
shall be allowed on the wall face. Any illumination of the wall shall be either
through halo or ground lighting. Ground lights shall include the appropriate
shields to direct the light at the wall while preventing light spillover.
      5.   Directional Signs: In order to direct vehicles around and through
the site, directional signs shall be allowed along the interior private streets
and drives. These directional signs shall be allowed with a maximum height of
five feet five inches (5'5") and a maximum total structure size of twenty (20)
square feet. The directional signs shall be designed with similar materials as
the monument signs on the site to help unify the signage on the site. Any
illumination of the directional signs shall either be through exterior
lighting, routered face letters, or halo lit lettering. Exterior lighting shall
be appropriately shielded to direct light at the sign while preventing light
spillover and glare. Location and design of the sign shall be reviewed by the
city prior to installation but no sign permit shall be required prior to
installation. All other aspects of the directional signs shall be in accordance
with city code requirements except, the Aviva name and logo may be displayed on
the directional signs.
   B.   Building Signage: Building mounted signage shall comply with the West
Des Moines sign code for the professional commerce park (PCP) district.
   C.   Other Signage: All other signage within the Aviva USA specific plan
shall be in accordance with the professional commerce park (PCP) standards. It
is recognized that the development of the western portion of the Aviva USA
specific plan area has not been planned and therefore the signage needs for
that portion of the site cannot be defined at the time of the writing of this
ordinance. At such time that development of this area is pending, the specific
plan ordinance may need to be amended to address the specific sign needs to
create a cohesive and unified sign package for the entire area. (Ord. 1858, 2-
8-2010)
091-10: VEHICLE TRIP ALLOCATION:
Per the Aviva USA-city of West Des Moines development agreement, the
approximately eighty eight (88) acre Aviva project has been allocated eight
thousand nine hundred thirty one (8,931) average daily trips (ADT), one
thousand six hundred forty three (1,643) A.M. peak, and one thousand five
hundred fifty eight (1,558) P.M. peak vehicle trips. Specific development
parameters and provisions are outlined in the Aviva USA-city of West Des Moines
development agreement; development of the site shall be governed by and must
comply with the requirements and guidelines found within the development
agreement. (Ord. 1810, 8-11-2008)
091-11: PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS:
The Aviva USA-city of West Des Moines development agreement identifies
responsibilities for public improvements associated with the initial
development of the Aviva project site (area 2 and adjacent public streets).
Public improvements associated with and necessary for the development of area 1
shall be the responsibility of the developer, its successors or assigns, if
any. The developer of area 2 shall construct necessary improvements not
otherwise assigned in the development agreement at his/her cost, and if for
general public use, dedicate to the city all sanitary sewer mains, water mains,
and storm sewers associated with development as required by the city of West
Des Moines' subdivision ordinance in accordance with applicable city design
standards. All necessary easements to allow city access to public utilities for
maintenance and repair purposes shall be executed prior to approval and
recordation of a final plat or site plan for each respective area or shall be
executed as a blanket access agreement prior to the approval and recordation of
the associated final plat. Unless otherwise specified within a specific
easement document, the city shall not be responsible for reimbursement,
restoration and/or replacement of any improvements located within the public
easements should the city be required to excavate the public utilities for
normal city operations. No occupancy permits, either temporary or permanent,
shall be issued until all necessary public improvements applicable to the area/
lot or structure requesting occupancy are installed and accepted by the city of
West Des Moines. Nothing in this ordinance shall be construed to prevent the
developer, its successors and/or assigns, if any, from entering into private
agreement(s) as it/they may desire to share the cost of improvements.
The placement of public utility easements within buffer parks, streetscapes and
under landscape islands or pods within parking areas is discouraged due to the
potential conflict between trees and the need to access the lines for repair.
Overstory trees should be placed off utility lines a minimum distance equal to
the one to one (1:1) excavation trench necessary for the deepest utility.
Adequate access for maintenance vehicles shall be provided into and through the
easement areas. (Ord. 1810, 8-11-2008)
091-12: STREET RIGHT OF WAY:
Dedication of public street rights of way shall be in accordance with the Aviva
USA-city of West Des Moines development agreement. (Ord. 1810, 8-11-2008)
091-13: STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN:
A master stormwater management plan for the entire development which governs
the overall stormwater management of the development shall be submitted to and
approved by the city of West Des Moines. Specific stormwater management plans
demonstrating compliance with the approved master stormwater management plan,
on file with the city, will be required with the development of each portion of
the site and/or site plan. The specific stormwater plans shall be prepared at
the developer's expense, by a professional engineer licensed in the state of
Iowa. All specific stormwater management plans shall comply with the city's
applicable design standards for stormwater management existing at the time each
site plan is approved.
In addition, the development must adhere to title 7, chapter 8, article G,
"Postconstruction Stormwater Management", of the city code. The following is a
summary of the requirements of said ordinance; however the summary is not all
inclusive. Refer directly to the ordinance for more details.
At the time of site plan approval, the developer shall execute a stormwater
management facility maintenance covenant and permanent easement agreement. The
agreement shall provide for access to the facility at reasonable times for
periodic inspection by the city to ensure that the facility is maintained in
proper working condition and meets design standards. In addition, the agreement
shall identify the parties responsible for maintenance of any stormwater
facilities as well as plans for periodic inspection and maintenance of said
facilities to ensure proper performance. The agreement shall be binding on all
subsequent owners of land served by the facility and subject to review by the
city. The agreement shall be recorded into the land record at the time of site
plan approval. (Ord. 1810, 8-11-2008)
091-14: VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES:
Any person who violates the provisions of this ordinance upon conviction shall
be punished as set forth in section 1-4-1 of the city code. (Ord. 1810, 8-11-
2008)
091-99: LEGISLATIVE HISTORY:
Ord. 1810, 8-11-2008; Ord. 1858, 2-8-2010.
PUD #92
ESCALADE TOWNHOMES
SECTION:
092-01: Legal Description
092-02: Intent
092-03: Buffering
092-04: Architecture
092-05: Land Use Design Criteria
092-06: Areas To Be Platted
092-07: Stormwater Management
092-08: Public Street Location
092-09: Park Land Dedication
092-10: Right Of Way Dedication
092-11: Violations And Penalties
092-99: Legislative History
092-01: LEGAL DESCRIPTION:
The north 306.92 feet of the east 706.58 feet of the northeast 1/4 of the
southeast 1/4 of the southeast 1/4 of section 11, township 78 north, range 26
west of the 5th p.m., Dallas County, Iowa and containing 4.414 acres more or
less. (Ord. 1656, 10-24-2005)
092-02: INTENT:
To create an infill residential development that fits within the constraints of
the site's environmental impacts. (Ord. 1656, 10-24-2005)
092-03: BUFFERING:
   A.   Buffer Parks: Thirty foot (30') buffer parks shall be required along
the north and west edges of the development. A forty five foot (45') buffer
park shall be located along the east edge of the development to buffer the
townhomes from Jordan Creek Parkway. The buffer parks shall be planted in
accordance with the thirty foot (30') buffer standards as noted in the city
code. No decks, patios or other accessory structures may be located within any
buffer park. (Ord. 1656, 10-24-2005)
092-04: ARCHITECTURE:
The intent is to create building facades that are varied and articulated to
provide visual interest to pedestrians and homeowners. Buildings should be
proportioned and defined by clear facade elements such as a base, middle, and
top.
   A.   Materials: The use of brick, acceptable stone or masonry shall be
incorporated into the building architecture on all sides of the structure,
unless the director of community development determines that the use of
alternate building materials enhances the physical appearance and accomplishes
a compatible structure with the overall development. Smooth faced concrete
block, tilt- up concrete panels, or prefabricated steel panels are prohibited
as the predominant exterior building materials. (Ord. 1656, 10-24-2005)
092-05: LAND USE DESIGN CRITERIA:
In addition to the general conditions as stated in sections above, the
following land use design criteria shall apply to this development. The allowed
uses are those permitted and permitted conditionally under the medium density
residential district. The maximum density allowed is four (4) dwelling units
per acre. These parcels combined shall be no more than five (5) acres.
   A.   Setbacks: All setbacks for the principal structure are measured from
the property line.
      1.   Front yard: Twenty five feet (25').
      2.   Rear yard: Five feet (5').
      3.   Side yard: Five feet (5') as measured to any portion of the
building.
   B.   Deck Setback: Decks located in the rear yard may have a setback of zero
feet (0') except where buffer parks are required. Decks or front porches in the
front or side yard must meet the setback of the principal setback.
   C.   Lot Width: The minimum lot width shall be no less than forty five feet
(45') in width. (Ord. 1656, 10-24-2005)
092-06: AREAS TO BE PLATTED:
Prior to, or in conjunction with, development or transfer of ownership of any
portion of the PUD plan, said area shall be platted in accordance with the
city's subdivision ordinance to delineate within a plat the parcel to be
developed or sold separately or any portion thereof. Lots without public street
frontage, in accordance with the city code requirements, may be allowed
provided the frontage requirements of the code have been met by an abutting or
surrounding lot which is under common ownership under any owners' association
with all properties within the master development plan being part of the
association, or there have been cross parking and access easements executed
which provide for the unrestricted use and access of the drives and parking for
all owners within the association. (Ord. 1656, 10-24-2005)
092-07: STORMWATER MANAGEMENT:
There shall be submitted to and approved by the West Des Moines public works
department, a master stormwater management plan for the entire development
which shall govern the overall stormwater management of the development.
Specific stormwater management plans will be required with the development of
each site plan. (Ord. 1656, 10-24-2005)
092-08: PUBLIC STREET LOCATION:
The location of the public street which access onto Jordan Creek Parkway will
be located no farther south than what is indicated on the approved PUD plan.
(Ord. 1656, 10-24-2005)
092-09: PARK LAND DEDICATION:
This development must adhere to the requirements of the park land dedication
ordinance. (Ord. 1656, 10-24-2005)
092-10: RIGHT OF WAY DEDICATION:
At the time of platting, the ultimate right of way shall be deeded to the city.
(Ord. 1656, 10-24-2005)
092-11: VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES:
Any person who violates the provisions of this ordinance upon conviction shall
be punished as set forth in section 1-4-1 of the city code. (Ord. 1656, 10-24-
2005)
092-99: LEGISLATIVE HISTORY:
Ord. 1656, 10-24-2005.
PUD #93
WESTOWN CITY CENTER
SECTION:
093-01: Legal Description
093-02: Sketch Plan
093-03: Conditions
093-04: Master Plan
093-05: Traffic Study
093-06: Signage
093-07: Building Restrictions, Easements And Covenants
093-08: Vehicular Access
093-99: Legislative History
093-01: LEGAL DESCRIPTION:
That part of the South 1/2 of the Northwest Fractional 1/4 of Section 5,
Township 78 North, Range 25 West of the 5th P.M., now included in and forming a
part of the City of West Des Moines, Polk County, Iowa, described as follows:
Commencing at the center of said Section 5, thence North along the East line of
said Northwest Fractional 1/4 having an assumed true bearing of North 0
degrees, 21 minutes West with all subsequent bearings referenced therefrom, a
distance of 1,320.0 feet to the Northeast corner of said South 1/2 of the
Northwest Fractional 1/4; thence North 90 degrees 00 minutes West along the
North line of said South 1/2 of the Northwest Fractional 1/4 and the centerline
of Westown Parkway, a distance of 595.75 feet; thence South 0 degrees 02
minutes 20 seconds East, a distance of 40 feet to the South right-of-way line
of said Westown Parkway and the point of beginning; said point of beginning
further described as being North 0 degrees 19 minutes 30 seconds West, a
distance of 1,280 feet and North 90 degrees 00 minutes 00 seconds East, a
distance of 2,039.58 feet from the West Quarter corner of said Section 5;
thence South 0 degrees 02 minutes 20 seconds East, a distance of 1,005.10 feet
to the North right-of-way line of Interstate Highway 235; thence South 89
degrees 40 minutes 30 seconds East along said North right-of-way line, a
distance of 491.41 feet to the West right-of-way line of 42nd Street in said
City; thence North 3 degrees 18 minutes 11 seconds East along said West right-
of-way line a distance of 1,009.56 feet to the South right-of-way line of said
Westown Parkway; thence North 90 degrees 00 minutes West along said South
right-of-way line, a distance of 550.25 feet to the point of beginning, in Polk
County, Iowa.
(Ord. 1694, 6-5-2006)
093-02: SKETCH PLAN:
On file in the city and made a part of this rezoning approval, for concept
description and delineation is the sketch plan document for the Westown City
Center PUD marked exhibit A. Wherever conflict occurs between the written text
in this document and the notations on the sketch plan, the written text shall
prevail. The sketch plan is a graphic representation of the property included
in the PUD delineating the approximate location and configuration of the
parcels for the purpose of easier reference for the applicable regulations of
this ordinance. (Ord. 1694, 6-5-2006)
093-03: CONDITIONS:
Title 9, chapter 9, "Planned Unit Development District", of the city code,
establishes certain regulations and guidelines pertaining to accompanying
information required on plat and site plan documents. Now, therefore, the
following conditions, restrictions, and regulations are adopted as part of this
approval:
   A.   General Conditions: In addition to the PUD sketch plan map, the
following general development criteria shall be integrated into and made a part
of this planned unit development:
      1.   General Conformance To Subdivision Ordinance: All subdivisions,
public and private streets, public or private street rights of way and general
development shall adhere to the standards and design criteria set forth in the
West Des Moines subdivision ordinance and/or established city policies
pertaining thereto, unless otherwise stated within this ordinance. Any
regulation, standard, provision or requirement that is not specifically
addressed within this document that is regulated elsewhere in the city code,
the requirements of the city code are applicable and shall be enforced.
      2.   Flood Hazard: In all areas within a 100-year frequency flood hazard
zone, or adjoining drainageways, and detention ponding areas involving
potential flood hazards, no building shall be erected which has a lowest level
floor, including basements, less than two feet (2') above the determined level
of the 100-year frequency flood event. Buildings shall only be permitted within
twenty five feet (25') of any easement or property boundary of a major
drainageway, stormwater detention basin or pond if the applicant can
demonstrate during the development review process that potential flooding from
extraordinary flood events have been mitigated through site design or building
design and approval is granted by the city council.
      3.   Developer Responsibilities: The developer, their successors and/or
assigns, if any, shall pay all planning, engineering, and construction costs
for the development of the planned unit development, in accordance with the
city policies current at the time of development, as required by this
ordinance, the subdivision ordinance, and the Des Moines metropolitan design
standards as adopted by the city of West Des Moines for all streets, storm
sewers, sanitary sewers, drainage improvements, detention basins, water mains,
buffers and other improvements as required within the PUD or by city codes.
      4.   Stormwater Management: Specific stormwater management plans will be
required with the development of each parcel, demonstrating compliance with the
approved PUD master stormwater management plan on file with the city's public
works department. The developer will have said specific stormwater management
plans prepared by a professional engineer licensed in the state of Iowa, prior
to the submittal of any specific development proposals within the PUD. All
specific stormwater management plans shall comply with the city's current
design standards for stormwater management. The method of stormwater management
and the stormwater conveyance system shall be determined prior to city approval
of any development within any portion of the property within the PUD. At the
time of platting or development, ownership and responsibility for all
stormwater detention areas and private stormwater detention outlet structures
will need to be established.
      5.   Public Street Improvements And Right Of Way Dedication: At the time
of subdivision platting or site plan approval within the PUD, the applicant
shall be responsible for construction and/or installation of all required
public infrastructure improvements in accordance with the city's subdivision
ordinance, as indicated herein, and/or as indicated on the approved PUD sketch
proposal. With any subdivision plat or site plan within the PUD, the applicant
shall be responsible for constructing and/or installing the public
infrastructure necessary to support development in a manner that will assure
that the public infrastructure functions at an acceptable level of service (per
the city's comprehensive plan) and that complies with all city ordinances.
      6.   Sanitary Sewer: Any proposed change in approved land use densities
for the PUD will require an analysis of the downstream sanitary sewer capacity
to assure that adequate capacity is available for the proposed change in
approved land use densities.
      7.   Food Service Establishments: The zoning on all or portions of the
land covered by this application allow operation of food service establishments
(FSEs), title 7, chapter 8, article F, "Industrial Waste", of the city code,
limitations on fats, oils, and grease (FOG) requires that any building or
facility, including food service establishments (FSE), likely to discharge FOG
to the sanitary sewer must install an approved grease interceptor and
thereafter operate and maintain the grease interceptor as provided in the
ordinance.
      8.   Street Lighting: The developer shall be responsible for all costs
associated with the installation of public streetlights within or adjacent to
any area proposed to be platted or included within a development.
      9.   Platted: Prior to, or in conjunction with development or transfer of
ownership of any portion of the PUD, said area shall be platted in accordance
with the city's subdivision ordinance to delineate within a plat the parcel to
be developed or sold separately or any portion thereof.
   B.   Land Use Design Criteria: In addition to the general conditions as
stated in subsection A of this section, the following land use design criteria
shall apply to the development areas designated by parcel on the sketch plan.
The following development standards and use regulations shall apply to each of
the individual parcels:
      1.   For All Parcels: All general use regulations, performance standards
and provisions set forth in title 9, "Zoning", of the city code for the PCP
professional commerce park district shall apply to any development proposal for
the property as shown on the sketch plan except as shall be further provided
herein and shall comply with all performance standards and provisions
including, but not limited to, open space, landscaping, building setbacks, and
other bulk regulations for the PCP professional commerce park district except
as it relates to the minimum acreage requirements for site plans.
         a.   Platting: Multiple use of the site by more than one building
shall be permitted only if said buildings are consistent in architectural
design and use of materials and organized utilizing a compatible planned open
space, landscape plan, and parking plan to serve and maintain a unified master
plan concept; multiple buildings separated by parking areas or drives and lots
less than two (2) acres in size shall be considered acceptable if approved by
the planning and zoning commission and city council as part of an acceptable
master development plan. It being hereby acknowledged that the master
development plan on file in the city anticipates the development of lots of
approximately one acre. The minimum twenty foot (20') parking lot setback along
Westown Parkway and 42nd Street shall be measured from the anticipated full
right of way as determined by the city during the platting process and shall be
utilized, designed, and improved as a landscaped buffer area effectively
screening all parking and drive areas from public view and presenting an
attractive view or element to the area.
All lots shall be developed to meet all PCP standards for parking, open space,
parking lot open space, setbacks, and all other development standards for the
PCP district. Cross access easements will be established to provide for the
unrestricted use and access of the drives.
Lots without public street frontage, in accordance with city code requirements
("interior lots"), may be allowed on the condition an abutting or surrounding
lot meets the frontage requirements and contains nonexclusive parking areas and
access drives which provide the interior lots public street access and the
means to meet parking requirements ("common areas"). Permission for the use of
the common areas by the interior lots may be accomplished through reciprocal
access and parking easements or through an owners' association. Any such
owners' association shall permit the nonexclusive use of the common areas by
the owners of the interior lots in common with the owners of some or all of the
remaining lots within Westown City Center. Any reference to owners shall refer
to the actual individual or entity having legal title to any lot as well as all
of the authorized users of such lots.
For lots platted which are not to be developed as stand alone lots (commonly
referred to as "postage stamp" lots), the requirements for open space, parking
lot open space, buffering, landscaping, and parking may be met by abutting or
surrounding lot which is under common ownership under any owners' association
with all properties within the master development plan being part of the
association and shared parking and cross access easement executed which provide
for the unrestricted use and access of the drives and parking for all owners
within the association. Further, all structures shall be constructed with a
minimum five foot (5') setback from the property line.
In no case will the open space, parking lot open space, landscape, setback or
performance standards for the PCP district be reduced.
         b.   Uses: Allowed uses within all parcels shall include all permitted
uses and permitted conditional uses within the PCP professional commerce park
district and all permitted uses except for the following uses which shall not
be permitted:
Hotels, rooming houses, camps, and other lodging places (SIC 70).
Personal item care and storage services (SIC 7299).
Mixed, manufactured, or liquefied petroleum gas production and/or distribution
(SIC 4925).
Any and all outside display shall be restricted and allowed only by the
issuance of a temporary use permit issued by the city of West Des Moines.
No drive-through facilities shall be allowed with the exception of a drive-
through for a bank use and each drive- through shall be designed to be screened
from the public street with berming, landscaping, and/or architectural
features.
   C.   Architecture: The design of the buildings within the PUD shall be
designed in such a manner to present an overall architecturally unified
development through the use of similar materials, colors, architectural
elements, etc. Architectural design and use of materials for the construction
of any building within the PUD shall be accomplished in a manner compatible
with PCP professional commerce park zone district building materials. The
architectural design of any building shall be acceptable to the city and all
buildings within the property shall have all sides of any building built on the
property consistent in design and use of materials. No wood, masonite, visible
asphaltic exterior wall or roof material, aluminum siding, nonarchitectural
sheet metal, concrete block, precast concrete panels, drivet, EIFS, or other
similar materials shall constitute a portion of any building except as a trim
material, unless the city council of West Des Moines, after having received a
recommendation from the planning and zoning commission of West Des Moines shall
determine said material when used as a primary element, enhances the physical
appearance.
All uninterruptible power supply, generators, heating, ventilation, and air
conditioning mechanical units and facilities shall be screened from public
view. All walls of any building within the property shall be compatible in
design and use of materials. Any storage or loading area and loading docks
shall be sufficiently buffered from adjoining properties, public streets and
general public view.
   D.   Parking And Drives: Along Westown Parkway, Interstate 235, and 42nd
Street, the parking lot and/or drive setback shall be a minimum of twenty feet
(20') and shall be measured from the anticipated full public street right of
way or public street right of way easement as determined by the city during the
platting or site planning process and shall be utilized, designed, and improved
as a landscaped buffer area effectively screening all parking and drive areas
from public view and presenting an attractive view or element to the area. The
area between the public street on the perimeter of the PUD and the on site
parking area and drives, shall be utilized, designed, and improved as a
landscaped buffer area effectively screening all parking and drive areas from
public view and presenting an attractive view or element to the area from the
public street. The parking lot setback from the west property line shall be at
a minimum five feet (5') and the drive setback from the west property line
shall be a minimum of twenty feet (20').
The site plan development of the property shall include a minimum of thirty
five percent (35%) of unencumbered open space and all parking areas shall
include landscape areas and islands, equal to not less than ten percent (10%)
of the total paved area of the site in accordance with city code requirements.
Such landscaped area shall be in addition to the open space requirement for the
total site. All islands within the parking lot shall be planted with living
materials, i.e., shrubs, grass, or ground cover, or mulched with organic mulch.
   E.   Buffering: Adequate buffering of negative aspects of any development
(uninterruptible power supplies, loading docks, garbage dumpsters and
mechanical units) from any public street and adjoining properties shall be
required. All buildings shall be located and designed so as to not expose
loading docks or doors, loading areas or the rear of buildings to public
streets. (Ord. 1694, 6-5-2006)
093-04: MASTER PLAN:
Prior to development within any portion of the PUD, a master plan shall be
prepared showing the location of streets and shared drives within or adjoining
the parcel in order to ensure workable traffic circulation patterns, grades,
and usable building sites. At the time of the master plan review the necessary
ingress- egress easements will be identified to ensure that applicable access
requirements will be addressed at the time of the platting or site plan review.
As a part of the master plan, the pedestrian access into and within the PUD
shall be designed to provide access from the adjacent properties to the use(s)
developed within the PUD. The intent of this requirement is to encourage
pedestrian access into the development from office uses in the area and to de-
emphasize the use of motorized vehicles for employees and tenants within the
surrounding areas desiring to frequent the uses within the PUD development.
(Ord. 1694, 6-5-2006)
093-05: TRAFFIC STUDY:
A traffic study has been completed and approved by the city for the purpose of
determining traffic impacts and required improvements that would be necessary
for the safe and orderly movement of vehicles into and around the proposed
development. This study accommodated the existing one hundred five thousand
(105,000) square foot office building, a four thousand (4,000) square foot bank
use, and two (2) 5,000-square foot restaurant (no drive-through) uses. Prior
to, or in conjunction with the development of any parcel, or portion of a
parcel, the developer shall have the traffic report reviewed by the city's
traffic consultant to ensure that the provisions and assumptions of the
original traffic report are still valid and applicable. (Ord. 1694, 6-5-2006)
093-06: SIGNAGE:
Signage restrictions shall be imposed to limit and reduce the negative impacts
of sign clutter. All signs shall comply with all provisions of the city sign
code. All signage constructed as wall signs on building fascia within the PUD
shall incorporate aesthetic features compatible with the overall character of
the development. All wall signs will be composed of solid individual letters
attached to the building fascia, or individual letters of anodized aluminum,
galvanized metal, and illuminated self- contained with translucent plastic
faces set in anodized aluminum returns and trim.
One ground or monument sign shall be permitted on each public street frontage.
Accessory commercial uses, as allowed in the PCP district, shall comply with
all PCP signage standards. Panel signs with letters incorporated or painted
upon a panel or wall area shall be prohibited. Advertising or promotional
temporary signage attached to exterior windows or walls including exposed neon
lights visible from the exterior of the building shall be prohibited. No pole
sign as defined by the West Des Moines city sign code shall be incorporated
into any development within the PUD. (Ord. 1694, 6-5-2006)
093-07: BUILDING RESTRICTIONS, EASEMENTS AND COVENANTS:
The developer shall with the approval of the city council adopt building
restrictions, easements and covenants pertaining to each parcel developed where
the developer and the city deem appropriate. (Ord. 1694, 6-5-2006)
093-08: VEHICULAR ACCESS:
Vehicular access from Westown Parkway shall be limited to the one existing
drive; vehicular access from 42nd Street shall be limited to the one existing
drive. An access drive between the property within this PUD and the property to
the west is required. To that end, provision will be made at the time of
platting or with the first development permit to establish an easement area and
construct an access to the west property line for future connection. (Ord.
1694, 6-5-2006)
093-99: LEGISLATIVE HISTORY:
Ord. 1694, 6-5-2006.
PUD #94
TACO JOHN'S
SECTION:
094-01: Legal Description
094-02: Intent
094-03: Required Plans
094-04: Compliance With Code
094-05: Developer Responsibilities
094-06: Permitted Uses
094-07: Vehicle Trip Allocation
094-08: Stormwater Management Plan
094-09: Public Street Right Of Way Dedication
094-10: Fourth Street Vacation And Lease
094-11: Street Design
094-12: Parking
094-13: Drive-Through
094-14: Pedestrian Elements
094-15: Landscaping
094-16: Signage
094-17: Lighting
094-18: Architecture
094-19: Bulk Regulations
094-20: Violations And Penalties
094-99: Legislative History
094-01: LEGAL DESCRIPTION:
A part of lot H, lot 1, and lot 94, Linnwill, an official plat of West Des
Moines, Polk County, Iowa and a part of the Fourth Street right of way as it is
presently established in the northwest quarter of section 11, township 78
north, range 25 west of the 5th P.M., West Des Moines, Polk County, Iowa, said
tract of land being more particularly described as follows:
Beginning 192.4 feet west of the southeast corner of lot 94, Linnwill, an
official plat, West Des Moines, Polk County, Iowa, said point being on the
south line of said lot 94; thence N89°41'41"W, 162.70 feet along the south line
of said lot 94, lot 1 and lot H, thence N00°10'19"E, 124.59 feet to a point of
curvature of a 25.00 feet radius curve concave to the southeast; thence
northeasterly, 39.06 feet along said curve, said curve has a chord length of
35.20 feet and a chord bearing of N44°55'41"E; thence N89°41'04"E, 136.82 feet;
thence S00°15'58"E, 150.75 feet, to the south line of said lot 94 and to the
point of beginning.
Said tract of land contains 0.556 acres more or less.
Said tract of land subject to all easements of record.
(Ord. 1879, 8-9-2010)
094-02: INTENT:
The Taco John's PUD intends to provide a framework for development standards
reflective of the realities and constraints of redevelopment and to establish
design standards to reinforce the context of the area and create a neighborhood
identity that recognizes the area's original development history.
The Taco John's PUD is located within the area identified for redevelopment by
the Grand Avenue redevelopment plan. Redevelopment in this area is intended to
create a special district within the city of West Des Moines known as the Val-
Gate district. All development within that district must be in furtherance of
the goals of the Grand Avenue redevelopment plan. The city of West Des Moines
Grand Avenue redevelopment plan and all appendices and exhibits, as amended,
are hereby adopted and incorporated as part of the Taco John's PUD.
The Grand Avenue redevelopment plan identifies planning units, major street
patterns, access and interconnection points, master stormwater drainage and
detention concepts, utilities, shared public spaces, district streetscape and
signage design, land use assumptions and proposed densities. The intent of the
redevelopment plan is to provide a tool that can be used to promote the
communication and cooperation between adjacent property owners and developers
to ensure cohesive and unified redevelopment.
The redevelopment plan shall be generated by the city development services
department and/or their consultants, reviewed by the plan and zoning commission
and approved by the city council prior to, or in conjunction with, the review
of the PUD for any property within said redevelopment plan area. No change to
the Grand Avenue redevelopment plan shall be made without approval of an
amended plan from the appropriate reviewing bodies.
Properties within the Grand Avenue redevelopment plan may be referred to as the
Val-Gate district. (Ord. 1879, 8-9-2010)
094-03: REQUIRED PLANS:
The following plans shall be required as a part of the processing of any
development application for any property within the Taco John's PUD:
   A.   Planned Unit Development: The planned unit development (PUD) identifies
detailed development criteria for each planning unit indicated on the Grand
Avenue redevelopment plan or more specifically delineated on the redevelopment
plan map. The planned unit development shall conform to the general development
intent identified in the approved redevelopment plan. The planned unit
development shall be reviewed by the plan and zoning commission and adopted by
the city council by ordinance.
This document shall constitute the planned unit development ordinance for Taco
John's. On file in the city and made a part of this ordinance is a sketch plan
that illustrates the overall site layout concept (exhibit I). This document and
the referenced documents or exhibits (on file in the city) are intended to
specify the components, parameters, and requirements to be adhered to and
implemented in order to ensure the realization of Taco John's PUD. It is
recognized that modifications and changes may be necessary due to changes in
building footprints, site details, and response to market demand. At the
discretion of the director of development services, changes to the layout of
the development that are deemed to be "major" changes shall require an
amendment to the sketch plan and ordinance, if applicable. Major amendments
shall require the review and approval of the plan and zoning commission and
city council.
Where the sketch plan and PUD language conflict, the PUD language shall
prevail.
   B.   Development Applications (Site Plans Or Major Modification To A Site
Plan): Site plans for all lots within Taco John's PUD must meet the intent of
the approved PUD. Site plans for all lots shall be submitted to the city of
West Des Moines for review and approval prior to the development of any portion
of the lot. Site plans for permitted uses which comply (as determined by the
director of development services or designee) with the design intent as set
forth in this PUD will be subject to review via the city's review process and
receive final approval from the city council following a recommendation from
the plan and zoning commission. Site plans for uses identified as permitted
conditional (Pc) shall require approval from the board of adjustment. At the
discretion of the director of development services, an amendment to the Taco
John's PUD may be required to bring consistency between the ordinance and site
plan development proposed. (Ord. 1879, 8-9-2010)
094-04: COMPLIANCE WITH CODE:
Unless otherwise specified herein, the development of Taco John's PUD shall
comply with the provisions of the West Des Moines city code. (Ord. 1879, 8-9-
2010)
094-05: DEVELOPER RESPONSIBILITIES:
   A.   Unless otherwise specifically approved by the city council, the
developer, its successors and/or assigns, if any, shall pay all planning,
engineering, and construction costs for the development of the planned unit
development as required by this ordinance, and shall pay all costs related to
approved site plans, which may include, but is not limited to, the cost of all
streets, storm sewers, sanitary sewers, water mains and service lines,
drainageway improvements, detention basins, buffers, and other improvements as
required. No occupancy permits, either temporary or permanent, shall be issued
until all necessary improvements applicable to the area/lot or structure
requesting occupancy are installed and accepted by the city of West Des Moines.
Nothing in this ordinance shall be construed to prevent the developer, its
successors and/or assigns, if any, from entering into private agreement(s) as
it/they may desire to share the cost of improvements.
   B.   The cost to relocate and to make any necessary improvements caused by
relocation to the existing traffic signal located adjacent to the development
shall be the responsibility of the developer.
   C.   The developer shall be responsible for the maintenance of the area
encompassing the streetscape easement and related public right of way.
   D.   Developer's responsibilities include all obligations contained in this
section as well as those responsibilities set forth in this ordinance. (Ord.
1879, 8-9-2010)
094-06: PERMITTED USES:
All general use regulations and provisions set forth in title 9, "Zoning", of
the city code for the community commercial district (CMC), shall apply to any
development proposal for the Taco John's PUD ordinance, unless noted elsewhere
within this ordinance.
   A.   Allowed Uses: Uses allowed in the Taco John's PUD shall be those uses
identified as permitted or permitted conditional for the community commercial
(CMC) district, except as noted below.
The following uses normally allowed in the community commercial (CMC) district
shall be prohibited in the Taco John's PUD:
 
SIC 4522 Heliport/helistop.
SIC 4925 Mixed, manufactured, or liquefied petroleum gas production and/or
         distribution (except: production and manufacturing).
SIC 554  Gasoline service stations.
SIC 592  Liquor stores.
SIC 5999 Adult entertainment establishment.
SIC 75   Automotive repair, services, and parking.
 
(Ord. 1879, 8-9-2010)
094-07: VEHICLE TRIP ALLOCATION:
As part of the site plan approved for this site and consistent with the traffic
analysis completed by the city of West Des Moines, the Taco John's PUD has been
allocated the following vehicle trips: one thousand one hundred forty (1,140)
average daily trips (ADT); seventy eight (78) P.M. peak hour trips; and zero
A.M. peak hour trips. As development proposals are approved the number of
vehicle trips generated by the proposed development (based upon the number of
square feet of a proposed specific use or number of dwelling units, in
conjunction with any parameters established in the traffic analysis) will be
subtracted from the overall total trips allocated to the development. Approval
of this proposed PUD does not constitute a guarantee that the proposed plan can
be implemented. Development of all parcels and implementation of desired land
uses, including specific high traffic generating tenants, will be limited by
the available number of trips. Should anticipated traffic exceed the total
trips allocated for Taco John's PUD prior to full build-out, further
development of parcels may be limited or prohibited. Alternate uses to the
proposed planned development(s), if within the parameters of the traffic
analysis and approved as part of the Grand Avenue redevelopment plan and this
PUD ordinance may be allowed, following completion of an amendment to the
approved traffic study analyzing the proposed alternative and appropriate city
approval if the existing uses and the proposed change(s) collectively do not
exceed one thousand one hundred forty (1,140) average daily trips (ADT),
seventy eight (78) P.M. peak hour trips and zero A.M. peak hour trips allocated
to this development. Overall trips for the Val-Gate district must remain within
the caps established for the Val-Gate district as a whole which were
established as part of the Grand Avenue redevelopment plan traffic study.
Future development within the Taco John's PUD may be limited by available trips
due to traffic generated elsewhere within the district. (Ord. 1879, 8-9-2010)
094-08: STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN:
A master stormwater management plan for the entire Grand Avenue redevelopment
area which governs the overall stormwater management of the Val-Gate district
shall be prepared by and approved by the city of West Des Moines. Specific
stormwater management plans will be required with the development of each site
plan. The specific stormwater plans shall be prepared at the developer's
expense, by a professional engineer licensed in the state of Iowa. All specific
stormwater management plans shall comply with the city's applicable design
standards for stormwater management existing at the time each development (site
plan) is approved and demonstrate compliance with the Grand Avenue
redevelopment master stormwater management plan if available at the time of
site plan approval. The developer of the Taco John's PUD shall be required to
participate in the Grand Avenue redevelopment stormwater management facilities
per their pro rata share of stormwater contribution for the Val-Gate district.
The developer of the Taco John's PUD shall also be required to enter into a
postconstruction stormwater management facility maintenance covenant and
permanent easement agreement to guarantee future maintenance of stormwater
facilities. Maintenance responsibilities for the Taco John's PUD shall be based
upon their pro rata share stormwater contribution for the Val-Gate district.
(Ord. 1879, 8-9-2010)
094-09: PUBLIC STREET RIGHT OF WAY DEDICATION:
In order to maintain the functional class of the city's roadway system as set
forth in the comprehensive plan the rights of way necessary for Grand Avenue
and Fourth Street shall be dedicated to the city in fee title. In recognizing
the unique design and context of the development, an additional easement along
Grand Avenue and Fourth Street shall be established to provide area for
district streetscape, signage and to maintain utility corridors. The developer
shall provide the necessary easements and dedication at the time of recordation
of the final plat or site plan, in accordance with right of way standards for
each road classification consistent with the city's comprehensive plan or as
otherwise defined in this ordinance. The developer shall provide at no cost to
the city temporary easements necessary for the construction of public streets
within the development. (Ord. 1879, 8-9-2010)
094-10: FOURTH STREET VACATION AND LEASE:
The developer of the Taco John's PUD and the city of West Des Moines have
entered into a development agreement for vacation of such right of way as is
necessary for the development of the Taco John's PUD and is shown on the
vacation plat for such purpose. The development agreement also allows for the
use of a portion of the remaining Fourth Street right of way for use in the
Taco John's PUD. Such use shall be per the terms of the development agreement
and such vacation and conveyance shall be per the triggering events in the
development agreement.
The developer of the Taco John's PUD shall be required to execute and record a
lot tie agreement to tie together the right of way conveyed to the rest of the
development parcel. (Ord. 1879, 8-9-2010)
094-11: STREET DESIGN:
   A.   Public Streets:
      1.   Grand Avenue shall be built as a four (4) lane roadway measuring
sixty five feet (65') from back of curb to back of curb. Grand Avenue shall
contain four (4) through lanes. Right and left turn lanes may be required when
traffic warrants.
      2.   As part of the development of Taco John's, Fourth Street shall be
built as a three (3) lane roadway measuring thirty seven feet (37') from back
of curb to back of curb. Fourth Street shall contain two (2) through lanes and
one right turn lane.
      3.   Fourth Street shall contain two (2) through lanes, one left turn
lane and one right turn lane when traffic warrants as determined by the city,
but no sooner than the expiration of the lease per the terms of the development
agreement.
   B.   Traffic Signs:
      1.   Signage for traffic control purposes associated with public streets
shall be installed and maintained by the city with the exception of the sign
poles. (Ord. 1879, 8-9-2010)
094-12: PARKING:
   A.   Off Street Parking:
      1.   All off street parking areas shall be sited and landscaped to screen
their visibility from street rights of way, residential dwellings, pedestrian
pathways, and adjoining property outside of the Taco John's PUD.
      2.   Parking stall measurements and drive aisle widths shall conform to
title 9, chapter 15 of the city code.
      3.   It is desired that all off street parking areas be aesthetically
improved to reduce obtrusive characteristics that are inherent to their
function. Parking lot screening shall be accomplished via streetscape
landscaping and hardscaping in accordance with the Grand Avenue redevelopment
plan and as described in subsection
094-15B of this ordinance.
      4.   At such time that the lease of Fourth Street right of way expires as
specified in the development agreement, all streetscape plantings and any
hardscape items located within the Fourth Street right of way shall be replaced
on private property outside of said right of way.
   B.   Parking Ratios: Parking shall be provided as specified in chapter 15 of
the city's zoning code except as further provided herein:
      1.   For the time period of the Fourth Street lease as specified in the
development agreement, the city council waives six (6) required parking spaces
for the Taco John's PUD and will permit operation of a restaurant use up to two
thousand three hundred ninety six (2,396) square feet with only thirty (30)
parking spaces. Any amount of restaurant use beyond two thousand three hundred
ninety six (2,396) square feet will require additional parking at a ratio
consistent with the city code.
      2.   Upon expiration of the Fourth Street lease, the city council will
waive an additional ten (10) required parking spaces. (Ord. 1879, 8-9-2010)
094-13: DRIVE-THROUGH:
If, through the design review process, including a traffic analysis, it can be
demonstrated that a drive-through does not cause traffic congestion, does not
cause the Taco John's PUD to exceed its trip caps, does not interfere with
pedestrian movements and can be designed to minimize their presence, a maximum
of one drive-up may be permitted within the Taco John's PUD. Said drive-through
shall have a minimum stacking capacity of eight (8) vehicles and shall not be
permitted to interfere with traffic on any public street. Walk-up or pedestrian
ATMs with no vehicle access shall be permitted as desired. The presence of
drive-ups shall be minimized through the incorporation of the drive-through
into the building architecture rather than as an added on canopy component and
the opaque visual screening through the use of earth berming and vegetation
placement. (Ord. 1879, 8-9-2010)
094-14: PEDESTRIAN ELEMENTS:
The Taco John's PUD, in alignment with the Grand Avenue redevelopment plan,
aims to encourage pedestrian movement and opportunities for pedestrian
interaction through site furniture and benches for pedestrian use along Grand
Avenue within an area of enhanced landscaping. Exhibit II illustrates these
site amenities. Development of these areas shall comply with the Grand Avenue
redevelopment plan guidelines with details of the development of each area to
be specified, reviewed, and approved at the time of site plan development.
Unless otherwise specified, the installation of these pedestrian elements shall
be by the developer of the Taco John's PUD in conjunction with approval of any
site plan within the PUD. (Ord. 1879, 8-9-2010)
094-15: LANDSCAPING:
The attached Grand Avenue redevelopment plan streetscape drawing (exhibit III)
illustrates the general landscaping concept: This plan should be used as the
guide for site plan development in respect to the general locations of plant
material to be provided. Details regarding specific varieties, exact
quantities, and the minimum size at time of planting shall be provided and
approved as part of the site plan submittal and shall meet the general
guidelines in respect to the minimum plant size traditionally applied to
development within the city. In the event that alternatives to what is shown on
the attached Grand Avenue redevelopment plan planting pallet (exhibit IV) are
desired, the minimum vegetation requirements specified within this ordinance
will need to be provided and the original intent of the required vegetation
met.
   A.   Open/Green Space: Due to the nature of the intended redevelopment in
respect to existing development pattern, uses, and densities, the developer of
the Taco John's PUD shall provide open space and landscaping to meet the intent
of the city's open space requirements while preserving the ability to
reasonably redevelop land within the Taco John's PUD. Plaza and streetscape
areas along with any areas associated with outdoor pedestrian use may be
counted toward fulfilling the minimum open space requirement, however, no lot
within the Taco John's PUD shall contain more than eighty five percent (85%)
impervious surface. In addition:
      1.   Streetscape plantings directly adjacent to a parcel can be counted
toward the open space planting requirements for that parcel.
      2.   A twenty (20) square foot mass planting of perennial flowers or
ornamental grasses may be substituted for three (3) shrubs.
      3.   No substitution for required trees is allowed.
      4.   The incorporation of evergreen vegetation is encouraged to provide
winter substance within the landscape.
      5.   Vegetation required as part of the open space may be placed into off
street parking areas or required buffers.
   B.   Streetscaping: A landscaped edge with hardscape elements or
"streetscape" shall be provided along Grand Avenue and Fourth Street. These
streetscapes are intended to provide desired green to the city, reinforce a
district identity, bring human scale to adjoining buildings and provide traffic
calming benefits.
The streetscape shall be accomplished in accordance with the Grand Avenue
redevelopment plan streetscaping plans and shall include vegetation, furniture,
and precast stone wall screening elements as shown in the plan. This
streetscape shall be provided along both Grand Avenue and Fourth Street and
shall be in lieu of a thirty foot (30') landscaped buffer park otherwise
required along Fourth Street. Parking areas shall be screened to a minimum
height of three feet (3') by the streetscaping.
   C.   Utilities: The placement of public utility easements within buffer
parks is discouraged due to the potential conflict between trees and the need
to access the lines for repair. Overstory trees and upright evergreen trees
shall not be permitted within utility easements. The presence of utility
easements shall not provide a basis for noncompliance with landscaping
provisions found within this ordinance and within any applicable codes. (Ord.
1879, 8-9-2010)
094-16: SIGNAGE:
All proposed exterior signage requires the review and approval of a sign permit
by the city of West Des Moines. Signage shall be consistent with title 9,
chapter 18 of the city code except as modified herein or within the Grand
Avenue redevelopment plan. All signage must be consistent in design with the
Grand Avenue redevelopment plan. The following signage may be allowed:
   A.   Business Identification Signs:
      1.   One ground mounted monument sign shall be permitted for the Taco
John's PUD. Said sign shall be limited in height to five feet (5') and sign
area copy of thirty five (35) square feet. Said sign shall be set back a
minimum of five feet (5') from the right of way.
      2.   One roof sign shall be permitted on the elevation facing Grand
Avenue only, provided it is mounted on a lower roof element so said sign does
not project above the highest point of the building roof. Square footage of a
roof mounted sign shall count toward the allowable square footage for a wall
sign.
      3.   One projecting sign shall be permitted and may be allowed to extend
above the building roof no more than one-half (1/2) the height of the sign.
      4.   Panel signs on the building shall be allowed.
      5.   Illuminated wall banding may be allowed, however, all such banding
shall count toward the permissible wall signage square footage.
      6.   Illuminated business identification signs shall be turned off no
later than one hour after the last retail or restaurant establishment in the
Grand Avenue redevelopment plan area closes. Signage which faces residential
dwellings shall not be illuminated.
      7.   No exterior signage is allowed for second floor or above tenants.
(Ord. 1897, 12-13-2010)
094-17: LIGHTING:
The Taco John's PUD will have a variety of light fixtures ranging from parking
lot lights and roadway fixtures to pathway lights. On file in the city are
sketches and images of the intended lighting series (see exhibit V). The
following general guidelines shall be in addition to the specific regulations
stated within the Grand Avenue redevelopment plan regulations.
   A.   Streetlights: Street lighting shall be as per the Grand Avenue
redevelopment plan. The height, spacing, light levels and uniformity
coefficients of streetlights along public streets shall be in accordance with
the city's street lighting standards. The developer of the Taco John's PUD
shall be required to enter into an agreement with the city stating that the
developer will install steel pole streetlights along Grand Avenue and Fourth
Street in accordance with a plan provided by Mid-American Energy or its
successors at such time that Grand Avenue is widened, or the existing overhead
electric is placed underground.
   B.   Parking Luminaries: Fixtures used within off street parking areas shall
not exceed twenty five feet (25') in height as measured from the ground to the
top of the light structure. Fixtures used shall be consistent throughout Taco
John's PUD and shall be in accordance with fixtures depicted in the Grand
Avenue redevelopment plan.
   C.   Building Lighting: All building lighting shall be in accordance with
exhibit V. No wall packs, or floodlighting without shields to direct the light
to its intended target are allowed. In addition to cutoff fixtures, particular
attention shall be given to eliminate hot spots and light glare. To achieve
this, additional measures may include, but are not limited to, lowering parking
lot light levels after business hours, turning off lights not necessary for
security purposes, and use of landscaping for light screening/blockage. As a
part of the review of each site plan, a photometric plan must be submitted.
During the review, the applicant must demonstrate how lighting will not
adversely affect adjoining properties.
   D.   Property Lines: Lighting at property lines shall be limited to one
foot-candle. Lighting shall not be permitted to spill onto roadways or adjacent
properties. Special care must be given to ensure excess light does not spill
onto properties adjacent to, but not part of, the Val-Gate district. (Ord.
1879, 8-9-2010)
094-18: ARCHITECTURE:
Attached to the Grand Avenue redevelopment plan as exhibit VI are illustrative
examples of the architectural concepts which shall serve to guide architectural
choices for all buildings within the Taco John's PUD. All buildings in the Taco
John's PUD shall reinforce the aesthetic concept depicted in the Grand Avenue
redevelopment plan. Specific architecture for all buildings shall be evaluated
as part of the site plan review and approval process.
   A.   All buildings within the Taco John's PUD shall accommodate the
following in building design:
      1.   Form And Scale: Buildings should reinforce the aesthetic concept as
depicted by the precedent images contained in the Grand Avenue redevelopment
plan. Buildings shall be designed to relate specifically to the pedestrian in
scale and variety. The following techniques should be used to meet this
objective:
         a.   Corporate architecture shall be prohibited except as permissible
by the Grand Avenue redevelopment plan in that it reinforces the iconic imagery
desired for the Val-Gate district.
         b.   Buildings shall be organized to create a logical balance and
relationship with the site, open spaces and circulation.
         c.   The building's design should meet context and site objectives
such as providing gateways, creating linkages and framing or terminating views.
         d.   Variation in building height, mass and roof forms shall be
provided while still maintaining an overall building continuity.
         e.   Shifts in building planes/facades and variation in exterior
materials shall be incorporated to minimize long expanses of wall.
         f.   Variation in materials, material modules, expressed joints,
textures, colors and details should be used to break up the mass of the
buildings.
         g.   Variation in horizontal planes through the use of materials,
color and projecting forms should be implemented to signify an entry and/or
protect the pedestrian.
         h.   Ground floor retail areas should provide the maximum possible
glazing toward sidewalks to provide pedestrians with visual interest.
         i.   A building's roof form and related details/materials are an
integral part of the architectural design aesthetic. Roofs should not be
designed as attention getting devices related to the reinforcement of signage
or as an identifiable corporate image unless said identification is in keeping
with the Grand Avenue redevelopment plan aesthetic.
         j.   Efforts shall be made to locate the buildings close to the street
with off street parking behind or to the side of the building.
      2.   Material Quality And Detail: All sides to each building are to
receive high quality materials and finishes (360 degree architectural
treatment). There are no "backs" to a building. However, the level of detail
can be reduced on the facades not facing a street. Materials should be durable,
economically maintained and of a quality that will maintain their appearance
over a prolonged time.
         a.   Primary building materials should include, but are not limited
to, glass, steel, concrete, natural wood, stone, brick and architectural
metals.
         b.   The following materials shall not be used for cladding unless
specifically approved by the city of West Des Moines:
            (1)   EIFS or synthetic stucco.
            (2)   Concrete masonry units.
            (3)   Tilt-up precast concrete systems that are structural in
appearance.
            (4)   Materials that are intended for interior use.
         c.   Changes in materials should occur at either inside corners or
where a detail is drawn to specifically accommodate a transition. (Ord. 1879,
8-9-2010)
094-19: BULK REGULATIONS:
   A.   Lot Size: No minimum lot size shall be required.
   B.   Building Height: The height of a building shall conform to the limits
prescribed by the zoning code.
   C.   Building Setbacks:
      1.   Unless otherwise specifically stated, setbacks shall be measured
from the ultimate right of way for line of parcels that abut a public street.
Setbacks along boundaries that do not abut a street shall be measured from the
lot boundary.
      2.   Building setbacks are to the main plane of the building excluding
canopies and pedestrian arcades. Building setbacks shall be as per title 9,
chapter 7 of the city code for community commercial (CMC) district except that
setbacks from street rights of way shall be a minimum of thirty feet (30').
         a.   Nothing herein, however, shall be construed as permitting the
location of a building that will interfere with sidewalks, trails, plazas, or
maintenance of utilities.
      3.   A minimum thirty foot (30') building separation shall be maintained
between buildings as measured to the closest points of buildings including
canopies, unless said buildings are physically connected.
      4.   Setbacks for detached accessory structures shall abide by code for
community commercial (CMC) district as appropriate.
   D.   Off Street Parking Lot Setbacks: Parking lots shall be set back a
minimum of ten feet (10') from the adjacent property line or fifteen feet (15')
from the back of curb of an adjoining private street unless a similar use or an
open space of at least twenty feet (20') in width abuts the lot, in which case
the parking lot setback shall be zero. (Ord. 1879, 8-9-2010)
094-20: VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES:
Any person who violates the provisions of this ordinance upon conviction shall
be punished as set forth in section 1-4-1 of the city code. (Ord. 1879, 8-9-
2010)
094-99: LEGISLATIVE HISTORY:
Ord. 1879, 8-9-2010; Ord. 1897, 12-13-2010.
PUD #95
RACCOON RIVER QUARRIES
SECTION:
095-01: Legal Description
095-02: Sketch Plan
095-03: Required Plans
095-04: Permits And Regulations
095-05: Requirements
095-06: Dedication Of Public Street Right Of Way
095-07: Dedication Of Recreational Trail Easements
095-08: Dedication Of Site
095-09: Reclamation Fund And Surety
095-10: Savings Clause
095-11: Violations And Penalties
095-99: Legislative History
095-01: LEGAL DESCRIPTION:
The legal description for the Raccoon River Quarries PUD is as follows:
That part of the east one-half of the northwest quarter (E1/2 NW1/4) of section
27 which lies south of right of way of the Chicago, Rock Island and Pacific
Railroad; that part of the west one-half of the northeast quarter (W1/2 NE1/4)
of section 27 which lies south of said railroad right of way; the southwest
quarter (SW1/4) of section 27 (except that part of the southeast quarter of the
southwest quarter (SE1/4 SW1/4) lying south of the Raccoon River); the west
one-half of the southeast quarter (W1/2 SE1/4) of section 27 (except that part
lying south of the Raccoon River); the south 39 acres of the southeast quarter
of the southeast quarter (SE1/4 SE1/4) of section 27; part of the southwest
quarter of the northwest quarter (SW1/4 NW1/4) of section 27 lying south of
said railroad; part of the southeast quarter of the northeast quarter (SE1/
4 NE1/4) of section 28 lying south of said railroad; the east one-half of the
southeast quarter (E1/2 SE1/4) of section 28 and part of the north one- half of
the northeast quarter (N1/2 NE1/4) of section 34 lying north of the Raccoon
River; all in township 78 north, range 26 west of the 5th P.M., Dallas County,
Iowa; and that part of the northwest quarter of the northwest quarter (NW1/
4 NW1/4) of section thirty-five (35), township seventy- eight north, range 26
west of the 5th P.M., lying north of the Raccoon River.
And
The south 1/2 of the north 1/2 lying south of the right-of- way of the Chicago,
Rock Island, and Pacific Railroad, except the east 175 feet of that part of the
NE1/4 of section 26-78-26 lying south of the right-of-way of public highway F-
90, and except parcel A of the survey of the north 1/2 of section 26, township
78 north, range 26 west of the 5th P.M., as shown in book 2000, page 6807 in
the office of the recorder of Dallas County, Iowa; and the SW 1/4; and the W 1/
2 of the SE 1/4 lying north and west of the Raccoon River, all located in
section 26; and
That part of the E 1/2 of the NE 1/4 lying south of the right-of-way of county
highway F-90; and the NE 1/4 of the SE 1/4, of section 27, all in township 78
north, range 26 west of the 5th P.M., Dallas County, Iowa, containing 408
acres, more or less, subject to easements, restrictions and other like matters
of record.
(Ord. 1851, 11-30-2009)
095-02: SKETCH PLAN:
Attached hereto and made a part of this rezoning approval, for concept
description and delineation is the sketch plan document for the Raccoon River
Quarries PUD marked "Exhibit A". Wherever conflict occurs between the written
text in this document and the notations on the sketch plan, the written text
shall prevail. The sketch plan is a graphic representation of the property
included in the PUD. (Ord. 1851, 11-30-2009)
095-03: REQUIRED PLANS:
   A.   Site Plan: The current Dallas County approved mining plans for each of
the two (2) quarry sites as updated to reflect current and intended mining
operations in light of recent road information and requirements within this PUD
shall be considered adequate site plans. No traffic study or stormwater
management plan shall be required. Site plans shall require the approval of the
city council upon review and recommendation of the plan and zoning commission.
Upon approval, the site plans for quarry operations shall take the place of the
county issued mining permits. Unless otherwise provided for within this
ordinance, the site plans shall be considered entitlement to operate until
December 31, 2043. All extraction operations shall be completed, material
stockpiles removed, and processing equipment moved from the site by or before
December 31, 2043. No time extensions to allow for any type of activity related
to mineral extraction operations or material stockpiling or sales shall be
granted. Although it is desired that all reclamation measures also be completed
by the December 31, 2043, date, if not fully implemented by said date, the
completion of mining company required reclamation measures shall continue as
necessary. If reclamation is not completed by December 31, 2043, a detailed
schedule for implementation of reclamation measures shall be provided to the
City. All quarrying rights of the mining companies to extract minerals from the
site shall terminate on December 31, 2043.
   B.   Reclamation Plan: Attached as exhibit B is the reclamation plan that
shall be implemented unless otherwise amended per agreement between the
quarries and the City of West Des Moines. This reclamation plan illustrates the
intended postmining land use and shall be used to guide mining activities to
achieve the identified plan elements. Ongoing reclamation progress in
accordance with this plan shall be evaluated approximately every five (5)
years. (Ord. 1851, 11-30-2009)
   C.   Adjustments: It shall be recognized that adjustments to the site plan
and/or reclamation plan to accommodate alternative mining methods, unforeseen
deposit/extraction issues, market demands, South Grand Prairie Parkway road
construction timing and methods, and/or changes to desired postmining elements
and locations shall be as agreed upon between the quarries and the City of West
Des Moines. Prior to implementation of any changes, the need for a formal plan
submittal to illustrate changes shall be as determined by the Director of
Development Services. If said changes are determined to be substantial, the
applicant shall submit, as determined by the Director of Development Services,
either a minor or major modification to a site plan application to the City for
review and approval by the appropriate approval body. Said application for
modification shall provide that information necessary to evaluate the changes,
but in general shall not be required to contain more information or detail than
the original site plan. City approval is only intended to ensure that the
proposed changes do not affect intended postmining activities; plan review
shall not be for the purposes of directing extraction activities other than
assuring compliance with applicable Code regulations and requirements. (Ord.
1851, 11-30-2009; amd. Ord. 2231, 6-12-2017)
095-04: PERMITS AND REGULATIONS:
All Federal and State permits required throughout the life of the quarries
shall be obtained by the quarries themselves. This ordinance shall not be
interpreted to negate the need to obtain appropriate permits and approvals from
other applicable agencies. (Ord. 1851, 11-30-2009)
095-05: REQUIREMENTS:
Unless provided otherwise in this ordinance, all general use regulations,
performance standards and provisions set forth in title 9, "Zoning", of the
City Code for the Agriculture/Open Space (OS) District shall apply to any
development on land within the Raccoon River PUD. To the extent that the
provisions of this ordinance conflict with or are more restrictive than similar
provisions provided elsewhere in the West Des Moines zoning ordinance, the
provisions of this ordinance shall control. The following regulations,
limitations, and restrictions shall apply to all land within the PUD:
   A.   Land Use: All land uses as set forth in title 9, "Zoning", of the City
Code for the Agriculture/Open Space (OS) District as permitted and permitted
conditionally shall apply except as designated below:
      1.   Allowed Uses: All uses as identified as permitted (P) or permitted
conditionally (Pc) within the Open Space (OS) District shall be prohibited,
except the following uses shall be permitted (P):
 
- SIC 14: Mining and quarrying of nonmetallic minerals, except fuels.
- SIC 01: Agricultural production - crops.
  SIC 02: Agriculture production - livestock and animal specialties shall be
- allowed until December 31, 2043, or until such time that livestock production
  impacts the implementation and use of recreational amenities of the site.
  SIC 0272: Horses - private horse keeping shall be allowed; however, no
- structures for the boarding or protection of the animals shall be allowed to
  be constructed within the floodway or floodplain. One horse may be allowed
  for every two (2) acres of undisturbed area.
  SIC 48: Communications - antennas and satellite dishes shall be allowed to
- the extent that they provide communication services for the mining companies/
  operation only.
- SIC 494: Water supply.
- In addition, public parks and recreational trails (no specific applicable SIC
  codes) shall be allowed. (Ord. 1851, 11-30-2009)
 
   B.   Excavation Setback: Excavation setbacks shall be as follows:
      1.   North: Minimum of one hundred forty feet (140') from the centerline
of F90 (Raccoon River Drive). When mining is complete, there shall be a minimum
of one hundred feet (100') of relatively flat area south of this one hundred
forty foot (140') line to the top of the north bank of the lake. In areas where
postreclamation berms are present south of this one hundred forty foot (140')
line, the relatively flat area shall extend a minimum of one hundred feet
(100') from the south toe of the berm to the top of the north bank of the lake.
This relatively flat area shall be graded to drain toward the lake. If all
available overburden material within this site has otherwise been utilized for
the South Grand Prairie Parkway construction, neither mining company shall be
required to bring soil material from off site to construct the necessary flat
area.
      2.   East And South: As depicted on the updated site plans, in general,
excavation limits shall be a minimum of fifty feet (50') from the property
boundary, the edge of the existing trees within the riparian areas along the
bank of the Raccoon River or a minimum of one hundred fifty feet (150') from
the top of the bank of the Raccoon River (as it presently exists), whichever is
greater. Unless specific permission is granted from the Director of Parks and
Recreation, no trees shall be removed from the riparian areas along the river.
The construction plans for the South Grand Prairie Parkway Bridge now require
overbank excavation not previously identified. The excavation (mining) setback
from this overbank shall be fifty feet (50') (and limited to within 825 feet of
the east ROW line of S. Grand Prairie Parkway adjacent to the bridge), and
Martin Marietta shall make a good faith effort to backfill in this area to
reinforce the bank.
      3.   West: The excavation limits are graphically illustrated on attached
exhibits C and D. The excavation limits have been revised to better accommodate
the future widening of South Grand Prairie Parkway. The City acknowledges that
sand and gravel mining is still expected to occur at approximately a 1:1 slope
down from the setback line (on the surface) resulting in the potential need to
backfill the toe of this slope (under water) prior to the future widening of
this road. To assist with this future activity, Martin Marietta shall make a
good faith effort to stockpile overburden within the phase 2 ROW for use by the
City as backfill.
      4.   Johnson Creek:
         a.   A minimum setback of one hundred fifty feet (150') shall be
provided from the eastern bank of Johnson Creek. Excavation may occur within up
to fifty feet (50') of the creek bank if the area is backfilled to a width of
one hundred fifty feet (150') for use as a greenbelt corridor and future trail
location.
         b.   A minimum setback of seventy five feet (75') shall be provided
from the western bank; there shall be no excavation closer than seventy five
feet (75') to the bank regardless if backfilling is to occur.
         c.   If per agreement between the quarries and the City and upon
obtainment of the appropriate permits by the City, the City desires to relocate
Johnson Creek to the western edge of the site, a minimum thirty foot (30')
setback shall be required from the eastern bank of the realigned creek.
      5.   Consent: With written consent of the abutting property owner, a zero
foot (0') setback shall be required along interior property lines thus allowing
the excavation pits of various operations to merge. Without written consent,
each quarry shall maintain a minimum fifty foot (50') setback from the common
property line. (Ord. 2231, 6-12-2017)
   C.   Building Setback: Buildings shall be set back a minimum of one hundred
seventy five feet (175') from the centerline of F90 (Raccoon River Drive) and a
minimum of fifty feet (50') from all other property lines.
   D.   Parking Setbacks: Off street parking areas shall be set back a minimum
of one hundred twenty five feet (125') from the centerline of F90 (Raccoon
River Drive).
   E.   Road Improvements:
      1.   Improvements: Unless otherwise agreed upon with the City as part of
the reclamation, all access and internal drives may be gravel or paved (PCC or
ACC) at the discretion of the property owner. Curb and gutters typically
required by Code for streets and parking areas shall not be required due to the
long range postmining land use intentions.
      2.   Dust Suppression: Best Management Practices for dust suppression
shall be used to mitigate dust. (Ord. 1851, 11-30-2009)
      3.   Additional Improvements: Additional road improvements associated
with or assistance in the construction of South Grand Prairie Parkway, if any,
shall be as agreed upon between the quarries and the City as part of a separate
road agreement. (Ord. 1851, 11-30-2009; amd. Ord. 2231, 6-12-2017)
      4.   Overburden Use: Unless otherwise refused by the City, the City shall
have access to and the first right to utilize quarry overburden, not otherwise
required of the reclamation plan. Stockpiling, physical placement and
compaction requirements and details, if any, shall be identified within the
separate road agreement and agreed upon by both the quarries and city.
   F.   Buffers: Buffering between districts or parcels and uses shall not be
required as set forth in title 9, chapter 19 of the city code.
      1.   Buffers shall be provided as follows:
         a.   North: A minimum fifty foot (50') wide buffer shall be provided
along F90 (Raccoon River Drive). Said buffer shall be located a minimum of
ninety feet (90') from the centerline of F90 (Raccoon River Drive).
         b.   East:
            (1)   A minimum one hundred foot (100') wide buffer shall be
provided adjacent to the property line along that portion of the property in
proximity to any existing residences or businesses on the adjacent property
unless written consent from adjoining property waiving the buffer requirement
is provided to the city. The existing undisturbed vegetation shall satisfy
buffer requirements.
            (2)   No buffer shall be required along that portion of the
property that is not in proximity to a business or residence; however, as
indicated previously in subsection B, "Excavation Setback", of this section the
existing riparian areas along the north and west bank of the river as generally
indicated on the updated site plans shall not be disturbed unless specifically
authorized by the director of parks and recreation.
         c.   South: None required; however, as indicated previously in
subsection B, "Excavation Setback", of this section the existing riparian areas
along the north bank of the river shall not be disturbed unless specifically
authorized by the director of parks and recreation.
         d.   West: None required.
      2.   The soil berming and vegetation measures which have been implemented
for buffering along the northern boundary as required by Dallas County as part
of the original mining permit shall be maintained until completion of mining
activities, including material stockpile removal. Visual screening of the
mining operation has been achieved through the implementation of a soil berm
approximately twelve feet (12') in height in conjunction with the establishment
of landscape vegetation. Due to the intended postmining land use and the desire
for views into the site from the abutting F90 (Raccoon River Drive) and other
areas to the north, upon completion of mining operations, portions of the berm
may be reshaped thus opening up views into the lake that was created during the
mineral extraction operation. Excess dirt, if any removed from the berms may
either be incorporated into an area within close proximity to where it is
removed, or at the city's effort and expense, the dirt may be relocated to
alternate areas. Unless otherwise agreed upon, the quarries shall not be
required to truck the excess dirt from the berms to alternate locations within
the site.
   G.   Pedestrian Trails: The general location of desired recreation trails
are indicated on the reclamation plan. Mineral extraction operations and
reclamation efforts shall be such to provide suitable and desirable trail
implementation.
   H.   Lake Edge: The postmining land use intention for this site is for a
recreational lake accommodating shoreline fishing, swimming and boating. In
anticipation of these intended uses, a variety of underwater slopes are
desired; therefore, adherence to the city's requirement of a maximum grade of
one to ten (1:10) (1 foot vertical rise to 10 feet horizontal run) within the
first fifty feet (50') of water area shall not be required. In lieu thereof,
the applicant shall work with the parks and recreation department to identify
specific areas and details of the lake edge treatment and underwater grades
desired. Said standard details shall be included within the reclamation plan or
associated reclamation text document, if prepared for the property. Although
every effort should be made to provide suitable slopes for the intended
postmining uses indicated for the lake's edge (swimming area, fish habitat,
wetland restoration, etc.), it is realized that due to the nature of this type
of mineral extraction and the presence of water throughout the extraction
process that the traditional grading of soil to achieve specific slopes is not
possible. The applicant will be able to place soil along an edge only to a
distance that traditional excavators and dump trucks allow; this soil will
reach the natural angle of repose; in general, this angle of repose shall be
considered acceptable.
Because a natural recreational area is anticipated as the postmining land use,
it is desired that the lake be of an organic shape rather than a rectilinear
typical of extraction operations. Measures to ensure a natural appearance to
the lake should be included within the reclamation plan.
   I.   Erosion Control:
      1.   Silt fences shall be installed where reasonably needed to control
off site erosion of nonvegetated soils, other than agriculture cropland, that
do not drain into the quarry. When feasible, all uncontrolled erosion material
and debris should drain to the quarry and not toward the river or creek.
      2.   All single points of discharge of stormwater leaving the site shall
have erosion protection.
      3.   All requirements of any applicable national pollutant discharge
elimination system (NPDES) permit shall be complied with.
   J.   Noise: All activities associated with the extraction and sale of
minerals from the site shall adhere to the limitations and requirements as set
forth within title 4, chapter 7, "Noise Control", of the city code, except as
otherwise amended in this ordinance.
      1.   To aid in adherence to the provisions of the noise control
ordinance, the following measures shall be implemented:
         a.   Electrical Equipment: As available, electrical equipment shall be
utilized in the mining operation in lieu of diesel powered equipment.
         b.   Noise Reducing Material: Urethane or similar noise reducing
material shall be used to line all chutes.
         c.   Backup Alarms: Backup alarms for equipment routinely used in the
day to day mining operations shall be set to the quietest setting allowed
within federal safety standards.
         d.   Material Loading: A good faith effort shall be made to limit
operations between the hours of six o'clock (6:00) A.M. to six o'clock (6:00)
P.M. on weekdays and six o'clock (6:00) A.M. to one o'clock (1:00) P.M. on
Saturday. However, it is recognized that due to the requirements that some
customers conduct construction activities during off peak hours, some loading
of materials may need to occur outside of these stated hours. The director of
development services should be notified of any special construction projects
which necessitate an extended period of off peak hour loading. At the
director's discretion, the request for temporary extended hours may require the
approval of the city council. All efforts shall be made to minimize noise from
these loading operations so as to minimize disturbance to residential
properties and businesses within the area. If multiple complaints are received,
at the discretion of the director of development services, mining operations
and customer loading outside of the defined hours may be prohibited.
         e.   Crushing Activities: Rock crushing activities for both quarries
of material mined within the site (no material trucked in from off site) shall
be allowed annually for a total of thirty (30) business days between October 1
and April 1 for each mining operation. The thirty (30) day period for rock
crushing activities for each mining operation may occur concurrently or be
divided into separate crushing periods; however, no crushing shall be conducted
between May 1 and September 30 of a calendar year without specific approval of
the city council. Rock crushing activities shall be limited to between the
hours of eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. to six o'clock (6:00) P.M. on weekdays; no
crushing activities shall be allowed on either Saturday or Sunday without
specific council approval. To the greatest extent possible, placement of
crushing equipment should be located near the current processing plant areas or
otherwise as far away from residential properties as possible. All feasible
noise and dust minimizing measures should be implemented to help mitigate
potential impacts of crushing activities on neighboring properties. Following
completion of annexation to the city by each mining operation and within one
year of the conclusion of the first thirty (30) day crushing period, the city
shall hold a public hearing before the city council to evaluate the
continuation of rock crushing activities. The city council shall have the
unilateral right to prohibit any further crushing activities if, in the
judgment of the city council, it is determined that adverse impacts from the
crushing activities on the surrounding area warrant termination. For purposes
of this ordinance, the rock crushing activities will constitute "adverse
impacts" if: 1) on three (3) or more occasions between October 1 and April 1
during which rock crushing has occurred, the crushing activities have failed to
meet all federal, state and local rules and regulations, including
specifications and conditions imposed by the Iowa department of natural
resources related to fugitive dust emissions; or, 2) on three (3) or more
occasions between October 1 and April 1 during which rock crushing has
occurred, the noise generated from each quarry's crushing activities exceeds
the maximum decibel level allowed by the city's noise ordinance (as measured at
the receiving property); or, 3) a combination of both 1) and 2) herein totaling
three (3) occasions between October 1 and April 1 during which rock crushing
has occurred. The council shall also have the authority upon evaluation of
crushing operations to lessen or increase the above stated restrictions as they
apply to rock crushing activities. Following the first public hearing, but no
less than every thirty six (36) months thereafter, the City may require
additional public hearings before the City Council to evaluate the impact of
the crushing activities on the surrounding area. Failure of the City Council
following a public hearing to determine that the rock crushing activities are
creating adverse impacts on the surrounding area, or failure of the City
Council to hold subsequent public hearings, shall allow the continuation of
rock crushing activities. A finding by the City Council following a public
hearing that the rock crushing activities of one mining company are creating
adverse impacts on the surrounding area shall not prohibit the continuation of
rock crushing activities by the second mining company if it is determined that
the rock crushing activities of the second mining company are not creating
adverse impacts on the surrounding area. A public hearing regarding the
continuation of rock crushing activities shall not be construed to allow review
of other activities permitted under this ordinance, which shall be conducted as
provided in this ordinance.
   K.   Lighting: All lighting fixtures, security and otherwise, shall be
downcast. All measures necessary to eliminate light spillover to properties
outside of the PUD perimeter boundaries shall be implemented; in general, light
levels at the perimeter boundary of the PUD shall not exceed one foot-candle.
   L.   Signage: A ground sign shall be allowed at each primary entrance; any
modifications to the existing ground signs shall abide by provisions within the
Sign Code. No billboard signs shall be allowed on any land within the PUD
boundaries. (Ord. 1851, 11-30-2009)
095-06: DEDICATION OF PUBLIC STREET RIGHT-OF-WAY:
   A.   F-90 (Raccoon River Drive): If not previously dedicated to the County,
a minimum of 82.5 feet of right-of-way shall be provided along the northern
boundary as measured from the centerline of F-90 (Raccoon River Drive). The
first sixty feet (60') of said right-of-way shall be by deed; the balance 22.5
feet shall be provided by an irrevocable offer of dedication upon official
annexation into the City. Existing road easements, including those in excess of
the currently anticipated road right-of-way needs shall be maintained until
such time that all future road improvements to F-90 (Raccoon River Drive) have
been completed. Upon completion of all improvements, excess right-of-way may,
at the discretion of the City, be vacated and the excess right-of- way provided
to the respective adjacent property owner. (Ord. 1851, 11-30-2009)
   B.   South Grand Prairie Parkway: Unless otherwise agreed upon and approved
by the City Council, the respective property owners shall provide an
irrevocable offer of dedication for the necessary right-of-way for South Grand
Prairie Parkway as determined by the City. Said dedication shall occur in
phases which correspond to street construction and/or road expansion. The
initial dedication shall provide 82.5 feet of right-of-way plus that necessary
for stability slopes. This dedication shall be provided upon the City's request
after annexation into the City and expiration of any appeals, including appeals
associated with zoning and site plan approvals and the road improvement
agreement. A second dedication of right-of-way to accommodate an additional
three (3) lanes at an urban cross section plus stability slopes shall occur on
the twenty seventh anniversary date of the adoption of this ordinance. The City
shall make a good faith effort to keep the quarries informed of road
construction timing and shall work with the quarries to accommodate extraction
activities within road expansion areas; however, it should be understood that
road construction priorities may change at any time pending transportation need
and funding sources. (Ord. 1851, 11-30-2009; amd. Ord. 2231, 6-12-2017)
095-07: DEDICATION OF RECREATIONAL TRAIL EASEMENTS:
Recreational trail easements through the property in a location and at a width
determined in conjunction with the Parks and Recreation Department as part of
the development of the reclamation plan shall be provided at such time that
they are requested by the City. A regional trail easement through the northeast
corner of the property lying north and east of Sugar Creek and which connects
trails on both the east and north sides of the PUD properties shall be provided
while mining is active. No other spur trails into the site or around the lake
shall be provided until such time that mining and reclamation is complete. If
the regional trail connection is desired prior to the completion of extraction
and/or reclamation activities, adequate safety and barrier measures shall be
determined and agreed upon by the quarry operators, the City, and shall comply
with all local, State and Federal regulation. Implementation of safety and
barrier measures shall be by the City at its sole cost. (Ord. 1851, 11-30-2009)
095-08: DEDICATION OF SITE:
On January 1, 2044, or sooner, the transfer of ownership of the quarry
properties as provided in the irrevocable offer executed in conjunction with
the issuance of the original mining permits by Dallas County or as otherwise
agreed upon between Dallas County and the City of West Des Moines shall occur.
(Ord. 1851, 11-30-2009)
095-09: RECLAMATION FUND AND SURETY:
   A.   Reclamation Fund: The operators of the quarries shall pay into an
appropriate governed Reclamation Fund an amount equal to ten cents ($0.10) per
ton of all aggregate sold from the mining site. This amount shall be paid
annually. If not sooner with approval of Dallas County, upon expiration of the
quarries' original mining permits in Dallas County, the fee shall be paid to
the City of West Des Moines. The monies collected shall be placed in an account
restricted solely for the implementation and development of the identified
postmining land use for this site. This fund shall be in addition to the quarry
operator's obligations to reclaim the site, as well as in addition to the
reclamation bonds otherwise required.
   B.   Reclamation Surety: If not sooner with approval of Dallas County, upon
expiration of the quarries' original mining permits in Dallas County, the
quarry operators shall change the recipient of the existing five hundred
thousand dollar ($500,000.00) bond to secure their obligation to reclaim the
property from Dallas County to the City of West Des Moines. This reclamation
surety shall be in addition to any reclamation bond required as part of the
mining permit under Iowa law. No reclamation bonds shall be completely released
until reclamation work required of the quarries as identified on the approved
reclamation plan has been completed. Appropriate partial release of a bond may
be allowed in accordance with completed work. The recipient of the bond, either
the State or the City, shall have jurisdiction over release amounts and timing.
(Ord. 1851, 11-30-2009)
095-10: SAVINGS CLAUSE:
If any section, provision, sentence, clause, phrase or part of the ordinance
shall be adjudged invalid or unconstitutional, such adjudication shall not
affect the validity of the ordinance as a whole or any provision, section,
subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or part hereof not adjudged invalid or
unconstitutional. (Ord. 1851, 11-30-2009)
095-11: VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES:
Any person who violates the provisions of this ordinance upon conviction shall
be punished as set forth in section 1-4-1 of the City Code of the City of West
Des Moines, Iowa. (Ord. 1851, 11-30-2009)
095-99: LEGISLATIVE HISTORY:
Ord. 1851, 11-30-2009; Ord. 2231, 6-12-2017.
PUD #96
WEST BANK-CASEY'S
SECTION:
096-01: Legal Description
096-02: Development Intent
096-03: Required Plans
096-04: Compliance With Code
096-05: Developer Responsibilities
096-06: Land Use
096-07: Vehicle Trip Allocation
096-08: Stormwater Management Plan
096-09: Public Street Right Of Way Dedication
096-10: Street Design
096-11: Parking
096-12: Drive-Through Businesses
096-13: Pedestrian Elements
096-14: Landscaping
096-15: Signage
096-16: Lighting
096-17: Architecture
096-18: Bulk Regulations
096-19: Violations And Penalties
096-99: Legislative History
096-01: LEGAL DESCRIPTION:
The legal description for the West Bank-Casey's PUD is as follows:
All of lot 3 lying west of a line that is 60 feet west and parallel to the
center section line of section 11, township 78 north, range 25 west, lot 4, lot
5 and the eastern 150 feet of lot 6 of McCurnin Place final plat and part of
the vacated Ashworth right-of-way lying immediately east and adjacent to said
lot 3, all in the city of West Des Moines, Polk County, Iowa and containing
2.28 acres.
(Ord. 1945, 3-5-2012)
096-02: DEVELOPMENT INTENT:
The West Bank-Casey's PUD intends to provide a framework for development
standards reflective of the realities and constraints of redevelopment and to
establish design standards to reinforce the intent of the Grand Avenue
redevelopment plan to respect the context of the area and create a neighborhood
identity that recognizes the area's original development history. The West
Bank-Casey's PUD is located within the area identified for redevelopment by the
Grand Avenue redevelopment plan. Redevelopment in this area is intended to
create a special iconic district within the city of West Des Moines known as
the Val-Gate district. All development within this district must be in
furtherance of the goals of the Grand Avenue redevelopment plan. The city of
West Des Moines Val-Gate district Grand Avenue redevelopment plan and all
appendices and exhibits, as amended, are hereby incorporated as part of the
West Bank-Casey's PUD.
The Grand Avenue redevelopment plan identifies major street patterns, access
and interconnection points, district streetscape locations and typical design
including signage and pedestrian elements. The intent of the redevelopment plan
is to provide a tool that can be used to promote the communication and
cooperation between adjacent property owners and developers within the overall
district to create and ensure a cohesive and unified redevelopment.
Properties within the Grand Avenue redevelopment plan may be referred to as the
Val-Gate district. (Ord. 1945, 3-5-2012)
096-03: REQUIRED PLANS:
The following plans shall be required as a part of the processing of any
development application for any property within the West Bank-Casey's PUD:
   A.   Planned Unit Development: A planned unit development (PUD) identifies
detailed development criteria for specific areas within the Grand Avenue
redevelopment plan area. The planned unit development shall conform to the
general development intent identified in the approved redevelopment plan. The
planned unit development shall be reviewed by the plan and zoning commission
and adopted by the city council by ordinance.
This document shall constitute the planned unit development ordinance for West
Bank-Casey's. On file in the city is a sketch plan that illustrates the overall
site layout concept (exhibit A). This document and any referenced documents or
exhibits (on file with the city clerk) are intended to specify the components,
parameters, and requirements to be adhered to and implemented in order to
ensure the realization of the Grand Avenue redevelopment plan. It is recognized
that modifications and changes may be necessary due to changes in building
footprints, site details, and response to market demand. At the discretion of
the development, planning and inspection manager, changes to the layout of the
development that are deemed to be "major" changes shall require an amendment to
the sketch plan and ordinance, if applicable. Major amendments shall require
the review and approval of the plan and zoning commission and city council.
Where the sketch plan and PUD language conflict, the PUD language shall
prevail.
   B.   Development Applications (Site Plans Or Modifications To A Site Plan):
Site plans for lots within the West Bank-Casey's PUD must meet the intent of
the approved PUD. Site plans for the development of each and all lots shall be
submitted to the city of West Des Moines for review and approval prior to the
development of any portion of the lot. Site plans for permitted uses which
comply (as determined by the development, planning and inspection manager or
designee) with the design intent as set forth in this PUD will be subject to
review via the city's review process and receive final approval from the city
council following a recommendation from the plan and zoning commission. Site
plans for uses identified as permitted conditional (PC) shall require approval
from the board of adjustment. At the discretion of the development, planning
and inspection manager, an amendment to the West Bank-Casey's PUD may be
required to bring consistency between the ordinance and site plan development
proposed. (Ord. 1945, 3-5-2012)
096-04: COMPLIANCE WITH CODE:
Unless otherwise specified herein, the development of West Bank- Casey's PUD
shall comply with the provisions of the West Des Moines city code. (Ord. 1945,
3-5-2012)
096-05: DEVELOPER RESPONSIBILITIES:
   A.   Unless otherwise specifically approved by the city council, the
developer, its successors and/or assigns, if any, shall pay all planning,
engineering, and construction costs for the development of the planned unit
development as required by this ordinance, and shall pay all costs related to
approved site plans, which may include, but is not limited to, the cost of all
streets, storm sewers, sanitary sewers, water mains and service lines,
drainageway improvements, detention basins, buffers, and other improvements as
required. No occupancy permits, either temporary or permanent, shall be issued
until all necessary improvements applicable to the area/lot or structure
requesting occupancy are installed and accepted by the city of West Des Moines.
Nothing in this ordinance shall be construed to prevent the developer, its
successors and/or assigns, if any, from entering into private agreement(s) as
it/they may desire to share the cost of improvements.
   B.   The cost of traffic signals to be located at the intersection of Grand
Avenue and the future north-south street located at the western edge of the PUD
as shown in exhibit A shall be the responsibility of the developer and abutting
property owners pursuant to the assessment policy of the city, of which the
city shall have no financial responsibility whatsoever.
   C.   The developer shall be responsible for the maintenance of the area
encompassing the streetscape easement and related public right of way.
   D.   Developer's responsibilities include all obligations contained in this
section as well as those responsibilities set forth in this ordinance. (Ord.
1945, 3-5-2012)
096-06: LAND USE:
All general use regulations and provisions set forth in title 9, "Zoning", of
the West Des Moines city code for the community commercial district (CMC),
shall apply to any development proposal for parcel A or parcel B West Bank-
Casey's PUD ordinance, unless noted elsewhere within this ordinance.
   A.   Allowed Uses: Uses allowed for parcels within the West Bank- Casey's
PUD shall be those uses identified as permitted or permitted conditional for
the community commercial (CMC) district, except as noted below:
      1.   In addition, the following permitted conditional (PC) uses shall be
permitted (P):
 
               Convenience stores: Maximum seven (7) fuel pump islands (14
SIC 5411 0200  vehicle fueling spots). Five thousand (5,000) square feet store
               and five thousand (5,000) square feet fuel island canopy.
SIC 6099 9912  Automatic teller machine (ATM): Freestanding.
 
   B.   Prohibited Uses: The following uses normally allowed in the community
commercial (CMC) district shall be prohibited in the West Bank-Casey's PUD:
 
SIC 4522       Heliport/helistop.
SIC 4925       Mixed, manufactured or liquefied petroleum gas production and/or
               distribution (except: production and manufacturing).
SIC 592        Liquor stores.
SIC 5999       Adult entertainment establishment.
SIC 6099-9901  Functions related to deposit banking NEC: Check cashing
               agencies.
SIC 6141       Personal credit institutions (a.k.a., delayed deposit lenders).
SIC 75         Automotive repair, services, and parking.
 
(Ord. 1945, 3-5-2012)
096-07: VEHICLE TRIP ALLOCATION:
The traffic study completed by the city of West Des Moines dated November 15,
2011, and approved for the West Bank-Casey's PUD parcels estimates a total of
three thousand sixty six (3,066) average daily trips (ADT); two hundred sixty
five (265) A.M. peak; and three hundred thirty six (336) P.M. peak vehicle
trips collectively for both parcels within the development. These numbers
constitute the number of total vehicle trips allocated to parcels A and B of
the West Bank-Casey's PUD. The combination of tenants/uses within parcels A and
B cannot collectively generate vehicle trips which exceed that allocated to
these parcels as indicated.
Development and redevelopment of each parcel and implementation of desired land
uses will be limited by the available number of trips designated above for the
West Bank-Casey's PUD, as well as compliance with all applicable regulations
within this ordinance or city code. The traffic to be generated by these
parcels must be less than or equal to that allocated. The traffic allocation
indicated above shall be an entitlement to the parcels. Traffic generation due
to subsequent redevelopment, expansion or change of use for either parcel shall
not exceed the maximum traffic allocation stated previously for parcels A and
B. Alternate uses to that currently anticipated may be allowed, following
completion of an amendment to the approved traffic study analyzing the proposed
alternative and appropriate city approval if the existing uses and the proposed
change(s) collectively do not exceed three thousand sixty six (3,066) average
daily trips (ADT); two hundred sixty five (265) A.M. peak; and three hundred
thirty six (336) P.M. peak vehicle trips allocated to these parcels.
Overall trips for the Val-Gate district must remain within the caps established
for the Val-Gate district as a whole which were established as part of the
Grand Avenue redevelopment plan traffic study. Future development within the
West Bank-Casey's PUD may be limited by available trips due to traffic
generated elsewhere within the district. (Ord. 1945, 3-5-2012)
096-08: STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN:
A master stormwater management plan (MSWMP) for the entire Grand Avenue
redevelopment area which governs the overall stormwater management of the Val-
Gate district shall be prepared by the city of West Des Moines. Specific
stormwater management plans (SWMP) will be required with the submittal of each
site development plan. The specific stormwater plans shall be prepared at the
developer's expense, by a professional engineer licensed in the state of Iowa.
All specific stormwater management plans shall comply with the city's
applicable design standards for stormwater management existing at the time each
development (site plan) is approved. Said SWMP must demonstrate compliance with
the Grand Avenue redevelopment master stormwater management plan, if available,
at the time of site plan approval.
The developer(s) of the West Bank-Casey's PUD shall be required to participate
in the Grand Avenue redevelopment stormwater management facilities per their
pro rata share of stormwater contribution for the Val-Gate district.
Although it cannot be guaranteed, the city will attempt to structure the
construction of stormwater infrastructure within the PUD parcels in such a
manner as to minimize the impact on the business operations of West Bank and
Casey's. Such mitigation measures may include limiting construction hours to
nonbank hours and/or providing alternate means of access to the site (from
north or west). Additional measures as identified may also be utilized. (Ord.
1945, 3-5-2012)
096-09: PUBLIC STREET RIGHT OF WAY DEDICATION:
In order to maintain the functional class of the city's roadway system as set
forth in the comprehensive plan, the right of way necessary for Grand Avenue
shall be dedicated to the city in fee title. 1st Street right of way may remain
in a right of way easement with the exception of that necessary to accommodate
traffic signals and associated utilities shall be dedicated in fee title. In
accordance with right of way standards for each road classification consistent
with the city's comprehensive plan or as otherwise defined in this ordinance,
the developer(s) shall provide the necessary easement and dedication at the
time of development for that property to which they have authority over. A
condition of approval will require the eventual dedication of approximately one
thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet of property necessary for
improvements to Grand Avenue which is not currently under the authority of the
developers. Because ownership of the land is different than ownership of the
improvements, a separate agreement will be negotiated with the developer to
provide for acquisition of the right of way. The developer shall provide at no
cost to the city temporary easements necessary for the construction of public
streets within the development. (Ord. 1945, 3-5-2012)
096-10: STREET DESIGN:
Exhibit A identifies the Grand Avenue redevelopment district street network and
general accesses as it relates to the West Bank-Casey's PUD area.
   A.   Existing Public Streets:
      1.   See exhibit A for illustration of public street lane configuration.
   B.   Future Public/Private Streets: The design of all other roads within the
area and adjacent to parcels A and B of this PUD, other than Grand Avenue and
1st Street, shall be consistent with the recommendations of the traffic
analysis (city of West Des Moines, dated November 15, 2011) and the following:
      1.   These roads may be public or private in ownership.
      2.   Lane configuration shall be as identified in the traffic analysis.
      3.   Adequate sight distances shall be maintained at all intersections to
allow vehicles and pedestrians approaching intersections to identify and
anticipate potential interaction and conflicts with other vehicles and
pedestrians.
      4.   No road closures are allowed regardless if private or public without
prior permission of the city of West Des Moines.
      5.   Future streets located along the north and west sides of West Bank-
Casey's PUD whether public or private, are intended to be constructed prior to,
or concurrent with, the widening of Grand Avenue and the installation of
medians.
      6.   It is the intent of the developer and the city that any private
roads within the Grand Avenue redevelopment plan area shall not subsequently be
conveyed to the city as public streets but shall remain private in perpetuity.
      7.   All private streets shall be maintained and function (including
timely snow removal) in a fashion similar to the public expectations of a
public street. The developer and the city shall execute a public access
easement at the time of street construction in which the rights and
responsibilities of the parties shall be delineated.
   C.   Signalized Intersections: Traffic signals may be allowed at the
intersection of Grand Avenue and the future north-south street located
immediately adjacent to and west of the West Bank- Casey's PUD area at such
time when traffic warrants as determined by the city. The city may facilitate
installation of this signal, but the city shall have no responsibility for any
cost of installing this signal. Dedication of permanent right of way to
accommodate the placement of signals and appurtenances shall be provided to the
city upon request by the city and at no cost to the city. Temporary
construction easements shall also be provided at no cost to the city.
   D.   Site Access:
      1.   Grand Avenue:
         a.   A permanent access drive to the West Bank-Casey's PUD area from
Grand Avenue shall be allowed and located no farther to the west than where
half of the westbound left turn lane for the future north-south street along
the western PUD boundary is developed (approximately 180 feet from the nose of
median to centerline of the driveway). Initially, this access will allow for
full turning movements; however, at such time that a median is constructed on
Grand Avenue; the access shall be restricted to a right in/right out access
only.
         b.   A temporary access drive to parcel A (West Bank) off of Grand
Avenue shall be allowed until such time that a street is constructed along the
western PUD boundary. A permanent secondary access into parcel A will be
located off of this western street. Upon construction of the street along the
west and creation of an access into parcel A, the Grand Avenue access will be
closed completely. The property owner of parcel A shall be responsible for
constructing the access drive connection to the west street. It is intended
that this western street will be constructed prior to or in conjunction with
the widening of Grand Avenue and the installation of medians.
      2.   1st Street: Access from 1st Street shall be provided immediately
north of the West Bank-Casey's PUD area within the existing city of West Des
Moines property and as generally depicted on the PUD sketch plan (exhibit A).
The developer of parcel B shall be responsible for constructing this access so
as to provide city required secondary access into parcel B. Maintenance of this
access shall be by the owner of parcel B until such time that the future road
along the north is constructed and said road determined to be public or private
and ongoing maintenance responsibilities are defined. The city shall grant the
necessary temporary construction easements to allow for the initial
construction and ongoing maintenance of the access drive.
      3.   Future Streets: Future streets shall be constructed along the
western and northern boundaries of the West Bank-Casey's PUD as shown on the
sketch plan on file in the city. Said streets may be public or private. At such
time as said streets are constructed, additional accesses into the West Bank-
Casey's PUD area may be provided off these streets at locations determined to
be acceptable to the city. (Ord. 1945, 3-5-2012)
096-11: PARKING:
   A.   Off Street Parking:
      1.   All off street parking areas shall be sited and landscaped to screen
their visibility from street rights of way, residential dwellings, pedestrian
pathways, and adjoining property outside of the West Bank-Casey's PUD. Parking
areas shall be screened to a minimum height of three feet (3').
      2.   Parking stall measurements and drive aisle widths shall conform to
title 9, chapter 15 of the city code.
      3.   It is desired that all off street parking areas be aesthetically
improved to reduce obtrusive characteristics that are inherent to their
function. Landscape islands and/or pods shall be implemented in accordance with
title 9, chapter 19 of the city code of West Des Moines except that parking
rows along a building face shall only be required to implement terminal islands
at the end of parking rows and shall not be required to provide intermediate
islands within a linear row of parking.
   B.   Parking Ratios: The minimum number of parking stalls shall be as
provided per title 9, chapter 15 of the city code. With the approval of the
city council and the execution of an appropriate cross parking easement, the
number of required spaces may be reduced due to shared parking between
establishments.
   C.   Off Street Parking Lot Setbacks: Parking shall be set back so as to
provide a minimum of fifteen feet (15') from the ultimate street right of way
of Grand Avenue and ten feet (10') from the ultimate street right of way of 1st
Street. Parking shall be set back a minimum of five feet (5') from the north
and west property lines of the West Bank-Casey's PUD. No parking lot setback
shall be required along the shared property line of parcels A and B. (Ord.
1945, 3-5-2012)
096-12: DRIVE-THROUGH BUSINESSES:
If, through the design review process, including a traffic analysis, it can be
demonstrated that a drive-through does not cause traffic congestion, does not
cause the West Bank-Casey's PUD to exceed its allocated vehicle trips, and does
not interfere with pedestrian movements, a maximum of one establishment within
parcel A may be permitted. Said drive-through shall provide the minimum queuing
required per title 9, chapter 15 of the city code. Queuing for drive-up lanes
shall not be permitted to interfere with traffic on any public street. The
presence of drive-ups shall be visually mitigated through the use of earth
berming and landscape vegetation placement. (Ord. 1945, 3-5-2012)
096-13: PEDESTRIAN ELEMENTS:
The West Bank-Casey's PUD, in alignment with the Grand Avenue redevelopment
plan, aims to encourage pedestrian movement and opportunities for pedestrian
interaction through the implementation of multiple and connected pathways to
and from parcels within the redevelopment area. In addition, to encourage
pedestrian activity, site furniture and benches for pedestrian use shall be
provided along public streets within an area of enhanced landscaping. One
pedestrian area shall be provided for every two hundred (200) linear feet of
frontage (streetscape). Each pedestrian area shall contain at a minimum two (2)
benches and one trash receptacle. These pedestrian areas may be spaced along
the frontage or grouped to create more of a larger plaza area. Development of
these areas shall comply with the Grand Avenue redevelopment plan guidelines
with details of the development of each area to be specified, reviewed, and
approved at the time of site plan development. Unless otherwise specified, the
installation of these pedestrian elements shall be by the developer of each
parcel within the West Bank-Casey's PUD at the time of redevelopment. (Ord.
1945, 3-5-2012)
096-14: LANDSCAPING:
Landscaping must be provided in accordance with city code unless otherwise
modified within this ordinance. Details regarding specific varieties, exact
quantities, and the minimum size at time of planting shall be provided and
approved as part of the site plan submittal and shall meet the general
guidelines in respect to the minimum plant sizes traditionally applied to
development within the city. The minimum vegetation quantities specified within
this ordinance will need to be provided. The provision of additional vegetation
above the minimum amount required may be necessary to fulfill the intent (i.e.,
visual mitigation/screening) of the required landscaping.
   A.   Open/Green Space: Due to the nature of the intended redevelopment in
respect to existing development pattern, uses, and densities, the amount and
locations of open space and green space/vegetation within the redevelopment
area will vary. As a general rule, the maximum amount of "green" (open lawn
areas and vegetation) should be provided within a site. To allow the most
flexibility in planning, collectively, the parcels shall attempt to provide a
minimum of twenty five percent (25%) open space; however, individually neither
parcel shall contain less than fifteen percent (15%) open space or more than
eighty five percent (85%) impervious surface. Plaza and streetscape areas along
with any areas associated with outdoor pedestrian use may be counted toward
fulfilling the minimum open space requirement. Plazas and outdoor pedestrian
use areas to be counted toward fulfilling minimum open space requirements may
be paved (impervious) as long as the paving is part of a planned hardscape and
softscape enhancement of the plaza or pedestrian area.
A minimum of two (2) trees and three (3) shrubs shall be provided for every
three thousand (3,000) square feet of required open space which shall be based
on twenty five percent (25%) of the site regardless of the actual amount
provided. Of the required trees, fifty percent (50%) shall be of an overstory
or evergreen variety unless otherwise done for design intent and specifically
approved by the appropriate reviewing body. No substitution for required trees
is allowed; however, a twenty (20) square foot mass planting of perennial
flowers or ornamental grasses may be substituted for three (3) shrubs. The
incorporation of evergreen vegetation is encouraged to provide winter substance
within the landscape. Vegetation required as part of the open space may be
placed into off street parking areas, streetscape areas or required buffers but
is in addition to vegetation required of streetscape areas.
   B.   Streetscaping: A landscaped edge with hardscape elements or
"streetscape" shall be provided along Grand Avenue and 1st Street. These
streetscapes are intended to provide desired green to the city, reinforce a
district identity, provide visual screening of parking and other negative site
elements, bring human scale to adjoining buildings and provide traffic calming
benefits. The streetscape shall be accomplished in accordance with the Grand
Avenue redevelopment plan streetscaping intent and shall include vegetation,
furniture, and ornamental stone wall screening elements as illustrated in the
redevelopment plan. Pedestrian elements such as patios and walkways may
encroach into the streetscape area; however, no buildings or off street parking
may.
A minimum ten foot (10') streetscape easement shall be provided parallel with
and along all arterial and collector streets to provide area for district
streetscape, signage and to maintain utility corridors. Said easement shall be
cut back at the corners of intersecting streets to provide a triangular
easement area for enhanced streetscape treatment. The developer shall provide
the necessary easements at the time of site plan.
Streetscape landscaping shall be placed within the streetscape easement of the
property. Landscape vegetation and amenities such as pedestrian benches and
ornamental wall stones shall be implemented within the streetscape area to
provide screening of off street parking areas to a minimum height of three feet
(3'). To aid in achieving this, a minimum of two (2) trees and ten (10) shrubs
shall be required for every fifty (50) linear feet of streetscape distance. Of
the required number of trees, a minimum of one- half (1/2) must be overstory in
nature. No substitution of shrubs for required trees shall be allowed.
Additionally, three (3) "ornamental wall stones" as illustrated in the Grand
Avenue redevelopment plan shall be provided for every one hundred (100) linear
feet of streetscape. It is recommended that the stones be clustered in groups
of at least three (3) stones amongst and between groups of shrubs to provide
mass and screening rather than be equally spaced along the streetscape length.
   C.   Screening Of Negative Site Elements: Electrical transformers, trash
dumpsters, service areas and loading docks, heating, ventilation, air
conditioning, generators, utility meters, and other mechanical equipment which
is located on, beside or adjacent to any building or development shall be
visually screened from views from adjacent roadways, pedestrian paths, and
adjoining properties.
   D.   Vegetation Placement: Overstory trees and upright evergreen trees shall
not be permitted within public utility easements. The presence of utility
easements shall not provide a basis for noncompliance with landscaping
provisions found within this ordinance and within any applicable codes. The
placement of public utility easements within streetscapes and buffer parks is
discouraged due to the potential conflict between trees and the need to access
the lines for repair. (Ord. 1945, 3-5-2012)
096-15: SIGNAGE:
All proposed exterior signage requires the review and approval of a sign permit
by the city of West Des Moines. All signage shall follow the architectural
theme of the Grand Avenue redevelopment district plan and shall comply with
title 9, chapter 18 of the city code except as modified herein or within the
Grand Avenue redevelopment plan. Sign design and construction not typically
allowed by code may be permitted by the sign administrator if it is deemed to
carry and reinforce the design intent of the Val- Gate district. Allowance of
alternate design and construction measures shall only be allowed if there is no
other code compliant manner in which to create the sign. The use of LED
illumination for signage emulating "neon style" lighting and relevant to the
architectural theme of the district may be allowed with the approval of the
development, planning and inspection manager. The following additional
modifications to title 9, chapter 18 of the city code are hereby made:
   A.   Val-Gate District Identification Signs:
      1.   District identification signs shall be accommodated at the northeast
corner of the intersection of 1st Street and Grand Avenue.
   B.   Business Identification Signs:
      1.   Business identification signs, including wall, ground monument, pole
(pylon), roof, and projecting signs shall be consistent with and reinforce the
design intent of the redevelopment plan.
      2.   A pole sign shall be permitted in lieu of traditional ground
monument sign or building projecting sign for the West Bank building only
(parcel A). This "West Bank" sign is being allowed as it has been determined
that it is iconic in nature exhibiting characteristics that meet and promote
the intended design intent of the Val-Gate redevelopment district.
         a.   Said sign shall be limited in height to that which the sign is
today (approximately 30 feet).
         b.   The size (copy area) and design of the sign is intended to match
that which exists today; however, the construction and illumination of the sign
may be updated to today's technology for increased safety, energy conservation,
and minimizing of light pollution.
         c.   The copy of the sign may not be changed. In the event that a new
tenant occupies the building, the pole sign shall be forfeited and removed from
the site. A traditional ground monument sign in accordance with city code may
be erected in place of the pole sign.
         d.   Said sign should be located from the ultimate public street right
of way line or back of curb of a private street a distance equal to the height
of the sign (30 feet).
         e.   The base of the pole sign may be enhanced with materials utilized
on the primary building in order to provide a visual connection and consistency
between the two (2) elements.
      3.   Roof signs shall be permitted in lieu of or as part of the allowable
wall or canopy signage for the Casey's site (parcel B). For the primary
building, said sign must be comprised of individual letters with the letters
extending above the primary building roof no higher than one-half (1/2) of the
height of the letter. A roof sign associated with the canopy may be placed
entirely above the canopy as long as it is deemed to be part of an
architectural element which carries and reinforces the design intent of the
Val-Gate district. Painted roof signs shall not be allowed.
      4.   A projecting sign shall be permitted as wall signage up to a maximum
of thirty five (35) square feet of the allowed wall signage for a building.
Said sign shall be allowed to extend above the building roof no more than one-
half (1/2) the height of the sign.
      5.   Ground monument signs shall be allowed in accordance with city code
for the CMC district with the following exceptions:
         a.   The main sign structure shall not exceed thirty five (35) square
feet and five feet (5') in height. Up to an additional one foot (1') of height
shall be allowed for columns or other architectural elements.
         b.   Along Grand Avenue, the sign shall be set back from the ultimate
property line a minimum of five feet (5'). Along 1st Street, the sign shall
provide a minimum two foot (2') setback from the edge of the public sidewalk.
Signs shall be set back from the north and west PUD boundaries so as to not
block pedestrian and vehicular visibility at intersections.
      6.   A portion of the allowable wall signage may be located on the fuel
canopy.
      7.   Illuminated banding (led) may be allowed on the primary structure,
canopy and/or monument signs if it is approved as part of the architectural
design.
      8.   Unless for a twenty four (24) hour establishment, illuminated
business identification signs shall be turned off no later than one hour after
the last retail or restaurant establishment in the Grand Avenue redevelopment
plan area closes. (Ord. 1945, 3-5-2012)
096-16: LIGHTING:
Consistent with the redevelopment plan, the West Bank-Casey's PUD shall
incorporate a variety of light fixtures ranging from parking lot lights and
roadway fixtures to pedestrian pathway lights. Lighting shall be IDA dark sky
compliant unless otherwise approved by the city of West Des Moines. Included
within section 6 of the Grand Avenue redevelopment plan are design
specifications and requirements along with sketches and images of the intended
lighting series. All lighting within the PUD area shall abide by these
standards and be consistent in character to that illustrated in the Grand
Avenue redevelopment plan and the Val-Gate district's iconic design intent.
As a part of the review of each site plan, a photometric plan must be
submitted. During the review, the applicant must demonstrate how lighting will
not adversely affect adjoining properties or patrons utilizing the public
street system. Special care must be given to ensure excess light does not spill
onto properties adjacent to, but not part of, the Val-Gate district.
The following general guidelines shall be in addition to the specific
regulations stated within the Grand Avenue redevelopment plan regulations:
   A.   Street Lights: The developer of the West Bank-Casey's PUD shall install
streetlights adjacent to current Grand Avenue in conjunction with development
of each parcel. In addition, the developer of the West Bank-Casey's PUD shall
enter into an agreement with the city stating that the developer will install
steel pole streetlights along Grand Avenue in accordance with a plan provided
by Mid-American Energy or its successors at such time that Grand Avenue is
widened. In addition, the developer shall enter into an agreement with the city
stating that the developer will install steel pole streetlights along 1st
Street at such time that the overhead power is placed underground. The
developer of each parcel A and B shall be responsible for the installation of
streetlights along the adjacent north and west streets at such time that the
streets are constructed. Each developer shall execute an agreement and waiver
for the future installation of these streetlights at the time of site plan
development permit approval.
   B.   Parking Luminaries: Fixtures shall be of a design to direct light
downward and shall not have bulbs which are exposed and extend below the frame
of the light fixture. Said fixtures shall not exceed twenty five feet (25') in
height as measured from the ground to the top of the light structure. Fixtures
used shall be consistent throughout the West Bank-Casey's PUD.
   C.   Building Lighting: No wall packs, or floodlighting without shields to
direct the light to its intended target are allowed. In addition to cut off
fixtures, particular attention shall be given to eliminate hot spots and light
glare.
   D.   Fuel Canopy Lighting: All light fixtures attached to a fuel pump island
canopy must be recessed into the canopy with flush mounted lenses. Canopy
lighting shall be designed to illuminate downward and eliminate glare and
spillover lighting. Architectural accent lighting in keeping with the design
intent of the Val-Gate district redevelopment plan may be allowed if approved
as part of the architectural design.
   E.   Pedestrian Pathways: Bollard or pole lighting shall be implemented
along pedestrian pathways. Pole lights shall not exceed fourteen feet (14') as
measured from the ground to the top of the light fixture. (Ord. 1945, 3-5-2012)
096-17: ARCHITECTURE:
Included within the Grand Avenue redevelopment plan is indication of the
architectural style and illustrative examples of the architectural concepts
which shall serve to guide the design of all buildings within the West Bank-
Casey's PUD. All buildings in the PUD shall reinforce the concept depicted in
the Grand Avenue redevelopment plan. Specific architecture for all buildings
shall be evaluated as part of the site plan review and approval process.
All buildings within the West Bank-Casey's PUD shall accommodate the following
in building design:
   A.   Form And Scale: Buildings should reinforce the aesthetic concept as
depicted by the precedent images contained in the Grand Avenue redevelopment
plan. Buildings shall be designed to relate specifically to the pedestrian in
scale and variety. The following techniques should be used to meet this
objective:
      1.   Corporate architecture shall be prohibited except as permissible by
the Grand Avenue redevelopment plan in that it reinforces the iconic imagery
desired for the Val-Gate district.
      2.   Buildings shall be organized to create a logical balance and
relationship with the site, open spaces and circulation.
      3.   Efforts shall be made to locate the buildings close to the street
with off street parking behind or to the side of the building.
      4.   The building's design should meet context and site objectives such
as providing gateways, creating linkages and framing or terminating views.
      5.   Variation in building height, mass and roof forms shall be provided
while still maintaining an overall building continuity.
      6.   Shifts in building planes/facades and variation in exterior
materials shall be incorporated to minimize long expanses of wall.
      7.   Variation in materials, material modules, expressed joints,
textures, colors and details should be used to break up the mass of the
buildings.
      8.   Variation in horizontal planes through the use of materials, color
and projecting forms should be implemented to signify an entry and/or protect
the pedestrian.
      9.   Ground floor retail areas should provide the maximum possible
glazing toward sidewalks to provide pedestrians with visual interest.
      10.   A building's roof form and related details/materials are an
integral part of the architectural design aesthetic. Roofs should not be
designed as attention getting devices related to the reinforcement of signage
or as an identifiable corporate image unless said identification is in keeping
with the Grand Avenue redevelopment plan aesthetic.
   B.   Material Quality And Detail: All sides to each building are to receive
high quality materials and finishes (360 degree architectural treatment). There
are no "backs" to a building. Materials should be durable, economically
maintained and of a quality that will maintain their appearance over a
prolonged time.
      1.   Primary building materials should include, but are not limited to,
glass, steel, concrete, natural wood, stone, brick and architectural metals.
      2.   The following materials shall not be used for cladding unless
specifically approved by the city of West Des Moines as part of the
architectural elevations:
         a.   EIFS or synthetic stucco.
         b.   Concrete masonry units.
         c.   Tilt up precast concrete systems that are structural in
appearance.
         d.   Materials that are intended for interior use.
      3.   Changes in materials should occur at either inside corners or where
a detail is drawn to specifically accommodate a transition. Stone and brick
materials should wrap corners several feet in order to provide authenticity to
the materials. (Ord. 1945, 3-5-2012)
096-18: BULK REGULATIONS:
   A.   Lot Size: No minimum lot size shall be required.
   B.   Building Height: The height of a building shall conform to the limits
prescribed by the zoning code for the CMC district unless otherwise
specifically approved by the city council after a recommendation from the plan
and zoning commission that the additional height is necessary and appropriate
to achieve an architectural intent consistent with the goals of the Grand
Avenue redevelopment plan.
Canopies shall provide a minimum clearance of fourteen feet (14'). There shall
be no maximum fuel canopy height; however, canopy heights greater than twenty
feet (20') shall only be allowed if the design of the canopy is deemed to carry
and reinforce the design intent of the Val-Gate district.
   C.   Building Setbacks:
      1.   Unless otherwise specifically stated, setbacks shall be measured
from the property line or ultimate street right of way line, whichever is more
restrictive.
      2.   Building setbacks are to the main plane of the building excluding
canopies and pedestrian arcades. It is encouraged that buildings should be
pushed forward to locate adjacent to public and private streets and that
parking should be located to the rear of buildings. Therefore:
         a.   Buildings shall be set back a minimum of fifteen feet (15') from
public streets.
         b.   The closest element of a building located adjacent to a private
street shall be no less than ten feet (10') from the back of curb.
         c.   Nothing herein, however, shall be construed as permitting the
location of a building that will interfere with pedestrian or vehicle
visibility at an intersection, sidewalks, trails, plazas, or maintenance of
utilities.
      3.   A minimum thirty foot (30') building separation shall be maintained
between buildings as measured to the closest points of buildings including
canopies, unless said buildings are physically connected or otherwise designed
and constructed in accordance with applicable building and fire codes to allow
for less of a separation distance.
      4.   A gas station canopy shall be set back a minimum of thirty five feet
(35') from Grand Avenue and 1st Street, and a minimum of twenty four feet (24')
from the north boundary of parcel B.
      5.   Dumpster enclosures shall be located no closer than ten feet (10')
from either Grand Avenue or 1st Street and a minimum of five feet (5') from all
other parcel boundaries. Dumpsters should be opaquely screened from visibility
from both Grand Avenue and 1st Street. Whenever possible, dumpsters should be
located and designed as an extension of the primary building. Freestanding
dumpster enclosures should be located and landscaped to blend with the
landscape and minimize their presence. Building materials for dumpster
enclosures shall be consistent with the primary building materials unless in
doing so attention is drawn to the enclosure. (Ord. 1945, 3-5-2012)
096-19: VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES:
Any person who violates the provisions of this ordinance upon conviction shall
be punished as set forth in section 1-4-1 of the city code of the city of West
Des Moines, Iowa. (Ord. 1945, 3-5-2012)
096-99: LEGISLATIVE HISTORY:
Ord. 1945, 3-5-2012.
PUD #97
60TH AND ASHWORTH CENTER
SECTION:
097-01: Legal Description
097-02: Sketch Plan
097-03: Conditions
097-04: Traffic Study Required
097-05: Violations And Penalties
097-99: Legislative History
097-01: LEGAL DESCRIPTION:
The legal description for 60th And Ashworth Center PUD is as follows:
Lots 6, 7, and 8 of Timothy Heights, an official plat and the east 150.00 feet
of the west 467.00 feet of the north 276.00 feet of the south 309.00 feet of
the SW 1/4 of section 6, township 78 north, range 25 west of the 5th P.M., all
being in and forming a part of the city of West Des Moines, Polk County, Iowa.
(Ord. 1933, 10-3-2011)
097-02: SKETCH PLAN:
On file in the city and made a part of this rezoning approval, for concept
description and delineation is the sketch plan document for the 60th And
Ashworth Center PUD marked "Exhibit A". It is recognized that minor shifts or
realignments of driveways may be necessary and compatible with the need to
acquire workable access patterns, grades and usable building sites, but the
general plan layout, including the relationship of uses to each other and the
relationship of land use to the general plan framework, traffic layout, and
development requirements shall be used as the implementation guide. Wherever
conflict occurs between the written text in this document and the notations on
the sketch plan, the written text shall prevail. The sketch plan is a graphic
representation of the property included in the PUD delineating the approximate
location and configuration of the parcels for the purpose of easier reference
for the applicable regulations of this ordinance. (Ord. 1933, 10-3-2011)
097-03: CONDITIONS:
Whereas, title 9, chapter 9, "Planned Unit Development District", of the city
code, establishes certain regulations and guidelines pertaining to accompanying
information required on plat and site plan documents. Now, therefore, the
following conditions, restrictions, and regulations are adopted as part of this
approval:
   A.   General Conditions: In addition to the PUD sketch plan map, the
following general development criteria shall be integrated into and made a part
of this planned unit development:
      1.   General Conformance To Subdivision Ordinance: All subdivisions,
public and private streets, public or private street rights of way and general
development shall adhere to the standards and design criteria set forth in the
West Des Moines subdivision ordinance and/or established city policies
pertaining thereto, unless otherwise stated within this ordinance. Any
regulation, standard, provision or requirement that is not specifically
addressed within this document that is regulated elsewhere in the city code,
the requirements of the city code are applicable and shall be enforced.
      2.   Flood Hazard: In all areas within a 100-year frequency flood hazard
zone, or adjoining drainageways, and detention ponding areas involving
potential flood hazards, no building shall be erected which has a lowest level
floor, including basements, less than two feet (2') above the determined level
of the 100-year frequency flood event. Buildings shall only be permitted within
twenty five feet (25') of any easement or property boundary of a major
drainageway, stormwater detention basin or pond if the applicant can
demonstrate during the development review process that potential flooding from
extraordinary flood events have been mitigated through site design or building
design and approval is granted by the city council.
      3.   Developer Responsibilities: The developer, their successors and/or
assigns, if any, shall pay all planning, engineering, and construction costs
for the development of the planned unit development, in accordance with the
city policies current at the time of development, as required by this
ordinance, the subdivision ordinance, and the Des Moines metropolitan design
standards as adopted by the city of West Des Moines for all streets, storm
sewers, sanitary sewers, drainage improvements, detention basins, water mains,
buffers and other improvements as required within the PUD or by city codes.
      4.   Stormwater Management: A stormwater management plan will be required
for the 60th And Ashworth Center PUD. Said stormwater management plan shall be
prepared by a professional engineer licensed in the state of Iowa. The
stormwater management plan shall comply with the city's current design
standards for stormwater management. The method of stormwater management and
the stormwater conveyance system shall be determined prior to city approval of
any development or redevelopment requiring a major modification permit within
any portion of the property within the PUD. At time of platting or development,
ownership and responsibility for all stormwater detention areas and private
stormwater detention outlet structures will need to be established.
      5.   Public Street Improvements And Right Of Way Dedication: With any
subdivision plat or site plan for property within the PUD, the applicant shall
be responsible for constructing and/or installing the public infrastructure
necessary to support development in a manner that will assure that the public
infrastructure functions at an acceptable level of service (per the city's
comprehensive plan) and complies with all city ordinances. The developer will
be required to provide comprehensive plan right of way for 60th Street and
Ashworth Road in fee title to the city of West Des Moines at the time of
platting or development/redevelopment.
      6.   Sanitary Sewer: Any proposed change in approved land use densities
for the PUD will require an analysis of the downstream sanitary sewer capacity
to assure that adequate capacity is available for the proposed change in
approved land use densities.
      7.   Compliance With Fats, Oils And Grease (FOG) Ordinance: Limitations
on fats, oils, and grease (FOG) of the city code requires that any building or
facility including food service establishments (FSE), likely to discharge fats,
oils and grease to the sanitary sewer must install an approved grease
interceptor and to thereafter operate and maintain the grease interceptor as
provided in ordinance 1875 (title 7, chapter 8, article F, "Industrial Waste",
of the city code).
      8.   Street Lighting: The developer shall be responsible for all costs
associated with the installation of public streetlights adjacent to the
development.
      9.   Subdivision: Prior to, or in conjunction with development or
transfer of ownership of any portion of the PUD, said area shall be platted in
accordance with the city's subdivision ordinance to delineate within a plat the
parcel to be developed or sold separately or any portion thereof.
   B.   Development Design Criteria: In addition to the general conditions as
stated above, the following land use design criteria, development standards,
and land use regulations shall apply to the development area indicated on the
sketch plan. All general use regulations, performance standards and provisions
set forth in title 9, "Zoning", of the city code for the neighborhood
commercial (NC) district shall apply to any development or redevelopment
proposal for the property as shown on the sketch plan unless otherwise provided
herein.
      1.   Land Use: All land uses as set forth in title 9, "Zoning", of the
city code for the neighborhood commercial (NC) district as permitted and
permitted conditionally shall apply except as designated below:
         a.   Permitted Uses: Permitted uses shall include the following:
            (1)   All permitted (P) uses allowed within the neighborhood
commercial (NC) district except those prohibited by this ordinance.
            (2)   All permitted conditional (Pc) uses allowed within the
neighborhood commercial (NC) district, except those otherwise prohibited by
this ordinance may be allowed with the approval of the appropriate review body.
            (3)   The following permitted conditional (Pc) uses shall be
allowed as permitted (P):
 
SIC 541  Convenience stores.
SIC 554  Gasoline service stations - without repair.
SIC 7991 Physical fitness facilities.
 
            (4)   The following permitted (P) uses may be allowed as a
permitted conditional (Pc) use with the approval of the appropriate review
body:
 
        Grocery stores (except convenience stores. Convenience stores shall be
SIC 541 permitted as indicated above) which exceed fifteen thousand (15,000)
        square feet gfa. Grocery stores less than fifteen thousand (15,000)
        square feet gfa shall be permitted (P).
 
            (5)   The following uses shall be permitted:
 
SIC 549       Miscellaneous food stores - no drive-throughs.
SIC 57        Furniture, home furnishings, and equipment stores, except SIC
              5712, furniture stores and SIC 572, household appliance stores.
SIC 5948      Luggage and leather goods stores with no leather tannery.
SIC 763       Watch, clock and jewelry repair.
SIC 7699-1100 Lock and key services.
SIC 7699-1602 Sewing machine repair.
 
         b.   Prohibited Uses: The following permitted (P) or permitted
conditional (Pc) uses otherwise allowed within the neighborhood commercial (NC)
district shall be prohibited:
 
SIC 01        Agricultural production - crops.
SIC 0742      Veterinary services for animal specialties, with outside runs.
              Animal specialty services, except veterinary, shall be prohibited
SIC 0752      except SIC 0752 9901 grooming services, pet and animal
              specialties, when animals are domesticated household pets.
SIC 5813      Drinking places.
SIC 592       Liquor stores.
SIC 6099-9901 Check and cash agencies.
SIC 832 0400  Individual and family social services, rehabilitation services.
 
      2.   Building Setbacks:
         a.   Principal structures shall be set back as follows:
South: Minimum of fifty feet (50') from the ultimate street right of way.
West: Minimum of fifty feet (50') from the ultimate street right of way.
North: Minimum of twenty four feet (24') from the PUD boundary.
East: Minimum of thirty feet (30') from the PUD boundary.
         b.   Freestanding accessory structures shall be set back as follows:
South and West: Minimum of thirty five feet (35') from ultimate street rights
of way.
North: Minimum of twenty feet (20') from PUD boundary.
East: Zero setback required.
      3.   Gasoline Fuel Pumps And Canopy: Up to six (6) fuel pump islands
which supply no more than two (2) vehicles at the same time (12 total fueling
stations) shall be allowed within the development. The gasoline fuel pump
canopy shall not exceed four thousand six hundred (4,600) square feet. The
canopy shall not exceed twenty feet (20') in height and shall provide a minimum
of fourteen feet (14') of vertical clearance under the canopy.
      4.   Minimum Parking Requirements: The minimum number of parking required
of a planned commercial center per city code shall be provided within the site.
Existing parking stalls and drive aisles within the site as of October 2011,
shall not be required to comply with the minimum dimensions as stated in title
9, "Zoning"; chapter 15, "Off Street Parking And Loading"; section 6, "Design
Standards"; subsection F, "Dimensions", of the city code; however, existing
parking stall dimensions deficiencies shall not be increased (stall length
decreased and drive aisle width further narrowed if presently less than the
minimum two-way required aisle width of 24 feet or reduced to less than 24 feet
in width if currently wider than the minimum two-way required 24 foot width),
nor shall any new parking stalls added to the site after October 2011, be less
than the minimum dimension standards stated within city code.
      5.   Vehicle Circulation Drives And Parking Lots: The location of the
perimeter vehicle circulation drive along the south and west sides of the
property as illustrated on the 2011 approved major modification site plan shall
be accepted as the minimum setback required for this element. Off street
parking areas shall be located a minimum of fifteen feet (15') from the
ultimate right of way line. No parking setback shall be required along the east
boundary when the site is developed as one parcel with the adjoining property
and implementing shared parking/circulation. If not developed as one, a fifteen
foot (15') parking lot setback and/or a five foot (5') vehicle circulation
drive setback shall be provided along the eastern boundary.
      6.   Parking Lot Landscaping: Views from a public street of off street
parking areas will need to be visually mitigated to the greatest extent
possible within the private area of the development property.
With the exception of terminal islands at the ends of linear parking rows,
parking lot landscape islands and tree pods requirements as stated within city
code shall not be required until such time that the entire site redevelops.
Until such time, the following measures shall be accommodated in order to
visually mitigate the appearance of a "sea of asphalt" that is characteristic
of parking areas.
         a.   No parking lot island shall be paved or covered with rock mulch.
         b.   Islands shall contain tree(s), multiple shrubs, and/or mass
plantings of ornamental grasses or perennials surrounded by organic mulch and/
or sod in order to increase the visible amount of "green" within the site.
         c.   Recognizing there are existing trees to work around and that
visibility at intersections should not be impeded, whenever possible, multiple
trees and shrubs shall be located within the islands in order to increase the
visual mass of the plantings.
Existing parking lot islands which do not meet these criteria shall enhance the
amount of "green" as part of a continual site improvement plan and/or in
conjunction with other site improvements associated with changes/accommodation
of new and existing tenants.
      7.   Open Space: Due to the dedication of public street right of way, a
minimum of sixteen percent (16%) of the total lot area after right of way
dedication shall be required to be provided as open space unencumbered by
structures or vehicle drive aisles and parking areas. The minimum amount of
landscape vegetation to be provided within the site shall be based on twenty
five percent (25%) of the site after dedication of ultimate right of way. Two
(2) trees and three (3) shrubs per three thousand (3,000) square feet of open
space based on twenty five percent (25%) of the site shall be provided within
the private portion of the site. Any new plantings proposed with the ultimate
street right of way area for either Ashworth Road or 60th Street will require
the review and approval of the city council.
      8.   Lighting: All light fixtures shall be of a cutoff type to eliminate
glare and spillover lighting beyond the property line. No wall pack lights are
allowed. Fuel canopy lighting must be flush mounted with no exposed bulbs
extending below the light fixture. All new lighting shall meet these criteria.
Any existing lighting which does not meet this shall be modified/replaced to
comply in conjunction with repairs to the fixture. (Ord. 1933, 10-3-2011)
097-04: TRAFFIC STUDY REQUIRED:
The traffic study completed by the city of West Des Moines dated September 19,
2007, and approved for the 60th And Ashworth Center PUD estimates a total of
five thousand one hundred sixty (5,160) average daily trips (ADT); four hundred
eighteen (418) A.M. peak; and three hundred eighty nine (389) P.M. peak vehicle
trips for the entire development. These numbers constitute the number of total
vehicle trips allocated to the development. The combination of tenants/uses
within this development cannot collectively generate vehicle trips which exceed
that allocated to the development as indicated. (Ord. 1933, 10-3-2011)
097-05: VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES:
Any person who violates the provisions of this ordinance upon conviction shall
be punished as set forth in section 1-4-1 of the city code. (Ord. 1933, 10-3-
2011)
097-99: LEGISLATIVE HISTORY:
Ord. 1933, 10-3-2011.
PUD #98
FAREWAY
SECTION:
098-01: Legal Description
098-02: Development Intent
098-03: Required Plans
098-04: Compliance With Code
098-05: Developer Responsibilities
098-06: Land Use
098-07: Vehicle Trip Allocation
098-08: Stormwater Management Plan
098-09: Public Street Right Of Way Dedication
098-10: Street Design
098-11: Parking
098-12: Pedestrian Elements
098-13: Landscaping
098-14: Signage
098-15: Lighting
098-16: Architecture
098-17: Bulk Regulations
098-18: Violations And Penalties
098-99: Legislative History
098-01: LEGAL DESCRIPTION:
The legal description for Fareway PUD is as follows:
Lot 9 McCurnin Place, an official plat, West Des Moines, Polk County, Iowa, and
lot 1, Roto Rooter plat 1, an official plat, West Des Moines, Polk County,
Iowa. Said tract of land being subject to and together with any and all
easements of record.
(Ord. 2026, 4-21-2014)
098-02: DEVELOPMENT INTENT:
The Fareway PUD intends to provide a framework for development standards
reflective of the realities and constraints of redevelopment and to establish
design standards to reinforce the intent of the Grand Avenue redevelopment plan
to respect the context of the area and create a neighborhood identity that
recognizes the area's original development history. The Fareway PUD is located
within the area identified for redevelopment by the Grand Avenue redevelopment
plan. Redevelopment in this area is intended to create a special iconic
district within the city of West Des Moines known as the Val-Gate district. All
development within this district must be in furtherance of the goals of the
Grand Avenue redevelopment plan. The city of West Des Moines Val-Gate district
Grand Avenue redevelopment plan and all appendices and exhibits, as amended,
are hereby incorporated as part of the Fareway PUD.
The Grand Avenue redevelopment plan identifies major street patterns, access
and interconnection points, district streetscape locations and typical design
including signage and pedestrian elements. The intent of the redevelopment plan
is to provide a tool that can be used to promote the communication and
cooperation between adjacent property owners and developers within the overall
district to create and ensure a cohesive and unified redevelopment.
Properties within the Grand Avenue redevelopment plan may be referred to as the
Val-Gate district. (Ord. 2026, 4-21-2014)
098-03: REQUIRED PLANS:
The following plans shall be required as a part of the processing of any
development application for any property within the Fareway PUD:
   A.   Planned Unit Development: A planned unit development (PUD) identifies
detailed development criteria for specific areas within the Grand Avenue
redevelopment plan area. The planned unit development shall conform to the
general development intent identified in the approved redevelopment plan. The
planned unit development shall be reviewed by the plan and zoning commission
and adopted by the city council by ordinance.
This document shall constitute the planned unit development ordinance for
Fareway. Attached to and made a part of this ordinance is a sketch plan that
illustrates the overall site layout concept (exhibit A). This document and any
referenced documents or exhibits (included or on file with the city) are
intended to specify the components, parameters, and requirements to be adhered
to and implemented in order to ensure the realization the Grand Avenue
redevelopment plan. It is recognized that modifications and changes may be
necessary due to changes in building footprints, site details, and response to
market demand. At the discretion of the development, planning and inspection
manager, changes to the layout of the development that are deemed to be "major"
changes shall require an amendment to the sketch plan and ordinance, if
applicable. Major amendments shall require the review and approval of the plan
and zoning commission and city council.
Where the sketch plan and PUD language conflict, the PUD language shall
prevail.
   B.   Development Applications (Site Plans Or Modifications To A Site Plan):
Site plans for lots within the Fareway PUD must meet the intent of the approved
PUD. Site plans for the development of each and all lots shall be submitted to
the city of West Des Moines for review and approval prior to the development of
any portion of the lot. Site plans for permitted uses which comply (as
determined by the development, planning and inspection manager or designee)
with the design intent as set forth in this PUD will be subject to review via
the city's review process and receive final approval from the city council
following a recommendation from the plan and zoning commission. Site plans for
uses identified as permitted conditional (Pc) shall require approval from the
board of adjustment. At the discretion of the development, planning and
inspection manager, an amendment to the Fareway PUD may be required to bring
consistency between the ordinance and site plan development proposed. (Ord.
2026, 4-21-2014)
098-04: COMPLIANCE WITH CODE:
Unless otherwise specified herein, the development of Fareway PUD shall comply
with the provisions of the West Des Moines city code. (Ord. 2026, 4-21-2014)
098-05: DEVELOPER RESPONSIBILITIES:
   A.   Unless otherwise specifically approved by the city council, the
developer, its successors and/or assigns, if any, shall pay all planning,
engineering, and construction costs for the development of the planned unit
development as required by this ordinance, and shall pay all costs related to
approved site plans, which may include, but is not limited to, the cost of all
streets, storm sewers, sanitary sewers, water mains and service lines,
drainageway improvements, detention basins, buffers, and other improvements as
required. No occupancy permits, either temporary or permanent, shall be issued
until all necessary improvements applicable to the area/lot or structure
requesting occupancy are installed and accepted by the city of West Des Moines.
Nothing in this ordinance shall be construed to prevent the developer, its
successors and/or assigns, if any, from entering into private agreement(s) as
it/they may desire to share the cost of improvements.
   B.   The cost of future upgraded traffic signals or dedicated turn lanes at
the intersection of Grand Avenue and 4th Street located at the southwest corner
of the PUD as shown in exhibit B on file in the city shall be the
responsibility of the developer and abutting property owners pursuant to the
assessment policy of the city, of which the city shall have no financial
responsibility whatsoever.
   C.   The developer shall be responsible for the maintenance of the area
encompassing the streetscape easement and related public right of way.
   D.   Developer's responsibilities include all obligations contained in this
section as well as those responsibilities set forth in this ordinance. (Ord.
2026, 4-21-2014)
098-06: LAND USE:
All general use regulations and provisions set forth in title 9, "Zoning", of
the West Des Moines city code for the community commercial (CMC) district,
shall apply to any development proposal for the Fareway PUD ordinance, unless
noted elsewhere within this ordinance.
   A.   Allowed Uses: Uses allowed for parcels within the Fareway PUD shall be
those uses identified as permitted or permitted conditional for the community
commercial (CMC) district including ancillary uses provided as part of the
primary use, except as noted below.
   B.   Prohibited Uses: The following uses normally allowed in the community
commercial (CMC) district shall be prohibited in the Fareway PUD:
 
SIC 4522      Heliport/helistop.
SIC 4925      Mixed, manufactured or liquefied petroleum gas production and/or
              distribution (except: production and manufacturing).
SIC 592       Liquor stores.
SIC 5999      Adult entertainment establishment.
SIC 6099-9901 Functions related to deposit banking NEC - check cashing
              agencies.
SIC 6141      Personal credit institutions (a.k.a., delayed deposit lenders).
SIC 75        Automotive repair, services, and parking.
 
(Ord. 2026, 4-21-2014)
098-07: VEHICLE TRIP ALLOCATION:
The traffic study completed by the city of West Des Moines dated January 21,
2014, and approved for the Fareway PUD parcels estimates a total of three
thousand eighty two (3,082) average daily trips (ADT); one hundred two (102)
A.M. peak; and two hundred eighty six (286) P.M. peak vehicle trips within the
development. These numbers constitute the number of total vehicle trips
allocated to the Fareway PUD. The combination of tenants/uses within the
development cannot collectively generate vehicle trips which exceed that
allocated to these parcels as indicated.
Development and redevelopment of each parcel and implementation of desired land
uses will be limited by the available number of trips designated above for the
Fareway PUD, as well as compliance with all applicable regulations within this
ordinance or city code. The traffic to be generated by these parcels must be
less than or equal to that allocated. The traffic allocation indicated above
shall be an entitlement to the parcels. Traffic generation due to subsequent
redevelopment, expansion or change of use for either parcel shall not exceed
the maximum traffic allocation stated previously for the development. Alternate
uses to that currently anticipated may be allowed, following completion of an
amendment to the approved traffic study analyzing the proposed alternative and
appropriate city approval if the existing uses and the proposed change(s)
collectively do not exceed three thousand eighty two (3,082) average daily
trips (ADT); one hundred two (102) A.M. peak; and two hundred eighty six (286)
P.M. peak vehicle trips allocated to these parcels.
Overall trips for the Val-Gate district must remain within the caps established
for the Val-Gate district as a whole which were established as part of the
Grand Avenue redevelopment plan traffic study. Future development within the
Fareway PUD may be limited by available trips due to traffic generated
elsewhere within the district. (Ord. 2026, 4-21-2014)
098-08: STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN:
A master stormwater management plan (MSWMP) for the entire Grand Avenue
redevelopment area which governs the overall stormwater management of the Val-
Gate district shall be prepared by the city of West Des Moines. Specific
stormwater management plans (SWMP) will be required with the submittal of each
site development plan. The specific stormwater plans shall be prepared at the
developer's expense, by a professional engineer licensed in the state of Iowa.
All specific stormwater management plans shall comply with the city's
applicable design standards for stormwater management existing at the time each
development (site plan) is approved. Said SWMP must demonstrate compliance with
the Grand Avenue redevelopment master stormwater management plan, if available,
at the time of site plan approval.
The developer(s) of the Fareway PUD shall be required to participate in the
Grand Avenue redevelopment stormwater management facilities and shall enter
into an agreement with the city approved as part of the site plan stating that
the developer will provide improvements or contribute fees per their pro rata
share in accordance with the Grand Avenue East stormwater connection fee
district as approved by the city council on April 21, 2014. (Ord. 2026, 4-21-
2014)
098-09: PUBLIC STREET RIGHT OF WAY DEDICATION:
In order to maintain the functional class of the city's roadway system as set
forth in the comprehensive plan, the right of way necessary for Grand Avenue,
4th Street and Ashworth Road including the additional right of way needed for
the future right turn lane for northbound traffic from 4th street on to
Ashworth Road as noted in the traffic study dated January 21, 2014, shall be
dedicated to the city in fee title. The developer shall provide at no cost to
the city temporary easements necessary for the construction of public streets
within or adjacent to the development. The city will endeavor to structure the
construction of the public improvements in such a manner as to minimize the
impact on the business operations of Fareway. (Ord. 2026, 4-21-2014)
098-10: STREET DESIGN:
Exhibit A identifies the Grand Avenue redevelopment plan street network and
general accesses as it relates to the Fareway PUD area.
   A.   Future Public/Private Streets: The Fareway PUD will be required to
provide access across the site to provide connection and design continuity to
the future roads within the area and adjacent to PUD, as illustrated in exhibit
A and shall meet the following:
      1.   These future roads may be public or private in ownership.
      2.   No road closures are allowed regardless if private or public without
prior permission of the city of West Des Moines.
      3.   Future access through the Fareway PUD is intended to be concurrent
with the widening of Grand Avenue and the installation of medians. A cross
access easement delineating the future access shall be approved as part of the
site plan for Fareway.
      4.   All future private streets shall be maintained and function
(including timely snow removal) in a fashion similar to the public expectations
of a public street. The developer and the city shall execute a public access
easement at the time of street construction in which the rights and
responsibilities of the involved parties for the streets with the Grand Avenue
redevelopment plan shall be delineated.
   B.   Signalized Intersections: Traffic signals may be upgraded at the
intersection of Grand Avenue and 4th Street located immediately southwest of
the Fareway PUD area at such time when traffic warrants as determined by the
city. The city may facilitate upgrade of this signal, but the city shall have
no responsibility for any cost of upgrading this signal. Dedication of
permanent right of way to accommodate the placement of signals and
appurtenances shall be provided to the city upon request by the city and at no
cost to the city. Temporary construction easements shall also be provided at no
cost to the city. The city will endeavor to structure the construction of the
public improvements in such a manner as to minimize the impact on the business
operations of Fareway.
   C.   Site Access:
      1.   Grand Avenue: A permanent access drive to the Fareway PUD area from
Grand Avenue shall be allowed and located in the interim adjacent to the west
property line of lot 8, McCurinin Place. Initially, this access will allow for
full turning movements; however, at such time that a median is constructed on
Grand Avenue, the access will need to be relocated and shall be restricted to a
right in/right out access only.
      2.   4th Street: Two (2) permanent access drives to the Fareway PUD area
from 4th Street shall be allowed, the southern one shall be aligned with the
intersection of Valhigh Road and the northern one shall be located
approximately one hundred thirty feet (130') south of the centerline of
Ashworth Road.
      3.   Ashworth Road: A permanent access drive to the Fareway PUD area from
Ashworth Road shall be allowed and located approximately one hundred eighty
five feet (185') east of the centerline of 4th Street.
      4.   Future Streets: A future cross access connection shall be provided
across the Fareway PUD as a continuation of the future east-west street as
illustrated in exhibit A. Design and location of said access shall be
determined at such time the east/west street adjacent to the PUD is designed.
(Ord. 2026, 4-21-2014)
098-11: PARKING:
   A.   Off Street Parking:
      1.   All off street parking areas shall be sited and landscaped to screen
their visibility from street rights of way, residential dwellings, pedestrian
pathways, and adjoining property outside of the Fareway PUD. Parking areas
shall be screened to a minimum height of three feet (3').
      2.   Parking stall measurements and drive aisle widths shall conform to
title 9, chapter 15 of the city code.
      3.   It is desired that all off street parking areas be aesthetically
improved to reduce obtrusive characteristics that are inherent to their
function. Landscape islands and/or pods shall be implemented in accordance with
title 9, chapter 19 of the city code except that parking rows along a building
face or streetscape shall only be required to implement terminal islands at the
end of parking rows and shall not be required to provide intermediate islands
within a linear row of parking.
   B.   Off Street Loading:
      1.   All off street loading areas shall be sited and landscaped to screen
their visibility from street rights of way, residential dwellings, pedestrian
pathways, and adjoining property outside of the Fareway PUD. Screening shall be
implemented in accordance with title 9, chapter 19 of the city code.
      2.   Loading area measurements and drive aisle widths shall conform to
title 9, chapter 15 of the city code.
   C.   Parking Ratios: The minimum number of parking stalls shall be as
provided per title 9, chapter 15 of the city code. With the approval of the
city council and the execution of an appropriate cross parking easement, the
number of required spaces may be reduced due to shared parking between
establishments or to provide future cross access circulation.
   D.   Off Street Parking Lot Setbacks: Parking shall be set back so as to
provide a minimum of ten feet (10') from the ultimate street right of way of
Grand Avenue and ten feet (10') from the ultimate street right of way of 4th
Street. Parking shall be set back a minimum of fifteen feet (15') from Ashworth
Road and five feet (5') from the east and south property lines of the Fareway
PUD unless the parking space within the setback is part of a common parking lot
of joint usage between the adjoining lots. (Ord. 2026, 4-21-2014)
098-12: PEDESTRIAN ELEMENTS:
The Fareway PUD, in alignment with the Grand Avenue redevelopment plan, aims to
encourage pedestrian movement and opportunities for pedestrian interaction
through the implementation of multiple and connected pathways to and from
parcels within the redevelopment area. In addition, to encourage pedestrian
activity, site furniture and benches for pedestrian use shall be provided along
public streets within an area of enhanced landscaping. One pedestrian area
shall be provided for every two hundred (200) linear feet of frontage
(streetscape). Each pedestrian area shall contain at a minimum two (2) benches
and one trash receptacle. These pedestrian areas may be spaced along the
frontage or grouped to create more of a larger plaza area. Development of these
areas shall comply with the Grand Avenue redevelopment plan guidelines with
details of the development of each area to be specified, reviewed, and approved
at the time of site plan development. Unless otherwise specified, the
installation of these pedestrian elements shall be by the developer of the
Fareway PUD at the time of redevelopment. A future pedestrian connection shall
be provided along the eastern edge of the Fareway PUD as illustrated in exhibit
B (PUD sketch plan). (Ord. 2026, 4-21-2014)
098-13: LANDSCAPING:
Landscaping must be provided in accordance with city code unless otherwise
modified within this ordinance. Details regarding specific varieties, exact
quantities, and the minimum size at time of planting shall be provided and
approved as part of the site plan submittal and shall meet the general
guidelines in respect to the minimum plant sizes traditionally applied to
development within the city. The minimum vegetation quantities specified within
this ordinance will need to be provided. The provision of additional vegetation
above the minimum amount required may be necessary to fulfill the intent (i.e.,
visual mitigation/screening) of the required landscaping.
   A.   Open/Green Space: Due to the nature of the intended redevelopment in
respect to existing development pattern, uses, and densities, the amount and
locations of open space and green space/vegetation within the redevelopment
area will vary. As a general rule, the maximum amount of "green" (open lawn
areas and vegetation) should be provided within a site. To allow the most
flexibility in planning, collectively, the development shall attempt to provide
a minimum of twenty five percent (25%) open space; however, no less than
fifteen percent (15%) open space or more than eighty five percent (85%)
impervious surface will be allowed. Plaza and streetscape areas along with any
areas associated with outdoor pedestrian use may be counted toward fulfilling
the minimum open space requirement. Plazas and outdoor pedestrian use areas to
be counted toward fulfilling minimum open space requirements may be paved
(impervious) as long as the paving is part of a planned hardscape and softscape
enhancement of the plaza or pedestrian area.
A minimum of two (2) trees and three (3) shrubs shall be provided for every
three thousand (3,000) square feet of required open space which shall be based
on twenty five percent (25%) of the site regardless of the actual amount
provided. Of the required trees, fifty percent (50%) shall be of an overstory
or evergreen variety unless otherwise done for design intent and specifically
approved by the appropriate reviewing body. No substitution for required trees
is allowed; however, a twenty (20) square foot mass planting of perennial
flowers or ornamental grasses may be substituted for three (3) shrubs. The
incorporation of evergreen vegetation is encouraged to provide winter substance
within the landscape. Vegetation required as part of the open space may be
placed into off street parking areas, streetscape areas or required buffers but
is in addition to vegetation required of streetscape areas. With city council
approval at the site plan application, the developer can defer installation of
required plantings to accommodate changes for future cross access.
   B.   Streetscaping: A landscaped edge with hardscape elements or
"streetscape" shall be provided along Grand Avenue and 4th Street between the
intersection with Grand Avenue and the development entry drive aligned with
Valhigh Road. These streetscapes are intended to provide desired green to the
city, reinforce a district identity, provide visual screening of parking and
other negative site elements, bring human scale to adjoining buildings and
provide traffic calming benefits. The streetscape shall be accomplished in
accordance with the Grand Avenue redevelopment plan streetscaping intent and
shall include vegetation, furniture, and ornamental stone wall screening
elements as illustrated in the redevelopment plan. Pedestrian elements such as
patios and walkways may encroach into the streetscape area; however, no
buildings or off street parking may.
A minimum ten foot (10') streetscape easement shall be provided parallel with
and along all arterial and collector streets as indicated in exhibit B and as
noted above to provide area for district streetscape, signage and to maintain
utility corridors. Said easement shall be adjusted at the corners of
intersecting streets if necessary to provide a full depth streetscape easement
area around traffic signal equipment easements. The developer shall provide the
necessary easements at the time of site plan approval.
Streetscape landscaping shall be placed within the streetscape easement of the
property. Landscape vegetation and amenities such as pedestrian benches and
ornamental wall stones shall be implemented within the streetscape area to
provide screening of off street parking areas to a minimum height of three feet
(3'). To aid in achieving this, a minimum of two (2) trees and ten (10) shrubs
shall be required for every fifty (50) linear feet of streetscape distance. Of
the required number of trees, a minimum of one- half (1/2) must be overstory in
nature. No substitution of shrubs for required trees shall be allowed.
Additionally, three (3) "ornamental wall stones" as illustrated in the Grand
Avenue redevelopment plan shall be provided for every one hundred (100) linear
feet of streetscape. It is recommended that the stones be clustered in groups
of at least three (3) stones amongst and between groups of shrubs to provide
mass and screening rather than be equally spaced along the streetscape length.
With city council approval at the site plan application, the developer can
defer installation of required streetscape elements or plantings to accommodate
changes in interim or future access drives.
   C.   Screening Of Negative Site Elements: Electrical transformers, trash
dumpsters, service areas and loading docks, heating, ventilation, air
conditioning, generators, utility meters, and other mechanical equipment which
is located on, besides or adjacent to any building or development shall be
visually screened from views from adjacent roadways, pedestrian paths, and
adjoining properties.
   D.   Vegetation Placement: Overstory trees and upright evergreen trees shall
not be permitted within public utility easements. The presence of utility
easements shall not provide a basis for noncompliance with landscaping
provisions found within this ordinance and within any applicable codes. The
placement of public utility easements within streetscapes and buffer parks is
discouraged due to the potential conflict between trees and the need to access
the lines for repair. (Ord. 2026, 4-21-2014)
098-14: SIGNAGE:
All proposed exterior signage requires the review and approval of a sign permit
by the city of West Des Moines. All signage shall reinforce the aesthetic
concept as depicted by the precedent images in exhibit C on file in the city
and Grand Avenue redevelopment district plan and shall comply with title 9,
chapter 18 of the city code except as modified herein or within the Grand
Avenue redevelopment plan. Sign design and construction not typically allowed
by code may be permitted by the sign administrator if it is deemed to carry and
reinforce the design intent of the Val-Gate district. Allowance of alternate
design and construction measures shall only be allowed if there is no other
code compliant manner in which to create the sign. The use of LED illumination
for signage emulating "neon style" lighting and relevant to the architectural
theme of the district may be allowed with the approval of the development,
planning and inspection manager. The following additional modifications to
title 9, chapter 18 of the city code are hereby made:
   A.   Business Identification Signs:
      1.   Business identification signs, including wall, ground monument, pole
(pylon), roof, and projecting signs shall be consistent with and reinforce the
design intent of the redevelopment plan.
      2.   Roof signs shall be permitted in lieu of or as part of the allowable
wall or canopy signage for the development. For the primary building, said sign
must be comprised of individual letters with the letters extending above the
primary building roof no higher than seven feet (7') from the top of the
primary roof parapet. A roof sign associated with the canopy may be placed
entirely above the canopy as long as it is deemed to be part of an
architectural element which carries and reinforces the design intent of the
Val-Gate district. Painted roof signs shall not be allowed.
      3.   Ground monument signs shall be allowed in accordance with city code
for the CMC district with the following exceptions:
         a.   The main sign structure shall not exceed thirty five (35) square
feet and five feet (5') in height. Up to an additional two feet (2') of height
shall be allowed for architectural elements.
         b.   Signs shall be set back from the PUD boundaries so as to not
block pedestrian and vehicular visibility at intersections.
      4.   Illuminated banding (LED) may be allowed on the primary structure,
canopy and monument signs if it is approved as part of the architectural
design.
      5.   Illuminated business identification signs shall be turned off no
later than one hour after the last retail or restaurant establishment in the
Grand Avenue redevelopment plan area closes. (Ord. 2026, 4-21-2014)
098-15: LIGHTING:
Consistent with the redevelopment plan, the Fareway PUD shall incorporate a
variety of light fixtures ranging from parking lot lights and roadway fixtures
to pedestrian pathway lights. Lighting shall be IDA dark sky compliant unless
otherwise approved by the city of West Des Moines. Included within section 6 of
the Grand Avenue redevelopment plan are design specifications and requirements
along with sketches and images of the intended lighting series. All lighting
within the PUD area shall abide by these standards and be consistent in
character to that illustrated in the Grand Avenue redevelopment plan and the
Val-Gate district's iconic design intent.
As a part of the review of each site plan, a photometric plan must be
submitted. During the review, the applicant must demonstrate how lighting will
not adversely affect adjoining properties or patrons utilizing the public
street system. Special care must be given to ensure excess light does not spill
onto properties adjacent to, but not part of, the Val-Gate district.
The following general guidelines shall be in addition to the specific
regulations stated within the Grand Avenue redevelopment plan regulations:
   A.   Streetlights: The developer of the Fareway PUD shall enter into an
agreement with the city stating that the developer will install steel pole
streetlights along Grand Avenue in accordance with a plan provided by Mid
American Energy or its successors at such time that Grand Avenue is widened. In
addition, the developer shall enter into an agreement with the city stating
that the developer will install steel pole streetlights along 4th Street and
Ashworth Road at such time that the overhead power is placed underground. The
developer shall execute an agreement and waiver for the future installation of
these streetlights at the time of site plan development permit approval.
   B.   Parking Luminaries: Fixtures shall be of a design to direct light
downward and shall not have bulbs which are exposed and extend below the frame
of the light fixture. Said fixtures shall not exceed thirty five feet (35') in
height as measured from the ground to the top of the light structure. Fixtures
used shall be consistent throughout the Fareway PUD.
   C.   Building Lighting: No wall packs, or floodlighting without shields to
direct the light to its intended target are allowed. In addition to cutoff
fixtures, particular attention shall be given to eliminate hot spots and light
glare. Decorative building lighting is allowed and will be reviewed as part of
the site plan for Fareway.
   D.   Pedestrian Pathways: Bollard or pole lighting shall be implemented
along pedestrian pathways if not sufficiently lighted by the parking
luminaries. Pole lights shall not exceed fourteen feet (14') as measured from
the ground to the top of the light fixture. (Ord. 2026, 4-21-2014)
098-16: ARCHITECTURE:
Included within the Grand Avenue redevelopment plan is indication of the
architectural style and illustrative examples of the architectural concepts
which shall serve to guide the design of all buildings within the Fareway PUD.
All buildings in the PUD shall reinforce the concept depicted in the Grand
Avenue redevelopment plan. Specific architecture for all buildings shall be
evaluated as part of the site plan review and approval process.
All buildings within the Fareway PUD shall accommodate the following in
building design:
   A.   Form And Scale: Buildings should reinforce the aesthetic concept as
depicted by the precedent images in exhibit D on file in the city. Buildings
shall be designed to relate specifically to the pedestrian in scale and
variety. The following techniques should be used to meet this objective:
      1.   Corporate architecture shall be prohibited except as permissible by
the Grand Avenue redevelopment plan in that it reinforces the iconic imagery
desired for the Val-Gate district.
      2.   Buildings shall be organized to create a logical balance and
relationship with the site, open spaces and circulation.
      3.   Efforts shall be made to locate the buildings close to the street
with off street parking behind or to the side of the building.
      4.   The building's design should meet context and site objectives such
as providing gateways, creating linkages and framing or terminating views.
      5.   Variation in building height, mass and roof forms shall be provided
while still maintaining an overall building continuity.
      6.   Shifts in building planes/facades and variation in exterior
materials shall be incorporated to minimize long expanses of wall.
      7.   Variation in materials, material modules, expressed joints,
textures, colors and details should be used to break up the mass of the
buildings.
      8.   Variation in horizontal planes through the use of materials, color
and projecting forms should be implemented to signify an entry and/or protect
the pedestrian.
      9.   Ground floor retail areas should provide the maximum possible
glazing toward sidewalks to provide pedestrians with visual interest.
      10.   A building's roof form and related details/materials are an
integral part of the architectural design aesthetic. Roofs should not be
designed as attention getting devices related to the reinforcement of signage
or as an identifiable corporate image unless said identification is in keeping
with the Grand Avenue redevelopment plan aesthetic.
   B.   Material Quality And Detail: All sides to each building are to receive
high quality materials and finishes (360 degree architectural treatment). There
are no "backs" to a building. Materials should be durable, economically
maintained and of a quality that will maintain their appearance over a
prolonged time.
      1.   Primary building materials should include, but are not limited to,
glass, steel, architectural concrete, natural wood, stone, brick and
architectural metals.
      2.   The following materials shall not be used for cladding unless
specifically approved by the city of West Des Moines as part of the
architectural elevations:
         a.   EIFS or synthetic stucco.
         b.   Concrete masonry units.
         c.   Tilt-up precast concrete systems that are structural in
appearance.
         d.   Materials that are intended for interior use.
      3.   Changes in materials should occur at either inside corners or where
a detail is drawn to specifically accommodate a transition. Stone and brick
materials should wrap corners several feet in order to provide authenticity to
the materials. (Ord. 2026, 4-21-2014)
098-17: BULK REGULATIONS:
   A.   Lot Size: No minimum lot size shall be required.
   B.   Building Height: The height of a building shall conform to the limits
prescribed by the zoning code for the CMC district unless otherwise
specifically approved by the city council after a recommendation from the plan
and zoning commission that the additional height is necessary and appropriate
to achieve an architectural intent consistent with the goals of the Grand
Avenue redevelopment plan.
Canopies shall provide a minimum clearance of fourteen feet (14') if located
over vehicle circulation areas. Canopy heights greater than twenty feet (20')
shall only be allowed if the design of the canopy is deemed to carry and
reinforce the design intent of the Val-Gate district.
   C.   Building Setbacks:
      1.   Unless otherwise specifically stated, setbacks shall be measured
from the property line or ultimate street right of way line, whichever is more
restrictive.
      2.   Building setbacks are to the main plane of the building excluding
canopies and pedestrian arcades. It is encouraged that buildings should be
pushed forward to locate adjacent to public and private streets and that
parking should be located to the rear of buildings. Therefore:
         a.   Buildings shall be set back a minimum of fifteen feet (15') from
public streets.
         b.   The closest element of a building located adjacent to a private
street shall be no less than ten feet (10') from the back of curb.
         c.   Nothing herein, however, shall be construed as permitting the
location of a building that will interfere with pedestrian or vehicle
visibility at an intersection, sidewalks, trails, plazas, or maintenance of
utilities.
      3.   A minimum thirty foot (30') building separation shall be maintained
between buildings within the PUD as measured to the closest points of buildings
including canopies, unless said buildings are physically connected or otherwise
designed and constructed in accordance with applicable building and fire codes
to allow for less of a separation distance.
      4.   Dumpster enclosures shall be located no closer than ten feet (10')
from any ultimate right of way for a public street and a minimum of five feet
(5') from all other parcel boundaries. Dumpsters should be opaquely screened
from visibility from any public street. Whenever possible, dumpsters should be
located and designed as an extension of the primary building. Freestanding
dumpster enclosures should be located and landscaped to blend with the
landscape and minimize their presence. Building materials for dumpster
enclosures shall be consistent with the primary building materials unless in
doing so attention is drawn to the enclosure. (Ord. 2026, 4-21-2014)
098-18: VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES:
Any person who violates the provisions of this ordinance upon conviction shall
be punished as set forth in section 1-4-1 of the city code. (Ord. 2026, 4-21-
2014)
098-99: LEGISLATIVE HISTORY:
Ord. 2026, 4-21-2014.
PUD #99
DENTON
SECTION:
099-01: Legal Description
099-02: Required Plans
099-03: Requirements
099-04: Landscaping
099-05: Open Space And Plaza Areas
099-06: Architecture
099-07: Signage
099-08: Pedestrian Orientation And Connection
099-09: Land Use Design Criteria
099-10: All Areas To Be Platted
099-11: Stormwater Management
099-12: Sanitary Sewer Service And Water Main Extensions
099-13: Vehicle Trip Allocations
099-14: Street Right Of Way
099-15: Access Drives And Traffic Signals
099-16: Streetlights
099-17: Violations And Penalties
099-99: Legislative History
099-01: LEGAL DESCRIPTION:
The legal description of Denton is as follows:
Beginning at a point 660.6 feet north of the southeast corner of section 13,
township 78 north, range 26, west of the 5th P.M., West Des Moines, Dallas
County, Iowa, thence westerly 1320 feet to a point 659.2 feet from the south
line of the southeast quarter of said section, thence north 329.6 feet on a
line parallel to and 1320.0 feet distant from the east line of said southeast
quarter, thence easterly 1320.0 feet to a point 990.9 feet from the south line
of the southeast quarter of said section, thence south 330.0 feet to the point
of beginning, subject to established highways except a parcel of land in
southeast quarter southeast quarter of said section 13, described as follows:
commencing at the east quarter corner of section 13, thence south along the
east line of said section 13, (on an assumed bearing of south 0 degrees 00
minutes) 1,811.65 feet, to the point of beginning; thence south 83 degrees 15
minutes 36 seconds west, 1,320.0 feet; thence south 0 degrees 00 minutes 169.8
feet; thence north 83 degrees 16 minutes 30 seconds east 1320.0 feet; thence
north 0 degrees 00 minutes 170.15 feet to the point of beginning; and except
land deeded to the city of West Des Moines, Iowa and recorded in book 2011,
page 2716.
And
A parcel of land in the southeast quarter of the southeast quarter (SE1/4 SE 1/
4) of section 13, township 78 north, range 26 west of the 5th P.M., West Des
Moines, Dallas County, Iowa, described as follows: Commencing at the east
quarter corner of section 13-78-26, thence south along the east line of said
section 13 (on an assumed bearing of south 0 degrees 00 minutes), 1,811.65
feet, to the point of beginning; thence south 83 degrees 15 minutes 36 seconds
west, 1,320.0 feet; thence south 0 degrees 00 minutes, 169.8 feet; thence north
83 degrees 16 minutes 30 seconds east 1,320.0 feet; thence north 0 degrees 00
minutes 170.15 feet to the point of beginning. Dallas County, Iowa.
(Ord. 2035, 5-19-2014)
099-02: REQUIRED PLANS:
The following plans shall be required as a part of the processing of any
development application for any property within the Denton specific plan.
   A.   Area Development Plan: An area development plan must be approved by the
city council prior to, or in conjunction with, the review of the specific plan
for any property within said specific plan. No change to the area development
plan shall be made without approval from the appropriate reviewing bodies. An
area development plan is a plan that identifies infrastructure, planning units,
major street patterns, drainage and detention, utilities, shared public spaces,
vehicular traffic impacts, proposed densities, and land use assumptions. It is
intended to promote the communication and cooperation between adjacent property
owners and developers to encourage cohesive, unified development, and identify
the anticipated phasing of construction, and parties involved.
On file in the city is the city council approved area development plan (exhibit
A) for this property which is labeled as area 3 on the map identifying the area
development plans within the town center overlay district guidelines as adopted
by the West Des Moines city council.
   B.   Specific Plan: A specific plan identifies detailed development criteria
for each planning unit identified in the area development plan. The specific
plan will conform to the general intent of the area development plan and the
town center overlay district guidelines and shall be adopted by the city
council by ordinance. This ordinance shall constitute the specific plan for the
Denton development. On file in the city and made a part of this rezoning is a
specific plan map for the Denton property (exhibit B). It is recognized that at
the time of development, modifications and changes to that shown on the map may
be necessary due to changes in building footprints or details; however, the
intent is that the major elements and uses indicated in the specific plan
should be adhered to and may not be altered without the approval of the city
council. Where the specific plan map and specific plan language conflict, the
specific plan language shall prevail.
   C.   Development Applications: Overlay district site plans (OSP) for parcels
within the Denton specific plan must meet the intent of the approved specific
plan and shall be submitted to the city of West Des Moines for review and
approval prior to the development of any portion of the property. Site plans
for permitted (P) land uses which meet the design intent of the specific plan
as determined by development planning and inspection manager, will be subject
to administrative review and approval by the development planning and
inspection manager. A one week review and comment period by each and all
available members of the plan and zoning commission and city council shall
precede the administrative approval. If upon review, two (2) or more members of
the city council, plan and zoning commission, or a combination thereof request
such; or if the development planning and inspection manager deems the proposed
site plan is not in compliance with the approved specific plan or is
potentially controversial, the site plan will be processed through the
traditional full site plan review and approval process. Site plans for
permitted conditional uses (Pc) as defined in the city code, unless otherwise
amended within this ordinance, shall be approved by the appropriate review
body. At the discretion of the development and planning inspection manager, an
amendment to the Denton specific plan ordinance may be required to bring
consistency between the ordinance and site plan development proposed. (Ord.
2035, 5-19-2014)
099-03: REQUIREMENTS:
Requirements for all parcels within the Denton specific plan:
   A.   Walkways: Private walkways adjacent to buildings or plaza areas shall
be designed to be wide enough to accommodate outdoor seating areas for
pedestrian street furniture, amenities such as planter pots and trash
receptacles and trees and other landscaping. Walkways adjacent to parking shall
be a minimum of six feet (6') in width to allow for vehicle bumper overhang and
adequate width for pedestrian movement.
   B.   Outdoor Patios: Commercial establishments that have an outdoor patio
for the consumption of alcoholic beverages are required to provide a definable
boundary for the "private" portion of the patio in which consumption is
allowed. In addition, each establishment is required to implement a means to
control access to the patio from the exterior or "public" areas. The barrier
specifications shall be determined at the review of the development application
and may include, but are not limited to, fencing, landscaping and signage.
   C.   Screening: Loading areas, undesirable building elements, transformers,
HVAC and trash enclosures shall be screened in accordance with city code.
Screening materials shall be consistent with that used on the primary
structure. Roof mounted HVAC screening shall be incorporated into the design of
the building through the use of raised parapets, screening walls or other
acceptable solutions as identified during the review of the site plan. Whenever
possible, trash enclosures should be designed as an extension of the building
rather than freestanding elements.
   D.   Cart Corrals: Shall be permanent fixtures and constructed with masonry,
stone or block. No signage identifying a tenant or products shall be located on
the cart corrals. Cart corrals shall be anchored to the ground to prevent
movement and misalignment due to vehicle and maintenance equipment hitting the
corral.
   E.   Street Furniture: On file in the city are representations of the street
furniture that when required shall be installed in the pedestrian use areas
throughout the Denton development. Although deviations from the illustrations
are permissible, the street furniture is intended to act as a unifying element
within the overall Denton development.
   F.   Lot Size: Multiple buildings on one lot and lots less than the minimum
square footage/acre required by code for the designated zoning parcel shall be
considered acceptable if supported by appropriate access easements and if
approved by the appropriate approval body as part of an overlay district site
plan, permitted conditional use permit or subdivision plat.
   G.   Buffer Parks: Buffer screening between districts or parcels and uses
shall not be required as set forth in section 9-19-8 of the city code, except
as noted otherwise in this ordinance.
   H.   Building Setbacks: Unless otherwise stated or required to be larger due
to buffering requirements, primary and accessory building setbacks from the
perimeter and interior property lines of the Denton specific plan area shall be
twenty five feet (25'). Residential and commercial buildings greater than three
(3) stories shall be set back an additional ten feet (10') for every additional
story (12 feet of height). If site layout is designed to meet the intent of the
overlay district through the creation of a street presence, primary buildings
may intermittently encroach into this setback; however, in no case shall any
part of the building be located less than twenty feet (20') from the property
line.
   I.   Height Restrictions: Unless otherwise noted in this ordinance, the
height of a building will conform to the standard zoning provisions for that
district, with the exception of building elements such as bell towers, clock
towers or other vertical architectural elements. These elements may exceed
height restrictions, as determined by the development planning and inspection
manager.
   J.   Lighting Standards: It is intended that lighting for each development
within the Denton specific plan area shall be designed to provide a safe
environment, yet mitigate light pollution onto adjoining properties. During the
design review of each building, the applicant must demonstrate how lighting
will not adversely affect the adjoining properties.
      1.   Light fixtures shall be limited to a maximum of twenty five feet
(25') in height as measured from the grade to the top of the fixture.
      2.   All lights shall be cutoff fixtures, no wall pack without shields to
direct the light to the intended target or floodlighting is allowed.
      3.   As part of the review of each site plan, a photometric plan must be
submitted. At the time of application, the plan shall demonstrate that light
levels fall at or below one foot-candle at the perimeter of the development
and, the interior property line of adjoining parcels unless shared parking
fields or another component of development common to the parcels justifies
otherwise or if adjacent to a public street in which public streetlights are
installed adjacent to the property.
      4.   Canopy lighting used for drive-ups must use a recessed or flush
lighting fixture so that no part of the fixture is visible from the street.
      5.   In addition to cutoff fixtures, particular attention shall be given
to eliminate hot spots or light glare. To achieve this additional measures may
include, but are not limited to, lowering parking lot light levels after
business hours, turning off lights not necessary for security purposes and use
of landscaping for light screening.
   K.   Parking Requirements: All parking areas shall be landscaped to screen
visibility thereof from public rights of way or from any adjoining property
outside the Denton development through the use of predominately evergreen plant
materials and/or earthen berming and shall be reviewed at the time of review of
the site plan for the development of the parcel.
      1.   The location of parking lots along streets shall be discouraged
unless adequate visual screening is provided to mitigate views thereof.
      2.   Parking lots shall be set back a minimum of twenty five feet (25')
from public streets and a minimum of fifteen feet (15') from property
boundaries unless part of a shared parking arrangement.
      3.   Minimum parking stall measurements and drive aisle widths shall
conform to title 9, chapter 15 of the city code.
      4.   Number of stalls:
         a.   With the exception of restaurants, all retail and office parcels
must comply with a minimum requirement of one space per three hundred (300)
square feet of gross floor area (gfa).
         b.   Parking ratios for restaurants (sit down and fast food) shall
provide within the lot a minimum of one space per two hundred (200) square feet
of gross floor area (gfa).
         c.   Minimum parking for residential uses shall be as follows:
            (1)   Senior housing (SIC 805): One and one-half (1.5) stalls per
unit. At least one covered parking stall shall be provided for each dwelling
unit.
            (2)   All other multi-family dwelling developments shall provide
parking in accordance with section 9-15-7 of the city code.
      5.   For any residential dwelling intended as owner occupied and/or for
which a condominium regime is established, a minimum of one of the required
spaces for each unit shall be as an enclosed parking space. This parking space
shall be a minimum of nineteen feet by nine feet (19' x 9') and may be designed
as a freestanding garage, attached garage or multiple garage spaces within an
enclosure. A specific covered parking space shall be designated for and legally
tied to each dwelling unit. The covered space must be for the exclusive use of
the occupant of the dwelling unit and cannot be rented or purchased by a third
party, even if the dwelling unit is rented. (Ord. 2035, 5-19-2014)
099-04: LANDSCAPING:
Landscaping required for one purpose is in addition to landscaping required for
other purposes (i.e., streetscape landscaping is in addition to landscaping
required for visual screening of parking, open space, parking lot, etc.).
   A.   Streetscaping: Along South 60th Street, streetscape landscaping shall
be provided within the first twenty five feet (25') parallel to the roadway as
measured from the ultimate street right of way line.
This streetscape landscaping is intended to provide for the enhancement of the
travelways. Buildings may intermittently encroach into the landscaped area;
however parking lots or accessory structures may not. The plantings shall be
installed with the development of the property. Landscaping standards are as
follows:
      1.   To calculate the number of required plants, divide the total linear
feet of street frontage by thirty (30). For every thirty feet (30'), one tree
and two (2) shrubs shall be required. The landscaping may be arranged in
massing or in a linear streetscape or a combination thereof.
      2.   No substitutions for trees may be allowed.
      3.   Alternative concepts that meet the intent of streetscape landscaping
may be allowed at the discretion of the development planning and inspection
manager.
   B.   Parking Lot/Vehicle Use Area Landscaping: The intent of this section is
to encourage extensive landscaping within parking lot areas, which tend to have
the greatest negative impact on developments, and to provide breaks in what
could be viewed as a "sea of parking". Whenever possible, a series of smaller
parking lots/areas separated by visible green areas shall be implemented in
lieu of one large parking expanse. Each area shall be landscaped and screened
from views from the public streets and adjacent properties which are not part
of the Denton development. Parking lots shall be designed to function not only
in the interest of accommodating automobiles, but also in the interest of
promoting safe pedestrian movement. The following parking lot landscaping
standards are in addition to the required buffer park, streetscape or plaza
landscaping requirements:
      1.   Landscape islands shall be located at the terminus end of parking
rows. In addition, landscape islands shall be placed, at a minimum, every
eighteen (18) stalls within a row of parking. Landscaped islands shall be, at a
minimum, ten feet (10') wide and thirty six feet (36') in length for dual
parking rows or a minimum of ten feet (10') wide and eighteen feet (18') in
width for single rows.
      2.   Landscaped pods (tree diamonds) within a row of parking shall be
evenly spaced between landscape islands, however, shall be spaced no farther
than nine (9) parking stalls from another landscaped pod or landscaped island.
Landscaped pods shall measure no less than six feet (6') to back of curb in
each direction.
      3.   A minimum of one overstory tree shall be located in each nine foot
by eighteen foot (9' x 18') island area and every tree pod (tree diamond). In
addition, for every twelve (12) parking stalls, two (2) shrubs or a twenty (20)
square foot massing of perennials or ornamental grasses shall be located within
the islands or pods within the parking area. If ornamental grasses are
implemented, it is encouraged to implement a variety that is a minimum of three
feet (3') in height so that the grasses are visible amongst the vehicles.
      4.   Parking lots, drive lanes and loading areas visible from the public
street and adjacent properties outside of the Denton development shall provide
appropriate screening through the use of any of the following:
         a.   Earthen berms which are generally three feet (3') or higher in
conjunction with implementation of vegetation, except where visibility at
intersections may be impacted.
         b.   Landscape walls:
            (1)   Freestanding walls implemented for screening measures shall
be treated to a finished state on both sides of the wall.
            (2)   Walls constructed for the retainment of soil which are
greater than four feet (4') in height must be designed by an individual
knowledgeable and certified in structural engineering. Walls over four feet
(4') shall have one and one-half feet (11/2') of horizontal terraces for every
two feet (2') of exposed vertical wall face. Exceptions to this requirement may
be granted by the development planning and inspection manager for unusual
situations and to preserve existing vegetation or landscape features.
            (3)   Walls may be brick, individual decorative modular wall stone,
or natural stacked wall or field stone. Walls composed of landscape timbers or
other wood products are not desired due to the deterioration potential of the
material. With approval by the development planning and inspection manager,
wood walls or other material may be used in areas where views of the wall will
be minimal.
            (4)   Vegetation shall be planted along all types of walls to
soften the visual impact, visually break up long expanses of the wall and to
visually anchor it to the site.
         c.   Screening through the implementation of predominately evergreen
materials which reach a minimum of three feet (3') in height. Vegetation
implemented for screening purposes shall be implemented at a size that is
larger than normal in order to accomplish immediate screening. (Ord. 2035, 5-
19-2014)
099-05: OPEN SPACE AND PLAZA AREAS:
The incorporation of open space/plaza areas is intended to provide a variety of
large and small rest areas for the residents, casual shopper, patrons waiting
for services, break areas for employees, and activity or gathering spaces for
planned development events.
   A.   Open Space Requirements: Each site plan shall include at least one
plaza, courtyard, or patio space which provides opportunities for pedestrians
through activity areas, sidewalk cafes, and/or seating. The size of the outdoor
space shall be proportional, as determined by the development planning and
inspection manager, to the size of the building(s) and the intended use(s). If,
during the review of the development application, it is determined that several
buildings could share in the creation of a plaza space, a detailed agreement as
to the responsibilities of the applicants must be submitted. At the review of
the site plan, the applicant must demonstrate how the open space/plaza area
design meets the following intents:
      1.   Creates spaces that allow for day, and if appropriate, evening
utilization by patrons and pedestrians;
      2.   Provides as many seating opportunities as possible through the
placement of seats or integration of raised planters (seat walls);
      3.   Implements the appropriate measures to optimize pedestrian comfort
(awnings, canopy trees, shade structures, location along building facades,
etc.);
      4.   Is a definable and inviting space;
      5.   Is separated from interaction with moving vehicles; and
      6.   Is visually pleasing and provides elements that enrich the space.
Elements shall include, but are not limited to, landscaping, alternate paving
materials and colors, artwork, fountains, flowers, banners, and children's play
environment. (Ord. 2035, 5-19-2014)
099-06: ARCHITECTURE:
The intent is to create building facades that are varied and articulated to
provide visual interest.
   A.   Design: The following should be considered in the design of each
building within the Denton development:
      1.   There are no "backs" of buildings; all buildings shall have three
hundred sixty degree (360°) architecture. All sides of all buildings should be
treated with the same level of architectural style and detail. Particular
attention shall be paid to transitioning between the residential and commercial
uses.
      2.   Entrances into buildings should be easily identified through the use
of building design and detailing. Projected or recessed entryways, higher
rooflines, awnings or changes in building material are examples that can create
this effect.
      3.   Buildings should be proportioned and defined by clear facade
elements such as a base, middle, and top.
      4.   Buildings shall implement variation in the building planes and
footprints in order to break up otherwise long expanses and to provide visual
interest. Materials should change with the change in building planes and a
variety of complementary building materials should be implemented; however, all
material should keep within the chosen theme.
      5.   Fenestration (door and window openings) shall be sized to the scale
of the building and detailed appropriately.
      6.   Trim and structural elements such as posts or columns shall be sized
to the scale of the building and detailed appropriately to the theme. Parapets
and other building elements which extend above rooflines shall be of adequate
depth to provide visual structural integrity. The backs of any visible
architectural element shall be treated to a finished state which blends with
the surrounding facade rather than left in a structural state.
      7.   Reflective glass or mirrored glass is discouraged. Efforts should be
made to use clear glass on storefronts, windows and doors to promote the
linkage of the interior and exterior of buildings.
      8.   The appropriate measure(s) to fully screen undesirable building
elements, mechanical (both ground and rooftop mounted) and electrical
equipment, including electrical transformers and meters shall be implemented.
When possible and feasible, screening measures shall be incorporated into the
building architecture through the use of wing walls, raised parapets, etc.
      9.   Corporate franchise design, where the building functions as a
trademark is strongly discouraged. Elements of the corporate prototype shall be
permissible only if the building design also incorporates significant
architectural elements which are compatible with and carry the defined theme of
the Denton development.
   B.   Materials: All buildings within the Denton development shall provide a
strong visual presence of hard materials through the use of appropriate amount
of brick, acceptable stone or masonry incorporated into the building
architecture on all sides of the structure. Masonry materials shall be
implemented in such a manner as to give the appearance of three-dimensional
elements and to provide authenticity to the materials. Appropriate stone sills
and headers shall be implemented to provide authenticity to the materials and
construction. Smooth faced concrete block, tilt-up concrete panels, or
prefabricated steel panels are prohibited as the predominant exterior building
materials unless it is determined by the development planning and inspection
manager that the overall building design meets the intent of the specific plan.
   C.   Areas A And C: In addition to the above stated design criteria, the
following shall apply specifically to residential developed in areas A and C.
      1.   Garages or accessory structures should incorporate architectural
details of the primary building with the use of roof forms, windows, doors and
other facade detailing. Garages visible from public streets or properties
outside of but adjacent to the Denton development must be architecturally
enhanced to break up the mass and disguise their purpose through the use of
materials, additional roof peaks, incorporation of windows, etc.
   D.   Area B: Area B is accessed through and visually appears as part of the
adjoining Galleria development, thus, a "quasi- Mediterranean" architectural
design style consistent with the adjoining Galleria development shall be
implemented for buildings within this area. All buildings within area B shall
execute this quasi-Mediterranean style through building design, types of
materials, colors implemented and other measures which are consistent and
complementary to other existing buildings within the surrounding Galleria
development area.
   E.   Canopies, Including Gas: Pump stations and other drive-through canopies
must be designed to incorporate the building's architecture through the use of
similar building materials, roof design and color, including the application of
brick or stone to canopy support columns. Canopies should be designed as an
extension of the building rather than an added on element. (Ord. 2035, 5-19-
2014)
099-07: SIGNAGE:
If not specifically addressed within this ordinance, the regulations and
provisions set forth in title 9, chapter 18, "Signs", of the city code for the
regional commercial (RC) and medium density residential (RM) districts, as
specified for the parcel shall govern sign design and placement.
   A.   Wall Signage:
      1.   Area A may locate wall signage in relationship to the primary
entrance only.
      2.   Buildings within area B may be allowed wall signage. Sign square
footage allowances shall be calculated based on one square foot of signage per
one linear foot of tenant frontage which contains a public entrance.
      3.   Area C shall not be allowed any wall signage.
   B.   Ground Monument Signs:
      1.   Area A shall be allowed one ground monument sign at each entrance.
The sign size, design, copy area, and setback shall be in accordance with city
code.
      2.   Area B shall be allowed one ground monument sign at the western
entrance into the site. Area B's sign may be located within five feet (5') of
the northern property line adjacent to the western drive access. The sign
structures shall not exceed five feet (5') in height and a maximum of thirty
five (35) square feet. Multiple tenants may be located on the sign. Location of
the sign shall not impede visibility of traffic along the drive or at the
intersection with the main vehicle drive along the south end of the Galleria
development.
      3.   Area C shall be allowed one ground monument sign along the entrance
drive if area C is developed independently of the parcel to the south. Sign
shall be set back a minimum of ten feet (10') from the property line and shall
not obstruct vision triangles. Sign shall abide by city code regulations for
size, design, and copy restrictions.
      4.   All ground signs shall have a solid noticeable base and/or column
element comprised of brick or stone.
      5.   The tenant copy area shall be comprised of individually attached
letters or a panel sign sized and treated (opaque vinyl or router face) to
minimize the amount of sign area that illuminates and to present the appearance
of individual letters.
      6.   Signs shall not block pedestrian and vehicular visibility at
intersections.
      7.   Vegetated landscape beds shall be incorporated around the base of
all freestanding signs in a size proportionate to the overall size of the sign,
as determined by the sign administrator. No additional mounding of soil or
earthen berming shall be allowed to elevate the sign except as required as part
of a site plan for screening purposes (berms). In situations in which the base
of the sign would be at an elevation lower than the adjoining street, soil may
be added to raise the sign base elevation to that equal to, but no higher than,
the adjoining street pavement.
      8.   If a sign is to be placed in a utility easement, the owner of the
property upon which the sign is placed shall execute an indemnification-hold
harmless agreement releasing the city of any responsibility for damages,
repairs, removal or reinstallation of any sign(s) located within a public
utility easement. (Ord. 2035, 5-19-2014)
099-08: PEDESTRIAN ORIENTATION AND CONNECTION:
Pedestrian access shall be provided to adjoining properties and the city's
public sidewalk and trail network. As necessary, pedestrian travelways should
be separated from vehicular traffic with landscaping, bollards, special paving,
or any other feature which identifies the pedestrian area. To further promote a
higher level of pedestrian awareness, the use of alternate paving materials to
designate pedestrian walkways from vehicular use areas and travel lanes shall
be required. (Ord. 2035, 5-19-2014)
099-09: LAND USE DESIGN CRITERIA:
In addition to the general conditions as stated herewithin, and subject to the
limitations imposed by the vehicle trip allocation table in section 099-13 of
this ordinance, the following land use design criteria shall apply to the areas
as designated on the specific plan map on file in the city. The specific plan
map on file with the city delineates parcels of the specific plan as A through
C. The following development standards and use regulations shall apply to the
respective development parcels:
   A.   Parcels A And C: The use regulations and provisions set forth in title
9 of the city code for medium density residential district (RM-12) as permitted
(P) or permitted conditionally shall apply to any development proposal for all
property within these parcels as shown on the specific plan map, unless
otherwise noted in this ordinance.
      1.   Land Uses:
         a.   All permitted (P) uses allowed per zoning unless otherwise
modified within this ordinance shall be permitted with the approval of the
appropriate review body.
         b.   All permitted conditional (Pc) uses allowed per zoning unless
otherwise modified within this ordinance may be allowed with the approval of
the appropriate review body.
         c.   The following permitted (P) and permitted conditional (Pc) land
uses shall be prohibited in areas A and C:
 
SIC 7041 Organization hotels and lodging on a membership basis.
SIC 8351 Child and daycare services which are not ancillary to primary use.
SIC 01   Agricultural production - crops.
SIC 7991 Physical fitness facilities which are not ancillary to primary use and
         intended for residents within the building.
SIC 7997 Membership sports and recreation clubs.
All uses identified in section 9-5-8, tables 5.5, 5.6, and 5.7 of the city
code.
 
      2.   Density:
         a.   Parcels A and C shall be allowed a maximum density of twelve (12)
dwelling units per acre including that area that is dedicated for public street
rights of way.
            (1)   Parcel A shall not exceed sixty one (61) dwelling units. Said
units shall be dedicated to senior housing (SIC 805) unless off street parking
within the site is provided in accordance with the following:
   (A) 1.5 spaces per unit for each efficiency apartment;
   (B) 2.0 spaces per unit for each one or two (2) bedroom units;
   (C) 2.5 spaces per unit for each three plus (3+) bedroom units;
   (D) One space per three hundred (300) square feet gfa for lease management
offices; and
   (E) One space per one hundred (100) square feet gfa for a building or
portion of building designated for multipurpose recreational uses.
            (2)   Parcel C shall not exceed ten (10) dwelling units.
      3.   Area C: Unless otherwise waived by the property owner, if a single-
family dwelling still exists on the property immediately to the south of area C
when area C develops, zoning district compatibility and transitioning shall be
provided as specified in subsection 9-5-7C of the city code.
   B.   Parcel B:
      1.   Land Uses: Uses within this parcel shall be those set forth in title
9 of the city code for regional commercial (RC) district as permitted or
permitted conditionally except as modified below:
         a.   All permitted (P) uses allowed per zoning unless otherwise
modified within this ordinance shall be permitted with the approval of the
appropriate review body.
         b.   All permitted conditional (Pc) uses allowed per zoning unless
otherwise modified within this ordinance may be allowed with the approval of
the appropriate review body.
         c.   The following size and use limitations shall apply to the
following uses:
 
         Packing and crating: Intended for establishments which provide mail
SIC 4783 and package drop-off services to the general public and businesses on
         a small scale; therefore, shall not exceed three thousand (3,000)
         square feet gfa of occupancy space.
         Restaurants, including fast food with drive-throughs shall only be
         allowed if the total expected vehicle expected trip generation for
SIC 5812 average daily traffic, A.M. peak, and P.M. peak when all buildings
         within area B have been developed is less than or equal to the trip
         generation allocations indicated in section
         099-13 of this ordinance for area B.
 
         d.   The following permitted (P) and permitted conditional (Pc) land
uses shall be prohibited in area B:
SIC 01        Agriculture production - crops.
SIC 0752      Boarding services with kennels, no outside runs.
SIC 076       Farm labor and management services with outdoor facilities,
              equipment, and/or materials. Offices only shall be allowed.
SIC 0781      Landscape counseling and planning with outdoor facilities,
              equipment, and/or materials. Office only shall be allowed.
SIC 4522      Heliport/helistop.
SIC 48        Communications.
SIC 49        Electric, gas and sanitary services.
SIC 541       Convenience stores.
SIC 55        Automotive dealers and service stations.
SIC 5932      Pawnshops.
SIC 5999      Adult entertainment establishment (films, books, magazines,
              sexually oriented merchandise).
SIC 5999      Monument and tombstone stores.
SIC 6141      Personal credit institutions (including check and cash agencies
              and delayed deposit services businesses).
SIC 75        Automotive repair, services and parking, except SIC 7542.
SIC 7699      Recreational vehicle repair services and miscellaneous automotive
              repair services.
SIC 8063      Psychiatric hospitals.
SIC 8069-0100 Substance abuse hospitals.
SIC 8322-0400 Rehabilitation services.
SIC 8322-99xx Individual and family services, not elsewhere classified.
 
(Ord. 2035, 5-19-2014)
099-10: ALL AREAS TO BE PLATTED:
Prior to, or in conjunction with development or transfer of ownership of any
portion of the specific plan, said area shall be platted in accordance with the
city's subdivision ordinance to delineate within a plat the parcel to be
developed or sold separately or any portion thereof. Lots without public street
frontage in accordance with city code requirements and/or lots less than the
minimum square footage/acre required by code for the designated zoning parcel
shall be considered acceptable if supported by appropriate access easements and
if approved by the appropriate approval body as part of an overlay district
site plan, permitted conditional use permit or subdivision plat. (Ord. 2035, 5-
19-2014)
099-11: STORMWATER MANAGEMENT:
A master stormwater management plan for the entire development which governs
the overall stormwater management of the development shall be submitted to and
approved by the city of West Des Moines. Specific stormwater management plans
demonstrating compliance with the approved master stormwater management plan,
on file with the city, will be required with the development of each area of
the site and/or site plan. The specific stormwater plans shall be prepared at
the developer's expense, by a professional engineer licensed in the state of
Iowa. All specific stormwater management plans shall comply with the city's
applicable design standards for stormwater management existing at the time each
site plan is approved.
At the time of site plan approval, the owner of the site planned property shall
execute a stormwater management facility maintenance covenant and permanent
easement agreement. The agreement shall be binding on all subsequent owners of
land served by the facility. (Ord. 2035, 5-19-2014)
099-12: SANITARY SEWER SERVICE AND WATER MAIN EXTENSIONS:
The developer, their successors or assigns, if any, shall construct, at their
cost, all sanitary sewer service for service to the Denton specific plan area
during the time the Denton development is being developed as required by city
of West Des Moines subdivision ordinance and the Des Moines metro standards.
The developer, their successors or assigns, if any, shall construct, at their
cost, all water mains for water service to the Denton specific plan area as
required by West Des Moines Water Works during the time the Denton development
is being developed. This requirement includes water mains in the Denton
specific plan area and in street right of way adjacent to the Denton specific
plan. The size of all water mains shall be determined by water works. Water
mains shall be constructed along the entire street frontages of the Denton
specific plan.
Nothing in this ordinance shall be construed to prevent the developer, their
successors or assigns, if any, from entering into private agreement(s) as they
may desire to share the cost of the water mains. (Ord. 2035, 5-19-2014)
099-13: VEHICLE TRIP ALLOCATIONS:
A traffic analysis was completed in March 2014, which evaluated proposed uses
within the Denton development. The analysis indicates that the Denton
development as a whole is anticipated to generate one hundred (100) A.M. peak
hour trips, one hundred ninety nine (199) P.M. peak hour trips, and two
thousand five hundred sixteen (2,516) ADT. Based upon the traffic analysis, the
traffic allocation table below specifies the allowable traffic generation for
each area identified within the Denton development.
Development and redevelopment of each parcel and implementation of desired land
uses in the Denton development will be limited by the available number of trips
designated for each parcel as shown on the traffic allocation table, as well as
compliance with all applicable regulations within this ordinance or city code.
The traffic to be generated by each parcel within the Denton development must
be less than or equal to the traffic allocation shown on the traffic allocation
table for that parcel. The maximum traffic allocation shown on the traffic
allocation table shall be an entitlement to each area within the Denton
development. Traffic generation due to subsequent redevelopment, expansion or
change of use for any parcel within the Denton development shall not exceed the
maximum traffic allocation entitlement shown on the traffic allocation table.
Unless otherwise specified, the traffic allocation for each parcel shown on the
traffic allocation table shall not change.
   TRAFFIC ALLOCATION TABLE
 
                                           P.M. Peak  A.M. Peak  ADT Traffic
Specific Plan Area Anticipated Use         Traffic    Traffic    Allocation
                                           Allocation Allocation
A                  61 DU senior apartments 14         12         210
B                  Regional commercial     179        83         2,243
C                  10 DU medium density    6          5          63
                   residential
                  Total                   199        100        2,516
 
(Ord. 2035, 5-19-2014)
099-14: STREET RIGHT OF WAY:
All street rights of way required for South 60th Street will be required to be
conveyed prior to or in conjunction with the final platting of parcel A. Right
of way requirements for this portion of South 60th Street are anticipated to be
one hundred twenty feet (120') plus additional right of way necessary for turn
lanes. (Ord. 2035, 5-19-2014)
099-15: ACCESS DRIVES AND TRAFFIC SIGNALS:
The general location and type of access drives to parcels within the Denton
development are indicated on the specific plan map. Final locations and drive
configurations shall be reviewed and approved as part of a site specific
traffic analysis in conjunction with the site plan review for each lot.
The specific plan map indicates the ultimate intended types of accesses. A
temporary full access is indicated on South 60th Street, south of Mills Civic
Parkway at the common boundary of area A and the Galleria development.
This access location is temporary and will be closed in the future thus
restricting turn movements to right in/right out movement only. Timing of
closures shall be at such time that South 60th Street is improved to ultimate
design or at such time that the city determines the level of service or
frequency of accidents requires closure. Unless otherwise addressed as part of
the ultimate build for each roadway, permanent medians will be installed or
extended by the adjacent property owners to limit these locations to a right
in/right out turn movement only. Construction of the closure measures shall be
by and at the financial cost of the adjoining property owners or as otherwise
privately assigned. The design of the medians and subsequent modifications to
lane markings shall be approved by the city prior to construction. Completion
of the closure is to occur no later than three (3) months from notice from the
city, subject to weather conditions.
At such time that traffic warrants, signals may be located at the identified
full access points on both Stagecoach Drive and South 60th Street. The cost of
installing traffic signals as required shall be the responsibility of the
abutting property owners pursuant to the policies of the city.
Signage associated with access drives shall be procured and installed
consistent with the "Manual Of Uniform Traffic Control Devices (MUTCD)",
federal highway administration, 2009 edition. (Ord. 2035, 5-19-2014)
099-16: STREETLIGHTS:
The developer of the Denton development shall be responsible for the
installation of all streetlights on all public streets abutting the Denton
specific plan area. The developer will be required at the time of platting to
provide the necessary agreement and payment to Mid American Energy for the
installation of streetlights adjacent to the parcels being platted.
Installation of the streetlights shall occur in conjunction with development of
each respective parcel or sooner if so desired by the applicant. (Ord. 2035, 5-
19-2014)
099-17: VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES:
Any person who violates the provisions of this ordinance upon conviction shall
be punished as set forth in section 1-4-1 of the city code of the city of West
Des Moines, Iowa. (Ord. 2035, 5-19-2014)
099-99: LEGISLATIVE HISTORY:
Ord. 2035, 5-19-2014.
PUD #100
KINGS LANDING
SECTION:
100-01: Legal Description
100-02: Sketch Plan
100-03: Required Plans
100-04: Intent Of The Kings Landing PUD
100-05: Conditions
100-06: Park Land Dedication
100-07: Master Property Owners' Association
100-08: Landscaping
100-09: Architecture
100-10: Land Use Design Criteria
100-11: Signage Regulation
100-12: Stormwater Management
100-13: Public Street Improvements And Right Of Way Dedication
100-14: Traffic Reports
100-99: Legislative History
100-01: LEGAL DESCRIPTION:
The legal description of Kings Landing is as follows:
A part of the northwest quarter of the northwest quarter of section 22,
township 78 north, range 26 west of the fifth principal meridian, in the city
of West Des Moines, Dallas County, Iowa and more particularly described as
follows:
Beginning at the northeast corner of said northwest quarter of the northwest
quarter; thence south 00°35'48" west along the east line of said northwest
quarter of the northwest quarter, 1320.35 feet to the southeast corner of said
northwest quarter of the northwest quarter; thence south 84°20'48" west along
the south line of said northwest quarter of the northwest quarter, 103.91 feet;
thence north 25°00'00" west, 400.82 feet; thence north 60°09'42" east, 136.55
feet; thence north 18°28'11" east, 63.75 feet; thence north 25°14'15" west,
250.00 feet; thence north 51°21'01" west, 312.74 feet; thence north 00°00'00"
east, 50.00 feet; thence north 56°59'52" east, 224.37 feet; thence north
00°35'48" east, 54.00 feet; thence north 24°34'32" east, 81.92 feet; thence
north 7°26'21" east, 89.46 feet to the north line of said northwest quarter of
the northwest quarter; thence north 83°57'38" east along said north line,
265.83 feet to the point of beginning and containing 8.00 acres (348,269 square
feet).
(Ord. 2042, 6-16-2014)
100-02: SKETCH PLAN:
On file in the city and made a part of this rezoning approval, for concept
description and delineation is the sketch plan document for the Kings Landing
PUD marked exhibit A. Wherever conflict occurs between the written text in this
document and the notations on the sketch plan, the written text shall prevail.
The sketch plan is a graphic representation of the property included in the PUD
delineating the approximate location and configuration of the parcels for the
purpose of easier reference for the applicable regulations of this ordinance.
(Ord. 2042, 6-16-2014)
100-03: REQUIRED PLANS:
Preliminary plat/final plat: Prior to or in conjunction with development or
transfer of ownership of any portion of the property covered by this PUD, said
area shall be platted in accordance with the city's subdivision ordinance.
(Ord. 2042, 6-16-2014)
100-04: INTENT OF THE KINGS LANDING PUD:
To create a residential development that is environmentally sensitive and
conserves the natural character of the Sugar Creek watershed and woodland
areas. (Ord. 2042, 6-16-2014)
100-05: CONDITIONS:
Whereas, subsection 9-4-3A25, "PUD - Planned Unit Development District", of the
city code, establishes certain regulations and guidelines pertaining to
accompanying information required on plat and site plan documents. Now,
therefore, the following conditions, restrictions, and regulations are adopted
as part of this approval:
   A.   General Conditions: In addition to the PUD sketch plan map, the
following general development criteria shall be integrated into and made a part
of this planned unit development:
      1.   General Conformance To Subdivision Ordinance: All subdivisions,
public and private streets, public or private street rights of way and general
development shall adhere to the standards and design criteria set forth in the
West Des Moines subdivision ordinance and/or established city policies
pertaining thereto, unless otherwise stated within this ordinance.
      2.   General Conformance To Zoning Ordinance: Unless otherwise specified
herein, the development of the Kings Landing PUD shall comply with the
provisions of the West Des Moines zoning ordinance. For the purposes of title
9, chapter 9, "Planned Unit Development District", of the city code final plan
submittal, the submittal of plat, site plan, permitted conditional use permit,
or master plan documents for any parcel or part of any parcel of the Kings
Landing PUD within two (2) years after approval and publication of this
ordinance, shall be considered to satisfy the terms and requirements of such
section.
      3.   Flood Hazard: In all areas within a 100-year frequency flood hazard
zone, or adjoining drainageways, and detention ponding areas involving
potential flood hazards, no building shall be erected which has a lowest level
floor, including basements, less than one foot (1') above the determined level
of the 100-year frequency flood event. Buildings shall only be permitted within
twenty five feet (25') of any easement or property boundary of a major
drainageway, stormwater detention basin or pond unless said location is
approved as part of the development entitlement by the city council and said
building is structurally designed accordingly.
      4.   Developer Responsibilities: The developer, their successors and/or
assigns, if any, shall pay all planning, engineering, and construction costs
for the development of the planned unit development, as required by this
ordinance and approved site plans and the cost of all streets, storm sewers,
sanitary sewers, drainageway improvements, detention basins, water mains,
buffers and other improvements as required for rights of way or public
easements within the Kings Landing PUD, unless otherwise approved by the city
council.
      5.   Stormwater Management: Specific stormwater management plans will be
required with the development of each parcel, demonstrating compliance with the
approved Kings Landing PUD master stormwater management plan, on file with the
city's public works department. The developer will have said specific
stormwater management plans prepared by a professional engineer licensed in the
state of Iowa, prior to the submittal of any specific development proposals
within the PUD. All specific stormwater management plans shall comply with the
city's current design standards for stormwater management. The method of
stormwater management and the stormwater conveyance system shall be determined
prior to city approval of any development within any portion of the property
within the PUD.
      6.   Public Street Improvements And Right Of Way Dedication: At time of
subdivision platting within the PUD, the subdivider shall be responsible for
construction and/or installation of all required public infrastructure
improvements in accordance with the city's subdivision ordinance, as indicated
herein, and/or as indicated on the approved Kings Landing PUD sketch proposal.
With any subdivision plat within the PUD, the subdivider shall be responsible
for constructing and/or installing the public infrastructure necessary to
support development within the subdivision in a manner that will assure that
the public infrastructure functions at an acceptable level of service (per the
city's comprehensive plan) and that complies with all city ordinances.
      7.   Sanitary Sewer: Any proposed change in approved land use densities
for the PUD will require an analysis of the downstream sanitary sewer capacity
to assure that adequate capacity is available for the proposed change in
approved land use densities.
      8.   Street Lighting: The developer shall be responsible for all costs
associated with the installation of public streetlights within or adjacent to
any area proposed to be platted or included within a development.
      9.   Mailboxes: The developer shall be responsible for installation of
any required gang style mailboxes as per the local U.S. postal service post
office. (Ord. 2042, 6-16-2014)
100-06: PARK LAND DEDICATION:
An area of land calculated by a set formula based upon the size and density of
the proposed development will be required to be dedicated for purposes of a
public park and greenbelt areas. A letter of agreement, acceptable to the park
and recreation department, detailing the specifics related to the park land
dedication requirements for the development of any area contained within the
PUD will be required to be submitted prior to the submittal of any development
proposal. (Ord. 2042, 6-16-2014)
100-07: MASTER PROPERTY OWNERS' ASSOCIATION:
If necessary, when the first plat within this development is recorded, proper
action shall be taken to establish a master property owners' association with
said property into the Kings Landing property owners' association and all
building restrictions, covenants, and other associated conditions attached to
the PUD shall be made to also apply to said property. The Kings Landing
property owners' association shall be responsible for the ongoing upkeep and
maintenance of any privately owned common grounds such as the buffer parks,
stormwater detention facilities, greenbelts, parks and other common space, as
outlined in the association documents and any other specific development
improvements noted as their responsibility in this ordinance. (Ord. 2042, 6-16-
2014)
100-08: LANDSCAPING:
Buffer screening between districts or parcels and uses shall be required as set
forth in title 9, chapter 19, "Landscaping", of the city code, except as noted
otherwise in this ordinance.
   A.   Trees that will encroach into any vehicle or pedestrian use area or
travel lane shall be of a variety that will accommodate pruning to allow for
the minimum clearance height (14 feet over vehicle travel lanes; 8 feet over
pedestrian travel lanes) without adversely affecting the overall natural shape
of the variety. Maintaining trees to these clearance levels is the
responsibility of the property owner.
   B.   Trees shall not be planted closer than five feet (5') to a sidewalk as
measured from the center of the tree or shrub trunk. The planting of trees on
corner lots within the area bounded by the street or alley lines of such lots
and a line adjoining points along said street or alley lines twenty five feet
(25') from the point of intersection of the public right of way lines shall be
prohibited. This area is defined as the sight triangle. No tree shall be
permitted within the sight triangle of a public street intersection.
   C.   There shall be a fifteen foot (15') no build area parallel to the east
property line of lot 8. Fences shall be allowed within the no build area.
Additional trees and shrubs shall be planted within this fifteen foot (15') no
build area from the north property line of lot 8 south approximately three
hundred ninety feet (390') to the end of the ingress/egress easement required
in section
100-10 of this ordinance. At the time of planting, deciduous trees shall be a
minimum three inch (3") caliper while coniferous trees shall be a minimum of
six feet (6') in height. A planting plan shall be submitted with the building
permit for lot 8 and the landscape must be installed prior to a final occupancy
permit for the house. (Ord. 2042, 6-16-2014)
100-09: ARCHITECTURE:
The intent is to create building designs throughout this development that are
varied and articulated to provide visual interest and appropriate context for
the natural character along with appropriate scale for the pedestrian elements
of the residential development. Architectural design for single-family units
shall accomplish this by careful attention to the use of exterior building
materials and details, locations of windows and doors, and change in building
mass within the plan and roof design. Materials and trim used on the front
facade shall be continued around all sides of the building. However, the level
of detail can be reduced on the facades not facing a street. Care should be
taken in the design of the building to keep grading and tree removal to a
minimum.
Homes shall use materials such as brick, stone, vertical or lap siding, shakes
and stucco, combining materials along with trim and details to present a mix of
residential architectural styles within the development. Use of natural
materials is encouraged, composite materials such as fiber cement and wood
composites are appropriate substitutions. Vinyl siding may be used only with
appropriately scaled trim and not as the majority cladding material. All
material, trim and details for a building shall be designed appropriately for
chosen architectural style. Materials should change with the change in building
planes. Trim and structural elements such as posts or columns shall be sized to
the scale of the building. When used, masonry materials shall have the
appearance of three-dimensional elements. Fenestration (door and window
openings) shall be sized to the scale of the building, incorporated on all
sides of the building and be compatible to the chosen architectural style.
Garages or accessory structures should incorporate architectural details of the
primary building with the use of roof forms, windows, doors and other facade
detailing.
Garage doors facing the public street should be set back so as to minimize the
dominance of their appearance and shall provide adequate space between the
street or sidewalk and the garage to accommodate additional parking. (Ord.
2042, 6-16-2014)
100-10: LAND USE DESIGN CRITERIA:
In addition to the general criteria as stated above, the following land use
design criteria shall apply to the development areas designated on the sketch
plan. The following development standards and use regulations shall apply to
the development parcels:
   A.   Single-Family Residential: All general use regulations and provisions
set forth in title 9, "Zoning", of the West Des Moines city code for
residential single-family (R-1) shall apply to any development proposal for
property, unless noted otherwise in this ordinance.
      1.   Setbacks: Setbacks for all single-family residential development
shall be:
         a.   For lots 1 through 7 the front yard building setback shall be a
minimum twenty five feet (25') and the rear yard setback shall be a minimum of
twenty five feet (25').
         b.   For lots 8 through 12 the front yard building setback shall be a
minimum of twenty feet (20') and the rear yard setback shall be a minimum of
twenty five feet (25').
         c.   Front porches, stoops and balconies may extend into the front
yard setback, yet may be no closer than twenty feet (20') to the front property
line.
      2.   Minimum Frontage: With regard to section 9-3-5, "Street Frontage
Required", of the city code the minimum frontage for lots 7 and 8 shall be
twenty feet (20').
      3.   Shared Driveway: There shall be an ingress/egress easement
established over the northerly three hundred ninety feet (390') of lots 7 and 8
for a shared driveway. The pavement for the shared driveway shall be at least
fifteen feet (15') from the east property line of lot 8, be twenty feet (20')
wide and be no closer than five feet (5') to the east property line of lot 6.
(Ord. 2042, 6-16-2014)
100-11: SIGNAGE REGULATION:
Signage restrictions shall be imposed to limit and reduce the negative impacts
of sign clutter. Signage within the residential areas of the PUD shall comply
with the sign standards of the applicable residential district. All signs shall
comply with all provisions of the city sign code. (Ord. 2042, 6-16-2014)
100-12: STORMWATER MANAGEMENT:
Specific stormwater management plans will be required with the development of
each parcel, demonstrating compliance with the approved Kings Landing PUD
master stormwater management plan, on file with the city's public works
department. The developer will have said specific stormwater management plans
prepared by a professional engineer licensed in the state of Iowa, prior to the
submittal of any specific development proposals within the PUD. All specific
stormwater management plans shall comply with the city's current design
standards for stormwater management. The method of stormwater management and
the stormwater conveyance system shall be determined prior to city approval of
any development within any portion of the property within the Kings Landing
PUD.
At time of platting or development, ownership and responsibility for all
stormwater detention areas and private stormwater detention outlet structures
will need to be established. (Ord. 2042, 6-16-2014)
100-13: PUBLIC STREET IMPROVEMENTS AND RIGHT OF WAY DEDICATION:
At the time of subdivision platting within the Kings Landing PUD, the
subdivider shall be responsible for construction and/or installation of all
required public infrastructure improvements in accordance with the city's
subdivision ordinance, and as indicated on the approved PUD sketch plan. With
any subdivision plat within the PUD, the subdivider shall be responsible for
constructing and/or installing the public infrastructure necessary to support
development within the subdivision in a manner that will assure that the public
infrastructure functions at an acceptable level of service (per the city's
comprehensive plan) and that it complies with all city ordinances.
   A.   Paving Requirements:
      1.   Stagecoach Drive: Is classified as a major collector roadway which
requires one hundred twenty feet (120') of total right of way or sixty feet
(60') from the center of the roadway. A minimum of two (2) through lanes plus
auxiliary lanes will need to be paved. The ultimate cross section should be
graded. The developer will need to work with adjacent property owners to
determine a satisfactory alignment. (Ord. 2042, 6-16-2014)
100-14: TRAFFIC REPORTS:
A traffic impact study (traffic report) dated March 11, 2014, has been prepared
by the city of West Des Moines for the Kings Landing. The traffic report also
outlines what the ultimate paving requirements will be for the major roadways
in the vicinity of the Kings Landing development. Prior to, or in conjunction
with the development of any parcel, or portion of a parcel, the developer shall
have the traffic report reviewed by the city's traffic consultant to ensure
that the provisions and assumptions of the original traffic report are still
valid and applicable. (Ord. 2042, 6-16-2014)
100-99: LEGISLATIVE HISTORY:
Ord. 2042, 6-16-2014.
PUD #101
ROGER'S FARM
SECTION:
101-01: Legal Description
101-02: Sketch Plan
101-03: Required Plans
101-04: Conditions
101-05: Park Land Dedication
101-06: Master Property Owners' Association
101-07: Landscaping
101-08: Architecture
101-09: Land Use Design Criteria
101-10: Signage Regulation
101-11: Stormwater Management
101-12: Public Improvements And Right Of Way Dedication
101-13: Traffic Reports
101-99: Legislative History
101-01: LEGAL DESCRIPTION:
The legal description for Roger's Farm PUD is as follows:
A parcel of land in section 23 and section 24, township 78 north, range 26 west
of the 5th P.M., city of West Des Moines, Dallas County, Iowa, that is more
particularly described as follows:
Beginning at the north 1/4 corner of said section 24; thence S00°24'01"W,
813.32 feet along the east line of the NW 1/4 of said section 24 to a point;
thence S64°14'45"W, 3308.95 feet to a point on the east right-of-way line of
South Jordan Creek Parkway; thence N27°06'32"W, 8.67 feet along said east
right-of-way line to a point of curvature; thence northerly along a curve to
the right having a radius of 1190.74 feet and a chord bearing of N01°27'43"W,
an arc length of 1066.01 feet along said east right-of-way line to a point of
tangency; thence N24°11'07"E, 621.41 feet along said east right-of-way line to
a point; thence N69°11'08"E, 50.00 feet along said east right-of-way line to a
point on the south right-of-way line of Stagecoach Drive; thence S65°48'53"E,
120.41 feet along said south right-of-way line to a point; thence S00°27'58"W,
14.79 feet along said south right-of-way line to a point; thence easterly along
a curve to the left having a radius of 925.00 feet and a chord bearing of
S82°36'01"E, an arc length of 440.37 feet along said south right-of-way line to
a point of tangency; thence N83°45'41"E, 148.52 feet along said south right-of-
way line to a point; thence S51°14'13"E, 75.00 feet along said south right-of-
way line to a point; thence N83°45'41"E, 120.00 feet along said south right-of-
way line to a point; thence N38°45'35"E, 75.00 feet along said south right-of-
way line to a point; thence N83°45'41"E, 767.29 feet along said south right-of-
way line to a point; thence S51°14'13"E, 75.00 feet along said south right-of-
way line to a point; thence N82°03'41"E, 120.05 feet along said south right-of-
way line to a point; thence N36°21'26"E, 75.00 feet along said south right-of-
way line to a point; thence northeasterly along a curve to the left having a
radius of 925.00 feet and a chord bearing of N56°31'29"E, an arc length of
673.24 feet along said south right-of-way line to a point; thence N76°27'26"E,
75.00 feet along said south right-of-way line to a point; thence N28°48'41"E,
120.01 feet along said south right-of- way line to a point; thence N18°50'04"W,
75.00 feet along said south right-of-way line to a point; thence N21°15"00"E,
22.56 feet along said south right-of-way line to a point; thence N83°45'51'E,
152.55 feet along the north line of the NW 1/4 of said section 24 to the point
of beginning and containing 65.089 acres more or less.
(Ord. 2052, 9-8-2014)
101-02: SKETCH PLAN:
On file in the city and made a part of this rezoning approval, for concept
description and delineation is the sketch plan document for the Roger's Farm
PUD marked exhibit A. Wherever conflict occurs between the written text in this
document and the notations on the sketch plan, the written text shall prevail.
The sketch plan is a graphic representation of the property included in the PUD
delineating the approximate location and configuration of the parcels for the
purpose of easier reference for the applicable regulations of this ordinance.
(Ord. 2052, 9-8-2014)
101-03: REQUIRED PLANS:
Prior to or in conjunction with development or transfer of ownership of any
portion of the property covered by this PUD, the following plans shall be
required:
   A.   Preliminary Plat And Final Plat: The PUD area shall be platted in
accordance with the city's subdivision ordinance. Parcels created via the plat
of survey process and platted outlots identified on a plat shall be unbuildable
until such time that the plat of survey parcel and/or outlot is replatted into
a developable lot via the preliminary and final platting processes.
   B.   Site Plan: Prior to the development of any area within the PUD, site
plan approval shall be granted by the appropriate approval body through the
development process. (Ord. 2052, 9-8-2014)
101-04: CONDITIONS:
Whereas, title 9, chapter 9, PUD planned unit development district of the city
code, establishes certain regulations and guidelines pertaining to accompanying
information required on plat and site plan documents. Now, therefore, the
following conditions, restrictions, and regulations are adopted as part of this
approval:
   A.   General Conditions: In addition to the PUD sketch plan map, the
following general development criteria shall be integrated into and made a part
of this planned unit development.
      1.   General Conformance To Subdivision Ordinance: All subdivisions,
public and private streets, public or private street rights of way and general
development shall adhere to the standards and design criteria set forth in the
West Des Moines subdivision ordinance and/or established city policies
pertaining thereto, unless otherwise stated within this ordinance.
      2.   General Conformance To Zoning Ordinance: Unless otherwise specified
herein, the development of the Roger's Farm PUD shall comply with the
provisions of the West Des Moines zoning ordinance.
      3.   Flood Hazard: In all areas within a 100-year frequency flood hazard
zone, or adjoining drainageways, and detention ponding areas involving
potential flood hazards, no building shall be erected which has a lowest level
floor, including basements, less than one foot (1') above the determined level
of the 100-year frequency flood event. Buildings shall not be permitted within
twenty five feet (25') of any easement or property boundary of a major
drainageway, stormwater detention basin or pond unless said location is
approved as part of the development entitlement by the city council and said
building is structurally designed accordingly.
      4.   Developer Responsibilities: The developer, their successors and/or
assigns, if any, shall pay all planning, engineering, and construction costs
for the development of the planned unit development, as required by this
ordinance and approved site plans and the cost of all streets, storm sewers,
sanitary sewers, drainageway improvements, detention basins, water mains,
buffers and other improvements as required for rights of way or public
easements within the Roger's Farm PUD, unless otherwise approved by the city
council.
      5.   Roadway Connection: Developer of parcel A shall provide a roadway
connection between Stagecoach Drive and the city park. Developer of parcel B
shall provide a roadway connection from Stagecoach Drive to S. Jordan Creek
Parkway. Said connection may be public or private but shall function like a
minor collector.
      6.   Sanitary Sewer: Any proposed change in approved land use densities
for the PUD will require an analysis of the downstream sanitary sewer capacity
to assure that adequate capacity is available for the proposed change in
approved land use densities.
      7.   Street Lighting: The developer shall be responsible for all costs
associated with the installation of public streetlights within or adjacent to
any area proposed to be platted or included within a development.
      8.   Mailboxes: The developer shall be responsible for installation of
any required cluster box units (CBUs/mailboxes) as per the local U.S. postal
service post office.
      9.   Parking Requirements: Number of parking stalls to be provided shall
be compliant with title 9, chapter 15, of the city code. For any residential
dwelling intended as owner occupied and/or for which a condominium regime is
established, a minimum of one of the required spaces for each unit shall be as
an enclosed parking space. This parking space shall be a minimum of nineteen
feet by nine feet (19' x 9') and may be designed as a freestanding garage,
attached garage or multiple garage spaces within an enclosure. A specific
covered parking space shall be designated for and legally tied to each dwelling
unit. The covered space must be for the exclusive use of the occupant of the
dwelling unit and cannot be rented or purchased by a third party, even if the
dwelling unit is rented. (Ord. 2052, 9-8-2014)
101-05: PARK LAND DEDICATION:
An area of land calculated by a set formula based upon the density (total
number of dwelling units) of the proposed development is required to be
dedicated for purposes of a public park and greenway as per city code. A park
land dedication agreement, acceptable to the parks and recreation department,
detailing the specifics related to the park land dedication requirements for
the development of any area contained within the PUD is required to be
submitted. As part of such, a 7.76 acre area of land (not a part of this PUD)
located to the south of parcel A is to be dedicated to the city by the owner of
the property for development as a public park. This park will fulfill a portion
of the dedication requirements for parcels A and B. In addition to dedication
of ground, public access easements for trails within the development shall be
granted, including public access easements across parcel A for the trail
constructed to connect the park to the existing trail network. (Ord. 2052, 9-8-
2014)
101-06: MASTER PROPERTY OWNERS' ASSOCIATION:
If deemed applicable, proper action shall be taken to establish a master
property owners' association. The Roger's Farm property owners' association
shall be responsible for the ongoing upkeep and maintenance of any privately
owned common grounds such as the buffer parks, stormwater detention facilities,
greenbelts, plazas and other common space, as outlined in the association
documents and any other specific development improvements noted as their
responsibility in this ordinance. (Ord. 2052, 9-8-2014)
101-07: LANDSCAPING:
Buffering between districts or parcels and uses shall be required as set forth
in title 9, chapters 5 and 19 of the city code, except as noted otherwise in
this ordinance.
   A.   There shall be a one hundred fifty foot (150') no build area parallel
to the east property line of parcel A and a small section of the no build area
to the west of the anticipated public park (see PUD sketch plan). The existing
berm on the east no build area shall be extended to the north and taper along
the north property line in a manner that will allow development of access roads
to the property and to adjacent properties. Access roads, trails and fences
shall be allowed within the no build area; however, a minimum thirty foot (30')
wide area shall be provided along the east property line which shall not be
encroached upon by roads or trails. Plantings shall be required in accordance
with one of the following as determined by the width of the existing berm
within the one hundred fifty foot (150') no build area:
      1.   Sixty feet (60') wide or greater berm: Provide the equivalent of one
overstory or upright evergreen tree and three (3) shrubs for every thirty five
(35) linear feet of berm length.
      2.   Thirty feet to fifty nine feet (30' - 59') wide berm: Provide the
equivalent of one overstory or upright evergreen tree, two (2) understory trees
and six (6) shrubs for every thirty five (35) linear feet of berm length.
A minimum of fifty percent (50%) of the required number of trees shall be
evergreen. At the time of planting, overstory trees shall have a minimum trunk
diameter of two inches (2"); understory trees shall have a minimum trunk
diameter of one and one-half inches (11/2"); and evergreens shall be a minimum
of six feet (6') in height. Shrub height at time of planting varies according
to the anticipated mature size of the plant. In general, the taller the shrub
at maturity the larger the plant size at time of planting. The location of the
required landscaping (trees, shrubs, etc.) may be planted in any location along
the berm.
   B.   No buffer shall be required between parcel A and the city park, nor
along the south boundary of parcel B adjacent to the residential estate zoned
property.
   C.   Trees that will encroach into any vehicle or pedestrian use area or
travel lane shall be of a variety that will accommodate pruning to allow for
the minimum clearance height (14 feet over vehicle travel lanes; 8 feet over
pedestrian travel lanes) without adversely affecting the overall natural shape
of the variety. Maintaining trees to these clearance levels is the
responsibility of the property owner.
   D.   Trees shall not be planted closer than five feet (5') to a sidewalk as
measured from the center of the tree or shrub base. No vegetation which
obstructs visibility shall be located within the sight triangle of intersecting
streets and drives. (Ord. 2052, 9-8-2014)
101-08: ARCHITECTURE:
The intent is to create building designs throughout this development that are
varied and articulated to provide visual interest and appropriate context for
the natural character along with appropriate scale for the pedestrian elements
of the residential development. Architectural design for residential units
shall accomplish this by careful attention to the use of exterior building
materials and details, locations of windows and doors, and change in building
mass within the plan and roof design. Materials and trim used on the front
facade shall be continued around all sides of the building.
Buildings shall use materials such as brick, stone, vertical or lap siding,
shakes and stucco, combining materials along with trim and details to provide
visual interest within the development. Use of natural materials is encouraged,
composite materials such as fiber cement and wood composites are appropriate
substitutions. Vinyl siding may be used only with appropriately scaled trim and
not as the majority cladding material. All material, trim and details for a
building shall be designed appropriately for chosen architectural style.
Materials should change with the change in building planes. Trim and structural
elements such as posts or columns shall be sized to the scale of the building.
When used, masonry materials shall have the appearance of three-dimensional
elements. Fenestration (door and window openings) shall be sized to the scale
of the building, incorporated on all sides of the building and be compatible to
the chosen architectural style.
In addition to the above stated design criteria, the following shall
specifically apply to residential development on the property:
   A.   Detached garages or accessory structures visible from public streets
shall incorporate architecture details through the use of windows, doors and
other facade detailing. Garage doors facing the public street should be set
back so as to minimize the dominance of their appearance and shall provide
adequate space between the street or sidewalk and the garage to accommodate
additional parking.
   B.   Entrances into buildings should be easily identified through the use of
building design and detailing. Projected or recessed entryways, higher
rooflines, awnings or changes in building material are examples that can create
this effect. (Ord. 2052, 9-8-2014)
101-09: LAND USE DESIGN CRITERIA:
In addition to the general criteria as stated above, the following land use
regulations, development standards, and design criteria shall apply to the
development of all areas designated on the sketch plan:
   A.   All general use regulations and provisions set forth in title 9,
"Zoning", of the West Des Moines city code for medium density residential (RM-
12) shall apply to any development proposal for the property, unless noted
otherwise in this ordinance.
      1.   Density: Collectively the entire property shall not exceed seven
hundred eighty one (781) dwelling units. Specifically, parcel A (the eastern
25.2 acres) shall not exceed twelve (12) dwelling units per acre for a maximum
of three hundred two (302) units. If less than three hundred two (302) dwelling
units are implemented within parcel A, the difference of units up to three
hundred two (302) dwellings may be located within parcel B; however, the total
number of dwelling units within parcels A and B shall not exceed seven hundred
eighty one (781) dwelling units.
      2.   Height:
         a.   Building height shall be limited to three (3) stories or less
within parcel A.
         b.   Parcel B building height shall be in accordance with the
requirements for the medium density residential zoning district as set forth in
title 9, chapter 7 of the city code.
      3.   Building Setbacks: Setbacks for all residential development shall be
as follows:
         a.   Two (2) stories or less:
            (1)   Front yard: Thirty feet (30') along Stagecoach Drive and S.
Jordan Creek Parkway as measured from the ultimate street right of way line.
            (2)   Side yard: Thirty feet (30').
            (3)   Rear yard: Thirty five feet (35').
         b.   Three (3) stories or more:
            (1)   Front yard: Fifty feet (50') along Stagecoach Drive and S.
Jordan Creek Parkway as measured from the ultimate street right of way line.
            (2)   Side yard: Thirty feet (30').
            (3)   Rear yard: Fifty feet (50').
            (4)   An additional ten feet (10') of setback is required along
each setback for each story above three (3) stories.
         c.   A twenty five foot (25') building setback shall be allowed for
those buildings within parcel A which are adjacent to the park access road as
long as:
            (1)   The units do not front (face) the roadway.
            (2)   The units do not exceed three (3) stories in height.
            (3)   No vehicle access to garages for the individual units is
taken off of the park access road. (Ord. 2052, 9-8-2014)
101-10: SIGNAGE REGULATION:
Signage shall comply with all provisions and standards of title 9, chapter 18
of the city code for the residential medium density (RM) zoning district. Under
the authority of the city's fire marshal, development directory boards may be
required. Said boards shall be of a design as specified by the fire marshal and
shall be located on private property outside of public street rights of way and
utility easements. (Ord. 2052, 9-8-2014)
101-11: STORMWATER MANAGEMENT:
Specific stormwater management plans will be required with the development of
each parcel. The developer will have said specific stormwater management plans
prepared by a professional engineer licensed in the state of Iowa, in
conjunction with the submittal of a specific development proposal for any
portion of property included within the PUD. All specific stormwater management
plans shall comply with the city's current design standards for stormwater
management. The method of stormwater management and the stormwater conveyance
system shall be determined prior to city approval of any development proposal.
At time of platting or site development (whichever is more applicable to
knowledge of stormwater detention measures), ownership and responsibility for
all stormwater detention areas and private stormwater detention outlet
structures will need to be established through the execution of a stormwater
facility maintenance agreement. (Ord. 2052, 9-8-2014)
101-12: PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS AND RIGHT OF WAY DEDICATION:
The developer of each parcel shall be responsible for constructing and/or
installing the public infrastructure necessary to support development within
the subdivision in a manner that will assure that the public infrastructure
functions at an acceptable level of service (per the city's comprehensive plan)
and that it complies with all city ordinances. At the time of subdivision
platting into developable lots, the subdivider shall provide the necessary
surety or city acceptable agreements to provide for the construction and/or
installation of all required public infrastructure improvements in accordance
with the city's subdivision ordinance.
Right of way for the street that runs through the center of parcel A will be
required to be conveyed prior to or in conjunction with the final platting of
parcel A into a developable lot and prior to approval of a site plan for parcel
A. Right of way requirements for this street are anticipated to be sixty feet
(60') plus a fifty five foot (55') radius cul-de- sac turnaround at the end of
the roadway.
Developer of parcel B shall provide an agreement and waiver for the future
widening of S. Jordan Creek Parkway adjacent to the PUD boundary. (Ord. 2052,
9-8-2014)
101-13: TRAFFIC REPORTS:
A traffic impact study (traffic report) dated August 15, 2014, has been
prepared by the city of West Des Moines for Roger's Farm. The traffic report
caps the traffic generated from all ground within this PUD at four thousand
nine hundred eighty six (4,986) average daily trips, with three hundred seventy
eight (378) A.M. peak hour trips and four hundred forty six (446) P.M. peak
hour trips. The traffic report, along with previous studies for the area,
outlines the ultimate geometry for the major roadways in the vicinity of the
Roger's Farm development. Prior to, or in conjunction with the development of
any parcel, or portion of a parcel, the developer shall have the traffic report
reviewed by the city's traffic consultant to ensure that the provisions and
assumptions of the original traffic report are still valid and applicable.
(Ord. 2052, 9-8-2014)
101-99: LEGISLATIVE HISTORY:
Ord. 2052, 9-8-2014.
PUD #102
MIDWEST TECHNOLOGY BUSINESS PARK
(Rep. by Ord. 2494, 11-1-2021)
PUD #103
CLOCKTOWER SQUARE
SECTION:
103-01: Legal Description
103-02: Sketch Plan
103-03: Intent
103-04: Required Plans
103-05: Conditions
103-06: Land Use Design Criteria
103-07: Architecture
103-08: Open Space
103-09: Parking
103-10: Outdoor Displays
103-11: Outdoor Storage, Shopping Carts, And Cart Corrals
103-12: Ingress/Egress
103-13: Buffering
103-14: Pedestrian Circulation
103-15: Signage Regulation
103-16: Fire Access
103-17: Traffic Study Required
103-18: Building Restrictions, Easements, And Covenants
103-19: Stormwater Management
103-20: Public Street Right Of Way
103-21: Lighting
103-22: Savings Clause
103-23: Violations And Penalties
103-99: Legislative History
103-01: LEGAL DESCRIPTION:
The legal description for Clocktower Square PUD is as follows:
Clocktower Square, Lots 1 and 2, an official plat now in and forming a part of
the City of West Des Moines, Polk County, Iowa.
(Ord. 2056, 10-6-2014)
103-02: SKETCH PLAN:
On file with the city and made a part of this rezoning approval, for concept
description and delineation is the sketch plan document for the Clocktower
Square PUD (the PUD) marked exhibit A. Wherever conflict occurs between the
written text in this document and the notations on the sketch plan, the written
text shall prevail. The sketch plan is a graphic representation of the property
included in the PUD delineating the approximate location and configuration of
the parcels for the purpose of easier reference for the applicable regulations
of this ordinance. (Ord. 2056, 10-6-2014)
103-03: INTENT:
The PUD intends to provide a framework for development standards given the
realities and constraints of redevelopment in certain areas of the city. (Ord.
2056, 10-6-2014)
103-04: REQUIRED PLANS:
The following plans shall be required as a part of the processing of any
development application for any property within the PUD:
   A.   Planned Unit Development: The planned unit development (PUD) identifies
detailed development criteria for each planning unit indicated on the
Clocktower Square PUD sketch plan. This document shall constitute the planned
unit development ordinance for Clocktower Square. On file with the city is a
sketch plan that illustrates the overall site layout concept (exhibit A). This
document and any referenced documents or exhibits (included or on file with the
city) are intended to specify the components, parameters, and requirements to
be adhered to and implemented in order to ensure the realization of the PUD. It
is recognized that modifications and changes may be necessary due to changes in
building footprints, site details, and response to market demand. At the
discretion of the director of development services, changes to the layout of
the development that are deemed to be "major" changes shall require an
amendment to the sketch plan and ordinance, if applicable. Major amendments
shall require the review and approval of the plan and zoning commission and
city council.
   B.   Development Applications (Major Modification To A Site Plan Or Minor
Modifications): Major modifications or minor modifications to a site plan for
all lots within the PUD must meet the intent of the approved PUD. Major
modifications or minor modifications for any lot(s) shall be submitted to the
city of West Des Moines for review and approval prior to the development or
redevelopment of any portion of any lot within the PUD. Site plans for
permitted uses which comply (as determined by the director of development
services or designee) with the design intent as set forth in this PUD will be
subject to review via the city's review process and receive final approval from
the city council following a recommendation from the plan and zoning
commission. Site plans for uses identified as permitted conditional (Pc) shall
require approval from the board of adjustment. At the discretion of the
director of development services, an amendment to the PUD may be required to
bring consistency between the ordinance and site plan development proposed.
Minor modifications to the site plan are subject to administrative review via
the city's review process unless it is determined by the director of
development services that the minor modification is subject to review via the
city's review process and receive final approval from the city council
following a recommendation from the plan and zoning commission. (Ord. 2056, 10-
6-2014)
103-05: CONDITIONS:
Whereas, title 9, chapter 9, "Planned Unit Development District", of the city
code establishes certain regulations and guidelines pertaining to accompanying
information required on plat and site plan documents. Now, therefore, the
following conditions, restrictions, and regulations are adopted as part of this
approval, to wit:
In addition to the sketch plan map, the following general development criteria
shall be integrated into and made a part of this specific plan ordinance:
   A.   Compliance With Codes: Unless otherwise specified herein, the
development of the Clocktower Square PUD shall comply with the provisions of
city code.
   B.   Flood Hazard: In all areas within a 100-year frequency flood hazard
zone, or adjoining drainageways, and detention ponding areas involving
potential flood hazards, no building shall be erected that has a lowest floor,
including basements, less than one foot (1') above the determining level of the
100-year frequency flood event, and no building shall be located within twenty
five feet (25') of any easement or property boundary of a major drainageway,
stormwater detention basin, or pond, unless said location is approved as part
of a development entitlement by the city council and said building is
structurally designed accordingly.
   C.   Developer Responsibilities: Unless otherwise specifically approved by
the city council, the developer, its successors and/or assigns, if any, shall
pay all planning, engineering, and construction costs for the development of
the planned unit development as required by this ordinance, and shall pay all
costs related to approved site plans. Nothing in this ordinance shall be
construed to prevent the developer, its successors and/or assigns, if any, from
entering into private agreement(s) as it/they may desire to share the cost of
improvements. (Ord. 2056, 10-6-2014)
103-06: LAND USE DESIGN CRITERIA:
In addition to the general conditions requirements stated within this document,
the following land use design criteria shall apply to the development areas
designated by parcel on the sketch plan.
   A.   Parcels A And B: All general use regulations and provisions set forth
in title 9, "Zoning", of the West Des Moines city code for the regional
commercial district (RC), shall apply to any development proposal for any of
these parcels as shown on the sketch plan for the PUD ordinance, unless noted
elsewhere within this ordinance.
      1.   Uses:
         a.   The following uses shall be limited to a maximum of thirty four
thousand (34,000) square feet in accumulation between the two (2) PUD parcels:
 
SIC 5812 Restaurants.
SIC 5813 Drinking places.
 
         b.   The following uses will be permitted uses:
 
SIC 60   Freestanding ATM (formerly a Pc use).
SIC 7999 Indoor golf.
 
         c.   The following shall be prohibited:
 
SIC 541 Convenience stores.
SIC 554 Gasoline service establishments, with or without repair.
 
      2.   Building Setbacks: Building setbacks shall be measured from the
ultimate right of way line for property lines abutting a public street and from
the property line in all other cases.
         a.   Parcel A Setbacks:
 
Front yard        60 feet adjacent to University Avenue3
                  82 feet adjacent to 28th Street3
Rear yard         40 feet1,2
Side yard         37 feet1,2
Minimum lot width 50 feet
Maximum height    36 feet2
Parking lot       15 feet measured from the ultimate right of way line3
 
   Notes:
       1.    Setback of 0 feet allowed if the property abuts a similar
district.
       2.    For each additional 10 feet of setback, an additional 12 feet of
height will be allowed.
       3.    If the existing parking lot encroaches into the required parking
setback from the ultimate right of way line, at the time of the reconstruction
of University Avenue or 28th Street, the setback will be 7 feet to accommodate
vehicle overhang and screening landscaping from the sidewalk to the curb of the
parking lot. If any part of the building adjacent to the parking lot in this
situation is to be razed, the parking lot setback will be 15 feet from the
ultimate right of way line at that time. Any parking spaces that may be lost
due to the reconstruction of University Avenue and/or 28th Street will not be
required to be reconstructed.
         b.   Parcel B Setbacks:
 
Front yard        59 feet adjacent to University Avenue
                  82 feet adjacent to 28th Street
Rear yard         50 feet1
Side yard         50 feet1
Minimum lot width 50 feet
Maximum height    36 feet2
Parking lot       15 feet measured from the ultimate right of way line3
 
   Notes:
       1.    Setback of 0 feet allowed if the property abuts a similar
district.
       2.    Additional 12 feet of height allowed for each additional 10 feet
of setback.
       3.    If the parking lot encroaches into the required parking setback
from the ultimate right of way line, at the time of the reconstruction of the
roadway, the setback will be 7 feet to accommodate vehicle overhang and
screening landscaping from the sidewalk to the curb of the parking lot. If any
part of the building adjacent to the parking lot in this situation is to be
razed, the parking lot setback will be 15 feet from the ultimate right of way
line at that time. Any parking spaces that may be lost due to the
reconstruction of University Avenue and/or 28th Street will not be required to
be reconstructed.
      3.   Outdoor Use Areas: Outdoor use areas, i.e., sitting and gathering
areas shall be encouraged.
      4.   Screening: Vegetation or other measures, with or without berming,
shall be required to provide opaque screening of all parking areas, dumpsters,
mechanical equipment, etc., from view from all streets (public and private) and
adjoining properties adjacent to the PUD boundary. (Ord. 2056, 10-6-2014)
103-07: ARCHITECTURE:
The architectural design of all buildings will be consistent throughout the
commercial center (parcels A and B together being considered as the center) to
provide a cohesive and thematic look.
   A.   Building design, materials, trim, detailing, and colors shall provide
continuity amongst the buildings to unite all structures in the development to
one project concept. Limited use of architectural elements characteristic of
prototypical architecture may be allowed at the discretion of the director of
development services or the appropriate reviewing and approval body and,
wherever possible, modified to give a unique image to the establishment in the
center. Natural, durable materials such as brick and stone shall be used as
elements in the architectural design of the facades facing 28th Street and
University Avenue for any building within the development. The use of vinyl
materials is prohibited.
   B.   Multiple tenants storefronts within a building and multiple buildings
on the site are allowed, provided that a master architectural concept plan for
the development as a whole is established and is implemented with facade
modifications, to ensure that the development be consistent in architectural
design and use of materials and organized utilizing a compatible planned open
space, landscape plan, and parking plan to serve and maintain a cohesive
development concept.
   C.   Design elements such as, but not limited to, clock towers, and other
architectural focal points, shall be allowed to exceed the maximum building
height following review and recommendation of the plan and zoning commission to
the city council. (Ord. 2056, 10-6-2014)
103-08: OPEN SPACE:
Open space shall be considered those areas unencumbered by structures, off
street parking and vehicle use drives, loading and other areas. Open space may
include pedestrian areas and outdoor eating areas. With a minimum of two (2)
trees and three (3) shrubs shall be provided for every three thousand (3,000)
square feet of required open space. Fifty percent (50%) of the trees required
of open space shall be evergreen in species.
As of the date of adoption of this ordinance, collectively between the two (2)
PUD parcels, a minimum of nineteen percent (19%) of the gross area is dedicated
to open space. With modifications to the site, all measures appropriate to
increase open space areas, such as, but not limited to, incorporation of
landscape islands within parking areas, shall be implemented toward meeting an
open space of nineteen percent (19%) collectively between the two (2) PUD
parcels.
Right of way changes that affect the minimum open space percentage will result
in a corresponding and equal change in the minimum open space percentage
requirement. (Ord. 2056, 10-6-2014)
103-09: PARKING:
Parking lot setbacks adjacent to public streets shall be utilized, designed,
and improved as a landscape buffer to effectively screen all parking and drive
areas from the public view. The required incorporation of landscape islands and
tree diamonds within the off street parking fields to break up paving and
provide opportunities for shade are governed by subsection 9-19-8H of the city
code. Drive aisle and stall dimensions shall be in accordance with section 9-
15-6 of the city code.
Parking ratios for restaurants (sit down and fast food) shall provide within
the PUD a minimum of one space per two hundred (200) square feet of gross floor
area. Parking ratios for all other uses shall provide within the PUD a minimum
of one space per three hundred (300) square feet of gross floor area.
For all Pc uses, a parking analysis will be performed by the city and provided
to the board of adjustment for their review. This analysis will include all
gross floor area of existing tenants, including the gross floor area of vacant
tenant space and the gross floor area of the proposed use, the information will
be used in the review process for Pc uses and provided to the board of
adjustment for their review. At the discretion of the board of adjustment a
less stringent parking calculation may be used provided the applicant can
demonstrate a parking rate less than the above is adequate due to the type of
potential use, shared uses or off peak uses. (Ord. 2056, 10-6-2014)
103-10: OUTDOOR DISPLAYS:
Outdoor displays for retail sales shall only be allowed with the issuance of a
temporary use permit under the provisions of title 9, chapter 16, "Temporary
Use Permits", of the city code. (Ord. 2056, 10-6-2014)
103-11: OUTDOOR STORAGE, SHOPPING CARTS, AND CART CORRALS:
Any outdoor storage shall be screened from public view by the use of screen
walls as approved by the city. Outdoor storage shall not be permitted to extend
above the height of the screen at any time. No long term exterior storage of
shopping carts associated with any use within the PUD shall be permitted. "Long
term storage" shall be defined as any time period in excess of three (3) hours.
Cart corrals shall be permanent fixtures and constructed with masonry, stone,
or block. No signage identifying a tenant or products shall be located on the
cart corrals. Cart corrals shall be anchored to the ground to prevent movement
and misalignment. (Ord. 2056, 10-6-2014)
103-12: INGRESS/EGRESS:
If not already established, as a blanket easement, the developer of the parcels
must provide a cross access parking and ingress/egress easement allowing
unrestricted public access over and through the property within the PUD. (Ord.
2056, 10-6-2014)
103-13: BUFFERING:
No buffer will be required on the west or north side of the parcel A and on the
north side of parcel B. (Ord. 2056, 10-6-2014)
103-14: PEDESTRIAN CIRCULATION:
Pedestrian circulation shall be shown on any site plan submitted for approval.
The plan shall provide internal access connections to minimize pedestrian
conflicts with traffic movements to areas within the PUD as well as providing
access to public sidewalks. (Ord. 2056, 10-6-2014)
103-15: SIGNAGE REGULATION:
Signage restrictions shall be imposed to limit and reduce the negative impacts
of sign clutter. It is recognized that within the Clocktower Square
development, some of the signage on the site at the time of the adoption of
this ordinance was allowed under previous sign regulations and agreements and
they do not comply with the current sign regulations. There is also potential
changes being considered for the site that will cause certain actions, such as
additional right of way reservation or acquisition, that will cause some ground
signs to be relocated and repairs and modifications to the facade of the
building that will necessitate building signs to be removed temporarily for the
work to be completed. Therefore these regulations have been adopted to address:
the current signage situation, temporary situations and future situations and
what will be allowed under the different scenarios. Any new signs shall comply
with the provisions of the current city sign code unless modified herein.
   A.   Development Identification Signs: The Clocktower Square development is
allowed one monument sign per public street frontage; one for University Avenue
and one for 28th Street. There are two (2) signs currently on the site, one in
the island at the north entrance off of University Avenue and one in the
northeast corner of the site.
      1.   Multi-Tenant Sign In Northeast Corner Of Site: The existing sign at
the northeast corner of the site is larger than what would be allowed under the
current sign code and would not meet setback requirements and is therefore
considered legal nonconforming. The existing sign may remain and continue to be
used but is limited to repainting, changing the face of the sign, and other
maintenance required to keep the sign operational and safe. The sign may not be
removed, expanded or reconfigured into another shape without losing the
nonconforming status and having to be brought into compliance with current code
or the standards identified herein.
If the sign is required to be moved due to the city's acquisition of the
additional right of way to conform to the ultimate rights of way as identified
within the WDM comprehensive plan or any other activity that would cause the
loss of the legal nonconforming status, the sign shall be relocated outside of
the ultimate public street right of way and meet the following:
         a.   A minimum setback of one foot (1') from the ultimate right of way
but the sign shall not encroach into the twenty five foot (25') sight triangle
for safety reasons.
         b.   No design of the ultimate right of way has been developed at this
time but the topographic difference between the site elevation and the street
elevation may require retaining walls. The sign may be built on top of the
grade, or placed on top of any retaining walls necessary to accommodate the
required topography for the right of way but the sign shall not be artificially
elevated by berming unless it is a required berm as part of a site development
plan.
         c.   Design of the sign shall incorporate architectural elements that
are consistent with the architectural theme of the development such as brick,
stone, medallions, colors, trim elements, etc.
         d.   Cabinet signs which illuminate the background of the copy (panel
signs) shall be prohibited. Copy shall be designed as individual letters which
may be channel letters, routed face with push through letters, reverse channel,
halo lit, opaque vinyl background, or an acceptable design approved by the sign
administrator.
         e.   The sign structure shall be a maximum height of ten feet (10')
and a maximum width of fifteen feet (15') with a maximum copy area for tenant
signage of one hundred eight (108) square feet. There shall be no limitation on
the number of the tenants that may be displayed in this copy area and the
landlord may determine the sign area allocation of the tenants displayed. The
name of the development, development logo, or other design elements may be
placed in the remaining sign area.
      2.   Monument Sign At The University Avenue Entrance: The existing sign
structure is presently approximately six and one-half feet (61/2') tall and
eleven and one-half feet (111/2') long and located approximately twenty feet
(20') from the existing University Avenue right of way. This sign may remain in
its current location and would be under the same limitations as a legal
nonconforming sign as noted above, except, due to the limited visibility of the
sign because of the topography adjacent to the drive entrance, an additional
eighteen inches (18") of sign height may be added to the existing sign area
which is approximately ninety six inches (96") long. This additional twelve
(12) square foot area may display the development name, property address,
development logo, or other development identifying elements. There shall be no
limitation on the number of the tenants that may be displayed in the copy area
on the lower portion of the sign and the landlord may determine the sign area
allocation of the tenants displayed.
If the sign is required to be moved due to the city's acquisition of the
additional right of way to conform to the ultimate rights of way as identified
within the West Des Moines comprehensive plan or any other activity that would
cause the loss of the legal nonconforming status, the sign shall be relocated
outside of the ultimate public street right of way with the following
restrictions:
         a.   If the sign is placed in an island within the driveway similar to
the existing situation, the sign shall meet the standards of the sign code at
that time.
         b.   If the sign is placed outside of the drive on either side of the
drive entrance, a minimum setback of one foot (1') from the ultimate right of
way will be required but the sign shall not encroach into the twenty five foot
(25') sight triangle along the public street right of way and the back of curb
of the drive entrance for safety reasons.
         c.   No design of the ultimate right of way has been developed at this
time but the topographic difference between the site elevation and the street
elevation may require retaining walls. The sign may be built on top of the
grade, or placed on top of any retaining wall necessary to accommodate the
required topography for the right of way but shall not be artificially elevated
by berming unless it is a required berm as part of a site plan development
plan.
         d.   Design of the sign shall incorporate architectural elements that
are consistent with the architectural theme of the development such as brick,
stone, medallions, colors, trim elements, etc.
         e.   Cabinet signs which illuminate the background of the copy (panel
signs) shall be prohibited. Copy shall be designed as individual letters which
may be channel letters, routed face with push through letters, reverse channel,
halo lit, opaque vinyl background, or an acceptable design approved by the sign
administrator.
         f.   The sign structure shall be a maximum height of seven feet (7')
and have a maximum area, including the structure, of seventy five (75) square
feet.
         g.   With the relocation of the sign, it is anticipated that the
visual obstruction created by the existing topography can be addressed in the
design of the sign and site so there shall be no restriction on the allocation
of the sign area between development identification and tenant identification
and the landlord may determine the sign area allocation.
      3.   Tenant Directional Sign: To assist patrons in navigating the site
once they have entered the development, one tenant directional sign shall be
allowed interior to the development near the north entrance to the development.
         a.   The intent of directional signage is not to draw people off of
the public street, so letter size and sign location shall be designed to
minimize visibility and readability from the exterior of the property and shall
not be allowed within the perimeter green space of the site.
         b.   It may be allowed in an interior parking lot island or in an area
adjacent to the buildings but shall be designed and located so as to not
obstruct vehicle or pedestrian visibility at intersections.
         c.   A maximum height of forty two inches (42") and a maximum length
of fifteen and one-half feet (151/2') shall be allowed and the design shall
incorporate architectural elements that are consistent with the architectural
theme of the development such as brick, stone, medallions, trim elements, etc.
         d.   A cabinet sign with an illuminated background to the copy (panel
signs) shall be prohibited. Copy shall be designed as individual letters which
may be channel letters, routed face with push through letters, reverse channel,
halo lit, opaque vinyl background, or an acceptable design approved by the sign
administrator.
      4.   Sign Code: Any other directional signs within the development shall
comply with the sign code regulations.
      5.   Existing Concrete Sign Element: At the north entrance to the site
there is currently a concrete sign panel incorporated into a retaining wall as
shown in exhibit B on file in the city. With redesign and redevelopment plans,
this sign is to be removed. As part of the redesign of the site, the panels of
this sign may be relocated within the interior of the development and used as
part of a landscape element to preserve the feature and create a connection to
the past history of the development. It is not intended that this sign would
draw people off of the public street, unless reused as a part of the multi-
tenant or monument sign, so the sign location and placement shall be designed
to minimize visibility and readability from the exterior of the property.
   B.   Building Signage: With the update and redevelopment of the center, it
is anticipated that existing tenant signs will need to be temporarily removed
for the facade work to be completed. These signs shall be allowed to be removed
and replaced without being required to come into compliance with the current
regulations so long as the same signs are placed back in the same location and
configuration as they were prior to the update work. No sign permit will be
required for this temporary work.
New building signs shall comply with the following calculations for square
footage of sign allowed, regardless of the placement location of the signage on
their own tenant space except as otherwise allowed herein:
      1.   Tenants with the entrance of their retail space facing north along
University Avenue shall earn one square foot of sign per one linear foot of
tenant frontage. If in the future any tenant in the building in the northeast
corner of the site has their retail entrance facing 28th Street, they shall
also earn one foot (1') of sign per one linear foot of tenant frontage facing
28th Street.
      2.   Tenants with their entrances facing the parking field in the
interior of the center shall earn two (2) square feet of sign per one linear
foot of tenant frontage.
      3.   The wall area facing University Avenue above the roof of the tenants
on the lower level that face University Avenue, only may be utilized for tenant
signage for those tenants who have entrances that face the interior of the
site. This wall area on both buildings within the center shall earn one square
foot for each linear foot of the wall frontage facing University Avenue. The
landlord may determine the sign area allocation of the tenants displayed within
the allowed square footage of each building and tenants in one building, may
not be displayed on the wall of another building within the center, tenant
signage shall only be allowed on the upper wall facing University Avenue within
the building that they are located.
      4.   Wall signage shall incorporate aesthetic features compatible with
the overall character of the development. All wall signs will be composed of
either solid individual letters of anodized aluminum or galvanized metal or
plastic attached to the building fascia, illuminated self-contained individual
letters with translucent plastic faces set in anodized aluminum returns and
trim or solid metal panels with routed letters illuminated by recessed
cabinets. To the greatest extent possible, signs shall be contoured to minimize
the excess unused area of a sign and to minimize the amount of glow. Logos may
be incorporated into wall signage and shall not be larger than one and one-half
(11/2) times that size of the largest letter in the sign. A contoured panel
sign may be allowed for logo signs but shall be designed so that only the logo
is illuminated and background areas are covered with opaque vinyl or a routed
face design. The sign administrator shall work with the applicant to accomplish
a sign for the logo that allows for the tenants identity to be recognized but
minimizes the background illumination and addresses the intent of this
ordinance. (Ord. 2056, 10-6-2014)
103-16: FIRE ACCESS:
   A.   All internal drive aisles and parking lots shall permit the travel of
the fire department's largest vehicle, including adequate accommodation of the
vehicle's turning needs. Approval of unique design solutions to accommodate
fire access may be granted by the city council, if the solutions proposed are
recommended by the West Des Moines fire department.
   B.   At the discretion of the city's fire marshal, "no parking fire lane"
areas may be established as necessary to ensure efficient movement and access
of the emergency vehicles. The property owner of specific property on which the
fire lanes are located shall be responsible for the procurement and erection of
approved fire lane signage.
   C.   All access drives and drive aisles shall maintain a minimum of twenty
feet (20') of clear pavement. An access drive will be located around the
perimeter of the PUD to facilitate emergency needs, additional parking, loading
and unloading and general circulation throughout the PUD properties.
   D.   A minimum of fourteen feet (14') of vertical clearance over the travel
portion shall be maintained at all times over all vehicle travelways.
   E.   The developer or its designee shall be responsible for enforcement of
no parking lanes and maintaining adequate clearance of structures and
vegetation along and above all vehicle travelways regardless if public or
private.
   F.   Adequate fire accesses as determined by the city's fire marshal shall
be provided at all times to those areas under construction. (Ord. 2056, 10-6-
2014)
103-17: TRAFFIC STUDY REQUIRED:
A traffic study has been completed and approved by the city for the purpose of
determining traffic impacts and required improvements that would be necessary
for the safe and orderly movement of vehicles into and around the proposed
development. Future development applications for major modifications or Pc uses
will be required to comply with the requirements outlined in the traffic impact
study being prepared for this site. The requirements may include, but are not
limited to, auxiliary lanes, access locations, allowable throat distances at
accesses, lane configurations, alignment, agreements to pay for applicant's
share of possible future traffic signals, etc. Prior to, or in conjunction with
the development of any parcel, or portion of a parcel, the developer shall have
the traffic report reviewed by the city's traffic engineer to ensure that the
provisions and assumptions of the original traffic report are still valid and
applicable. The future developer will be required to comply with the
requirements outlined in the traffic impact study being prepared for this site.
(Ord. 2056, 10-6-2014)
103-18: BUILDING RESTRICTIONS, EASEMENTS, AND COVENANTS:
The developer shall, with the approval of the city council, adopt building
restrictions, easements, and covenants pertaining to the property where the
developer and the city deem appropriate. An agreement assigning responsibility
for the operation and maintenance of the common areas is required and a copy
forwarded to the city prior to the first major modification for any property
within the PUD. (Ord. 2056, 10-6-2014)
103-19: STORMWATER MANAGEMENT:
Specific stormwater management plans will be required with any major
modifications of any parcel, platting, or Pc applications for new structures.
These plans will demonstrate compliance with the approved PUD master stormwater
management plan, on file with the city. The developer will have said specific
stormwater management plans prepared by a professional engineer licensed in the
state of Iowa, prior to the submittal of any specific development proposals
within the PUD. The method of stormwater management and the stormwater
conveyance system shall be established as follows:
Phase I: The first phase will consist of the construction of detention
facilities in drainage basins 2 and 3A (basin map on file with the city) to
limit the discharge of the site to the 5-year developed storm. The first phase
will be completed with the first development modification for parcel A and/or
parcel B, including, but not limited to, new buildings, variances, building
additions whether done by minor modification or major modification and parking
lot modifications and excluding facade changes.
Phase II: The second phase will consist of the construction and expansion of
detention facilities in drainage basin 3B to limit the discharge of the site to
a level between the 5-year development storm and the 5-year undeveloped storm.
The second phase will be accomplished with the second major modification of the
site plan or permitted conditional use permit for which building modifications
or site modifications are proposed for parcel A and/or parcel B or by December
31, 2025, whichever occurs first.
Phase III: The third phase will consist of the construction of detention
facilities in drainage basin 1 to limit the discharge of the site to the 5-year
predeveloped storm. The third phase will be accomplished with the third major
modification of the site plan or permitted conditional use permit for which
building modifications or site modifications are proposed for parcel A and/or
parcel B, or by December 31, 2030, whichever occurs first. (Ord. 2056, 10-6-
2014)
103-20: PUBLIC STREET RIGHT OF WAY:
All general development shall adhere to the standards and design criteria set
forth in the West Des Moines subdivision ordinance, the West Des Moines
comprehensive plan, and/or established city policies pertaining to public
street rights of way. With the redevelopment of parcels A and/or B, with
"redevelopment" meaning any major modification, permitted conditional use
permits for which building modifications or site modifications are proposed,
the public street rights of way for University Avenue and 28th Street will be
brought into compliance with the comprehensive plan right of way dimension
requirements. The method to bring the right of way into compliance will be
determined by the city, for the appropriate classification of the roadway, to
ensure that there is sufficient roadway infrastructure to support the
development and accommodate future public improvements to the transportation
system. (Ord. 2056, 10-6-2014)
103-21: LIGHTING:
All lighting shall be downcast with fixtures of a cutoff type to eliminate
glare and spillover lighting beyond the property line. The height of parking
lot fixtures shall be no higher than twenty five feet (25') to minimize the
presence of the lights and impact on the surrounding areas. All lighting shall
be shielded to direct the light to the intended target. Wall packs without
shields are not allowed. As part of site development, a photometric plan
illustrating lighting levels of one foot-candle or less at the property line
will need to be provided. (Ord. 2056, 10-6-2014)
103-22: SAVINGS CLAUSE:
If any section, provision, sentence, clause, phrase or part of the ordinance
shall be adjudged invalid or unconstitutional, such adjudication shall not
affect the validity of the ordinance as a whole or any provision, section,
subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or part hereof not adjudged invalid or
unconstitutional. (Ord. 2056, 10-6-2014)
103-23: VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES:
Any person who violates the provisions of this ordinance upon conviction shall
be punished as set forth in section 1-4-1 of the city code. (Ord. 2056, 10-6-
2014)
103-99: LEGISLATIVE HISTORY:
Ord. 2056, 10-6-2014.
PUD #104
GRAND VALLEY
SECTION:
104-01: Legal Description
104-02: Sketch Plan
104-03: Required Plans
104-04: Intent Of The Grand Valley PUD
104-05: Conditions
104-06: Park Land Dedication
104-07: Master Property Owners' Association
104-08: Land Use Design Criteria
104-09: Density
104-10: Architecture
104-11: Landscaping
104-12: Buffering And Transitioning
104-13: Signage Regulation
104-14: Stormwater Management
104-15: Traffic Reports
104-16: Savings Clause
104-17: Effective Date
104-18: Violations And Penalties
104-99: Legislative History
104-01: LEGAL DESCRIPTION:
The legal description for Grand Valley PUD is as follows:
All that part of the west half of the southwest quarter of government lot 4 in
section 21, township 78 north, range 25 west of the fifth principal meridian
lying east of South 35th Street and north of Grand Avenue, comprising 36 acres
more or less, included within and forming a part of the city of West Des
Moines, Polk County, Iowa; except the north 60 feet thereof.
(Ord. 2075, 12-15-2014)
104-02: SKETCH PLAN:
On file in the City and made a part of this rezoning approval, for concept
description and delineation is the sketch plan document for the Grand Valley
PUD marked Exhibit A. Wherever conflict occurs between the written text in this
document and the notations on the sketch plan, the written text shall prevail.
The sketch plan is a graphic representation of the property included in the PUD
delineating the approximate location and configuration of the parcels for the
purpose of easier reference for the applicable regulations of this ordinance.
(Ord. 2075, 12-15-2014)
104-03: REQUIRED PLANS:
   A.   Preliminary Plat/Final Plat: Prior to or in conjunction with
development of any portion of the property covered by this PUD, said area shall
be platted in accordance with the City's subdivision ordinance.
   B.   Site Plan Development Applications: Site plans for lots within the
Grand Valley PUD must meet the intent of the PUD. Prior to development of the
respective parcel, site plans for development of the single-family attached or
multi-family product shall be submitted to the City for review through the
development review process and approval by the appropriate approval body. (Ord.
2195, 2-6-2017)
104-04: INTENT OF THE GRAND VALLEY PUD:
To create a residential development that provides a mix of attached and
detached single-family and multi-family housing options. (Ord. 2075, 12-15-
2014)
104-05: CONDITIONS:
Whereas, title 9, chapter 9, "Planned Unit Development District", of the City
Code, establishes certain regulations and guidelines pertaining to accompanying
information required on plat and site plan documents. In addition, the
following conditions, restrictions, and regulations are adopted as part of this
approval:
   A.   General Conditions: In addition to the PUD sketch plan map, the
following general development criteria shall be integrated into and made a part
of this planned unit development.
      1.   General Conformance To Subdivision Ordinance: All subdivisions,
public and private streets and street rights-of-way and general development
shall adhere to the standards and design criteria set forth in the West Des
Moines subdivision ordinance and/or established city policies pertaining
thereto, unless otherwise stated within this ordinance.
      2.   General Conformance To Zoning Ordinance: Unless otherwise specified
herein, the development of the Grand Valley PUD shall comply with the
provisions of title 9, "Zoning", of the city code or any other applicable
codes.
      3.   Flood Hazard: In all areas within a 100-year frequency flood hazard
zone, or adjoining drainageways, and detention ponding areas involving
potential flood hazards, no building shall be erected which has a minimum
opening elevation (including top of window well) less than two feet (2') above
the determined level of the 100-year frequency flood event. Buildings shall
only be permitted within twenty five feet (25') of any easement or property
boundary of a major drainageway, stormwater detention basin or pond if said
location is approved as part of the development entitlement by the city council
and said building is structurally designed accordingly.
      4.   Developer Responsibilities: The developer, their successors and/or
assigns, if any, shall pay all planning, engineering, and construction costs
for the development of the planned unit development, as required by this
ordinance and approved site plans and the cost of all streets, storm sewers,
sanitary sewers, drainageway improvements, detention basins, water mains,
buffers and other improvements as required for rights of way or public
easements within the Grand Valley PUD, unless otherwise approved by the city
council.
      5.   Public Street Improvements And Right Of Way Dedication: At time of
subdivision platting within the PUD, the subdivider shall be responsible for
construction and/or installation of all required public infrastructure
improvements in accordance with the city's subdivision ordinance, as indicated
herein, and/or as indicated on the approved Grand Valley PUD sketch proposal.
With any subdivision plat within the PUD, the subdivider shall be responsible
for constructing and/or installing the public infrastructure necessary to
support development within the subdivision in a manner that will assure that
the public infrastructure functions at an acceptable level of service (per the
city's comprehensive plan) and that complies with all city ordinances.
      6.   Sanitary Sewer: Any proposed change in approved land use densities
for the PUD will require an analysis of the downstream sanitary sewer capacity
to assure that adequate capacity is available for the proposed change in
approved land use densities.
      7.   Street Lighting: The developer shall be responsible for all costs
associated with the installation of public streetlights within or adjacent to
any area proposed to be platted or included within a development.
      8.   Mailboxes: The developer shall be responsible for installation of
any required cluster box units (CBUs) as per the local U.S. postal service post
office. (Ord. 2075, 12-15-2014)
104-06: PARK LAND DEDICATION:
An area of land calculated by a set formula based upon the size and density of
the proposed development will be required to be dedicated for purposes of a
public park and greenbelt areas. A park land dedication agreement, acceptable
to the park and recreation department, detailing the specifics related to the
provision of park land dedication requirements for the development of each area
contained within the PUD will be required to be executed prior to the approval
of each plat or site plan for parcels within the development. (Ord. 2075, 12-
15-2014)
104-07: MASTER PROPERTY OWNERS' ASSOCIATION:
If necessary, when the first plat within this development is recorded, proper
action shall be taken to establish a master property owners' association with
said property into the Grand Valley property owners' association and all
building restrictions, covenants, and other associated conditions attached to
the PUD shall be made to also apply to said property. The Grand Valley property
owners' association shall be responsible for the ongoing upkeep and maintenance
of any privately owned common grounds such as the buffer parks, stormwater
detention facilities, greenbelts, parks and other common space, as outlined in
the association documents and any other specific development improvements noted
as their responsibility in this ordinance. (Ord. 2075, 12-15-2014)
104-08: LAND USE DESIGN CRITERIA:
In addition to the general criteria as stated previously, the following land
use design criteria shall apply to the development areas designated on the
sketch plan. The following development standards and use regulations shall
apply to the development parcels:
   A.   Parcel A: All general use regulations and provisions set forth in title
9, Zoning of the West Des Moines city code for residential single-family (R-1)
zoning district shall apply to any development proposal for property in Parcel
A as shown on the sketch plan, unless noted otherwise in this ordinance.
      1.   Setbacks: All residential structures shall comply with a thirty foot
(30') front yard setback and a thirty five foot (35') rear yard setback as
measured from the boundary of Parcel A. Side yard setbacks shall be a minimum
of five feet (5') as measured to the closest element including egress window
wells, roof overhangs, bay windows, chimney bump outs, etc.
      2.   Porches: Front porches shall have a usable area that is no less than
five feet (5') in width and depth. Porches may be allowed to extend into the
front yard building setback, but shall be no closer than twenty five feet (25')
to the front property line.
      3.   Maximum Height: The maximum height in Parcel A shall not exceed two
(2) stories. (Ord. 2075, 12-15-2014)
   B.   Parcel B And Parcel C: All general use regulations and provisions set
forth in title 9, "Zoning", of the West Des Moines City Code for Residential
Medium Density (RM-7) or Residential Single-Family (RS-5), as follows, shall
apply to any development proposal for property in Parcels B or C, as shown on
the sketch plan, unless noted otherwise in this ordinance. Parcels B and C may
be developed with either traditional single-family detached dwellings on
individual lots or with horizontally attached multi- family dwelling units with
a maximum of four (4) dwellings per building and two (2) stories or less.
Multi-family dwelling units may be located on either one large parcel of common
ground or postage stamp lots. The first plat within each parcel will determine
the type of dwelling unit for that parcel; both single- family detached and
multi-family attached dwellings shall not be allowed within the same PUD
parcel.
      1.   Bulk Regulations:
         a.   Single Family Detached: All single family detached residential
structures shall comply with the following:
            (1)   Front Yard Primary Building Setback: Minimum twenty five feet
(25'), excluding porches. Porches are allowed to extend a maximum of six feet
(6') into the front yard setback.
            (2)   Rear Yard Primary Building Setback: A minimum thirty five
foot (35') rear yard setback as measured from the perimeter boundary of Parcel
B or Parcel C, respectively, except when adjacent to a required buffer. A
twenty five foot (25') setback shall be allowed on lots abutting a buffer as
measured from the interior edge of buffer to the primary structure.
            (3)   Side Yard Primary Building Setbacks: The minimum of any one
side yard shall be no less than five feet (5') and the minimum sum of both side
yards shall be at least twelve feet (12'), as measured to the foundation. The
minimum separation between single family detached residential structures shall
be ten feet (10'), as measured between the foundations. Building projections
may encroach up to two feet (2') into the setback as long as the structures
comply with all applicable Building Codes on fire resistive construction. No
window well or any ground mounted mechanical equipment may be located in a side
yard that is less than seven feet (7') in width.
            (4)   Accessory Structures: Accessory structures shall comply with
regulations for the Residential Single-Family (RS-5) Zoning District.
            (5)   Minimum Lot Width: Minimum lot width shall be fifty feet
(50').
         b.   Horizontally Attached Multi Family: Shall abide by City Code for
the Residential Medium Density (RM-7) District.
      2.   Porches And Balconies: Front porches or balconies for both single-
family and multi-family shall have a usable area that is no less than six feet
(6') in width and depth. Porches and balconies may be allowed to extend into
the front yard building setback a maximum of six feet (6').
      3.   Maximum Height: The maximum height of dwelling buildings within
Parcels B and C shall not exceed two (2) stories.
   C.   Parcel D: All general use regulations and provisions set forth in title
9, "Zoning", of the West Des Moines City Code for Residential Medium Density
(RM-7) shall apply to any development proposal for property in Parcel D, as
shown on the sketch plan, unless noted otherwise in this ordinance.
      1.   Setbacks: All residential structures shall comply with all general
use regulations and provisions set forth in title 9, "Zoning", of the City Code
for Residential Medium Density District, as well as, zoning district
transitioning and compatibility as identified in the Zoning Code, chapter 5,
section 7, with the following exceptions:
         a.   The setback from the common boundary line of Parcel D and Parcel
E shall be fifteen feet (15') when Parcel E is utilized as detention or open
space and not otherwise incorporated into a residential lot that is to be
developed. In any circumstance in which Parcel D directly borders a developable
residential lot (Parcels A, B, or C), minimum setbacks shall abide by City Code
for the Residential Medium-Density District and zoning district transitioning
and compatibility as identified in chapter 5, section 7 of this title.
         b.   Open space required for Parcel D shall be twenty percent (20%)
when Parcel E is utilized as detention or open space, or twenty five percent
(25%) if Parcel E is developed with anything other than detention or open
space.
      2.   Balconies: Balconies may extend a maximum of five feet (5') into the
front and rear yard building setback.
      3.   Maximum Height: The maximum building height shall not exceed three
(3) stories. (Ord. 2347, 2-19-2019)
   D.   Parcel E: Parcel E as shown on the sketch plan shall be reserved and
used for stormwater detention. (Ord. 2195, 2-6-2017)
104-09: DENSITY:
The total number of dwellings within the Grand Valley PUD shall not exceed
seven (7) dwelling units per acre or two hundred forty one (241) dwelling
units. Parcels A, B and C shall not exceed a maximum of five (5) dwelling units
per acre. Any unused density from Parcels A, B, and C, may be located in Parcel
D. The density allotment from Parcel E can be used on Parcel D, which may
result in the density of Parcel D exceeding maximum density for the zoning
district. If Parcel D is developed before Parcels A, B, and/or C, the density
of the remaining undeveloped parcels shall be reduced as necessary as they are
developed such that the total number of units within the PUD does not exceed
two hundred forty one (241). (Ord. 2195, 2-6-2017)
104-10: ARCHITECTURE:
The intent is to create building designs throughout this development that are
varied and articulated to provide visual interest and appropriate context for
the natural character along with appropriate scale for the pedestrian elements
of the residential development. Architectural design for residential units
shall accomplish this by careful attention to the use of exterior building
materials and details, locations of windows and doors, and change in building
mass within the footprint and roof design. Care should be taken in the design
of the buildings to keep grading and tree removal to a minimum.
Buildings shall use materials such as brick, stone, vertical or lap siding,
shakes and stucco, combining materials along with trim and details to provide
visual interest within the development. Use of natural materials is encouraged,
composite materials such as fiber cement and wood composites are appropriate
substitutions. All material, trim and details for a building shall be designed
appropriately for the chosen architectural style. When used, masonry materials
shall be appropriately utilized to present the appearance of three- dimensional
elements and authenticity to the materials.
In addition, architectural design for Parcel D shall attempt to have several
elements that carry to provide visual continuity and cohesiveness; however it
is preferred that not all buildings be identical. All buildings shall use the
following in all building design:
   A.   Fenestration (door and window openings) shall be sized to the scale of
the building and detailed appropriately to the pedestrian theme. Use of
repeating window patterns and details are encouraged to unify the design.
   B.   Each building of the development should carry a consistent appearance
while varying the color or style of brick, stone and siding to distinguish
between buildings.
   C.   Entrances into buildings should be easily identified through the use of
building design and detailing. Projected or recessed entryways, higher
rooflines, awnings or changes in building material are examples that can create
this effect.
   D.   Materials and trim used on the front facade shall be continued around
all sides of the building.
   E.   To the degree possible and logical, materials should change with the
change in building planes.
   F.   Trim and structural elements such as posts or columns shall be sized to
the scale of the building and detailed appropriately to the architectural
style.
   G.   Garages or accessory structures should incorporate architecture details
with the use of windows, doors, and other facade detailing. (Ord. 2075, 12-15-
2014)
104-11: LANDSCAPING:
Landscaping for open space, off street parking, buffering, mitigation of
negative elements, etc., shall be required as set forth in title 9, chapter 19,
"Landscaping", of the City Code, except as noted otherwise in this ordinance.
If there is a conflict between the PUD and the City Code, the more restrictive
shall apply. (Ord. 2075, 12-15-2014)
104-12: BUFFERING AND TRANSITIONING:
Buffering and density transition methods shall be required as set forth in
title 9, chapter 19, section 8E and title 9, chapter 5, section 7C of the City
Code unless noted otherwise within this ordinance. (Ord. 2075, 12-15-2014)
A thirty foot (30') landscaped and bermed buffer shall be provided along the
South 35th Street frontage. With the exception of a buffer required for double-
frontage single-family detached lots, the buffer may overlap building setbacks.
On single-family detached double frontage lots, the rear yard setback shall be
measured from the interior edge of the buffer.
Where single-family detached abuts single-family attached and multi-family, the
following architectural and/or buffering standards as outlined in A, B, C, and
D below and illustrated in Exhibit A (on file with the City Clerk) shall also
apply:
   A.   Single-family attached and multi-family buildings located on street
corners shall have facades that relate to both streets. Buildings should
implement building enhancements, such as but not limited to porches, sun rooms,
bay windows, additional entries, and other elements typically used only on
front facades on both street-facing facades. A minimum landscape of three (3)
trees and sixteen (16) shrubs shall be implemented along that part of a lot
adjacent to the street that functions as the side yard for the lot.
   B.   Parcels developed with multi-family dwellings that have a side yard
which abuts the rear yard of an adjacent single-family detached property shall
provide a six foot (6') privacy fence on the common property line with a
fifteen foot (15') side yard building setback.
   C.   In the case where single-family attached and multi-family residential
buildings back up to parcels intended for detached single-family homes, a
minimum of two (2) overstory trees shall be located in the rear yard area and a
six foot (6') privacy fence shall be constructed along the rear property line.
   D.   Adequate buffering of views of the multi-family development to be
located in Parcel D from homes along the south boundary of Parcel A and the
eastern boundary of Parcels B and C, if developed with single-family detached
dwellings, shall be provided. Earthen berming, if possible, along with
implementation of landscape vegetation equivalent to that required of City Code
for a thirty foot (30') wide buffer shall be provided adjacent to the pond
within Parcel E or along the north and west boundaries of Parcel D. (Ord. 2195,
2-6-2017)
104-13: SIGNAGE REGULATION:
Signage restrictions shall be imposed to limit and reduce the negative impacts
of sign clutter. Signage within each PUD parcel shall comply with all
provisions of title 9, chapter 18 of the City Code for either the Single-Family
Residential (R-1), Residential Single-Family (RS) District or the Residential
Medium Density (RM) District, whichever is applicable to the type of dwellings
implemented within the parcel. (Ord. 2195, 2-6-2017)
104-14: STORMWATER MANAGEMENT:
Specific stormwater management plans will be required with the development of
each parcel, demonstrating compliance with the approved Grand Valley PUD master
stormwater management plan, on file in the City. The developer will have said
specific stormwater management plans prepared by a professional engineer
licensed in the State of Iowa, in conjunction with the submittal of a specific
development proposal for a parcel within the PUD. All specific stormwater
management plans shall comply with the City's current design standards for
stormwater management. The method of stormwater management and the stormwater
conveyance system shall be determined prior to City approval of any development
within any portion of the property within the Grand Valley PUD.
At time of platting or development, ownership and responsibility for all
stormwater detention areas and private stormwater detention outlet structures
will need to be established. (Ord. 2075, 12-15-2014)
104-15: TRAFFIC REPORTS:
A traffic impact study (traffic report) dated July 30, 2014, has been prepared
by the City of West Des Moines for the Grand Valley development. The traffic
report caps the traffic generated from all ground within this PUD at two
thousand four hundred five (2,405) average daily trips, with one hundred eighty
two (182) A.M. peak hour trips and two hundred fifteen (215) P.M. peak hour
trips. The traffic report also outlines the ultimate paving requirements for
the major roadways in the vicinity of the Grand Valley development. Prior to,
or in conjunction with the development of any parcel, or portion of a parcel,
the developer shall have the traffic report reviewed by the City's traffic
consultant to ensure that the provisions and assumptions of the original
traffic report are still valid and applicable. (Ord. 2075, 12-15-2014)
104-16: SAVINGS CLAUSE:
If any section, provision, sentence, clause, phrase or part of the ordinance
shall be adjudged invalid or unconstitutional, such adjudication shall not
affect the validity of the ordinance as a whole or any provision, section,
subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or part hereof not adjudged invalid or
unconstitutional. (Ord. 2075, 12-15-2014)
104-17: EFFECTIVE DATE:
This ordinance shall be in full force and effect after its passage, approval
and publication as provided by law. (Ord. 2075, 12-15-2014)
104-18: VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES:
Any person who violates the provisions of this ordinance upon conviction shall
be punished as set forth in 1-4-1 of the City Code of the City of West Des
Moines, Iowa. (Ord. 2195, 2-6-2017)
104-99: LEGISLATIVE HISTORY:
Ord. 2075, 12-15-2014; Ord. 2195, 2-6-2017; Ord. 2347, 2-19-2019.
PUD #105
ELDORADO ESTATES
SECTION:
105-01: Legal Description
105-02: Sketch Plan
105-03: Required Plans
105-04: Conditions
105-05: Park Land Dedication
105-06: Master Property Owners' Association
105-07: Landscaping
105-08: Architecture
105-09: Land Use Design Criteria
105-10: Signage Regulation
105-11: Stormwater Management
105-12: Public Improvements And Right Of Way Dedication
105-13: Traffic Reports
105-14: Savings Clause
105-15: Effective Date
105-99: Legislative History
105-01: LEGAL DESCRIPTION:
Lot 2, Roger's Farm, an official plat, now included in and forming a part of
the city of West Des Moines, Dallas County, Iowa. Said tract of land being
subject to and together with any and all easements of record. Said tract of
land contains 35.99 acres more or less. (Ord. 2107, 8-10-2015)
105-02: SKETCH PLAN:
Attached hereto and made a part of this rezoning approval, for concept
description and delineation is the sketch plan document for the Eldorado
Estates PUD marked exhibit A. The sketch plan is a graphic representation of
the property included in the PUD delineating the approximate location and
configuration of the parcels for the purpose of easier reference for the
applicable regulations of this ordinance. Wherever conflict occurs between the
written text in this document and the notations on the sketch plan, the written
text shall prevail. (Ord. 2107, 8-10-2015)
105-03: REQUIRED PLANS:
Prior to or in conjunction with development or transfer of ownership of any
portion of the property covered by this PUD, the following plans shall be
required:
   A.   Preliminary Plat And Final Plat: The PUD area shall be platted in
accordance with the city's subdivision ordinance. Parcels created via the plat
of survey process and platted outlots identified on a plat shall be unbuildable
until such time that the plat of survey parcel and/or outlot is replatted into
a developable lot. (Ord. 2107, 8-10-2015)
105-04: CONDITIONS:
Whereas, title 9, chapter 9, "Planned Unit Development District", of the city
code, establishes certain regulations and guidelines pertaining to accompanying
information required on plat and site plan documents. Now, therefore, the
following conditions, restrictions, and regulations are adopted as part of this
approval:
   A.   General Conditions: In addition to the PUD sketch plan map, the
following general development criteria shall be integrated into and made a part
of this planned unit development:
      1.   General Conformance To Subdivision Ordinance: All subdivisions,
public and private streets, public or private street rights of way and general
development shall adhere to the standards and design criteria set forth in the
West Des Moines subdivision ordinance and/or established city policies
pertaining thereto, unless otherwise stated within this ordinance.
      2.   General Conformance To Zoning Ordinance: Unless otherwise specified
herein, the development of the Eldorado Estates PUD shall comply with the
provisions of the West Des Moines zoning ordinance.
      3.   Flood Hazard: In all areas within a 100-year frequency flood hazard
zone, or adjoining drainageways, and detention ponding areas involving
potential flood hazards, no building shall be erected which has a lowest level
floor, including basements, less than one foot (1') above the determined level
of the 100-year frequency flood event. Buildings shall not be permitted within
twenty five feet (25') of any easement or property boundary of a major
drainageway, stormwater detention basin or pond unless said location is
approved as part of the development entitlement by the city council and said
building is structurally designed accordingly.
      4.   Developer Responsibilities: The developer, their successors and/or
assigns, if any, shall pay all planning, engineering, and construction costs
for the development of the planned unit development, as required by this
ordinance and approved site plans. Developer shall be responsible for cost of
all streets, storm sewers, sanitary sewers, drainageway improvements, detention
basins, water mains, buffers and other improvements as required of the
development. Developer shall dedicate appropriate rights of way and/or public
easements required within the Eldorado Estates PUD, unless otherwise approved
by the city council.
      5.   Sanitary Sewer: Any proposed change in approved land use densities
for the PUD will require an analysis of the downstream sanitary sewer capacity
to assure that adequate capacity is available for the proposed change in
approved land use densities.
      6.   Street Connection: A sixty foot (60') public ingress/egress easement
shall be granted or right of way dedicated by the developer from the street
within the subject property to provide for future access to the property to the
south that fronts onto South Jordan Creek Parkway. The means of access shall be
determined with the preliminary plat and final plat for the property.
      7.   Street Lighting: The developer shall be responsible for all costs
associated with the installation of public streetlights within or adjacent to
any area proposed to be platted or included within a development.
      8.   Mailboxes: The developer shall be responsible for installation of
any required cluster box units (CBUs/mailboxes) as per the local U.S. postal
service post office.
      9.   Driveway Locations: The throat distance of the local street through
the property from Jordan Creek Parkway to the first driveway shall be at least
seventy five feet (75'), measured curb to curb, in order to provide adequate
separation of turn movements. (Ord. 2107, 8-10-2015)
105-05: PARK LAND DEDICATION:
An area of land calculated by a set formula based upon the density (total
number of dwelling units) of the proposed development is required to be
dedicated for purposes of a public park and greenway as per city code. A park
land dedication agreement, acceptable to the park and recreation department,
detailing the specifics related to the park land dedication requirements for
the development of any area contained within the PUD is required to be
submitted. As part of such, a 7.76 acre area of land (not a part of this PUD)
located to the south of the Aspire residential development (also known as
outlot Y, Roger's Farm) has been dedicated to the city by the owner of that
property on behalf of the Eldorado Estates developer for development as a
public park. This park, along with access easements and associated trails on
the east and west sides of the Aspire development, will fulfill the dedication
requirements for the Roger's Farm Subdivision of which the Eldorado Estates PUD
is a part. (Ord. 2107, 8-10-2015)
105-06: MASTER PROPERTY OWNERS' ASSOCIATION:
If deemed applicable, proper action shall be taken to establish a master
property owners' association. The Eldorado Estates property owners' association
shall be responsible for the ongoing upkeep and maintenance of any privately
owned common grounds such as buffer parks, stormwater detention facilities,
greenbelts, plazas and other common space, as outlined in the association
documents and any other specific development improvements noted as their
responsibility in this ordinance. (Ord. 2107, 8-10-2015)
105-07: LANDSCAPING:
Buffering between districts or parcels and uses shall be required as set forth
in title 9, chapters 5 and 19 of the city code, except as noted otherwise in
this ordinance.
   A.   There shall be a thirty foot (30') wide buffer park easement along the
South Jordan Creek Parkway frontage of the development. The equivalent of one
overstory or upright evergreen tree, two (2) understory trees and six (6)
shrubs for every thirty five (35) linear feet of buffer length shall be
provided.
A minimum of fifty percent (50%) of the required number of trees within the
buffer park shall be evergreen. At the time of planting, overstory trees shall
have a minimum trunk diameter of two inches (2"); understory trees shall have a
minimum trunk diameter of one and one-half inches (11/2"); and evergreens shall
be a minimum of six feet (6') in height. Shrub height at time of planting
varies according to the anticipated mature size of the plant. In general, the
taller the shrub at maturity the larger the plant size at time of planting. The
location of the required landscaping (trees, shrubs, etc.) may be planted in
any location along the berm.
   B.   Trees that will encroach into any vehicle or pedestrian use area or
travel lane shall be of a variety that will accommodate pruning to allow for
the minimum clearance height (14 feet over vehicle travel lanes; 8 feet over
pedestrian travel lanes) without adversely affecting the overall natural shape
of the variety. Maintaining trees to these clearance levels is the
responsibility of the property owner.
   C.   Trees shall not be planted closer than five feet (5') to a sidewalk as
measured from the center of the tree or shrub base.
   D.   No vegetation which obstructs visibility shall be located within the
site triangle of intersecting streets and drives. (Ord. 2107, 8-10-2015)
105-08: ARCHITECTURE:
The intent is to create building designs throughout this development that are
varied and articulated to provide visual interest and appropriate context for
the natural character of the surrounding area along with appropriate scale for
the pedestrian elements of a residential development. Architectural design for
single-family units shall accomplish this by careful attention to the use of
exterior building materials and details, locations of windows and doors, and
change in building mass within the plan and roof design. Care should be taken
in the design of the building to keep grading and tree removal to a minimum.
Homes shall use materials such as brick, stone, vertical or lap siding, shakes
and stucco, combining materials along with trim and details to present a mix of
residential architectural styles within the development. Use of natural
materials is encouraged, composite materials such as fiber cement and wood
composites are appropriate substitutions. Vinyl siding may be used only with
appropriately scaled trim and not as the majority cladding material. All
material, trim and details for a building shall be designed appropriately for
chosen architectural style. Materials should change with the change in building
planes. Trim and structural elements such as posts or columns shall be sized to
the scale of the building. When used, masonry materials shall have the
appearance of three-dimensional elements.
Visible garages shall not encompass more than fifty percent (50%) of the street
facade of the building. Garages may be turned to reduce visibility of the
garages. Appropriate architectural detailing shall be incorporated into the
visible side wall of a garage parallel to the street so as to enhance the
architecture and minimize indication that it is garage versus house. Detached
garages or accessory structures should incorporate architectural details of the
primary building with the use of roof forms, windows, doors and other facade
detailing. (Ord. 2107, 8-10-2015)
105-09: LAND USE DESIGN CRITERIA:
In addition to the general criteria as stated above, the following land use
regulations, development standards, and design criteria shall apply to the
development of all areas designated on the sketch plan:
   A.   Lots 1 Through 14: All general use regulations and provisions set forth
in title 9, "Zoning", of the city code for residential estate (RE-1A) shall
apply to any development proposal for the property, unless noted otherwise in
this ordinance.
      1.   Minimum Lot Size: The minimum lot size permitted in this development
shall be forty thousand (40,000) square feet with a maximum of fourteen (14)
lots.
      2.   Minimum Lot Width: Minimum lot width shall be no less than one
hundred feet (100') as measured at the front building setback line.
      3.   Building Height: Building height shall be in accordance with the
requirements for the residential estate zoning district as set forth in title
9, chapter 7 of the city code.
      4.   Building Setbacks: Setbacks for all residential development shall be
as follows:
         a.   Front yard: Thirty five foot (35') setback along the internal
street within the development. Building shall be set as close to the thirty
five foot (35') setback line as possible so as to preserve as many trees as
possible and minimize grading of the site.
         b.   Rear yard: Fifty feet (50').
         c.   Side yard: Twenty feet (20') as measured to the closest element
of the building.
         d.   Setback along Jordan Creek Parkway shall be a minimum of fifty
feet (50').
         e.   Detached accessory structures shall not be located in the front
yard and shall maintain a minimum twenty foot (20') setback from side and rear
property lines.
      5.   Fire Sprinklered: Homes within the Eldorado Estates PUD that are
eight thousand (8,000) square feet or larger must be fire sprinklered according
to the West Des Moines fire code. Homes on lots 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, and 10 shall
be fire sprinklered regardless of size of the dwelling structure, since the
homes on those lots will be greater than seven hundred fifty feet (750') from
the eastern edge of Jordan Creek Parkway. If any portion of the home on lot 3
is seven hundred fifty feet (750') or greater from the eastern curb line of
Jordan Creek Parkway, it shall also be fire sprinklered regardless of the size
of the dwelling structure. The distance from Jordan Creek Parkway to the
dwelling structure shall be determined by the city fire marshal. (Ord. 2107, 8-
10-2015)
105-10: SIGNAGE REGULATION:
Signage shall comply with all provisions and standards of title 9, chapter 18
of the city code for the residential estate (RE) zoning district. (Ord. 2107,
8-10-2015)
105-11: STORMWATER MANAGEMENT:
A stormwater management plan will be required with the platting of this
property. The developer will have said stormwater management plan prepared by a
professional engineer licensed in the state of Iowa, in conjunction with the
submittal of a preliminary plat for the development of the property. The
stormwater management plan shall comply with the city's current design
standards for stormwater management. The method of stormwater management and
the stormwater conveyance system shall be determined prior to city approval of
a preliminary plat.
At time of platting, ownership and responsibility for all stormwater detention
areas and private stormwater detention outlet structures will need to be
established through the execution of a stormwater facility maintenance
agreement. (Ord. 2107, 8-10-2015)
105-12: PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS AND RIGHT OF WAY DEDICATION:
The developer shall be responsible for constructing and/or installing the
public infrastructure necessary to support development within the subdivision
in a manner that will assure that the public infrastructure functions at an
acceptable level of service (per the city's comprehensive plan) and that it
complies with all city ordinances. At the time of subdivision platting into
developable lots, the subdivider shall provide the necessary surety or city
acceptable agreements to provide for the construction and/or installation of
all required public infrastructure improvements in accordance with the city's
subdivision ordinance.
Right of way for the street(s) that serves homes in the development will be
required to be conveyed prior to or in conjunction with the final platting of
the property into developable lots. Right of way requirements for this street
shall be sixty feet (60') plus a fifty five foot (55') radius cul-de- sac
turnaround at the end of the roadway. (Ord. 2107, 8-10-2015)
105-13: TRAFFIC REPORTS:
A traffic impact study (traffic report) dated June 12, 2015, has been prepared
by the city of West Des Moines for Eldorado Estates. The traffic report caps
the traffic generated from this PUD at three hundred forty three (343) average
daily trips, twenty seven (27) A.M. peak hour trips and thirty six (36) P.M.
peak hour trips. The traffic report, along with previous studies for the area,
outlines the ultimate geometry for the major roadways in the vicinity of the
Eldorado Estates development. Once the subject property is platted into
residential lots, an additional traffic study may be required to confirm that
the proposed subdivision plat is consistent with the number of lots and traffic
to be generated anticipated with the June 12, 2015, study. (Ord. 2107, 8-10-
2015)
105-14: SAVINGS CLAUSE:
If any section, provision, sentence, clause, phrase or part of the ordinance
shall be adjudged invalid or unconstitutional, such adjudication shall not
affect the validity of the ordinance as a whole or any provision, section,
subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or part hereof not adjudged invalid or
unconstitutional. (Ord. 2107, 8-10-2015)
105-15: EFFECTIVE DATE:
This ordinance shall be in full force and effect after its passage, approval
and publication as provided by law. (Ord. 2107, 8-10-2015)
105-99: LEGISLATIVE HISTORY:
Ord. 2107, 8-10-2015.
PUD #106
1ST STREET REDEVELOPMENT
SECTION:
106-01: Legal Description
106-02: Development Intent
106-03: Required Plans
106-04: Compliance With Code
106-05: Developer Responsibilities
106-06: Land Use
106-07: Vehicle Trip Allocation
106-08: Stormwater Management Plan
106-09: Public Street Right-Of-Way Dedication
106-10: Street Design
106-11: Parking
106-12: Pedestrian Elements
106-13: Landscaping
106-14: Signage
106-15: Lighting
106-16: Architecture
106-17: Bulk Regulations
106-18: Violations And Penalties
106-19: Savings Clause
106-20: Effective Date
106-99: Legislative History
106-01: LEGAL DESCRIPTION:
Lots 95 and 96 of Linnwill, an official plat in the city of West Des Moines,
Polk County, IA, except for the east 60 feet;
And
Lot 1 of Linnwill plat 2, an official plat in the city of West Des Moines, Polk
County, Iowa,
And
Lot 1 of Linnwill plat, an official plat in the city of West Des Moines, Polk
County, Iowa;
And
The property known as parcel "2018-36" and legally described as:
A parcel of land located in Lot D in Linnwill, an official plat, now included
in and forming a part of the City of West Des Moines, as recorded in Book J,
Page 481 of the Polk County Recorder's Office, Polk County, Iowa, more
particularly described as follows:
Beginning at the northwest corner of said Lot D, thence south 89° 33' 21" east,
50.00 feet along the north line of said Lot D to the northeast corner of said
lot d; thence south 00° 00' 56" east, 79.96 feet along the east line of said
lot d to the southwest corner of Lot 1 in Linnwill; thence north 89° 36' 24"
west, 50.01 feet to the west;
Line of said Lot D; thence north 00° 01' 03" west, 80.01 feet along said west
line to the point of beginning, containing 4,000 square feet or 0.09 acres more
or less;
And
Lot 2 & 3 Of Linnwill Plat 2, an official plat in the City Of West Des Moines,
Polk County, Iowa, Except Parcel 2018-18, as recorded in Book 17544, page 254
of the Polk County Recorder's Office, Polk County, Iowa.
(Ord. 2135, 1-11-2016; amd. Ord. 2436, 9-8-2020)
106-02: DEVELOPMENT INTENT:
The 1st Street Redevelopment PUD intends to provide a framework for development
standards reflective of the realities and constraints of redevelopment and to
establish design standards to reinforce the intent of the Grand Avenue
redevelopment plan to respect the context of the area and create a neighborhood
identity that recognizes the area's original development history. The 1st
Street Redevelopment PUD is located within the area identified for
redevelopment by the Grand Avenue redevelopment plan. Redevelopment in this
area is intended to create a special iconic district within the City of West
Des Moines known as the Val-Gate District. All development within this district
must be in furtherance of the goals of the Grand Avenue redevelopment plan. The
City of West Des Moines Val-Gate District Grand Avenue redevelopment plan and
all appendices and exhibits, as amended, are hereby incorporated as part of the
1st Street Redevelopment PUD.
The Grand Avenue redevelopment plan identifies major street patterns, access
and interconnection points, district streetscape locations and typical design
including signage and pedestrian elements. The intent of the redevelopment plan
is to provide a tool that can be used to promote the communication and
cooperation between adjacent property owners and developers within the overall
district to create and ensure a cohesive and unified redevelopment.
Properties within the Grand Avenue redevelopment plan may be referred to as the
Val-Gate District. (Ord. 2122, 11-2-2015)
106-03: REQUIRED PLANS:
The following plans shall be required as a part of the processing of any
development application for any property within the 1st Street Redevelopment
PUD: (Ord. 2122, 11-2-2015)
   A.   Planned Unit Development: A planned unit development (PUD) identifies
detailed development criteria for specific areas within the Grand Avenue
redevelopment plan area. The planned unit development shall conform to the
general development intent identified in the approved redevelopment plan. The
planned unit development shall be reviewed by the Plan and Zoning Commission
and adopted by the City Council by ordinance.
This document shall constitute the planned unit development ordinance for the
1st Street Redevelopment. Attached to and made a part of this ordinance is a
sketch plan that illustrates the overall site layout concept (Exhibit A). This
document and any referenced documents or exhibits (on file in the City) are
intended to specify the components, parameters, and requirements to be adhered
to and implemented in order to ensure the realization the Grand Avenue
redevelopment plan. It is recognized that modifications and changes may be
necessary due to changes in building footprints, site details, and response to
market demand. At the discretion of the director of development services,
changes to the layout of the development that are deemed to be "major" changes
shall require an amendment to the sketch plan and ordinance. Major amendments
shall require the review and approval of the Plan and Zoning Commission and
City Council.
Where the sketch plan and PUD language conflict, the PUD language shall
prevail. (Ord. 2122, 11-2-2015; amd. Ord. 2184, 11-28-2016)
   B.   Development Applications (Site Plans Or Modifications To A Site Plan):
Site plans for lots within the 1st Street Redevelopment PUD must meet the
intent of the approved PUD. Site plans for the development of each and all lots
shall be submitted to the City of West Des Moines for review and approval prior
to the development of any portion of the lot. Site plans for permitted uses
which comply (as determined by the Director of Development Services or
designee) with the design intent as set forth in this PUD will be subject to
review via the City's review process and receive final approval from the City
Council following a recommendation from the Plan and Zoning Commission. Site
plans for uses identified as permitted conditional (Pc) shall require approval
from the Board of Adjustment. At the discretion of the Director of Development
Services, an amendment to the 1st Street Redevelopment PUD may be required to
bring consistency between the ordinance and site plan development proposed.
   C.   Preliminary And Final Platting: After development of the first building
on the site, prior to or in conjunction with any future site plan submittal for
proposed development of any portion of the 1st Street Redevelopment PUD, said
area shall be preliminary and final platted, in accordance with the City's
subdivision ordinance, to delineate the parcels or lots to be developed or
sold. Lots without public street frontage, in accordance with the City Code
requirements, may be allowed provided the frontage requirements of the Code
have been met by an abutting or surrounding lot which is under common ownership
under an owners' association, or a cross parking and access easement has been
executed which provides for the unrestricted use and access of the drives and
parking. Platted outlots are not buildable.
Unless otherwise specifically restricted by City Council action, groundwork and
construction of private roads and utilities may be started, at the developer's
risk, upon approval of the preliminary plat by the City Council. Public street
and utility construction may begin, at the risk of the developer, after
approval of the preliminary plat by the City Council and construction
improvement plans by the City of West Des Moines.
Prior to approval of the final plat, unless otherwise allowed by Council, the
developer of the 1st Street Redevelopment PUD shall provide the appropriate
agreements, easements, and sureties for all public rights-of-way and other
public improvements (utilities, sidewalks, streetlights, etc.) within and
associated with the development.
A final plat applicable to each proposed development area must be approved and
recorded with the Polk County Recorder's Office prior to approval of a site
plan or issuance of any building permit, including footing and foundation
permits, for construction of any structure within the area proposed for
development after the initial building is constructed. (Ord. 2122, 11-2-2015)
106-04: COMPLIANCE WITH CODE:
Unless otherwise specified herein, the development of 1st Street Redevelopment
PUD shall comply with the provisions of the City Code. (Ord. 2122, 11-2-2015)
106-05: DEVELOPER RESPONSIBILITIES:
   A.   Unless otherwise specifically approved by the City Council, the
developer, its successors and/or assigns, if any, shall pay all planning,
engineering, and construction costs for the development of the planned unit
development as required by this ordinance, and shall pay all costs related to
approved site plans, which may include, but is not limited to, the cost of all
streets, storm sewers, sanitary sewers, water mains and service lines,
drainageway improvements, detention basins, buffers, and other improvements as
required. No final occupancy permit shall be issued until all necessary
improvements applicable to the area/lot or structure requesting occupancy are
installed and accepted by the City of West Des Moines. Nothing in this
ordinance shall be construed to prevent the developer, its successors and/or
assigns, if any, from entering into private agreement(s) as it/they may desire
to share the cost of improvements.
   B.   Unless otherwise provided by a separate agreement, the cost of future
traffic signals and dedicated turn lanes at the southern full access
intersection on 1st Street located at the southeast corner of the PUD as shown
in exhibit B shall be the responsibility of the developer pursuant to the
assessment policy of the city, of which the city shall have no financial
responsibility whatsoever.
   C.   The developer shall be responsible for the maintenance of the area
encompassing the streetscape easement and related public right of way.
   D.   Developer's responsibilities include all obligations contained in this
section as well as those responsibilities otherwise set forth in this
ordinance. (Ord. 2122, 11-2-2015)
106-06: LAND USE:
All general use regulations and provisions set forth in title 9, "Zoning", of
the city code for the community commercial district (CMC), shall apply to any
development proposal for the 1st Street Redevelopment PUD ordinance, unless
noted elsewhere within this ordinance.
   A.   Allowed Uses: Uses allowed for parcels within the 1st Street
Redevelopment PUD shall be those uses identified as permitted or permitted
conditional for the community commercial (CMC) district including ancillary
uses provided as part of the primary use, except as noted below.
   B.   Prohibited Uses: The following uses normally allowed in the community
commercial (CMC) district shall be prohibited in the 1st Street Redevelopment
PUD:
 
SIC 4522      Heliport/helistop
SIC 4925      Mixed, manufactured or liquefied petroleum gas production and/or
              distribution (except: production and manufacturing)
SIC 592       Liquor stores
SIC 5999      Adult entertainment establishment
SIC 6099-9901 Functions related to deposit banking NEC - check cashing agencies
SIC 6141      Personal credit institutions (a.k.a., delayed deposit lenders)
SIC 75        Automotive repair, services, and parking
 
(Ord. 2122, 11-2-2015)
106-07: VEHICLE TRIP ALLOCATION:
The traffic study completed by the city of West Des Moines dated October 2,
2014, and approved for the 1st Street Redevelopment PUD parcels estimated a
total of six thousand three hundred eighty one (6,381) average daily trips
(ADT); four hundred ninety four (494) A.M. peak; and four hundred sixty eight
(468) P.M. peak vehicle trips within the development. These numbers constitute
the number of total vehicle trips allocated to the 1st Street Redevelopment
PUD. The combination of tenants/uses within the development cannot collectively
generate vehicle trips which exceed that allocated to these parcels as
indicated.
Development and redevelopment of each parcel and implementation of desired land
uses will be limited by the available number of trips designated above for the
1st Street Redevelopment PUD, as well as compliance with all applicable
regulations within this ordinance or city code. The traffic to be generated by
these parcels must be less than or equal to that allocated. The traffic
allocation indicated above shall be an entitlement to the parcels. Traffic
generation due to subsequent redevelopment, expansion or change of use for any
parcel shall not exceed the maximum traffic allocation stated previously for
the development. Alternate uses to that currently anticipated may be allowed,
following completion of an amendment to the approved traffic study analyzing
the proposed alternative and appropriate city approval if the existing uses and
the proposed change(s) collectively do not exceed six thousand three hundred
eighty one (6,381) average daily trips (ADT); four hundred ninety four (494)
A.M. peak; and four hundred sixty eight (468) P.M. peak vehicle trips allocated
to these parcels.
Overall trips for the Val-Gate district must remain within the caps established
for the Val-Gate district as a whole which were established as part of the
Grand Avenue redevelopment plan traffic study. Future development within the
1st Street Redevelopment PUD may be limited by available trips due to traffic
generated elsewhere within the district. (Ord. 2122, 11-2-2015)
106-08: STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN:
A master stormwater management plan (MSWMP) for the entire Grand Avenue
redevelopment area which governs the overall stormwater management of the Val-
Gate district has been prepared by the city of West Des Moines. Specific
stormwater management plans (SWMP) will be required with the submittal of each
site development plan. The specific stormwater plans shall be prepared at the
developer's expense, by a professional engineer licensed in the state of Iowa.
All specific stormwater management plans must be consistent with the Grand
Avenue redevelopment master stormwater management plan prepared by the city and
shall comply with the city's applicable design standards for stormwater
management existing at the time each development (site plan) is approved. Said
SWMP must demonstrate compliance with the Grand Avenue redevelopment master
stormwater management plan, if available, at the time of site plan approval.
The developer(s) of the 1st Street Redevelopment PUD shall be required to
participate in the Grand Avenue redevelopment stormwater management facilities
and shall enter into an agreement with the city approved as part of the site
plan stating that the developer will provide improvements or contribute fees
per their pro rata share in accordance with the Grand Avenue East stormwater
connection fee district as approved by the city council on April 21, 2014.
As part of the Grand Avenue redevelopment stormwater project, it is anticipated
that a stormwater structure will be installed across a portion of the
developer's property. The developer agrees to provide to the city an easement
for said structure. The city will endeavor to structure the construction of the
stormwater improvements in such a manner as to minimize the impact on the
business operations of the businesses within the 1st Street Redevelopment area.
(Ord. 2122, 11-2-2015)
106-09: PUBLIC STREET RIGHT OF WAY DEDICATION:
In order to maintain the functional class of the city's roadway system as set
forth in the comprehensive plan, the right of way necessary for Grand Avenue
shall be provided by the developer. An irrevocable offer of right of way
dedication shall be provided at the time of the PUD, with actual dedication of
the right of way to occur in conjunction with the installation of Grand Avenue
improvements or submittal of a major modification application for the True
Value site. The developer shall provide at no cost to the city temporary
easements necessary for the construction of public streets within or adjacent
to the development. The city will endeavor to structure the construction of the
public improvements in such a manner as to minimize the impact on the business
operations of the businesses within the 1st Street Redevelopment area. (Ord.
2122, 11-2-2015)
106-10: STREET DESIGN:
Exhibit C identifies the Grand Avenue redevelopment plan street network and
general accesses as it relates to the 1st Street Redevelopment PUD area.
   A.   Future Public/Private Streets: The 1st Street Redevelopment PUD will be
required to provide access across the site to provide connection and design
continuity throughout the site and to the properties adjacent to the PUD, as
illustrated in exhibit A and shall meet the following:
      1.   These future roads and driveways through the site shall be private
in ownership.
      2.   No road closures are allowed regardless if private or public without
prior permission of the city of West Des Moines.
      3.   All future roads/driveways shall be maintained and function
(including timely snow removal) in a fashion similar to the public expectations
of a public street. The developer and the city shall execute a public access
easement at the time of street construction in which the rights and
responsibilities of the involved parties for the roads/driveways with the Grand
Avenue redevelopment plan shall be delineated.
   B.   Signalized Intersections: Traffic signals may be required at the
southern full access intersection with 1st Street at such time when traffic
warrants as determined by the city. Also, the future reconstruction of Grand
Avenue may warrant the traffic signals at 1st and Grand to be relocated, which
may require the dedication of right of way. If necessary, dedication of
permanent right of way to accommodate the placement of signals and
appurtenances shall be provided to the city upon request by the city and at no
cost to the city. Temporary construction easements shall also be provided at no
cost to the city as necessary.
   C.   Site Access:
      1.   Grand Avenue: A permanent access drive to the 1st Street
Redevelopment PUD area from Grand Avenue shall be allowed and located to the
northwest of the existing True Value building and aligned with the existing
Casey's/West Bank driveway to the north. This access will remain in its current
location, which does not align with the Casey's/West Bank driveway, until such
time that outlot 1 and outlot 2 (on the PUD sketch plan) are redeveloped. With
the redevelopment of these outlots, the Grand Avenue access location will move
to the west and align with the Casey's/West Bank driveway and providing a
north/south access point on the west side of the PUD. Initially, this access
will allow for full turning movements; however, at such time that a median is
constructed on Grand Avenue; the access will be restricted to a right in/right
out access only.
      2.   1st Street: Two (2) permanent access drives to the 1st Street
Redevelopment PUD area from 1st Street shall be allowed.
         a.   North Access: In the interim, the existing northern access drive
shall be retained in its current location until such time that parcel 3 or 4
develops. At that time, the access drive shall be reconstructed further south
to provide a straight east/west drive aisle through parcels 3 and 4 as depicted
on the PUD sketch plan.
         b.   South Access: The southern access drive shall be retained in its
current location until such time that the developer wishes to move it further
south based on the design that was approved as part of the revised PUD Sketch
dated October 5, 2016.
      c.    No access shall be permitted from the site to Linnwill Place.
   3.   Future Cross Access: A future cross access connection shall be provided
across the 1st Street Redevelopment PUD to the property at the northwest corner
of the PUD. Design and location of said access shall be determined at such time
the property to the northwest is developed and the building on outlot 1 is
removed. In addition, two (2) additional future cross access may be permitted
to the PUD if the property to the west of the 1st Street Redevelopment PUD
redevelops in the future. Design and location of the additional access shall be
determined at such time the property to the west is redeveloped. Appropriate
cross access easements shall be executed at time of drive relocations and
construction. (Ord. 2122, 11-2-2015; amd. Ord. 2436, 9-8-2020)
106-11: PARKING:
   A.   Off Street Parking:
      1.   All off street parking areas shall be sited and landscaped to screen
their visibility from street rights of way, residential dwellings, pedestrian
pathways, and adjoining property outside of the 1st Street Redevelopment PUD.
Parking areas shall be screened to a minimum height of three feet (3').
      2.   Parking stall measurements and drive aisle widths shall conform to
title 9, chapter 15 of the city code.
      3.   It is desired that all off street parking areas be aesthetically
improved to reduce obtrusive characteristics that are inherent to their
function. Landscape islands and/or pods shall be implemented in accordance with
title 9, chapter 19 of the city code except that parking rows along a building
face or adjacent to the streetscape shall only be required to implement
terminal islands at the end of a parking row and shall not be required to
provide intermediate islands within a linear row of parking.
      4.   Overstory trees shall be planted within all terminal landscape
islands within the parking lot.
   B.   Off Street Loading:
      1.   All off street loading areas shall be sited and landscaped to screen
their visibility from street rights of way, residential dwellings, pedestrian
pathways, and adjoining property outside of the 1st Street Redevelopment PUD.
Screening shall be implemented in accordance with title 9, chapter 19 of the
city code.
      2.   Loading area measurements and drive aisle widths shall conform to
title 9, chapter 15 of the city code.
   C.   Parking Ratios: The minimum number of parking stalls shall be as
provided per title 9, chapter 15 of the city code, except that office and
retail uses shall provide a minimum of one parking space per three hundred
(300) square feet of gross floor area. Restaurants (both sit down and drive-
through) and drinking establishments shall provide a minimum of one parking
space per one hundred fifty (150) square feet of gross floor area. With the
approval of the city council and the execution of an appropriate cross parking
easement, required spaces for one parcel may be located on a different parcel.
If shared parking is utilized, the total parking spaces provided within the PUD
must meet the minimum number of parking stalls for all uses within the PUD.
   D.   Off Street Parking Lot Setbacks: Parking shall be set back so as to
provide a minimum of fifteen feet (15') from the ultimate street right of way
of Grand Avenue and fifteen feet (15') from the ultimate street right of way of
1st Street. The parking lot setback may be reduced to ten feet (10') if a
streetscape is implemented within the setback. Parking shall be set back a
minimum of five feet (5') from internal property lines within the 1st Street
Redevelopment PUD unless the parking space within the setback is part of a
common parking lot of joint usage between the adjoining lots. (Ord. 2122, 11-2-
2015)
106-12: PEDESTRIAN ELEMENTS:
The 1st Street Redevelopment PUD, in alignment with the Grand Avenue
redevelopment plan, aims to encourage pedestrian movement and opportunities for
pedestrian interaction through the implementation of multiple and connected
pathways to and from parcels within the redevelopment area. In addition, to
encourage pedestrian activity, site furniture and benches for pedestrian use
shall be provided along public streets within an area of enhanced landscaping.
One pedestrian area shall be provided for every two hundred (200) linear feet
of frontage (streetscape). Each pedestrian area shall contain at a minimum two
(2) benches and one trash receptacle. These pedestrian areas may be spaced
along the frontage or grouped to create more of a larger plaza area.
Development of these areas shall comply with the Grand Avenue redevelopment
plan guidelines with details of the development of each area to be specified,
reviewed, and approved at the time of site plan development. Unless otherwise
specified, the installation of these pedestrian elements shall be by the
developer of the 1st Street Redevelopment PUD at the time of redevelopment of
the lot on which the pedestrian area is to be located. Pedestrian areas may be
located adjacent to the streetscape area as long as public access easements are
provided for the pedestrian area or any walk connection to the streetscape.
(Ord. 2122, 11-2-2015)
106-13: LANDSCAPING:
Landscaping must be provided in accordance with City Code unless otherwise
modified within this ordinance. Details regarding specific varieties, exact
quantities, and the minimum size at time of planting shall be provided and
approved as part of the site plan submittal and shall meet the general
guidelines in respect to the minimum plant sizes traditionally applied to
development within the City. The minimum vegetation quantities specified within
this ordinance will need to be provided. The provision of additional vegetation
above the minimum amount required may be necessary to fulfill the intent (i.e.,
visual mitigation/screening) of the required landscaping.
   A.   Open/Green Space: Due to the nature of the intended redevelopment in
respect to existing development patterns, uses, and densities, the amount and
locations of open space and green space/vegetation within the redevelopment
area will vary. As a general rule, the maximum amount of "green" (open lawn
areas and vegetation) should be provided within a site. To allow the most
flexibility in planning, collectively, the development shall attempt to provide
a minimum of twenty five percent (25%) open space; however, no less than
fifteen percent (15%) open space or more than eighty five percent (85%)
impervious surface will be allowed. Plaza and streetscape areas along with any
areas associated with outdoor pedestrian use may be counted toward fulfilling
the minimum open space requirement. Plazas and outdoor pedestrian use areas to
be counted toward fulfilling minimum open space requirements may be paved
(impervious) as long as the paving is part of a planned hardscape and softscape
enhancement of the plaza or pedestrian area.
A minimum of two (2) trees and three (3) shrubs shall be provided for every
three thousand (3,000) square feet of required open space which shall be based
on twenty five percent (25%) of the site regardless of the actual amount
provided. Of the required trees, fifty percent (50%) shall be of an overstory
variety unless otherwise done for design intent and specifically approved by
the appropriate reviewing body. No substitution for required trees is allowed;
however, a twenty (20) square foot mass planting of perennial flowers or
ornamental grasses may be substituted for three (3) shrubs. The incorporation
of evergreen vegetation is encouraged to provide winter substance within the
landscape. Vegetation required as part of the open space may be placed into off
street parking areas, streetscape areas or required buffers, but is in addition
to vegetation required of streetscape areas. With approval at the site plan
application, the developer may request the City Council defer installation of
required plantings to accommodate changes for future cross access.
   B.   Streetscaping: A landscaped edge with hardscape elements or
"streetscape" shall be provided along Grand Avenue and 1st Street. These
streetscapes are intended to provide desired green to the City, reinforce a
district identity, provide visual screening of parking and other negative site
elements, bring human scale to adjoining buildings and provide traffic calming
benefits. The streetscape shall be accomplished in accordance with the Grand
Avenue redevelopment plan streetscaping intent and shall include vegetation,
furniture, and ornamental stone wall screening elements as illustrated in the
redevelopment plan. Pedestrian elements such as patios and walkways may
encroach into the streetscape area; however, no buildings or off street parking
may.
A minimum ten foot (10') streetscape easement shall be provided along Grand
Avenue and 1st Street to the first drive entrance onto 1st Street to provide
area for district streetscape, signage and to maintain utility corridors. Said
easement shall be adjusted at the corners of intersecting streets if necessary
to provide a full depth streetscape easement area around traffic signal
equipment easements. The developer shall provide the necessary easements at the
time of site plan approval. The streetscape easement width may be modified to
accommodate the existing parking lot location along Parcels 1 and 2.
Streetscape landscaping shall be placed within the streetscape easement of the
property. Landscape vegetation and amenities such as pedestrian benches and
ornamental wall stones shall be implemented within the streetscape area to
provide screening of off street parking areas to a minimum height of three feet
(3'). To aid in achieving this, a minimum of two (2) trees and ten (10) shrubs
shall be required for every fifty (50) linear feet of streetscape distance. Of
the required number of trees, a minimum of one-half (1/2) must be overstory in
nature. No substitution of shrubs for required trees shall be allowed.
Additionally, three (3) "ornamental wall stones" as illustrated in the Grand
Avenue redevelopment plan shall be provided for every one hundred (100) linear
feet of streetscape. It is recommended that the stones be clustered in groups
of at least three (3) stones amongst and between groups of shrubs to provide
mass and screening rather than be equally spaced along the streetscape length.
With City Council approval at the site plan application, the developer can
defer installation of required streetscape elements or plantings to accommodate
changes in interim or future access drives. If the south access drive is moved
further to the south, three (3) deferred ornamental wall stones on the Parcel 7
(Dollar Tree) site shall be installed in the area of the existing south
driveway location that will be eliminated.
   In coordination with the reconstruction of Grand Avenue and the relocation
of the Grand Avenue entrance drive, the developer must submit a minor
modification application for PUD Parcel 1 to initiate installation of the
streetscape improvements along the Grand Avenue frontage and the 1st Street
frontage for PUD Parcel 1. Said minor modification shall also include parking
lot modifications as needed and streetscape improvements across the former
location of the Grand Avenue entrance drive.
   C.   Buffers:
      1.   Required: The provision of buffers shall be required for that
portion of the property that is located directly adjacent to residentially
zoned properties.
      2.   Perimeter Boundaries: Buffers shall be provided along the perimeter
boundaries of the 1st Street Redevelopment PUD as follows:
         a.   South: The first fifteen feet (15') along the south boundary of
the PUD. The required landscaping within the buffer shall be equivalent to the
amount of trees and shrubs required within a thirty foot (30') buffer park as
outlined below.
         b.   West: No buffer required; however, views of negative site
elements visible adjacent properties shall be mitigated.
         c.   North and east: No buffer required; however streetscape
landscaping is required as outlined above. If streetscape landscaping is
installed along 1st Street in front of Parcels 1 and 2 and also in front of
Parcel 7, then streetscape landscaping shall be required in front of Parcels 3
and 4.
         d.   No buffers between internal parcels shall be required except to
mitigate undesirable elements and views.
      3.   Thirty Foot Buffer:
         a.   Required Plantings:
            (1)   One overstory tree, two (2) ornamental trees and six (6)
shrubs shall be provided per thirty five (35) linear feet of required buffer.
         b.   Vegetation Substitution:
            (1)   Two (2) ornamental trees, one evergreen tree, or six (6)
shrubs may be substituted for one required overstory tree; however, no more
than twenty five percent (25%) of the required number of overstory trees may be
substituted.
            (2)   A twenty five (25) square foot mass planting of perennials or
ornamental grasses may be substituted for three (3) shrubs.
            (3)   Plantings shall be a mix of deciduous and evergreen to ensure
year round color.
         c.   Privacy Fence: Due to existing utilities and easements in the
area on the south side of the 1st Street Redevelopment PUD, a privacy fence
will be required in lieu of the required landscape plantings of a thirty foot
(30') buffer to adequately screen the development from the adjacent residences
to the south.
         d.   Clustered Vegetation: It is recognized that some views of
businesses are desired; therefore, buffer vegetation may be clustered to open
up view windows to the businesses.
      4.   Buffer Timing: The required privacy fence to be installed along the
south property line shall be reviewed as a Minor Modification Level 1 to Parcel
7 (Dollar Tree). The fence minor modification shall also include streetscape
plantings along 1st Street from the entrance drive to Parcel 7 (Dollar Tree),
south to the existing driveway stub from 1st Street.
   D.   Screening Of Negative Site Elements: Electrical transformers, trash
dumpsters, service areas and loading docks, heating, ventilation, air
conditioning, generators, utility meters, and other mechanical equipment which
is located on, besides or adjacent to any building or development shall be
visually screened from views from adjacent roadways, pedestrian paths, and
adjoining properties.
   E.   Vegetation Placement: Overstory trees and upright evergreen trees shall
not be permitted within public utility easements. (Ord. 2122, 11-2-2015; amd.
Ord. 2263, 11-27-2017; Ord. 2436, 9-8-2020)
106-14: SIGNAGE:
All proposed exterior signage requires the review and approval of a sign permit
by the city of West Des Moines. All signage shall reinforce the aesthetic
concept as depicted by the precedent images as exhibit E on file with the city
and Grand Avenue redevelopment district plan and shall comply with title 9,
chapter 18 of the city code except as modified herein or within the Grand
Avenue redevelopment plan. Sign design and construction shall reinforce the
design intent of the Val-Gate district. The use of LED illumination for signage
emulating "neon style" lighting and relevant to the architectural theme of the
district may be allowed with the approval of the director of development
services. The following additional modifications to title 9, chapter 18 of the
city code are hereby made:
   A.   Business Identification Signs:
      1.   Business identification signs, including wall, ground monument, pole
(pylon), roof, and projecting signs shall be consistent with and reinforce the
design intent of the Val-Gate district redevelopment plan.
      2.   A maximum of three (3) freestanding signs shall be allowed within
the development: one for the Grand Avenue frontage and two (2) for the 1st
Street frontage. The sign for the Grand Avenue frontage may be a retro style
pole sign as identified within the precedent images for signs on the property.
The sign shall not exceed the height and size as shown in the precedent image.
The two (2) signs along 1st Street shall be ground monument signs. Signs shall
be in accordance with city code for the CMC district with the following
exception that the signs may display any tenants within the development and not
limited to those on the parcel that the sign is located. Decorative elements of
the sign structure that are a part of a thematic design to convey the Val- Gate
district image, may extend above the monument sign structure not more than two
feet (2') and shall not be included in the sign area calculation and the height
of the sign.
      3.   Roof signs shall be permitted in lieu of or as part of the allowable
wall or canopy signage for the development if approved as part of the
architectural theme for a building that reinforces the intent of the Val-Gate
district. Said signs must be comprised of individual letters with the letters
extending above the primary building roof no higher than four feet (4') from
the top of the primary roof parapet. A roof sign associated with the canopy may
be placed entirely above the canopy as long as it is deemed to be part of an
architectural element which carries and reinforces the design intent of the
Val-Gate district. Painted roof signs shall not be allowed.
      4.   Illuminated banding (LED) may be allowed on the primary structure,
canopy and monument signs if it is approved as part of the architectural
design.
      5.   Illuminated business identification signs shall be turned off no
later than one hour after the last retail or restaurant establishment in the
Grand Avenue redevelopment plan area closes.
      6.   Building (wall) signage shall be allowed according to the provisions
of the sign ordinance, Title 9, Zoning, Chapter 18, Signs, except that
buildings less than one thousand (1,000) square feet in size may calculate
allowable square footage of wall signage based on the longest wall of the
building regardless if the wall plane fronts to a street. (Ord. 2122, 11-2-
2015; amd. Ord. 2520, 6-20-2022)
106-15: LIGHTING:
Consistent with the redevelopment plan, the 1st Street Redevelopment PUD shall
incorporate a variety of light fixtures ranging from parking lot lights and
roadway fixtures to pedestrian pathway lights. Lighting shall be IDA Dark Sky
compliant unless otherwise approved by the city of West Des Moines. Included
within section 6 of the Grand Avenue redevelopment plan are design
specifications and requirements along with sketches and images of the intended
lighting series. All lighting within the PUD area shall abide by these
standards and be consistent in character to that illustrated in the Grand
Avenue redevelopment plan and the Val-Gate district's iconic design intent.
As a part of the review of each site plan, a photometric plan must be
submitted. During the review, the applicant must demonstrate how lighting will
not adversely affect adjoining properties or patrons utilizing the public
street system. Special care must be given to ensure excess light does not spill
onto properties adjacent to, but not part of, the Val-Gate district.
The following general guidelines shall be in addition to the specific
regulations stated within the Grand Avenue redevelopment plan regulations:
   A.   Streetlights: The developer of the 1st Street Redevelopment PUD shall
enter into an agreement with the city stating that the developer will install
steel pole streetlights along Grand Avenue in accordance with a plan provided
by MidAmerican Energy or its successors at such time that Grand Avenue is
widened. In addition, the developer shall enter into an agreement with the city
stating that the developer will install steel pole streetlights along 1st
Street at such time that the overhead power is placed underground.
   B.   Parking Luminaries: Fixtures shall be of a design to direct light
downward and shall not have bulbs which are exposed and extend below the frame
of the light fixture. Said fixtures shall not exceed twenty five feet (25') in
height as measured from the ground to the top of the light structure. Fixtures
used shall be consistent throughout the 1st Street Redevelopment PUD.
   C.   Building Lighting: No wall packs, or floodlighting without shields to
direct the light to its intended target are allowed. In addition to cutoff
fixtures, particular attention shall be given to eliminate hot spots and light
glare. Decorative building lighting is allowed and will be reviewed as part of
the site plan for each building.
   D.   Pedestrian Pathways: Bollard or pole lighting shall be implemented
along pedestrian pathways if not sufficiently lighted by the parking
luminaries. Pole lights shall not exceed fourteen feet (14') as measured from
the ground to the top of the light fixture. (Ord. 2122, 11-2-2015)
106-16: ARCHITECTURE:
Included within the Grand Avenue redevelopment plan is indication of the
architectural style and illustrative examples of the architectural concepts
which shall serve to guide the design of all buildings within the 1st Street
Redevelopment PUD. All buildings in the PUD shall reinforce the concept
depicted in the Grand Avenue redevelopment plan, which is for architecture that
depicts a mid century (or 50's) architectural style. Specific architecture for
all buildings shall be evaluated as part of the site plan review and approval
process.
All buildings within the 1st Street Redevelopment PUD shall accommodate the
following in building design:
   A.   Form And Scale: Buildings should reinforce the aesthetic concept as
depicted by the precedent images in exhibit F on file with the city and as
depicted by the precedent images contained in the Grand Avenue redevelopment
plan for all other parcels. Buildings shall be designed to relate specifically
to the pedestrian in scale and variety. The following techniques should be used
to meet this objective:
      1.   Corporate architecture shall be prohibited except as permissible by
the Grand Avenue redevelopment plan in that it reinforces the iconic imagery
desired for the Val-Gate district.
      2.   Buildings shall be organized to create a logical balance and
relationship with the site, open spaces and circulation.
      3.   The building's design should meet context and site objectives such
as providing gateways, creating linkages and framing or terminating views.
      4.   Variation in building height, mass and roof forms shall be provided
while still maintaining an overall building continuity.
      5.   Shifts in building planes/facades and variation in exterior
materials shall be incorporated to minimize long expanses of wall.
      6.   Variation in materials, material modules, expressed joints,
textures, colors and details should be used to break up the mass of the
buildings.
      7.   Variation in horizontal planes through the use of materials, color
and projecting forms should be implemented to signify an entry and/or protect
the pedestrian.
      8.   Ground floor retail areas should provide the maximum possible
glazing toward sidewalks to provide pedestrians with visual interest.
      9.   A building's roof form and related details/materials are an integral
part of the architectural design aesthetic. Roofs should not be designed as
attention getting devices related to the reinforcement of signage or as an
identifiable corporate image unless said identification is in keeping with the
Grand Avenue redevelopment plan aesthetic.
   B.   Material Quality And Detail: All sides to each building are to receive
high quality materials and finishes (360 degree architectural treatment). There
are no "backs" to a building. Materials should be durable, economically
maintained and of a quality that will maintain their appearance over a
prolonged time.
      1.   Primary building materials should include, but are not limited to,
glass, steel, architectural concrete and concrete block, natural wood, stone,
brick and architectural metals.
      2.   The following materials shall not be used for cladding unless
specifically approved by the city of West Des Moines as part of the
architectural elevations:
         a.   EIFS or synthetic stucco.
         b.   Nonarchitectural concrete masonry units.
         c.   Tilt-up precast concrete systems that are structural in
appearance.
         d.   Materials that are intended for interior use.
      3.   Changes in materials should occur at either inside corners or where
a detail is drawn to specifically accommodate a transition. Stone and brick
materials should wrap corners several feet in order to provide authenticity to
the materials. (Ord. 2122, 11-2-2015)
106-17: BULK REGULATIONS:
   A.   Lot Size: No minimum lot size shall be required.
   B.   Building Height: The height of a building shall conform to the limits
prescribed by the zoning code for the CMC district unless otherwise
specifically approved by the city council after a recommendation from the plan
and zoning commission that the additional height is necessary and appropriate
to achieve an architectural intent consistent with the goals of the Grand
Avenue redevelopment plan.
If located over vehicle circulation areas, canopies shall provide a minimum
clearance of fourteen feet (14'). Canopy heights greater than twenty feet (20')
shall only be allowed if the design of the canopy is deemed to carry and
reinforce the design intent of the Val-Gate district.
   C.   Building Setbacks:
      1.   Unless otherwise specifically stated, setbacks shall be measured
from the property line or ultimate street right of way line, whichever is more
restrictive. (Ord. 2122, 11-2-2015)
      2.   Building setbacks are to the main plane of the building excluding
canopies and pedestrian arcades. It is encouraged that buildings should be
pushed forward to locate adjacent to public and private streets and that
parking should be located to the rear of buildings. Therefore:
         a.   Buildings shall be set back a minimum of ten feet (10') from
public streets as long as vision triangles are not obstructed. The actual
location of buildings will be reviewed with each specific site plan.
         b.   Buildings shall be set back a minimum of twenty five feet (25')
from side or rear property lines adjacent to nonresidential zoned property.
         c.   Buildings shall be set back a minimum of fifty feet (50') from
side or rear property lines adjacent to residential zoned property.
         d.   The closest element of a building located adjacent to a private
street or drive shall be no less than ten feet (10') from the back of curb,
except that the building constructed on parcel 7 shall be allowed to be closer
than ten feet (10') until such time that the southern access drive is
relocated.
         e.   Nothing herein, however, shall be construed as permitting the
location of a building that will interfere with pedestrian or vehicle
visibility at an intersection, sidewalks, trails, plazas, or maintenance of
utilities. (Ord. 2135, 1-11-2016)
      3.   A minimum thirty foot (30') building separation shall be maintained
between buildings within the PUD as measured to the closest points of buildings
including canopies, unless said buildings are physically connected or otherwise
designed and constructed in accordance with applicable building and fire codes
to allow for less of a separation distance. Buildings existing within the PUD
at the time of PUD approval shall be permitted to be separated by less than the
minimum thirty feet (30').
      4.   Dumpster enclosures shall be located no closer than ten feet (10')
from any ultimate right-of-way for a public street and a minimum of five feet
(5') from the PUD boundaries; however, to the greatest extent possible,
dumpsters shall be located interior to the site and not along street frontages.
Whenever possible, dumpsters should be located and designed as an extension of
the primary building. Freestanding dumpster enclosures should be located and
landscaped to blend with the landscape and minimize their presence. Building
materials for dumpster enclosures shall be consistent with the primary building
materials unless in doing so attention is drawn to the enclosure. (Ord. 2122,
11-2-2015)
106-18: VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES:
Any person who violates the provisions of this ordinance upon conviction shall
be punished as set forth in section 1-4-1 of the City Code. (Ord. 2122, 11-2-
2015)
106-19: SAVINGS CLAUSE:
If any section, provision, sentence, clause, phrase or part of the ordinance
shall be adjudged invalid or unconstitutional, such adjudication shall not
affect the validity of the ordinance as a whole or any provision, section,
subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or part hereof not adjudged invalid or
unconstitutional. (Ord. 2122, 11-2-2015)
106-20: EFFECTIVE DATE:
This ordinance shall be in full force and effect after its passage, approval
and publication as provided by law. (Ord. 2122, 11-2-2015)
106-99: LEGISLATIVE HISTORY:
Ord. 2122, 11-2-2015; Ord. 2135, 1-11-2016; Ord. 2184, 11-28-2016; Ord. 2263,
11-27-2017; Ord. 2436, 9-8-2020; Ord. 2520, 6-20-2022.
PUD #107
PLATINUM POINTE TOWNHOMES
SECTION:
107-01: Legal Description
107-02: Sketch Plan
107-03: Required Plans
107-04: Intent Of The Platinum Pointe PUD
107-05: Conditions
107-06: Park Land Dedication
107-07: Master Property Owners' Association
107-08: Land Use Design Criteria
107-09: Density
107-10: Architecture
107-11: Landscaping
107-12: Buffering And Transitioning
107-13: Signage Regulation
107-14: Stormwater Management
107-15: Traffic Reports
107-16: Savings Clause
107-17: Effective Date
107-99: Legislative History
107-01: LEGAL DESCRIPTION:
The northeast 1/4 of the northeast 1/4 of section 15, township 78 north, range
26 west of the 5th P.M., city of West Des Moines, Dallas County, Iowa; except
the south 66.00 feet, thereof; and except, Whisper Ridge plat 1, 2, and 3,
official plats, now included in and forming a part of the city of West Des
Moines, Dallas County, Iowa.
Said tract of land contains 13.32 acres, more or less.
(Ord. 2090, 5-4-2015)
107-02: SKETCH PLAN:
On file in the city and made a part of this rezoning approval, for concept
description and delineation is the sketch plan document for the Platinum Pointe
PUD marked exhibit A. Wherever conflict occurs between the written text in this
document and the notations on the sketch plan, the written text shall prevail.
The sketch plan is a graphic representation of the property included in the PUD
delineating the approximate location and configuration of the parcels for the
purpose of easier reference for the applicable regulations of this ordinance.
(Ord. 2090, 5-4-2015)
107-03: REQUIRED PLANS:
   A.   Preliminary Plat/Final Plat: Prior to or in conjunction with
development of any portion of the property covered by this PUD, said area shall
be platted in accordance with the city's subdivision ordinance.
   B.   Site Plan Development Applications: Site plans for property within the
Platinum Pointe PUD must meet the intent of the PUD. Prior to development of
the respective parcel, site plans for development shall be submitted to the
city for review through the development review process and approval by the
appropriate approval body. (Ord. 2090, 5-4-2015)
107-04: INTENT OF THE PLATINUM POINTE PUD:
To provide a multi-family product to meet the demands of the population by
providing a greater variety in type, design and layout of buildings within
residential developments across the city. (Ord. 2090, 5-4-2015)
107-05: CONDITIONS:
Whereas city code establishes certain regulations and guidelines pertaining to
accompanying information required on plat and site plan documents. In addition,
the following conditions, restrictions, and regulations are adopted as part of
this approval:
   A.   General Conditions: In addition to the PUD sketch plan map, the
following general development criteria shall be integrated into and made a part
of this planned unit development:
      1.   General Conformance To Subdivision Ordinance: All subdivisions,
public and private streets and street rights of way and general development
shall adhere to the standards and design criteria set forth in the West Des
Moines subdivision ordinance and/or established city policies pertaining
thereto, unless otherwise stated within this ordinance.
      2.   General Conformance To Zoning Ordinance: Unless otherwise specified
herein, the development of the Platinum Pointe PUD shall comply with the
provisions of the title 9, "Zoning", of the city code or any other applicable
codes.
      3.   Flood Hazard: In all areas within a 100-year frequency flood hazard
zone, or adjoining drainageways, and detention ponding areas involving
potential flood hazards, no building shall be erected which has a minimum
opening elevation (including top of window well) less than two feet (2') above
the determined level of the 100-year frequency flood event. Buildings shall
only be permitted within twenty five feet (25') of any easement or property
boundary of a major drainageway, stormwater detention basin or pond if said
location is approved as part of the development entitlement by the city council
and said building is structurally designed accordingly.
      4.   Developer Responsibilities: The developer, their successors and/or
assigns, if any, shall pay all planning, engineering, and construction costs
for the development of the planned unit development, as required by this
ordinance and approved site plans and the cost of all streets, storm sewers,
sanitary sewers, drainageway improvements, detention basins, water mains,
buffers and other improvements as required for rights of way or public
easements within the Platinum Pointe PUD, unless otherwise approved by the city
council.
      5.   Public Street Improvements And Right Of Way Dedication: At time of
subdivision platting, the subdivider or others as agreed upon privately shall
be responsible for construction and/or installation of all required public
infrastructure improvements in accordance with the city's subdivision
ordinance, as indicated herein, and/or as indicated on the approved Platinum
Pointe PUD sketch proposal. With any subdivision plat, the subdivider or others
shall be responsible for constructing and/or installing the public
infrastructure necessary to support development within the subdivision in a
manner that will assure that the public infrastructure functions at an
acceptable level of service (per the city's comprehensive plan) and that
complies with all city ordinances. Unless otherwise allowed by city council,
public improvements necessary to support the proposed development will need to
be complete and accepted by the city council prior to issuance of a final
occupancy permit for any habitable structure within the development.
      6.   Sanitary Sewer: Any proposed change in approved land use densities
for the PUD will require an analysis of the downstream sanitary sewer capacity
to assure that adequate capacity is available for the proposed change in
approved land use densities.
      7.   Street Lighting: The developer or others as agreed upon privately
shall be responsible for all costs associated with the installation of public
streetlights within or adjacent to any area proposed to be platted or included
within a development.
      8.   Mailboxes: The developer shall be responsible for installation of
any required cluster box units (CBUs) as per the local U.S. postal service post
office. (Ord. 2090, 5-4-2015)
107-06: PARK LAND DEDICATION:
An area of land calculated by a set formula based upon the size and density of
the proposed development will be required to be dedicated for purposes of a
public park and green belt areas. Property for park land to meet dedication
requirements has been provided at the northwest corner of 91st Street and
Bridgewood Boulevard. If further dedication is determined to be necessary, a
park land dedication agreement, acceptable to the park and recreation
department, detailing the specifics related to the provision of park land
dedication requirements for the development of each area contained within the
PUD will be required to be executed prior to the approval of each plat or site
plan for parcels within the development. (Ord. 2090, 5-4-2015)
107-07: MASTER PROPERTY OWNERS' ASSOCIATION:
If necessary, when the first plat within this development is recorded, proper
action shall be taken to establish a master property owners' association with
said property into the Platinum Pointe property owners' association and all
building restrictions, covenants, and other associated conditions attached to
the PUD shall be made to also apply to said property. The Platinum Pointe
property owners' association shall be responsible for the ongoing upkeep and
maintenance of any privately owned common grounds such as the buffer parks,
internal streets, stormwater detention facilities, greenbelts, parks and other
common space, as outlined in the association documents and any other specific
development improvements noted as their responsibility in this ordinance. (Ord.
2090, 5-4-2015)
107-08: LAND USE DESIGN CRITERIA:
In addition to the general criteria as stated previously, the following land
use design criteria shall apply to the development areas designated on the
sketch plan. The following development standards and use regulations shall
apply to the development parcels:
   A.   Parcel A: All general use regulations and provisions set forth in title
9, "Zoning", of the city code for residential medium density (RM-12) zoning
district shall apply to any development proposal for property in parcel A as
shown on the sketch plan, unless noted otherwise in this ordinance.
      1.   Setbacks: All attached residential buildings shall comply with the
following:
         a.   A minimum twenty five foot (25') front yard setback, as measured
from the front plane of the building to the back of curb of the private
streets;
         b.   A minimum thirty foot (30') rear yard setback as measured from
the perimeter boundary of parcel A;
         c.   A minimum five foot (5') side yard setback as measured from the
lot line to the building foundation with the exception of those buildings whose
side wall faces either Bridgewood Boulevard or Coachlight Drive (Rockwood Lane)
shall provide a minimum of thirty feet (30') as measured from the street right
of way line to the building foundation.
      2.   Building Separation: A minimum fifteen foot (15') separation shall
be provided between primary attached dwelling structures and between primary
dwelling structures and accessory structures. Separation distance between
structures shall be measured from the foundation of each structure/building. A
minimum of five feet (5') of open space shall be provided between closest
elements of structures (egress windows, window or fireplace bump outs, decks,
sunrooms, patios, roof overhangs, etc.). All components of the structure,
including foundations shall be located entirely within the lot's boundary.
      3.   Maximum Height: The maximum height of dwelling buildings within
parcel A shall not exceed two (2) stories. The maximum height of accessory
structures shall be limited by city code but in no case shall exceed one story.
      4.   Lot Width: Parcel A shall meet minimum lot widths as required by
title 9, chapter 7, "Setback And Bulk Density Regulations", of the city code
for three plus (3+) attached units within the residential medium-density zoning
district. Individual lots (a.k.a. postage stamp lots) which extend a minimum of
five feet (5') beyond the building footprint on all nonattached building walls
shall be allowed for each dwelling unit. As indicated above, all building
components, including foundations shall be located entirely within the lot's
boundary. (Ord. 2090, 5-4-2015)
107-09: DENSITY:
The total number of dwellings within the Platinum Pointe PUD shall not exceed
five (5) dwelling units per acre or sixty six (66) dwelling units. (Ord. 2090,
5-4-2015)
107-10: ARCHITECTURE:
Architectural design for multi-family buildings shall express a creative
presentation of exterior building materials, exterior details and texture,
treatment of windows and doors, and use of angles and multiplicity of planes
within the wall and roof design to lessen the plainness of appearance which can
be characteristic of multi-unit residential buildings. The use of building
articulation that breaks up the building mass into modules which reflect
proportions similar to the single-family residential dwellings shall be
required. Methods used to create intervals which reflect individual dwelling
units are:
   A.   Facade modulation - stepping back or extending forward a portion of the
facade;
   B.   Entrances to the dwelling units should be easily and individually
identified through the use of design and detailing. Projected or recessed
entryways, higher rooflines, awnings or changes in materials are examples that
can create this effect;
   C.   Changing the rooflines by alternating dormers, stepped roofs, gables,
or other roof elements to reinforce the modulation or articulation interval;
   D.   Changing materials with the change in building plane to vary the look
of the individual dwelling units;
   E.   Using paint and materials to reinforce the modulation or articulated
intervals.
Buildings shall combine materials such as brick, stone, vertical or lap siding,
shakes and stucco, along with trim and details to provide visual interest
within the development. Use of natural materials is encouraged: Composite
materials such as fiber cement and wood composites are appropriate
substitutions. Vinyl siding may be used only with appropriately scaled trim.
All material, trim and details for a building shall be designed appropriately
for chosen architectural style. Materials should change with the change in
building planes. Trim and structural elements such as posts or columns shall be
sized to the scale of the building. When used, masonry materials shall have the
appearance of three- dimensional elements and shall be appropriately wrapped
around corners or building elements to provide authenticity to the materials.
Fenestration (door and window openings) shall be sized to the scale of the
building, incorporated on multiple sides of the building and be compatible to
the chosen architectural style. Asphaltic shingles shall be allowed provided
the shingle materials are of a heavier grade that produces a shake or shadowing
effect and is consistent with the color and materials used for the multi-family
residential developments.
Garage doors facing the street should be set back to minimize the dominance of
their appearance or staggered across the building facade to create
opportunities for individuality of the dwelling units. The architectural
details of the garage should incorporate the materials and treatments of the
dwelling unit, such as windows, doors, paint and materials, and style of the
dwelling unit.
All facades of the building in unobstructed view of the public shall be treated
with the same level of architectural style and detail. (Ord. 2090, 5-4-2015)
107-11: LANDSCAPING:
Landscaping for open space, off street parking, buffering, mitigation of
negative elements, etc., shall be required as set forth in title 9, chapter 19,
"Landscaping", of the city code, except as noted otherwise in this ordinance.
If there is a conflict between the PUD and city code, the more restrictive
shall apply. (Ord. 2090, 5-4-2015)
107-12: BUFFERING AND TRANSITIONING:
   A.   Zoning district compatibility and transitioning, as applicable, shall
comply with section 9-5-7 of the city code.
   B.   A minimum thirty foot (30') landscape buffer shall be provided along
S88th Street, Coachlight Drive (Rockwood Lane) and the western property
boundary. Buffer width, earthen berming and minimum vegetation shall abide by
subsection 9-19-8E of the city code. The buffer and building setbacks can
overlap; however, no part of a structure may encroach into the buffer. The
landscape buffers shall be indicated on the preliminary plat and the landscape
buffering planting plan submitted for review with the site plan. (Ord. 2090, 5-
4-2015)
107-13: SIGNAGE REGULATION:
Signage within each PUD parcel shall comply with all provisions of title 9,
chapter 18 of the city code for the residential medium-density (RM) district.
(Ord. 2090, 5-4-2015)
107-14: STORMWATER MANAGEMENT:
Specific stormwater management plans may be required with the development of
each parcel which demonstrates compliance with the approved Platinum Pointe PUD
master stormwater management plan, on file with the city. The developer shall
have said specific stormwater management plans prepared by a professional
engineer licensed in the state of Iowa, in conjunction with the submittal of a
specific development proposal for parcel A within the PUD. All stormwater
management plans shall comply with the city's current design standards for
stormwater management. The method of stormwater management and the stormwater
conveyance system shall be determined prior to city approval of any development
within any portion of the property within the Platinum Pointe PUD.
At time of platting or development, ownership and responsibility for all
stormwater detention areas and private stormwater detention outlet structures
will need to be established. (Ord. 2090, 5-4-2015)
107-15: TRAFFIC REPORTS:
A traffic impact study (traffic report) dated December 31, 2014, has been
prepared by the city of West Des Moines for the Platinum Pointe townhome
development. The traffic report caps the traffic generated from all ground
within this PUD at three thousand five hundred thirty eight (3,538) average
daily trips, two hundred sixty nine (269) A.M. peak hour trips and three
hundred twenty eight (328) P.M. peak hour trips. The traffic report also
outlines the ultimate paving requirements for the major roadways in the
vicinity of the Platinum Pointe townhome development. Development of the site
will need to abide by the recommendations of the December 2014 traffic report.
In the event the number of dwelling units is increased or the layout of the
proposed development, including access connections to surrounding public
streets is altered, if determined necessary, a new traffic study to analyze the
changes may be required. Development of the site will need to abide by the
recommendations of the new traffic study. (Ord. 2090, 5-4-2015)
107-16: SAVINGS CLAUSE:
If any section, provision, sentence, clause, phrase or part of the ordinance
shall be adjudged invalid or unconstitutional, such adjudication shall not
affect the validity of the ordinance as a whole or any provision, section,
subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or part hereof not adjudged invalid or
unconstitutional. (Ord. 2090, 5-4-2015)
107-17: EFFECTIVE DATE:
This ordinance shall be in full force and effect after its passage, approval
and publication as provided by law. (Ord. 2090, 5-4-2015)
107-99: LEGISLATIVE HISTORY:
Ord. 2090, 5-4-2015.
PUD #108
MAJESTIC OAKS
SECTION:
108-01: Legal Description
108-02: Sketch Plan
108-03: Required Plans
108-04: Intent Of The Majestic Oaks PUD
108-05: Conditions
108-06: Park Land Dedication
108-07: Master Property Owners' Association
108-08: Land Use Design Criteria
108-09: Signage Regulation
108-10: Stormwater Management
108-11: Traffic Reports
108-12: Savings Clause
108-13: Effective Date
108-99: Legislative History
108-01: LEGAL DESCRIPTION:
Outlot 'X' of Tiburon, an official plat recorded in book 2014, page 5707 at the
Dallas County recorder's office and a parcel of land in the SW1/4 SW1/4 of
section 15, township 78 north, range 26 west of the 5th P.M., all in the city
of West Des Moines, Dallas County, Iowa that is more particularly described as
follows:
Beginning at the NE corner of said SW1/4 SW1/4, said NE corner also being the
SE corner of said outlot 'X'; thence S00°10'19"W, 1314.38 along the east line
of said SW1/4 SW1/4 to the SE corner of said SW1/4 SW1/4; thence S83°59'42"W,
385.51 feet along the south line of said SW1/4 SW1/4 to a point; thence
N83°28'17"W, 96.67 feet to a point; thence N53°09'58"W, 65.27 feet to a point;
thence N14°05'42"W, 31.75 feet to a point; thence N42°25'18"E, 80.78 feet to a
point; thence N22°46'31"E, 51.52 feet to a point; thence N31°21'13"E, 83.02
feet to a point; thence N70°05'28"E, 92.77 feet to a point; thence N32°55'08"E,
48.01 feet to a point; thence N14°59'27"E, 41.77 feet to a point; thence
N29°07'47"W, 65.31 feet to a point; thence N15°19'52"W, 208.81 feet to a point;
thence N11°08'55"W, 102.56 feet to a point; thence N36°07'20"W, 54.54 feet to a
point; thence N84°48'52"W, 108.64 feet to a point; thence N75°40'50"W, 73.63
feet to a point; thence N35°12'35"W, 82.79 feet to a point; thence N06°20'06"W,
76.12 feet to a point; thence N14°40'23"E, 82.44 feet to a point; thence
N03°23'37"E, 64.09 feet to a point; thence N09°50'39"W, 79.55 feet to a point;
thence N16°31'21"W, 116.49 feet to a point on the north line of said SW1/4 SW1/
4, said point also being the SW corner of said outlot 'X'; thence N00°38'03"E,
163.14 feet along the west line of said outlot 'X' to the NW corner of said
outlot 'X'; thence N83°51'55"E, 352.46 feet along the north line of said outlot
'X' to a point; thence S00°38'03"W, 103.20 feet along said north line to a
point; thence N83°27'22"E, 350.20 feet along said north line to the NE corner
of said outlot 'X', said NE corner also being on the east line of the NW1/
4 SW1/4 of said section 15; thence S00°39'45"W, 62.23 feet along the east line
of said outlot 'X' and said NW1/4 SW1/4 to the point of beginning and
containing 17.00 acres.
(Ord. 2146, 5-16-2016)
108-02: SKETCH PLAN:
On file in the city and made a part of this rezoning approval, for concept
description and delineation is the sketch plan document for the Majestic Oaks
PUD marked exhibit A. Wherever conflict occurs between the written text in this
document and the notations on the sketch plan, the written text shall prevail.
The sketch plan is a graphic representation of the property included in the PUD
delineating the approximate location and configuration of the parcels for the
purpose of easier reference for the applicable regulations of this ordinance.
(Ord. 2146, 5-16-2016)
108-03: REQUIRED PLANS:
Prior to or in conjunction with development of any portion of the property
covered by this PUD, said area shall be preliminary and final platted in
accordance with the city's subdivision ordinance. (Ord. 2146, 5-16-2016)
108-04: INTENT OF THE MAJESTIC OAKS PUD:
To create a single-family residential development that balances the development
of homes and the channel pattern of Sugar Creek. (Ord. 2146, 5-16-2016)
108-05: CONDITIONS:
Whereas, title 9, chapter 9, "Planned Unit Development District", of the city
code, establishes certain regulations and guidelines pertaining to accompanying
information required on plat documents. In addition, the following conditions,
restrictions, and regulations are adopted as part of this approval:
   A.   General Conditions: In addition to the PUD sketch plan map, the
following general development criteria shall be integrated into and made a part
of this planned unit development.
      1.   General Conformance To Subdivision Ordinance: All subdivisions,
public and private streets and street rights of way and general development
shall adhere to the standards and design criteria set forth in the West Des
Moines subdivision ordinance and/or established city policies pertaining
thereto, unless otherwise stated within this ordinance.
      2.   General Conformance To Zoning Ordinance: Unless otherwise specified
herein, the development of the Majestic Oaks PUD shall comply with the
provisions of the title 9, "Zoning", of the city code or any other applicable
codes.
      3.   Flood Hazard: In all areas within a 100-year frequency flood hazard
zone, or adjoining drainageways, and detention ponding areas involving
potential flood hazards, no building shall be erected which has a minimum
opening elevation (including top of window well) less than three feet (3')
above the determined level of the 100-year frequency flood event.
      4.   Developer Responsibilities: The developer, their successors and/or
assigns, if any, shall pay all planning, engineering, and construction costs
for the development of the planned unit development, as required by this
ordinance, or the subdivision ordinance of the city of West Des Moines, Iowa,
for all streets, storm sewers, sanitary sewers, drainageway improvements,
detention basins, water mains, buffers and other improvements within the PUD as
may be required within the Majestic Oaks PUD, subdivision ordinances, and
zoning ordinances, unless otherwise approved by the city council.
      5.   Public Street Improvements And Right Of Way Dedication: At time of
subdivision platting within the PUD, the subdivider shall be responsible for
construction and/or installation of all required public infrastructure
improvements in accordance with the city's subdivision ordinance, as indicated
herein, and/or as indicated on the approved Majestic Oaks PUD sketch proposal.
With any subdivision plat within the PUD, the subdivider shall be responsible
for constructing and/or installing the public infrastructure necessary to
support development within the subdivision in a manner that will assure that
the public infrastructure functions at an acceptable level of service (per the
city's comprehensive plan) and that complies with all city ordinances.
      6.   Sanitary Sewer: Any proposed change in approved land use densities
for the PUD will require an analysis of the downstream sanitary sewer capacity
to assure that adequate capacity is available for the proposed change in
approved land use densities.
      7.   Street Lighting: The developer shall be responsible for all costs
associated with the installation of public streetlights within or adjacent to
any area proposed to be platted.
      8.   Mailboxes: The developer shall be responsible for installation of
any required cluster box units (CBUs) as per the local U.S. postal service post
office. (Ord. 2146, 5-16-2016)
108-06: PARK LAND DEDICATION:
An area of land calculated by a set formula based upon the size and density of
the proposed development will be required to be dedicated for purposes of a
public park and greenway areas. The park land requirements for this development
will be provided by the dedication of greenway lands located along the west
side of Sugar Creek, or by another means set forth by the parks and recreation
department. The greenway lands are part of same overall property, held under
same ownership, and would be deeded to the city upon any future platting of
this property. A park land dedication agreement, acceptable to the parks and
recreation department, detailing the specifics related to the provision of park
land dedication requirements for the development of each area contained within
the PUD will be required to be executed prior to the approval of each final
flat for parcels within the development. (Ord. 2146, 5-16-2016)
108-07: MASTER PROPERTY OWNERS' ASSOCIATION:
In conjunction with the recordation of the first final plat for ground included
within this development, proper action shall be taken to establish a Majestic
Oaks property owners' association. The association shall encompass all property
included in this PUD. Association documents are intended to provide that
general maintenance of each outlot area associated with lots 1-14, including
general maintenance of the stream bank, shall be the responsibility of the
associated residential lot. Sugar Creek bank stabilization activities and
repair due to erosion shall be the collective responsibility of the Majestic
Oaks property owners' association, not the individual lots. Maintenance
responsibilities for outlot Z and any other common grounds shall be defined
within the association documents. (Ord. 2146, 5-16-2016)
108-08: LAND USE DESIGN CRITERIA:
In addition to the general criteria as stated previously, the following land
use design criteria shall apply to the development areas designated on the
sketch plan. The following development standards and use regulations shall
apply to the development parcels:
   A.   All general use regulations and provisions set forth in title 9,
"Zoning", of the city code for residential single-family (R-1) zoning district
shall apply to any development proposal for property in parcel A as shown on
the sketch plan, unless noted otherwise in this ordinance.
      1.   Front Yard Building Setbacks: All residential dwelling structures
shall comply with a minimum twenty five foot (25') front yard setback as
measured to the closest element, including porches, except for garages which
must be set back a distance of thirty feet (30') as measured from the garage
door opening to the front property line. Porches are not allowed to extend into
the front yard setback.
      2.   Rear Yard Building Setbacks:
         a.   Lots 1-13: All dwelling structures, attached accessory structures
such as decks, sunrooms, porches, and detached garages shall comply with a
forty foot (40') rear yard setback as measured from rear property line of the
lot containing the dwelling structure (not the rear boundary of an associated
outlot) and shall be contained within the area created between the front and
rear yard setbacks. Gazebos, play structures, sheds, swimming pools, etc., may
be located within the rear yard setback but shall not be located within the
associated outlot.
         b.   Lots 14-16 shall comply with a minimum thirty five foot (35')
rear yard setback as set forth in the residential single-family (R-1) zoning
district.
      3.   Side Yard Setbacks: All lots shall comply with minimum side yard
setbacks as set forth in the residential single-family (R-1) zoning district.
Outlot X is intended to be lot tied to lot 1 and become part of the buildable
lot, therefore, the south side yard setback within lot 1 shall be measured from
the southern boundary line of outlot X.
      4.   Outlots: No structures of any kind, including fences, shall be
located within the outlots associated with lots 1-14. These outlots are
intended for drainage and floodplain management.
      5.   Outlot Z: Outlot Z is unbuildable until such time that it is
replatted through the city's subdivision process. A development ground monument
sign and landscape vegetation may be located within the outlot without
replatting. (Ord. 2146, 5-16-2016; amd. Ord. 2483, 7-19-2021)
108-09: SIGNAGE REGULATION:
Signage for the development shall comply with all provisions of title 9,
chapter 18 of the city code for the single-family residential (R-1) district.
(Ord. 2146, 5-16-2016)
108-10: STORMWATER MANAGEMENT:
Majestic Oaks stormwater management plan shall be prepared in conjunction with
the preliminary platting of property within the PUD. Said stormwater management
plans shall be prepared by a professional engineer licensed in the state of
Iowa. Stormwater management plans shall comply with the city's current design
standards for stormwater management. The method of stormwater management and
the stormwater conveyance system shall be determined prior to city approval of
a plat for any portion of the property within the Majestic Oaks PUD.
At time of platting or development, ownership and responsibility for any
stormwater detention areas and private stormwater detention outlet structures
required will need to be established. (Ord. 2146, 5-16-2016)
108-11: TRAFFIC REPORTS:
A traffic impact study (traffic report) dated January 27, 2015, has been
prepared by the city of West Des Moines for the Majestic Oaks development.
(Ord. 2146, 5-16-2016)
108-12: SAVINGS CLAUSE:
If any section, provision, sentence, clause, phrase or part of the ordinance
shall be adjudged invalid or unconstitutional, such adjudication shall not
affect the validity of the ordinance as a whole or any provision, section,
subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or part hereof not adjudged invalid or
unconstitutional. (Ord. 2146, 5-16-2016)
108-13: EFFECTIVE DATE:
This ordinance shall be in full force and effect after its passage, approval
and publication as provided by law. (Ord. 2146, 5-16-2016)
108-99: LEGISLATIVE HISTORY:
Ord. 2146, 5-16-2016; amd. Ord. 2483, 7-19-2021.
PUD #109
DELLA VITA
SECTION:
109-01: Legal Description
109-02: Sketch Plan
109-03: Required Plans
109-04: Conditions
109-05: Park Land Dedication
109-06: Master Property Owners' Association
109-07: Land Use Design Criteria
109-08: Architecture
109-09: Landscaping
109-10: Signage Regulations
109-11: Stormwater Management
109-12: Public Improvements And Right Of Way Dedication
109-13: Traffic Reports
109-14: Savings Clause
109-15: Effective Date
109-99: Legislative History
109-01: LEGAL DESCRIPTION:
A part of the south half of the northeast quarter of section 10, township 78
north, range 26 west of the fifth principal meridian in the city of West Des
Moines, Dallas County, Iowa and more particularly described as follows:
Beginning at the southeast corner of said south half of the northeast quarter;
thence south 82°56'46" west along the south line of said south half of the
northeast quarter, 1315.53 feet to the southwest corner of the southeast
quarter of the northeast quarter of said section 10; thence south 82°47'26"
west along said south line, 89.76 feet; thence westerly along a curve concave
northerly whose radius is 1440.00 feet, whose arc length is 414.30 feet and
whose chord bears north 88°58'02" west, 412.87 feet; thence north 80°43'31"
west, 356.44 feet; thence westerly along a curve concave southerly whose radius
is 1560.00 feet, whose arc length is 452.15 feet and whose chord bears north
89°01'43" west, 450.57 feet to the west line of said south half of the
northeast quarter; thence north 00°35'58" east along said west line, 507.62
feet; thence south 89°38'41" east, 31.00 feet; thence north 05°50'13" east,
307.70 feet; thence north 10°57'47" west, 171.57 feet; thence north 02°33'13"
east, 111.56 feet; thence south 88°07'48" west, 28.53 feet to the northwest
corner of said south half of the northeast quarter; thence north 82°51'12" east
along the north line of said south half of the northeast quarter, 1384.56 feet;
thence south 00°28'16" west, 350.00 feet; thence north 82°51'12" east, 1245.00
feet to the east line of said south half of the northeast quarter; thence south
00°28'16" west along said east line, 969.36 feet to the point of beginning and
containing 65.24 acres (2,842,026 square feet).
(Ord. 2171, 10-17-2016)
109-02: SKETCH PLAN:
On file in the city and made a part of this rezoning approval, for concept
description and delineation is the sketch plan document for the Della Vita PUD
marked exhibit A. Wherever conflict occurs between the written text in this
document and the notations on the sketch plan, the written text shall prevail.
The sketch plan is a graphic representation of the property included in the PUD
delineating the approximate location and configuration of the parcels for the
purpose of easier reference for the applicable regulations of this ordinance.
(Ord. 2171, 10-17-2016)
109-03: REQUIRED PLANS:
Prior to or in conjunction with development or transfer of ownership of any
portion of the property covered by this PUD, the following plans shall be
required:
   A.   Preliminary Plat And Final Plat: The area included within the PUD shall
be platted in accordance with the city's subdivision ordinance. Parcels
identified on a plat as outlots shall be unbuildable until such time that the
outlot is replatted into a developable lot via the preliminary and final
platting processes.
   B.   Site Plan: Prior to the development of parcel B within the PUD, site
plan approval shall be granted by the appropriate approval body through the
development process. (Ord. 2171, 10-17-2016)
109-04: CONDITIONS:
Whereas, title 9, chapter 9, "Planned Unit Development District", of the city
code, establishes certain regulations and guidelines pertaining to accompanying
information required on plat and site plan documents. Now, therefore, the
following conditions, restrictions, and regulations are adopted as part of this
approval:
   A.   General Conditions: In addition to the PUD sketch plan map, the
following general development criteria shall be integrated into and made a part
of this planned unit development.
      1.   General Conformance To Subdivision Ordinance: All subdivisions,
public and private streets, public or private street rights of way and general
development shall adhere to the standards and design criteria set forth in the
West Des Moines subdivision ordinance and/or established city policies
pertaining thereto, unless otherwise stated within this ordinance.
      2.   General Conformance To Zoning Ordinance: Unless otherwise specified
herein, the development of the Della Vita PUD shall comply with the provisions
of the West Des Moines zoning ordinance.
      3.   Flood Hazard: In all areas within a 100-year frequency flood hazard
zone, or adjoining drainageways, and detention ponding areas involving
potential flood hazards, no building shall be erected which has a lowest level
floor, including basements, less than one foot (1') above the determined level
of the 100-year frequency flood event. Buildings shall not be permitted within
twenty five feet (25') of any easement or property boundary of a major
drainageway, stormwater detention basin or pond unless said location is
approved as part of the development entitlement by the city council and said
building is structurally designed accordingly.
      4.   Developer Responsibilities: The developer, their successors and/or
assigns, if any, shall pay all planning, engineering, and construction costs
for the development of the planned unit development, as required by this
ordinance and approved site plans and the cost of all streets, storm sewers,
sanitary sewers, drainageway improvements, detention basins, water mains,
buffers and other improvements as required for rights of way or public
easements within the Della Vita PUD, unless otherwise approved by the city
council.
      5.   Sanitary Sewer: Any proposed change in approved land use densities
for the PUD will require an analysis of the downstream sanitary sewer capacity
to assure that adequate capacity is available for the proposed change in
approved land use densities.
      6.   Street Lighting: The developer shall be responsible for all costs
associated with the installation of public streetlights within or adjacent to
any area proposed to be platted or included within a development.
      7.   Mailboxes: The developer shall be responsible for installation of
any required cluster box units (CBUs/mailboxes) as per the local U.S. postal
service post office.
      8.   Parking Requirements: Number of parking stalls to be provided shall
be compliant with city code, title 9, chapter 15. For any residential dwelling
intended as owner occupied and/or for which a condominium regime is
established, a minimum of one of the required spaces for each unit shall be as
an enclosed parking space. This parking space shall be a minimum of nineteen
feet by nine feet (19' x 9') and may be designed as a freestanding garage,
attached garage or multiple garage spaces within an enclosure. A specific
covered parking space shall be designated for and legally tied to each dwelling
unit. The covered space must be for the exclusive use of the occupant of the
dwelling unit and cannot be rented or purchased by a third party, even if the
dwelling unit is rented. (Ord. 2171, 10-17-2016)
109-05: PARK LAND DEDICATION:
An area of land calculated by a set formula based upon the density (total
number of dwelling units) of the proposed development is required to be
dedicated for purposes of a public park and greenway as per city code. A park
land dedication agreement, acceptable to the parks and recreation department,
detailing the specifics related to the park land dedication requirements for
the development of any area contained within the PUD is required prior to the
Della Vita final plat being approved. (Ord. 2171, 10-17-2016)
109-06: MASTER PROPERTY OWNERS' ASSOCIATION:
If deemed applicable, proper action shall be taken to establish a master
property owners' association. The Della Vita property owners' association shall
be responsible for the ongoing upkeep and maintenance of any privately owned
common grounds such as the buffer parks, stormwater detention facilities,
greenways, plazas and other common space, as outlined in the association
documents and any other specific development improvements noted as their
responsibility in this ordinance. (Ord. 2171, 10-17-2016)
109-07: LAND USE DESIGN CRITERIA:
In addition to the general criteria as stated above, the following land use
regulations, development standards, and design criteria shall apply to the
development of all areas designated on the sketch plan:
   A.   Parcel A: All general use regulations and provisions set forth in title
9, "Zoning", of the West Des Moines city code for single-family residential (R-
1) zoning district shall apply to parcel A as identified on the PUD sketch
(exhibit A), unless noted otherwise in this ordinance.
   B.   Parcel B: All general use regulations and provisions set forth in title
9, "Zoning", of the West Des Moines city code for medium density residential
(RM-12) zoning district shall apply to parcel B as identified on the PUD sketch
(exhibit A), unless noted otherwise in this ordinance.
      1.   Density: Based on the PUD sketch (exhibit A) submitted by the
applicant, the density for parcel B shall not exceed one hundred fifty (150)
dwelling units.
      2.   Building Setbacks: Setbacks for parcel B shall be as follows:
         a.   Perimeter setback (to adjacent properties and public street right
of way): Thirty five feet (35'). Covered porches, decks, patios, etc., shall
not encroach into the required perimeter setback.
         b.   Front yard setback (adjacent to private streets): Twenty five
feet (25') from the face of the garage to the curb of the private street or
sidewalk if such is provided, whichever is closer. Porches, decks or patios are
allowed to encroach up to eight feet (8') into the twenty five foot (25') front
yard setback.
         c.   Side yard setback (adjacent to private streets): Fifteen feet
(15') to curb of private streets, if no driveway is present; no porches, decks
or patios can encroach into the fifteen foot (15') side yard setback.
         d.   The required thirty five foot (35') perimeter building setback
and the required landscape buffers are allowed to overlap.
      3.   Building Separation:
         a.   For detached townhomes and two-story attached townhomes with four
(4) units or less, there shall be a minimum building separation of fourteen
feet (14') between buildings or outdoor spaces (patios, decks, etc.), if such
is provided.
         b.   For two-story attached townhomes with more than four (4) units
per building or three-story or greater attached townhomes with four (4) units
or less, there shall be a minimum building separation of twenty feet (20')
between buildings or outdoor spaces (patios, decks, etc.), if such is provided.
         c.   For three-story or greater attached townhomes with more than four
(4) units per building, there shall be a minimum building separation of thirty
feet (30') between buildings or outdoor spaces (patios, decks, etc.), if such
is provided. (Ord. 2171, 10-17-2016)
109-08: ARCHITECTURE:
   A.   Variety: The intent is to provide a variety of building facades
throughout this development for visual interest. This may be accomplished by
such things as variety of building types, attention in application of exterior
building details, use of various window and doors styles, change in building
mass or roof forms, and varied use of materials and colors. Facades clearly
visible from a street or property outside of the development, shall present a
high level of visual interest and detail (materials, trim, architectural
details); however, this level may be reduced on the facades not visible from a
street (public or private) or adjacent property surrounding the development.
Those areas within the development adjacent to a street or adjoining property
for which a landscape buffer and three to four foot (3 - 4') berm is required
thus resulting in limited views of the facade from vehicles do not need to
provide a high level of detail unless views thereof are still possible. Public
view facades shall be identified as part of the platting process.
Buildings should use materials such as brick, stone, stucco, siding or shakes,
decorative trim or combination of materials to enhance architectural style and
building elements. Exterior designs should implement appropriately scaled trim
to provide detailing, rationalize facade changes, and provide visual interest.
Changes in materials should generally be aligned with changes in plane or roof
form to emphasize these changes in building mass. Structural elements such as
posts or columns shall be sized to the scale of the building and detailed
appropriately to the style. When used, masonry materials shall start and stop
at changes in wall plane or wrap corners a suitable distance (minimum 18
inches) to give authenticity to the material. Fenestration (door and window
openings) shall be sized to the scale of the building and be compatible to the
chosen architectural style.
Entrances into buildings should be easily identified through the use of
building design and detailing. Buildings in which the garage projects in front
of the main plane and/or entry to the house should look for ways to draw visual
attention to the entry and away from the garage. Projected or recessed
entryways, porches or extended rooflines along with changes in building
material are examples that can create this effect.
Detached garages should be clad in the same materials and incorporate similar
architectural details of the primary buildings with the use of roof forms,
windows, doors and other facade detailing.
   B.   Medium Density Residential Units (Parcel B): The multi-family buildings
within the development shall be a mix of detached townhomes, bi-attached
dwelling buildings, and attached buildings with a maximum of four (4) dwelling
units. Building design shall incorporate strategies to lessen the plainness of
appearance which can be characteristic of multi-family residential buildings.
Additionally, measures such as changes in the use of materials and colors and
minor changes to facade components such as footprint modulation, varying wall
heights, roof style, window size and patterning, door style, etc., should be
implemented to minimize repetition and monotony amongst buildings. Door or
window openings shall be included on all visible sides of a building in
sufficient number and size to visually break up blank building walls. Public
view facades shall be identified as part of the platting process.
Building design of all street front facades shall incorporate brick or stone in
a percentage that provides a strong visual presence. Siding, shakes and stucco
can encompass the remaining area, combining a variety of colors and textures
along with trim and details to provide visual interest within the building and
development.
The following shall apply to the different types of medium density dwellings
proposed within the Della Vita PUD:
      1.   Detached Townhomes: There shall be no identical townhomes (in
design, materials, or color) located directly adjacent to each other fronting
on the same side of a street. The same base building design may be located side
by side as long as measures such as changes in roof components, variation in
entry/porch design and size, window size, number and patterning, etc., are
implemented to make each building appear different from the other. In addition,
the layout of the townhomes shall be altered along a street (public or private)
so that the garages are not all located on the same side of the dwelling.
      2.   Bi-Attached Townhomes: The same architectural style and details,
brick/stone and colors shall be permitted for both dwelling units in one bi-
attached townhome building, however, adjacent dwelling buildings shall
implement different materials and colors. Bi-attached buildings of identical
design shall be spaced four (4) or more buildings apart along a private street
frontage. Buildings of the same design may be located across the street from a
building of the same style but the colors and materials should be different
between the two (2) buildings.
      3.   Attached Townhome Building (Up To 4 Units): No four (4) unit
dwelling building shall be visibly identical to an adjacent building. Adjacent
buildings shall have a different color and materials package than the adjacent
building and should implement minor changes in building details in order to
provide a look different from the adjacent building. Changes in materials and
colors to provide each unit an individual look is not required; however,
whenever possible, minor changes in entry design, roof components, windows,
etc., should be implemented to aid in setting one unit apart from another.
(Ord. 2171, 10-17-2016)
109-09: LANDSCAPING:
Buffering between districts or parcels and uses shall be required as set forth
in title 9, chapters 5 and 19 of the city code, except as noted otherwise in
this ordinance.
   A.   Landscape buffers shall be required along 88th Street on the east, E.P.
True Parkway on the south and on the north side of the medium density (RM-12)
designated portion of the Della Vita PUD. If, at the time of platting, single-
family homes still exist to the north of the RM-12 portion of the property, a
thirty foot (30') buffer shall be required along the northern boundary. The
buffer park will not be required in the event the abutting property owner(s) to
the north of the RM-12 portion of the property provide(s) a written covenant to
waive the requirement. In addition, a buffer shall be required between the
single- family, R-1 designated lots and the medium density, RM-12 designated
lot(s) within the Della Vita PUD. The required buffer between the two (2)
zoning districts shall be located entirely on parcel B.
   B.   Buffers required under the provisions of this section or elsewhere in
this title shall be accomplished by any one of the following methods:
      1.   Sixty Foot Buffer: A landscaped and earthen bermed area of not less
than sixty feet (60') in width comprised of landscape plantings consisting of
the equivalent of one overstory or upright evergreen tree and three (3) shrubs
for every thirty five (35) linear feet of buffer.
      2.   Thirty Foot Buffer: A landscaped and earthen bermed area of not less
than thirty feet (30') in width comprised of landscape plantings consisting of
the equivalent of one overstory or upright evergreen tree, two (2) understory
trees and six (6) shrubs for every thirty five (35) linear feet of buffer.
A minimum of fifty percent (50%) of the required number of trees shall be
evergreen. At the time of planting, overstory trees shall have a minimum trunk
diameter of two inches (2"); understory trees shall have a minimum trunk
diameter of one and one-half inches (11/2"); and evergreens shall be a minimum
of six feet (6') in height. Shrub height at time of planting varies according
to the anticipated mature size of the plant. In general, the taller the shrub
at maturity the larger the plant size at time of planting. The location of the
required landscaping (trees, shrubs, etc.) may be planted in any location
within the buffer area.
   C.   The required thirty five foot (35') perimeter building setback for
parcel B and the required landscape buffers are allowed to overlap.
   D.   Rear yard setbacks for single-family lots are measured from the
interior boundary of the buffer.
   E.   Trees that will encroach into any vehicle or pedestrian use area or
travel lane shall be of a variety that will accommodate pruning to allow for
the minimum clearance height (14 feet over vehicle travel lanes; 8 feet over
pedestrian travel lanes) without adversely affecting the overall natural shape
of the variety. Maintaining trees to these clearance levels is the
responsibility of the property owner.
   F.   Trees shall not be planted closer than five feet (5') to a sidewalk as
measured from the center of the tree or shrub base.
   G.   No vegetation which obstructs visibility shall be located within the
site triangle of intersecting streets and drives. (Ord. 2171, 10-17-2016)
109-10: SIGNAGE REGULATIONS:
Signage shall comply with all provisions and standards of title 9, chapter 18
of the West Des Moines city code for the respective zoning district in which
the sign is located. Under the authority of the city's fire marshal,
development directory boards may be required for parcel B. Said boards shall be
of a design as specified by the fire marshal and shall be located on private
property outside of public street rights of way and utility easements.
Directory boards shall be in place prior to the issuance of the first occupancy
permit, including temporary occupancy permits for any dwelling within parcel B.
(Ord. 2171, 10-17-2016)
109-11: STORMWATER MANAGEMENT:
Specific stormwater management plans will be required with the development of
each parcel. The developer will have said specific stormwater management plans
prepared by a professional engineer licensed in the state of Iowa, in
conjunction with the submittal of a specific development proposal for any
portion of property included within the PUD. All specific stormwater management
plans shall comply with the city's current design standards for stormwater
management. The method of stormwater management and the stormwater conveyance
system shall be determined prior to city approval of any development proposal.
At time of platting or site development (whichever is more applicable to
knowledge of stormwater detention measures), ownership and repair and
maintenance responsibility for all stormwater detention areas and private
stormwater detention outlet structures will need to be established through the
execution of a stormwater facility maintenance agreement. (Ord. 2171, 10-17-
2016)
109-12: PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS AND RIGHT OF WAY DEDICATION:
The developer of each parcel shall be responsible for constructing and/or
installing the public infrastructure necessary to support development within
the subdivision in a manner that will assure that the public infrastructure
functions at an acceptable level of service (per the city's comprehensive plan)
and that it complies with all city ordinances. At the time of subdivision
platting into developable lots, the subdivider shall construct, provide the
necessary surety or city acceptable agreements to provide for the construction
and/or installation of all required public infrastructure improvements in
accordance with the city's subdivision ordinance. (Ord. 2171, 10-17-2016)
109-13: TRAFFIC REPORTS:
A traffic impact study (traffic report) dated December 29, 2015, has been
prepared by the city of West Des Moines for the Della Vita development. The
traffic report caps the traffic generated from all property within this PUD at
three thousand three hundred sixty nine (3,369) average daily trips, with two
hundred fifty nine (259) A.M. peak hour trips and three hundred twenty two
(322) P.M. peak hour trips. The traffic report, along with previous studies for
the area, outlines the ultimate geometry for the major roadways in the vicinity
of the Della Vita development. Prior to, or in conjunction with the development
of any parcel, or portion of a parcel, the developer shall have the traffic
report reviewed by the city's traffic consultant to ensure that the provisions
and assumptions of the original traffic report are still valid and applicable.
(Ord. 2171, 10-17-2016)
109-14: SAVINGS CLAUSE:
If any section, provision, sentence, clause, phrase or part of the ordinance
shall be adjudged invalid or unconstitutional, such adjudication shall not
affect the validity of the ordinance as a whole or any provision, section,
subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or part hereof not adjudged invalid or
unconstitutional. (Ord. 2171, 10-17-2016)
109-15: EFFECTIVE DATE:
This ordinance shall be in full force and effect after its passage, approval
and publication as provided by law. (Ord. 2171, 10-17-2016)
109-99: LEGISLATIVE HISTORY:
Ord. 2171, 10-17-2016.
PUD #110
SAMMONS FINANCIAL GROUP
SECTION:
110-01: Legal Description
110-02: Development Intent
110-03: Required Plans
110-04: Compliance With Code
110-05: Conditions
110-06: Vehicle Trip Allocation
110-07: Fire Access
110-08: Parking
110-09: Stormwater Management Plan
110-10: Utilities
110-11: Land Use And Bulk Regulations
110-12: Pedestrian Elements
110-13: Landscaping
110-14: Signage
110-15: Architecture
110-16: Repealer
110-17: Violations And Penalties
110-18: Other Remedies
110-19: Savings Clause
110-20: Effective Date
110-99: Legislative History
110-01: LEGAL DESCRIPTION:
The east 1/2 of the southwest 1/4 of section 14, Township 78 north, range 26
west of the 5th P.M., Dallas County, Iowa, except Parcel AA and Parcel H of the
plat of survey filed in book 2014, page 4167 as part of the southeast 1/4 of
the southwest 1/4 of section 14, Township 78 north, range 26 west of the 5th
P.M., West Des Moines, Dallas County, Iowa and except those parcels shown on
the deed to the City of West Des Moines as filed in book 2009, page 15835, and
except that parcel shown on the deed to the City of West Des Moines as filed in
book 2015, page 13828.
(Ord. 2372, 7-1-2019)
110-02: DEVELOPMENT INTENT:
The Sammons Financial Group PUD aims to create a development that provides for
a professional office development linked by a system of trails, walkways,
streetscapes and bike paths. An open space/stream preserve unifies the
development while providing links with surrounding developments. (Ord. 2372, 7-
1-2019)
110-03: REQUIRED PLANS:
The following plans shall be required as a part of the processing of any
development application for any property within the Sammons Financial Group
PUD:
   A.   Preliminary And Final Platting: Prior to or in conjunction with any
site plan submittal for proposed development within Sammons Financial Group
PUD, such area shall be subdivided by both preliminary and final plat, in
accordance with the City's Subdivision Ordinance, to delineate the parcel to be
developed or sold. A preliminary and final plat shall be required regardless if
a plat-of-survey is approved for the property to allow for transfer of
ownership. Outlots are not buildable until such time that they are replatted
through the preliminary and final plat subdivision process. Prior to approval
of an associated final plat, unless otherwise authorized by the City Council,
the developer of property within the Sammons Financial Group PUD shall provide
all necessary and appropriate agreements, easements, and sureties for all
public rights-of-way and other public improvements (utilities, sidewalks,
street lights, traffic signals, etc.) within and associated with the property
being final platted.
   B.   Permits: An associated final plat applicable to each proposed
development area must be approved and recorded with the Dallas County
Recorder's Office prior to issuance of any building permit, including footing
and foundation permits, for construction of any structure or improvement within
the parcel identified for development.
   C.   Development Applications (Site Plans): Site plans for all lots and
phases of development within the Sammons Financial Group PUD must meet the
intent of the approved PUD sketch. The Sammons Financial Group building site
plan shown on the PUD sketch is for illustrative purposes only. The specific
site layout is not approved with the Sammons Financial Group PUD. Site plans
shall be submitted to the City of West Des Moines for review and approval prior
to the development of any portion of the development of the subject property.
At the discretion of the Director of Development Services, an amendment to the
Sammons Financial Group PUD Ordinance may be required to bring consistency
between the ordinance and site plan development proposed.
Unless otherwise specifically restricted by the City Council, ground work and
construction of private roads and utilities may be started, at the developer's
risk, upon approval of the preliminary plat by the City Council; however, no
construction of structures, including footing and foundations shall be allowed
prior to site plan approval. Public street and utility construction may begin,
at the sole risk of the developer, after approval of the preliminary plat by
the City Council and Public Improvement Plans by the City of West Des Moines.
(Ord. 2372, 7-1-2019)
110-04: COMPLIANCE WITH CODE:
Unless otherwise specified herein, the development of all property within the
Sammons Financial Group PUD shall comply with the provisions of the West Des
Moines City Code. (Ord. 2372, 7-1-2019)
110-05: CONDITIONS:
Whereas, title 9, chapter 9, Planned Unit Development District of the City
Code, establishes certain regulations and guidelines pertaining to accompanying
information required on plat and site plan documents. In addition, the
following conditions, restrictions, and regulations are adopted as part of this
approval:
   A.   General Conditions: In addition to the PUD Sketch Plan Map, the
following general development criteria shall be integrated into and made a part
of this planned unit development.
      1.   Flood Hazard: In all areas within a 100-year frequency flood hazard
zone, or adjoining drainage ways, and detention ponding areas involving
potential flood hazards, no building shall be erected which has a minimum
opening elevation (including top of window well) less than one foot (1') above
the determined level of the 100-year frequency flood event. Buildings shall
only be permitted within twenty five feet (25') of any easement or property
boundary of a major drainageway, stormwater detention basin or pond if said
location is approved as part of the development entitlement by the City Council
and said building is structurally designed accordingly.
      2.   Developer Responsibility: Unless otherwise specifically approved by
the City Council, the developer, its successors and/or assigns, if any, shall
pay all planning, engineering, and construction costs for the development of
the planned unit development as required by this ordinance, and shall pay all
costs related to approved site plans, which may include but is not limited to
the cost of all streets, storm sewers, sanitary sewers, water mains and service
lines, drainage-way improvements, detention basins, and other improvements as
required. No occupancy permits, either temporary or permanent, shall be issued
until all necessary improvements applicable to the area/lot or structure
requesting occupancy are installed and public improvements accepted by the City
of West Des Moines. Nothing in this ordinance shall be construed to prevent the
developer, its successors and/or assigns, if any, from entering into private
agreement(s) as it/they may desire to share the cost of improvements.
      3.   Public Street Improvements And Right-Of-Way Dedication: Unless
otherwise provided for in a separate development agreement, at the time of
subdivision platting within the PUD, the subdivider shall be responsible for
construction and/or installation of all required public infrastructure
improvements in accordance with the City's Subdivision Ordinance, as indicated
herein, and/or as indicated on the approved Sammons Financial Group PUD sketch
plan. With any subdivision plat within the PUD, the subdivider shall be
responsible for constructing and/or installing the public infrastructure
necessary to support development within the subdivision in a manner that will
assure that the public infrastructure functions at an acceptable level of
service (per the City's Comprehensive Plan) and that complies with all City
Ordinances.
      4.   Cross Connections: No cross connection(s) will be required between
area 1 and area 2.
      5.   Sanitary Sewer: Any proposed change in approved land use densities
for the PUD will require an analysis of the downstream sanitary sewer capacity
to assure that adequate capacity is available for the proposed change in
approved land use densities.
      6.   Street Lighting: Unless otherwise provided for in a separate
development agreement, the developer shall be responsible for all costs
associated with the installation of public street lights within or adjacent to
any area proposed to be platted or included within a development.
      7.   Mailboxes: The developer shall be responsible for installation of
any required cluster box units (CBUs) as per the local U.S. Postal Service Post
Office. (Ord. 2372, 7-1-2019)
110-06: VEHICLE TRIP ALLOCATION:
A traffic analysis was completed on April 18, 2019 which evaluated proposed
land uses on areas within the Sammons Financial Group PUD. The analysis
indicates that the Sammons Financial Group PUD as a whole is anticipated to
generate four thousand seven hundred forty one (4,741) average daily trips,
seven hundred fifty seven (757) A.M. peak hour and six hundred eighty five
(685) P.M. peak hour trips. Based upon the traffic analysis, the traffic
allocation table specifies the allowable traffic generation for each developed
and undeveloped parcel in the Sammons Financial Group PUD.
Development of each area and implementation of desired land uses in the Sammons
Financial Group PUD will be limited by the available number of trips designated
for each area as shown on the traffic allocation table, as well as compliance
with all applicable regulations within this ordinance or City Code. The traffic
to be generated by each parcel within the Sammons Financial Group PUD must be
less than or equal to the traffic allocation shown on the traffic allocation
table for that area. The maximum traffic allocation shown on the traffic
allocation table shall be an entitlement to each area within the PUD. Traffic
generation due to subsequent redevelopment, expansion or change of use for any
parcel within the PUD shall not exceed the maximum traffic allocation
entitlement shown on the traffic allocation table. Unless otherwise specified,
the traffic allocation for each area shown on the traffic allocation table
shall not change. Areas 1 and 2 collectively may not exceed the number of
vehicle trips shown in the traffic allocation table for these areas. The trips
may be distributed to another area, as necessary, at the time of initial site
development, if determined acceptable through a traffic study and with written
consent of the property owner transferring (losing) trips; however, the two (2)
areas together may not exceed four thousand seven hundred forty one (4,741)
average daily trips, seven hundred fifty seven (757) A.M. peak hour and six
hundred eighty five (685) P.M. peak hour trips.
   TRAFFIC ALLOCATION TABLE
 
PUD Sketch Area       Average     Traffic Allocation Traffic Allocation
                      Daily Trips (A.M. Peak)        (P.M. Peak)
1                     3,938       660                598
2                     803         97                 87
   Total trips for 4,741       757                685
development
 
(Ord. 2372, 7-1-2019)
110-07: FIRE ACCESS:
   A.   All streets and parking lots shall permit the travel of the Fire
Department's largest vehicle, including adequate accommodation of the vehicle's
turning needs. Approval of unique design solutions to accommodate fire access
may be granted by the City Council if, the solutions proposed are recommended
by the West Des Moines Fire Department.
   B.   At the discretion of the City's Fire Marshal, "No Parking Fire Lane"
areas may be established as necessary to ensure efficient movement and access
of the fire trucks. The owner of each respective area within Sammons Financial
Group PUD shall be responsible for the procurement and erection of approved
fire lane signage applicable to their parcel(s).
   C.   All roads, alleys, and access drives shall maintain a minimum of twenty
feet (20') of clear pavement.
   D.   A minimum of fourteen feet (14') of vertical clearance over the travel
portion shall be maintained at all times over all vehicle travel ways,
including drive-under canopies.
   E.   The developer or its designee shall be responsible for enforcement of
no parking lanes and maintaining adequate clearance of structures and
vegetation along and above all vehicle travel ways regardless if public or
private. (Ord. 2372, 7-1-2019)
110-08: PARKING:
   A.   Off-Street Parking:
      1.   All off-street parking areas shall be sited and landscaped to screen
their visibility from street rights-of-way, pedestrian pathways, and adjoining
property outside of Sammons Financial Group PUD development.
      2.   Excluding parking structures, parking stalls measurements and drive
aisle widths shall conform to title 9, chapter 15 of the City's Zoning
Ordinance.
      3.   If parking structures are proposed, architectural design and vehicle
functionality, including emergency services access and maneuverability, shall
be reviewed in conjunction with site plan review.
      4.   If a proposed parking stall is designed to allow the bumper of the
vehicle to overhang an open area or center median which does not include a
pedestrian pathway, the length of both the parking stall and island may be
reduced by that overhang amount or a maximum of two feet (2'). If the proposed
overhang is over a sidewalk less than seven feet (7') wide rather than natural
green space, that sidewalk width shall be increased two feet (2') to
accommodate pedestrian movements and vehicle overhang.
      5.   It is desired that all off-street parking areas be aesthetically
improved to reduce obtrusive characteristics that are inherent to their
function. Multiple landscape islands combined with vegetation shall be
incorporated to effectively eliminate a "sea of asphalt/concrete" and to
provide shade thus decreasing heat reflection back into the environment.
Landscape islands/tree pods and associated vegetation shall be implemented in
accordance with the following:
         a.   Islands or open areas shall be located at the terminus end of all
parking rows. Terminal islands shall measure at least ten feet (10') in width
and shall match, at a minimum the stall length.
         b.   Linear parking islands that run the length of the parking row
shall be implemented every six (6) rows. Said linear islands may be used as
pedestrian pathways and shall measure an average of ten feet (10') in width.
These areas may also serve as bioswales/detention areas.
         c.   No more than ten (10) continuous parking stalls are allowed in a
single row without being interrupted by landscape areas. Landscape islands or
landscape pods shall be incorporated at least every ten (10) parking stalls per
row. Islands shall measure a minimum of ten feet (10') in width and shall
match, at a minimum the stall length. Each 10' x 17' landscape island or
landscape pod shall contain at least one overstory tree and vegetated
groundcover (turf, perennials, ornamental grasses or shrubs), except for
parking islands associated with lower levels within a parking structure. As an
alternative to the implementation of pods within a linear row of parking, the
terminal islands at each end of the row of parking may be increased in width by
five feet (5') for every two (2) pods within the row which are eliminated. In
no instance however, should there be greater than eighteen (18) parking stalls
in a row uninterrupted by a landscape island or pod. The width of landscape
islands within a linear row of parking need only match the minimum width of a
parking stall. In the event landscape islands are increased in size, one
overstory tree shall be required for every one hundred fifty (150) square feet
of landscape area in those larger islands.
   B.   Parking Ratios:
      1.   A minimum of one space per two hundred seventy five (275) square
feet of gross floor area (gfa) shall be provided within each lot/parcel.
      2.   At the discretion of the Director of Development Services, a less
stringent parking calculation may be used provided the applicant can
demonstrate a parking rate less than that required by code is adequate due to
the type of potential use, shared uses or off-peak uses. (Ord. 2372, 7-1-2019)
110-09: STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN:
A Master Stormwater Management Plan (MSWMP) which governs the overall
stormwater management of the PUD shall be submitted to and approved by the City
of West Des Moines as part of the preliminary plat or site plan application
process, whichever occurs first. Specific Stormwater Management Plans (SWMP)
which demonstrates compliance with the approved Sammons Financial Group PUD
Master Stormwater Management Plan, on file with the City, will be required with
the development of each subsequent preliminary plat or site plan. The Specific
Stormwater Plans shall be prepared at the developer's expense, by a
professional engineer licensed in the State of Iowa. All Stormwater Management
Plans shall comply with the City's applicable design standards for stormwater
management existing at the time each development (site plan) is approved. (Ord.
2372, 7-1-2019)
110-10: UTILITIES:
The developer, its successors or assigns, if any, shall construct at its cost,
and if for general public use dedicate to the City, all sanitary sewer mains,
water mains, and storm sewers associated with the Sammons Financial Group PUD
as required by the City of West Des Moines' Subdivision Ordinance in accordance
with applicable City design standards. All necessary easements to allow City
access to public utilities for maintenance and repair purposes shall be
executed prior to approval and recordation of the final plat for each
respective area or shall be executed as a blanket access agreement prior to the
approval and recordation of the first final plat. Unless otherwise specified
within a specific easement document, the City shall not be responsible for
reimbursement, restoration and/or replacement of any improvements located
within the public easements should the City be required to excavate the public
utilities for normal City operations.
Overstory trees shall not be placed over utility lines or within utility
easements. Adequate access for maintenance vehicles shall be provided into and
through the easement areas. (Ord. 2372, 7-1-2019)
110-11: LAND USE AND BULK REGULATIONS:
In addition to the general conditions stated previously within this ordinance,
the following land use and bulk regulations shall apply to the specific areas
designated on the Sammons Financial Group PUD Sketch.
   A.   Areas 1 And 2:
      1.   Land Use: All general use regulations, performance standards, and
provisions set forth in title 9, "Zoning" of the City Code for the Office (OF)
District shall apply to areas 1 and 2 within the Sammons Financial Group PUD.
      2.   Building Setbacks:
         a.   Unless otherwise specifically stated, setbacks shall be measured
from the property line of parcels that abut a public street or back-of-curb of
an adjoining private street. Setbacks along boundaries that do not abut a
street shall be measured from the lot boundary.
         b.   Building setbacks are to the main plane of the building excluding
canopies and pedestrian arcades. Canopies and arcades are allowed to extend
into the building setback a maximum of eight feet (8') however they may not
extend into a required buffer.
            (1)   Buildings must be set back a minimum of thirty feet (30')
from Mills Civic Parkway, Cascade Avenue, S 81st Street, and S 85th Street
right-of-way/property lines.
            (2)   Rear yard: Thirty five feet (35'); fifteen feet (15') if it
abuts a like zoning district.
            (3)   Side yard: Ten feet (10'); zero feet (0') if it abuts a like
zoning district.
            (4)   Buildings should be set back a minimum of fifteen feet (15')
from the back-of-curb of internal private streets and off-street parking areas
to accommodate the pedestrian streetscape.
         c.   Detached accessory structures shall be set back a minimum of
thirty feet (30') from all public streets. Detached accessory structures shall
be set back a minimum of fifteen feet (15') from interior lot lines and from
the back of curb of internal private drives.
      3.   Building Height: The maximum height of a building shall not exceed
thirty six feet (36') in height, except that an additional twelve feet (12') of
height is allowed for each additional ten feet (10') of building setback.
      4.   Off-Street Parking Lot Setbacks: Parking lots shall be set back a
minimum of thirty feet (30') from the Mills Civic Parkway, Cascade Avenue, S
81st Street, and S 85th Street right-of- way/property lines and five feet (5')
from the back of curb of internal private streets. Parking lots shall be set
back a minimum of thirty feet (30') from the edge of the blueline stream
running through the property. A minimum five foot (5') setback is required
along an adjoining lot line, unless the parking space within the setback is
part of a common parking lot of joint usage between the adjoining lots. Views
of parking lots from public thoroughfares and adjacent parcels shall be
visually mitigated through the use of a combination of earthen berms and
landscape vegetation - this may or may not require the parking lots to be set
back more than the minimum. (Ord. 2372, 7-1-2019)
110-12: PEDESTRIAN ELEMENTS:
Sammons Financial Group PUD aims to encourage pedestrian movement and
opportunities for pedestrian interaction through a series of interconnected
sidewalks and trails which lead to the office areas as well as adjacent
developments. Development of these areas shall comply with the following
guidelines with details of the development of each area to be specified,
reviewed, and approved at the time of site plan development. Unless otherwise
specified, the installation of these pedestrian elements shall be by the
respective developer of each parcel within the Sammons Financial Group PUD in
conjunction with or before the development of the parcel.
   A.   Trails And Sidewalks:
      1.   Identification: Pedestrian crossings of internal private streets and
parking lot drive aisles should be identified through the use of striped
crosswalks as appropriate.
      2.   Vertical Clearance: A minimum of eight feet (8') of vertical
clearance shall be maintained at all times over all pedestrian travel ways.
      3.   Public Trails:
         a.   Public trails shall be installed within the Sammons Financial
Group PUD area in alignment with the City's Master Trail Plan or as agreed upon
with the City of West Des Moines.
         b.   Trails shall be constructed in accordance with the City of West
Des Moines' Standard Specifications.
         c.   A minimum of two feet (2') of clear shoulder should be provided
on each side of the trail. (Ord. 2372, 7-1-2019)
110-13: LANDSCAPING:
The landscaping requirements specified herein are intended to create an
aesthetically pleasing development which enhances the appearance and character
of the City of West Des Moines, while protecting the general health, safety and
welfare of the citizens. Landscaping is required to address the following
primary aspects or consequences of development:
• Open space protection and enhancement,
• Creation of environments conducive and inviting to pedestrian activities,
• Street/parking side enhancement ("streetscapes"),
• Visual screening of undesirable views, activities and/or site elements, and
• Mitigation of paving expanses associated with off-street parking.
   A.   Open/Green Space: The intent of open space is to allow for a balance
between natural areas and the built environment and to provide for the overall
beautification and "greening" of the City. The minimum percentage of the site
to be provided as open space shall comply with City Code for the respective
zoning district for each parcel. All of the land within a site that is not
occupied by buildings, on-street and off-street parking areas, or other vehicle
use areas may be classified as open space. Plaza areas, water features and
structures such as gazebos, arbors, pergolas, etc., that are associated with
outdoor pedestrian use areas may be counted towards fulfilling the minimum open
space requirement.
      1.   In order to ensure "green" within the development, vegetation must
be incorporated at a rate of two (2) overstory trees, one understory or conifer
tree, and three (3) shrubs for every three thousand (3,000) square feet of
required open space.
         a.   One tree may be substituted for ten (10) shrubs.
         b.   A twenty (20) square foot mass planting of perennial flowers or
ornamental grasses may be substituted for three (3) shrubs.
         c.   No substitution for required trees is allowed.
         d.   The incorporation of evergreen vegetation is encouraged to
provide winter substance within the landscape.
      2.   Vegetation required as part of the open space may be placed into
off-street parking areas or required buffers; however the open space vegetation
is in addition to that which would be required of buffers or parking islands/
pods and may not be counted towards fulfilling the minimum amount of vegetation
required for these areas.
   B.   Buffer And Visual Screening: The implementation of vegetation is
required as part of buffering/screening. This vegetation may be combined with
other measures such as berming, low stone walls, decorative fencing, or any
combination thereof to enhance the effectiveness of the buffering/screening.
Buffers should be designed to achieve the maximum amount of screening from the
maximum number of viewpoints with vegetation layered to ensure adequate
blockage of views and to create depth.
      1.   A minimum thirty foot (30') wide buffer shall be required along
Mills Civic Parkway. A combination of land forms, evergreen and deciduous trees
and shrubs, and tall grasses shall be used to visually buffer adjacent parking
and negative ground level site improvements from public streets and from
properties outside of the Sammons Financial Group PUD development. Land forms
ranging from three feet (3') to four feet (4') in height with slopes not to
exceed 3:1 are required. Land forms should undulate to create a natural
appearance rather than being designed with a consistent height along the entire
berm. One overstory tree, two (2) understory trees and six (6) shrubs shall be
provided for an average of every thirty five (35) lineal feet of this buffer;
of the required trees, one-fourth (1/4) shall be evergreen in nature.
         a.   Vegetation may be substituted at the following rate:
            (1)   One tree may be substituted for ten (10) shrubs as long as
under-canopy views of parking and negative elements are mitigated.
            (2)   A sixty (60) square foot mass planting of perennial flowers
or ornamental grasses may be substituted for six (6) shrubs.
            (3)   No substitution for required trees is allowed.
         b.   No parking lots, drive aisles, fences, or buildings are permitted
within required buffers; however, sidewalks, trails, landscape features,
pedestrian furniture, and permitted signage may be located within the buffers.
      2.   In addition to that specified above, the elements identified within
the following section shall be buffered/screened regardless of use area:
         a.   Views of off-street parking areas, loading docks, and other
vehicle related service areas from adjacent roadways, pedestrian paths and
adjoining properties within and outside of the development shall be buffered
and visually screened to a height of at least six feet (6'). Creative grading
including land forms can be used to provide this screening, in conjunction with
plantings or fencing. Loading docks must be located and oriented to minimize
views into the dock/service area. Screening can be provided thru a combination
of the placement of adjacent buildings, screen walls, land forms, and
plantings.
         b.   Mechanical, utility meters, transformers, HVAC, and other similar
undesirable elements/equipment which are located on, beside, or adjacent to any
building shall be buffered and visually screened from streets, pedestrian
pathways, and adjoining property within and outside of the development. A
permanent screen that utilizes building materials and designs compatible and
consistent with the architecture and materials of the principal building shall
be implemented whenever possible. It is desired that raised parapets or
elevated architectural features provide roof top mechanical screening rather
than wrapping the units with screen walls. As much as possible, roof top
mechanical units should be clustered rather than randomly placed on the roof.
Additionally, roof top units should be located towards the center of the roof
as much as possible to minimize views thereof. Equipment should be screened on
all sides.
         c.   Sanitation/recycle enclosures shall be visually screened from
view from streets, businesses, pedestrian pathways, and adjoining property
within and outside of the development. The enclosure should incorporate the
primary building material of the adjacent buildings on three (3) sides (brick
or masonry material) and a durable gate material on the fourth side. (Ord.
2372, 7-1-2019)
110-14: SIGNAGE:
All proposed exterior signage requires a sign permit issued by the City of West
Des Moines through normal sign review procedures prior to installation of the
sign. Unless otherwise prescribed herein, signage shall abide by the standards
and regulations as set forth in title 9, chapter 18, "Signs", of the City Code
for the Office (OF) District.
   A.   Monument Signs:
      1.   Primary Monument Entrance Sign: One monument sign shall be allowed
at the primary entrance to area 1 from Mills Civic Parkway (east entrance). The
sign shall not exceed twelve feet (12') in height, a maximum size for the total
structure of ninety six (96) square feet and a maximum sign copy of thirty five
(35) square feet per side. The sign shall be set back a minimum of twenty feet
(20') from the ultimate street right-of-way line.
      2.   Secondary Monument Entrance Sign: One monument sign shall be allowed
at the secondary entrance to area 1 from S. 81st Street (north entrance). The
sign shall not exceed seven feet (7') in height, a maximum size for the total
structure of seventy seven (77) square feet and a maximum sign copy of twenty
(20) square feet per side. The sign shall be set back a minimum of twenty feet
(20') from the ultimate street right-of-way line.
      3.   Other Monument Signs: All other monument signs within area 1 shall
comply with current City Sign Code.
      4.   Area 2 Monument Signs: Area 2 of the Sammons Financial Group PUD
shall comply with current City Sign Code for allowed monument signs.
   B.   Landscape Signs: Landscape signs shall be allowed at the corner of each
perimeter public street intersection for both area 1 and area 2. The signs
shall be designed according to the current City Sign Code.
   C.   Directional Signs: Directional signs shall be allowed according to the
current City Sign Code for both area 1 and area 2.
   D.   Wall Signs: Building wall signage shall comply with current City Sign
Code for both area 1 and area 2. (Ord. 2372, 7-1-2019)
110-15: ARCHITECTURE:
The intent is to create building facades throughout this development that are
varied and articulated to provide visual interest to pedestrians and to
establish a unique identity for the development. The architectural design of
any building within this development shall be acceptable to the City. The
architecture shall express a creative presentation by careful attention to
exterior building materials and details, use of fenestration, and change in
building mass within the plane and roof design to lessen the plainness of
appearance which can be characteristic of large commercial buildings. Building
design, materials, trim, detailing, and colors shall provide continuity amongst
buildings to unite all structures within the development into one project
concept. All sides to each building shall receive high quality materials,
finishes, and details (360-degree architectural treatment). There are no
"backs" to a building. Materials should be durable, economically maintained and
of a quality that will maintain their appearance over a prolonged time.
On file with the City are conceptual architectural illustrations of the general
building style and material options. Once City approval is gained on a
particular building design, any alteration in design before or during
construction must be reviewed and approved by the City's Development Services
Department.
   A.   Building Design And Materials: All buildings within this development
shall accommodate or incorporate the following in building design and
materials:
      1.   Corporate architecture shall be prohibited. Limited use of
architectural elements characteristic of prototypical architecture may be
allowed at the discretion of the Director of Development Services or the
appropriate reviewing and approval body. Implementation of these architectural
elements shall be minimized and whenever possible modified to give a unique
image to the establishment. No standard corporate building design without
modifications shall be implemented.
      2.   Buildings shall be organized to create a logical and identifiable
relationship with the site and other buildings, open spaces, and pedestrian
circulation paths.
      3.   The use of building articulation and materials which break up the
building mass into modules that respect a pedestrian scale and reflects
proportions similar to other buildings within the development.
      4.   The building's design should meet context and site objectives such
as providing gateways, creating visual and physical linkages and framing or
terminating views.
      5.   Variation in building height, mass and roof forms shall be provided
to create interest while still maintaining an overall building continuity.
Roofs should not be designed as attention- getting devices related to the
reinforcement of signage or as an identifiable corporate image.
      6.   Entrances into buildings should be easily identified through the use
of building design and detailing. Projected or recessed entryways, change in
rooflines, addition of awnings or changes in building material are examples
that can create this effect.
      7.   Shifts in building planes/facades and variation in exterior
materials shall be incorporated to minimize long expanses of wall. Long blank
walls shall be prohibited.
      8.   Variation in materials, material modules, expressed joints,
textures, colors and details should be used to break up the mass of the
buildings. Materials should change with the change in building planes.
      9.   Trim and structural elements such as posts or columns shall be sized
to the scale of the building.
      10.   Whenever possible, ground floor areas should provide the maximum
possible glazing toward sidewalks to provide pedestrians with visual interest.
Use of reflective glass or mirrored glass is discouraged. Efforts should be
made to use clear glass on storefronts, windows and doors to promote the
linkage of the interior and exterior of buildings.
      11.   Natural materials such as brick and stone shall be used as the
major elements of the facade. Architectural precast concrete or metal
acceptable to the City may be incorporated in the design as the major element.
Concrete products shall have integrated color rather than surface applied
paint/staining and should generally have texture for interest; smooth finish
concrete products may be used in conjunction with texture for accent purposes.
The use of EIFS, synthetic stucco or composite materials shall be used in
moderation and primarily used as an accent or trim material and cannot be the
predominate building material. Use of EIFS is limited to areas of the building
six feet (6') above grade and higher and use of vinyl materials is prohibited.
   B.   Area 2: It is recognized that the development of area 2 has not been
planned and therefore the architectural intent for that portion of the site
cannot be defined at the time of the writing of this ordinance. At such time
that development of this area is pending, the architecture design and choice of
colors and materials will need to be such so as to provide visual cohesiveness
and achieve a unified development for the entire PUD area. At time of
development of area 2, an amendment to the PUD may be necessary to address the
specific architecture needs for area 2. (Ord. 2372, 7-1-2019)
110-16: REPEALER:
All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with the provisions of this
ordinance are hereby repealed. (Ord. 2372, 7-1-2019)
110-17: VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES:
Any person who violates the provisions of this ordinance upon conviction shall
be punished as set forth in section 1-4-1 of the City Code of the City of West
Des Moines, Iowa. (Ord. 2372, 7-1-2019)
110-18: OTHER REMEDIES:
In addition to the provisions set out in the violations and penalties section
herein, the City may proceed in law or equity against any person, firm or
corporation for violation of any section or subsection of this ordinance. (Ord.
2372, 7-1-2019)
110-19: SAVINGS CLAUSE:
If any section, provision, sentence, clause, phrase or part of this ordinance
shall be adjudged invalid or unconstitutional, such adjudication shall not
affect the validity of this ordinance as a whole or any provision, section,
subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or part hereof not adjudged invalid or
unconstitutional. (Ord. 2372, 7-1-2019)
110-20: EFFECTIVE DATE:
This ordinance shall be in full force and effect after its passage, approval
and publication as provided by law. (Ord. 2372, 7-1-2019)
110-99: LEGISLATIVE HISTORY:
Ord. 2194, 2-6-2017; Ord. 2372, 7-1-2019.
PUD #111
QUAIL PARK WOODS
SECTION:
111-01: Legal Description
111-02: Sketch Plan
111-03: Required Plans
111-04: Conditions
111-05: Land Use Design Criteria
111-06: Parkland Dedication
111-07: Master Property Owners' Association
111-08: Tree Preservation
111-09: Architecture
111-10: Signage Regulation
111-11: Stormwater Management
111-12: Public Improvements
111-13: Savings Clause
111-14: Effective Date
111-99: Legislative History
111-01: LEGAL DESCRIPTION:
Commencing at the Southeast corner of Section 19, Township 78 North, Range 25,
West of the Fifth P.M., thence easterly along the center line of Iowa Highway
No. 90, 3,891.0 feet, thence Northwest at right angles to the center line of
said Iowa Highway 90, 113.6 feet to the point of beginning, thence continuing
in a straight line 548.15 feet, thence Southwest parallel to and 661.75 feet
distant from said center line of Iowa Highway No. 90, 803 feet, thence
Southeast on a line which is at right angles to North line of Highway 90,
544.25 feet to a point which is 117.5 feet normally distant from said center
line of Highway 90, thence Northeast along the northerly right-of-way line of
said Highway 90, 225.0 feet to a point which is 120.0 feet normally distant
from center line of Highway 90, thence Northeast along said right-of-way line
578.0 feet to the point of beginning, being a part of the Southeast quarter of
Section 20, Township 78 North, Range 25 West of the Fifth P.M., and containing
10.475 acres more or less, now included in and forming a part of the City of
West Des Moines, Polk County, Iowa.
(Ord. 2197, 2-21-2017)
111-02: SKETCH PLAN:
On file in the City and made a part of this rezoning approval, for concept
description and delineation is the Sketch Plan document for the Quail Park
Woods PUD marked Exhibit A. The Sketch Plan is a graphic representation of the
property included in the PUD delineating the approximate location and
configuration of the PUD parcels for the purpose of easier reference for the
applicable regulations of this ordinance. Wherever conflict occurs between the
written text in this document and the notations on the Sketch Plan, the written
text shall prevail. (Ord. 2197, 2-21-2017)
111-03: REQUIRED PLANS:
Prior to or in conjunction with development or transfer of ownership of any
portion of the property covered by this PUD, the following plans shall be
required:
   A.   Preliminary Plat And Final Plat: The PUD area shall be platted in
accordance with the City's subdivision ordinance. Parcels created via the plat-
of-survey process and platted outlots identified on a plat shall be unbuildable
until such time that the plat-of-survey parcel and/or outlot is re-platted into
a developable lot through the preliminary plat and final plat process. (Ord.
2197, 2-21-2017)
111-04: CONDITIONS:
Whereas, title 9, chapter 9, PUD Planned Unit Development District of the City
Code, establishes certain regulations and guidelines pertaining to accompanying
information required on plat and site plan documents. Now, therefore, the
following conditions, restrictions, and regulations are adopted as part of this
approval:
   A.   General Conditions: In addition to the PUD Sketch Plan Map, the
following general development criteria shall be integrated into and made a part
of this planned unit development.
      1.   General Conformance To Subdivision Ordinance: All subdivisions,
public and private streets, public or private street rights-of-way and general
development shall adhere to the standards and design criteria set forth in the
West Des Moines subdivision ordinance and/or established City policies
pertaining thereto, unless otherwise stated within this ordinance.
      2.   General Conformance To Zoning Ordinance: Unless otherwise specified
herein, the development of the PUD shall comply with the provisions of the West
Des Moines zoning ordinance.
      3.   Flood Hazard: In all areas within a 100-year frequency flood hazard
zone, or adjoining drainage ways, and detention ponding areas involving
potential flood hazards, no building shall be erected which has a lowest level
floor, including basements, less than one foot (1') above the determined level
of the 100-year frequency flood event. Buildings shall not be permitted within
twenty five feet (25') of any easement or property boundary of a major drainage
way, stormwater detention basin or pond unless said location is approved as
part of the development entitlement by the City Council and said building is
structurally designed accordingly.
      4.   Developer Responsibilities: The developer, their successors and/or
assigns, if any, shall pay all planning, engineering, and construction costs
for the development of the planned unit development, as required by this
ordinance and approved site plans. Developer shall be responsible for cost of
all streets, storm sewers, sanitary sewers, drainage way improvements,
detention basins, water mains, buffers and other improvements as required of
the development. Developer shall dedicate appropriate rights-of-way and/or
public easements required within the PUD, unless otherwise approved by the City
Council.
      5.   Sanitary Sewer: Any proposed change in approved land use densities
for the PUD will require an analysis of the downstream sanitary sewer capacity
to assure that adequate capacity is available for the proposed change in
approved land use densities.
      6.   Street Lighting: The developer shall be responsible for all costs
associated with the installation of public street lights within or adjacent to
any area proposed to be platted or included within a development.
      7.   Mailboxes: The developer shall be responsible for installation of
any required cluster box units (CBUs/mailboxes) required by the local U.S.
Postal Service Post Office. (Ord. 2197, 2-21-2017)
111-05: LAND USE DESIGN CRITERIA:
In addition to the general criteria as stated above, the following land use
regulations, development standards, and design criteria shall apply to the
development of all areas designated on the Sketch Plan:
   A.   All general use regulations and provisions set forth in title 9,
"Zoning", of the West Des Moines City Code for Residential Estate (RE-1A) shall
apply to any development proposal for the property, unless noted otherwise in
this ordinance.
      1.   Minimum Lot Size: The minimum lot size permitted in this development
shall be forty thousand (40,000) square feet.
      2.   Minimum Lot Width: Minimum lot width shall be no less than one
hundred feet (100') as measured at the front building setback line.
      3.   Building Height: Building height shall be in accordance with the
requirements for the Residential Estate Zoning District as set forth in title
9, chapter 7 of the City Code.
      4.   Building Setbacks: Setbacks for all residential development shall be
as follows:
         a.   Front Yard: A minimum of fifty feet (50') setback along the
internal street within the development. Building shall be set as close to the
front yard setback line as possible so as to preserve as many trees in the rear
and side yards as possible and minimize grading of the site. Front building
setbacks will not be consistent throughout the development due to the shape of
the lot and the point at which the lot width reaches one hundred feet (100').
Development of intervening lots shall abide by setbacks stated in this
ordinance and shall not be determined by the front yard setback of properties
within two hundred feet (200') on the same side of the street as otherwise
required by City Code.
         b.   Rear Yard: Eighty feet (80') on the west and east perimeter;
fifty feet (50') on the north and south perimeter of the PUD.
         c.   Side Yard: Fifteen feet (15') as measured to the foundation with
no other element of the building encroaching into the setback by more than two
feet (2').
         d.   Detached Accessory Structures: Detached accessory structures
shall not be located in the front yard and shall maintain a minimum twenty foot
(20') setback from side property lines and a minimum of eighty feet (80') from
rear property lines on the west, south, and east perimeter and fifty feet (50')
from the north perimeter of the PUD.
      5.   Sprinkler Systems; Cul-De-Sacs: Homes within the PUD that are eight
thousand (8,000) square feet or larger must have a fire sprinkler system
according to the West Des Moines Fire Code. On a cul-de-sac, any home beyond
the length of seven hundred fifty feet (750') from the center line of the cross
street as measured along the center line of the cul-de-sac must have a fire
sprinkler systems. Cul-de-sacs shall not be longer than one thousand feet
(1,000') in length. (Ord. 2197, 2-21-2017)
111-06: PARKLAND DEDICATION:
An area of land calculated by a set formula based upon the density (total
number of dwelling units) of the proposed development is required to be
dedicated for purposes of a public park and greenway as per City Code. A
parkland dedication agreement, acceptable to the Park and Recreation
Department, detailing the specifics related to the parkland dedication
requirements for the development of any area contained within the PUD is
required to be submitted with subdivision of the land within the PUD. (Ord.
2197, 2-21-2017)
111-07: MASTER PROPERTY OWNERS' ASSOCIATION:
If deemed applicable, proper action shall be taken to establish a Master
Property Owners' Association. The Property Owners' Association shall be
responsible for the ongoing upkeep and maintenance of any privately owned
common grounds such as buffer parks, stormwater detention facilities,
greenbelts, plazas and other common space, as outlined in the association
documents and any other specific development improvements noted as their
responsibility in this ordinance. (Ord. 2197, 2-21-2017)
111-08: TREE PRESERVATION:
   A.   The intent of this section is to recognize existing canopied areas
containing trees of significant size, value, and quantity such that the
environmental aesthetic is enhanced by these areas. At the time of platting,
existing tree cover on the site shall be protected and any loss mitigated.
Removal of trees will be permitted for diseased, dead, damaged, or of a species
not commonly recognized as being desirable. For every two thousand (2,000)
square feet of tree canopy removed as measured on an aerial photograph after
July 1, 2015, at least one (1) evergreen a minimum of six feet (6') tall or
over-story species tree at least two inches (2") in caliper, is to be planted
on the lot to mitigate the permanent loss of canopy. At the time of building
permit application for each home, trees to be removed shall be indicated and
documentation from a certified arborist or ASLA licensed landscape professional
indicating the reason for tree removal and whether replacement shall be
provided to the Development Services Department of the City. Tree replacement
shall occur prior to issuance of a final occupancy permit for the home.
      1.   Trees shall not be planted closer than five feet (5') to a sidewalk
as measured from the center of the tree.
      2.   No vegetation which obstructs visibility shall be located within the
site triangle of intersecting streets and private drives, including residential
driveways. (Ord. 2197, 2-21-2017)
111-09: ARCHITECTURE:
   A.   Intent: The intent of these regulations is to create building facades
throughout this development that are varied and articulated to provide visual
interest. Architectural design for single-family dwellings shall accomplish
this by careful attention to exterior building materials and details, use of
windows and doors, and change in building mass within the plan and roof design.
Materials, fenestration, and trim used on the front facade shall be continued
around all sides of the building. However, the level of detail can be reduced
on the facades not facing a street. Care should be taken in the design of the
building to keep grading and tree removal to a minimum.
   B.   Exteriors: Exteriors of the dwellings and accessory structures shall
incorporate materials such as brick, stone, lap or vertical siding, shakes,
decorative trim or similar combination of material which incorporates elements
typical of the chosen architectural style. Use of natural materials is
encouraged, composite materials such as fiber cement and wood composites are
appropriate substitutions. Vinyl siding may be used only with appropriately
scaled and detailed trim and not as the primary cladding material. Changes in
materials should be aligned with changes in plan or roof form to emphasize
these changes in building mass and shall have the appearance of 3-dimensional
elements. Trim and structural elements such as posts or columns shall be sized
to the scale of the building and detailed appropriately to the style. Masonry
shall be incorporated into the building architecture on the front and side
facades, and in a proportion that provides a strong visual presence.
Fenestration (door and window openings) shall be sized to the scale of the
building and be compatible with the chosen architectural style.
   C.   Symmetry: Detached garages or accessory structures should incorporate
architectural details of the primary building with the use of roof forms,
materials, fenestration and other facade detailing.
   D.   Garage Orientation: Garages shall be sited to minimize the visual
presence to the street. To facilitate this requirement, acceptable garage
orientations include:
      1.   Street Oriented Garage: Garages that open to the street are strongly
encouraged and desired to be recessed behind the front plane of the house a
minimum of five feet (5'). In no case shall the garage project more than five
feet (5') in front of the plane of the house.
         a.   In situations where the garage is located less than five feet
(5') behind the front plane of the house, the third car garage, if applicable,
must be stepped back a minimum of four feet (4') from the front of the two (2)
car garage with all garage doors to be individual one (1) car doors.
         b.   In situations where the garage projects up to five feet (5') in
front of the plane of the house, a covered porch shall be constructed that is
at least the width equal to twenty five percent (25%) of the total width of the
house and at least five (5) unobstructed feet in depth.
      2.   Side Loaded Garage: Garages that open to a side yard. This garage
orientation can be located in front of the house equal to the building setback
for the house. Side loaded garages should incorporate architectural details
such as windows, doors, and other detailing on the street facade in order to
present a house appearance thus disguising the garage function. (Ord. 2197, 2-
21-2017)
111-10: SIGNAGE REGULATION:
Signage shall comply with all provisions and standards of title 9, chapter 18
of the City Code for the Residential Estate (RE) Zoning District. (Ord. 2197,
2-21-2017)
111-11: STORMWATER MANAGEMENT:
A Stormwater Management Plan will be required with the platting of this
property. The developer will have said Stormwater Management Plan prepared by a
professional engineer licensed in the State of Iowa, in conjunction with the
submittal of a preliminary plat for the development of the property. The
Stormwater Management Plan shall comply with the City's current design
standards for stormwater management. The method of stormwater management and
the stormwater conveyance system shall be determined prior to City approval of
a preliminary plat.
At time of platting, ownership and responsibility for all stormwater detention
areas and private stormwater detention outlet structures will need to be
established through the execution of a Stormwater Facility Maintenance
Agreement prepared by the City with information provided by the developer. This
agreement essentially provides that the property owner will maintain and repair
their stormwater facilities. If they fail to do so, the City will make repairs
or perform maintenance and assess all costs back to the property owner. As part
of the maintenance agreement, the property owner will be responsible to provide
a letter certifying the detention facility is in conformance with the approved
Stormwater Management Plan. The property owner also will need to provide as-
built drawings of the detention facilities. Both the letter and as-builts will
need to be signed and sealed in accordance with chapter 6, 193c-6.1 (542B) of
the Iowa Code. (Ord. 2197, 2-21-2017)
111-12: PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS:
The developer shall be responsible for constructing and/or installing the
public infrastructure necessary to support development within the subdivision
in a manner that will assure that the public infrastructure functions at an
acceptable level of service (per the City's Comprehensive Plan) and that it
complies with all City ordinances. Public improvements must be accepted by the
City prior to issuance of any occupancy permit, including temporary occupancy
permits. (Ord. 2197, 2-21-2017)
111-13: SAVINGS CLAUSE:
If any section, provision, sentence, clause, phrase or part of the ordinance
shall be adjudged invalid or unconstitutional, such adjudication shall not
affect the validity of the ordinance as a whole or any provision, section,
subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or part hereof not adjudged invalid or
unconstitutional. (Ord. 2197, 2-21-2017)
111-14: EFFECTIVE DATE:
This ordinance shall be in full force and effect after its passage, approval
and publication as provided by law. (Ord. 2197, 2-21-2017)
111-99: LEGISLATIVE HISTORY:
Ord. 2197, 2-21-2017.
PUD #112
PHENIX
SECTION:
112-01: Legal Description
112-02: Sketch Plan
112-03: Intent
112-04: Required Plans
112-05: General Conditions
112-06: Land Use And Design Criteria
112-07: Alley Vacation
112-08: Architecture
112-09: Traffic Study Required
112-10: Sanitary Sewer Easement
112-11: Stormwater Management Plan
112-12: Violations And Penalties
112-13: Other Remedies
112-14: Saving Clause
112-15: Effective Date
112-99: Legislative History
112-01: LEGAL DESCRIPTION:
Lots 1 through 20, Block 23, 1st Addition to Valley Junction, an official plat
now in and forming a part of the City of West Des Moines, Polk County, Iowa.
(Ord. 2205, 3-20-2017)
112-02: SKETCH PLAN:
On file in the City and made a part of this rezoning approval, for concept
description and delineation is the Sketch Plan Document for the Phenix PUD
marked Exhibit A. The Sketch Plan is a graphic representation of the property
included in the PUD delineating the approximate location and configuration of
the parcels for the purpose of easier reference for the applicable regulations
of this ordinance. Wherever conflict occurs between the written text in this
document and notations on the Sketch Plan, the written text shall prevail.
(Ord. 2205, 3-20-2017)
112-03: INTENT:
The Phenix PUD intends to provide a framework for development standards
reflective of the realities and constraints of redevelopment of an existing
structure that has been an integral part of the community of West Des Moines,
and to establish design standards to reinforce and respect the context of the
area and create a neighborhood identity that recognizes the area's original
development history. Because of the existing nature of the building and site,
certain Zoning Code provisions will need to be modified to accommodate reuse of
the building. All applicable Building and Fire Codes related to the reuse of
the existing former school building shall apply. (Ord. 2205, 3-20-2017)
112-04: REQUIRED PLANS:
Development within the Phenix PUD must meet the intent of the approved PUD. The
following plans shall be required as a part of the development or redevelopment
of property contained within the Phenix PUD:
   A.   Development Applications (Site Plans Or Modifications To A Site Plan):
Site plans or modifications to a site plan shall be submitted to the City of
West Des Moines for review and approval prior to the development of any portion
of Parcel A. Site plans for permitted uses which comply (as determined by the
Director of Development Services or designee) with the design intent as set
forth in this PUD will be subject to review via the City's review process and
if required, receive final approval from the City Council following a
recommendation from the Plan and Zoning Commission. Site plans for uses
identified as permitted conditional (Pc) shall require approval from the Board
of Adjustment. At the discretion of the Director of Development Services, an
amendment to the Phenix PUD may be required to bring consistency between the
ordinance and site plan development proposed. (Ord. 2205, 3-20-2017)
112-05: GENERAL CONDITIONS:
Whereas, title 9 of the West Des Moines City Code includes chapter 9, Planned
Unit Development District (PUD) establishes certain regulations and guidelines
pertaining to accompanying information required on development applications and
documents for the PUD subject property.
   A.   Now, therefore, the following conditions, restrictions, and regulations
are adopted as part of this approval and the following general site plan
criteria shall be integrated into and made a part of the development criteria
for the Phenix PUD, to wit:
      1.   Compliance With Codes: Unless otherwise specified herein, the
development of ground within the Phenix PUD shall comply with the provisions of
City Code.
      2.   100-Year Flood Hazard Zone: In all areas within a 100-year frequency
flood hazard zone, or adjoining drainageways or detention areas involving
potential flood hazards, no building shall be erected which has a lowest floor,
including basements, less than two feet (2') above the determined level of the
100-year frequency flood event or flood proofed to the same elevation in
accordance with the West Des Moines floodplain ordinance, and no building shall
be erected within twenty five feet (25') of any major drainage, stormwater
detention basin or pond.
      3.   Construction And Engineering Costs: Unless otherwise agreed to via
proper legal documentation, the developer, their successors and assigns, if
any, shall pay all construction and engineering costs for the development of
the planned unit development, in accordance with the current City policies at
the time of development, as required by this ordinance, the subdivision
ordinance of the City of West Des Moines, and the Des Moines Metropolitan
Design Standards as adopted by the City of West Des Moines, for all streets,
storm sewers, sanitary sewers, drainage improvements, detention basins, water
mains, buffers and other improvements within the PUD as may be required. (Ord.
2205, 3-20-2017)
112-06: LAND USE AND DESIGN CRITERIA:
In addition to the general conditions requirements stated within this document,
the following land use design criteria shall apply to development areas,
Parcels A, A-1, A-2, B, and C as indicated on the sketch plan.
   A.   Land Use:
      1.   Parcels A, A-1, and A-2: All general use regulations and provisions
set forth in title 9, "Zoning", of the West Des Moines City Code for the
Residential Medium Density (RM-12) District, shall apply to any development
proposal for this parcel as shown on the sketch plan for the PUD ordinance,
unless noted elsewhere within this ordinance. A maximum of seventeen (17)
dwelling units shall be allowed within the former Phenix School Building.
         a.   Uses:
            (1)   Ancillary space within the building (gymnasium) shall abide
by the following:
   (A) Unless otherwise modified here within, any permitted (P) or permitted
conditional (Pc) use otherwise allowed per City Code within the Residential
Medium Density (RM) Zoning District shall be allowed with approval by the
appropriate review body if it is demonstrated that the proposed use will not
have a negative effect on the surrounding single-family residential
neighborhood. Negative effects will include, but are not limited to
inadequacies in parking resulting in excessive on-street parking, noise audible
to the surrounding neighborhood, late evening or early morning activities that
are atypical and potentially disruptive to traditional residential
neighborhoods, etc.
   (B) Public uses under the direction of any department of the City shall be
allowed, with the exception of law enforcement holding facilities, if adequate
on-site parking facilities are provided and exterior impacts of the use are
negligible.
   (C) No dwelling uses may be located within the gymnasium.
            (2)   The following uses shall be prohibited within the former
Phenix School Building:
   (A) Any use not otherwise permitted or permitted conditionally per City Code
in the RM Zoning District.
   (B) Commercial and noncommercial greenhouses.
   (C) Funeral services of any nature (SIC 7261).
   (D) Individual and family social services (SIC 8322).
   (E) Job training - vocational rehabilitation services (SIC 8331).
   (F) Social services not elsewhere classified (SIC 8399).
      2.   Parcels B and C: These parcels shall remain as open space.
Recreational and uses beneficial to the community such as community gardens may
be allowed with proper City approvals.
   B.   Minimum Lot Size And Frontage:
      1.   Phenix school and related parking shall be provided within a lot
which is a minimum of eighty thousand (80,000) square feet in size and provides
a minimum of one hundred fifty feet (150') of street frontage.
      2.   Parcels B and C shall have no minimum lot size requirements as long
as they are used as open space and/or for recreational or community uses.
   C.   Building Setbacks:
      1.   Phenix Building:
         a.   Existing building: Minimum ten foot (10') setback from any
property line.
         b.   New structures or additions to existing building: Minimum thirty
foot (30') front and side yard setback, minimum thirty five foot (35') rear
yard setback.
   D.   Building Height: All exterior modifications or building additions to
the Phenix Building shall not exceed the current height of the building,
excluding roof-top mechanical unit (RTU) enclosures, communication equipment,
and penthouse elements. Accessory structures shall comply with the height
requirements as noted in title 9 of City Code.
   E.   Parking:
      1.   Required:
         a.   Phenix dwelling parking:
            (1)   1.5 spaces per efficiency unit.
            (2)   2.0 spaces per 1 - 2 bedroom unit.
            (3)   2.5 spaces per 3+ bedroom unit.
            (4)   One space per one hundred (100) square feet GFA of multi-
purpose recreational use areas.
            (5)   Unless otherwise waived by the City Council, any dwelling
which is owner-occupied, shall provide a minimum of one (1) 9' x 19' enclosed
parking space.
         b.   Phenix gymnasium parking: Per City Code for the primary, or
highest generating use if multiple activities/uses are implemented.
         c.   Parking for Parcels B and C shall be provided on-street unless
the use of the property is determined to warrant more parking than can be
safely provided on-street. Minimum off-street parking requirements for Parcels
B and C shall be as determined by the City Council.
      2.   Setbacks: Off-street parking lots shall be set back so as to provide
a minimum of fifteen feet (15') from the ultimate street right-of-way of the
surrounding streets and fifteen feet (15') from any common property line with
single family developed property.
      3.   Landscaping: A landscaped edge or "streetscape" shall be provided to
screen parking lots adjacent to a street. These streetscapes are intended to
provide desired green to the City and provide visual screening of parking and
other negative site elements. Landscape vegetation shall be implemented within
the area to provide screening of off-street parking areas to a minimum height
of three feet (3'). To aid in achieving this, a minimum of two (2) trees and
ten (10) shrubs shall be required for every fifty (50) linear feet of
streetscape distance. A minimum of fifty percent (50%) of the shrubs shall be
evergreen in nature. Of the required number of trees, at least one-half (1/2)
must be overstory in nature unless prevented by overhead utilities or
underground utility easements. No substitution of shrubs for required trees
shall be allowed. Landscaping plan must accommodate required vision clearances
at street and drive intersections.
      4.   New Parking Lots: Dimension, design, landscaping, and surfacing of
new parking lots shall be in accordance with City Code.
   F.   Buffers: No buffers to separate different land uses shall be required
between the former Phenix School Building and adjacent properties.
   G.   Lighting: As a part of the review of any site plan, if new exterior
lighting is proposed, a photometric plan must be submitted. During the review,
the applicant must demonstrate how lighting will not adversely affect adjoining
properties or patrons utilizing the public street system.
      1.   Site Lighting: Fixtures shall be of a design to direct light
downward (full cut-off) and shall not have bulbs which are exposed and extend
below the frame of the light fixture. Said fixtures shall not exceed twenty
five feet (25') in height as measured from the ground to the top of the light
structure.
      2.   Building Lighting: No wall packs, or floodlighting without shields
to direct the light to its intended target are allowed. In addition to cut-off
fixtures, particular attention shall be given to eliminate hot spots and light
glare. Decorative building lighting is allowed and will be reviewed as part of
a site plan.
   H.   Screening Of Negative Site Elements: Electrical transformers, trash
dumpsters, service areas and loading docks, heating, ventilation, air
conditioning, generators, utility meters, and other mechanical equipment which
is located on, besides or adjacent to any building shall be visually screened
from views from adjacent roadways and properties.
   I.   Open Space: Due to the nature of the intended redevelopment in respect
to existing development patterns and improvements, the amount and locations of
open space and green space/vegetation within the redevelopment area will vary.
As a general rule, the maximum amount of "green" (open lawn areas and
vegetation) should be provided within a site. To allow the most flexibility in
planning, Parcel A shall attempt to provide a minimum of twenty five percent
(25%) open space; however, no less than twenty percent (20%) open space or more
than eighty percent (80%) impervious surface will be allowed. Vegetation
required as part of the open space is in addition to, streetscape and parking
areas or required landscape for screening. Required open space landscape can
utilize existing plant material, with the remainder needed to be in conformance
with City Code to be installed within PUD Parcel A prior to issuance of a
temporary occupancy permit for any dwelling unit within the former Phenix
School Building. (Ord. 2241, 8-7-2017)
112-07: ALLEY VACATION:
Although not constructed, a parcel for an alley was included in the original
platting of the single family lots (Lots 1 - 20, block 23, 1st addition to
Valley Junction). This platted alley shall be vacated with the north
approximately one hundred twenty five feet (125') being incorporated into
Parcel B and the south approximately one hundred twenty five feet (125')
incorporated into Parcel C. The balance of the original alley parcel shall be
incorporated into Parcel A. (Ord. 2234, 7-10-2017)
112-08: ARCHITECTURE:
The architecture of any new construction within the Phenix PUD shall build on
and reinforce the context of the existing building or of the surrounding
residential area to create a development identity that recognizes the history
and incorporates the forms and elements typical of the original development
period of the area (1900s to the 1930s).
   A.   Phenix Building (Parcel A): All exterior modifications, building
additions or accessory structures to the former Phenix School Building shall be
compatible with the historic character of the existing building. Building
design for new construction should incorporate the form, scale, elements and
detailing typical to a 1930s art deco concrete structure. Materials should be
high quality, durable, and maintain their appearance over a prolonged time.
Repair and/or replacement shall be of like kind or revert back to the original
historic appearance if not replacing original material. It is strongly
recommended that any alterations or additions follow The Secretary of the
Interior's Standards for Rehabilitation by the National Park Service. (Ord.
2241, 8-7-2017)
112-09: TRAFFIC STUDY REQUIRED:
A Traffic Impact Study (Traffic Report) dated November 17, 2016, has been
prepared by the City of West Des Moines for the Phenix site development. The
Traffic Report establishes the traffic generated from all property within this
PUD, including seventeen (17) apartments, a maximum of ten (10) single-family
lots and use of the gymnasium as a satellite library at six hundred nine (609)
average daily trips (ADT), with twenty four (24) A.M. peak hour trips and
seventy three (73) P.M. peak hour trips. If the use of the gymnasium differs
from that studied, a revised traffic study may be required to insure that the
new use does not impact the surrounding public street road network. No
modifications to surrounding street infrastructure is necessary to accommodate
the proposed development as studied in the 2016 report. (Ord. 2205, 3-20-2017)
112-10: SANITARY SEWER EASEMENT:
City Code requires utility easements for sewers to be a minimum of thirty feet
(30') wide or twice the depth, whichever is greater. Prior to issuance of an
occupancy permit, including temporary occupancy of any dwelling within the
former Phenix School Building, a thirty foot (30') wide sanitary sewer
easement, centered on the sewer pipe shall be established for the existing
north-south line located immediately east of the Phenix Building. Due to the
proximity of the Phenix Building to the existing line, a full thirty foot (30')
wide easement may not be possible adjacent to the building, thus adjacent to
the building only, a narrower easement may be accepted. In the event that the
Phenix Building is ever demolished, the additional width necessary to achieve a
minimum thirty foot (30') wide easement, or greater if determined necessary at
that time, shall be granted at no cost to the City. (Ord. 2241, 8-7-2017)
112-11: STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN:
Stormwater Management Plans (SWMP) will be required with the submittal of site
development plans for PUD Parcel A where the increase in impervious area
exceeds two thousand (2,000) square feet. The specific Stormwater Plans shall
be prepared at the developer's expense, by a professional engineer licensed in
the State of Iowa. All Stormwater Management Plans must follow the
recommendations in the SE Basin Stormwater Study by L.E. Leon, prepared for the
City and shall comply with the City's applicable design standards for
stormwater management existing at the time each development (site plan) is
approved. (Ord. 2205, 3-20-2017)
112-12: VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES:
Any person who violates the provisions of this ordinance upon conviction shall
be punished as set forth in section 1-4-1 of the City Code of the City of West
Des Moines, Iowa. (Ord. 2205, 3-20-2017)
112-13: OTHER REMEDIES:
In addition to the provisions set out in the violations and penalties section
herein, the City may proceed in law or equity against any person, firm or
corporation for violation of any section or subsection of this ordinance. (Ord.
2205, 3-20-2017)
112-14: SAVINGS CLAUSE:
If any section, provision, sentence, clause, phrase or part of the ordinance
shall be adjudged invalid or unconstitutional, such adjudication shall not
affect the validity of the ordinance as a whole or any provision, section,
subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or part hereof not adjudged invalid or
unconstitutional. (Ord. 2205, 3-20-2017)
112-15: EFFECTIVE DATE:
This ordinance shall be in full force and effect after its passage, approval
and publication as provided by law. (Ord. 2205, 3-20-2017)
112-99: LEGISLATIVE HISTORY:
Ord. 2205, 3-20-2017; Ord. 2234, 7-10-2017; Ord. 2241, 8-7-2017.
PUD #113
THE FOUNDRY
SECTION:
113-01: Legal Description
113-02: Sketch Plan
113-03: Intent
113-04: Required Plans
113-05: Conditions
113-06: Land Use Design Criteria
113-07: Parking
113-08: Landscaping
113-09: Graywater Disposal Site
113-10: Architecture
113-11: Signage Regulation
113-12: Stormwater Management
113-13: Public Improvements
113-14: Traffic Study Required
113-15: Savings Clause
113-16: Effective Date
113-99: Legislative History
113-01: LEGAL DESCRIPTION:
All that part of Lot "D" in recorded Plat of Valley Junction in the NE 1/4 of
Section 15, Township 78 North, Range 25 West, Polk County, Iowa, more
particularly described as follows:
Beginning at a point which is 36 feet southerly from, measured at right angles
to, the north line of said Lot "D" and 428.28 feet westerly from the east line
of said Section 15, measured along the north line of said Lot "D"; thence
westerly parallel with and 36 feet distant southerly from the north line of
said Lot "D" a distance of 720 feet; thence westerly 128.33 feet to a point
which is 49 feet southerly at right angles from the north line of said Lot "D";
thence southerly at right angles to the north line of said Lot "D", a distance
of 81.7 feet; thence southeasterly along an 18 degree curve convex to the
northwest, a distance of 136.9 feet to a point which is 178.5 feet southerly,
at right angles from the north line of said Lot "D" and 1148.28 feet westerly
from the east line of said Section 15 measured along the north line of said Lot
"D"; thence southeasterly along an 18 degree curve convex to the northwest, a
distance of 215 feet to a point which is 336 feet southerly from, measured at
right angles to, the north line of said Lot "D", thence easterly 578 feet to a
point which is 336 feet southerly from, measured at right angles to, the north
line of said Lot "D" and 428.28 feet west of the east line of Section 15 ;
thence north 300 feet to point of beginning, Except for the tract of land in
Lot "D", Valley Junction, Deeded in Book 11740, Page 344 recorded on July 7,
2006 in the Office of the Polk County Recorder and Except for that part deeded
to the City of West Des Moines on August 3, 2010 in Warranty Deed 13528, Page
812 and Except for that part deeded to the City of West Des Moines on August 3,
2010 in Warranty Deed 13528, Page 812.
AND
Outlot "z" in Goodman Industrial Park, an Official Plat, now included in and
forming a part of the City of West Des Moines, Polk County, Iowa.
(Ord. 2206, 3-20-2017)
113-02: SKETCH PLAN:
On file in the City and made a part of this rezoning approval, for concept
description and delineation is the Sketch Plan document for The Foundry PUD
marked Exhibit A. The Sketch Plan is a graphic representation of the property
included in the PUD delineating the approximate location and configuration of
the PUD parcels for the purpose of easier reference for the applicable
regulations of this ordinance. Wherever conflict occurs between the written
text in this document and the notations on the Sketch Plan, the written text
shall prevail. (Ord. 2206, 3-20-2017)
113-03: INTENT:
The intent of this PUD is to plan for three (3) uses of the property: a
distillery, a beer hall, and a commissary kitchen. The PUD also intends to
provide a framework for development standards reflective of the realities and
constraints of redevelopment of an existing structure that has been an integral
part of the community of West Des Moines, to establish design standards to
reinforce and respect the context of the area and create a development identity
that recognizes the area's original history. Because of existing nature of the
building and site, certain Zoning Code provisions may need to be modified to
accommodate reuse of the building. All applicable Building and Fire Codes
related to the reuse of the existing building shall apply. (Ord. 2206, 3-20-
2017)
113-04: REQUIRED PLANS:
The following plans shall be required as a part of the processing of any
development application for any property within the PUD:
   A.   Planned Unit Development: The planned unit development (PUD) identifies
detailed development criteria for the property indicated on the PUD sketch
plan. This document shall constitute the planned unit development ordinance for
The Foundry. On file with the City as Exhibit A is a sketch plan that
illustrates the overall site layout concept. This document and any referenced
documents or exhibits (on file with the City) are intended to specify the
components, parameters, and requirements to be adhered to and implemented in
order to ensure the realization of the PUD. It is recognized that modifications
and changes may be necessary due to changes in building footprints, site
details, and response to market demand. At the discretion of the Director of
Development Services, changes to the layout of the development that are deemed
to be "major" changes shall require an amendment to the sketch plan and
ordinance, if applicable. Major amendments shall require the review and
approval of the Plan and Zoning Commission and City Council.
   B.   Development Applications (Major Modification To A Site Plan, Permitted
Conditional Use Permit, Or Minor Modifications): Major modifications or minor
modifications to a site plan for all development within the PUD must meet the
intent of the approved PUD. Major modifications or minor modifications shall be
submitted to the City of West Des Moines for review and approval prior to the
development or redevelopment of any portion of the property within the PUD.
Major modifications to a site plan for permitted uses which comply (as
determined by the Director of Development Services or designee) with the design
intent as set forth in this PUD will be subject to review via the City's review
process and, if applicable, receive final approval from the City Council
following a recommendation from the Plan and Zoning Commission. Site plans for
uses identified as permitted conditional (Pc) shall require approval from the
Board of Adjustment. At the discretion of the Director of Development Services,
an amendment to the PUD may be required to bring consistency between the
ordinance and site plan development proposed. Minor modifications to the site
plan are subject to administrative review via the City's review process unless
it is determined by the Director of Development Services that the minor
modification is subject to review via the City's review process and receive
final approval from the City Council following a recommendation from the Plan
and Zoning Commission. (Ord. 2206, 3-20-2017)
113-05: CONDITIONS:
Whereas, title 9, chapter 9, PUD Planned Unit Development District of the City
Code, establishes certain regulations and guidelines pertaining to accompanying
information required on plat and site plan documents. Now, therefore, the
following conditions, restrictions, and regulations are adopted as part of this
approval:
   A.   General Conditions: In addition to the PUD Sketch Plan Map, the
following general development criteria shall be integrated into and made a part
of this planned unit development.
      1.   General Conformance To Subdivision Ordinance: All subdivisions,
public and private streets, public or private street rights-of-way and general
development shall adhere to the standards and design criteria set forth in the
West Des Moines subdivision ordinance and/or established City policies
pertaining thereto, unless otherwise stated within this ordinance.
      2.   General Conformance To Zoning Ordinance: Unless otherwise specified
herein, the development of the PUD shall comply with the provisions of the West
Des Moines zoning ordinance.
      3.   Building And Fire Code Conformance: All construction or remodeling
shall conform to West Des Moines building codes and West Des Moines fire codes
and addendums.
      4.   Flood Hazard: In all areas within a 100-year frequency flood hazard
zone, or adjoining drainage ways, and detention ponding areas involving
potential flood hazards, no building shall be erected which has a lowest level
floor, including basements, less than one foot (1') above the determined level
of the 100-year frequency flood event. Buildings shall not be permitted within
twenty five feet (25') of any easement or property boundary of a major drainage
way, stormwater detention basin or pond unless said location is approved as
part of the development entitlement by the City Council and said building is
structurally designed accordingly.
      5.   Developer Responsibilities: The developer, their successors and/or
assigns, if any, shall pay all planning, engineering, and construction costs
for the development of the planned unit development, as required by this
ordinance and approved site plans. Developer shall be responsible for cost of
all streets, storm sewers, sanitary sewers, drainage way improvements,
detention basins, water mains, buffers and other improvements as required of
the development. Developer shall dedicate appropriate rights-of-way and/or
public easements required within the PUD, unless otherwise approved by the City
Council.
      6.   Sanitary Sewer: Any proposed change in approved land use densities
for the PUD will require an analysis of the downstream sanitary sewer capacity
to assure that adequate capacity is available for the proposed change in
approved land use densities.
      7.   Street Lighting: The developer shall be responsible for all costs
associated with the installation of public street lights within or adjacent to
any area proposed to be platted or included within a development. (Ord. 2206,
3-20-2017)
113-06: LAND USE DESIGN CRITERIA:
In addition to the general criteria as stated above, the following land use
regulations, development standards, and design criteria shall apply to the
development of all areas designated on the Sketch Plan:
All general use regulations and provisions set forth in title 9, "Zoning", of
the City Code for General Industrial (GI) Zoning District shall apply to any
development proposal for the property, unless noted otherwise in this
ordinance.
   A.   Uses: The following three (3) land uses will be allowed within the PUD,
any other land use proposed for the PUD in the future will need to be reviewed
and approved through the Plan and Zoning Commission and City Council under a
rezoning review.
      1.   Commercial Kitchen: This use will be a kitchen-only use under eating
places (SIC 5812). The commercial kitchen is intended to provide food
preparation equipment for up to sixteen (16) food trucks operating out of the
kitchen and may serve patrons of the planned beer hall. Office space that is
ancillary to the kitchen and is a part of the business operations of the
kitchen shall be allowed. Gardens for the production of food to be used in the
commercial kitchens or donated may be allowed within the site. Said gardens
shall not be rented to entities not utilizing the commercial kitchen for food
preparation.
      2.   Distillery: This use will be allowed as a permitted use under the
manufacturing of beverages (SIC 208). Tap rooms/tasting rooms/or space devoted
to on premises consumption of spirits beyond the sampling of the product shall
adhere to State of Iowa regulations. Office space that is ancillary to the
distillery and is a part of the business operation of the distillery is
allowed.
      3.   Beer Hall: This use will be considered a bar or drinking place under
drinking places (SIC 5813) and will require the review of a permitted
conditional use permit application. The permitted conditional use application
will be reviewed by the Board of Adjustment. Office space that is ancillary to
the beer hall and is a part of business operations of the beer hall is allowed.
   B.   Building Setbacks: Building setbacks for principal and accessory
structures shall be measured from the ultimate right- of-way line for property
lines abutting a public street or the property lines in all other cases.
   C.   Outdoor Use Areas: The intent of these provisions is to limit the noise
and light impact to the residential uses that are within three hundred feet
(300') of the principal building or the edge of the patio or outdoor use area,
whichever is more restrictive. Patios and other gathering areas outdoors will
be allowed with the following conditions:
      1.   Sound from televisions, speakers, or the like placed on the patio
which is audible to any residential property is not allowed. No live amplified
music (bands), not otherwise approved as part of a temporary use permit, is
allowed. Lights of televisions, video screens, signage within the patio, etc.,
shall not be visible to any residential property.
An application for temporary use permits may be submitted to the City for the
use of the area to the south and east of the principal building, subject to
meeting the conditions and requirement of the permit.
      2.   No overhead or garage-type doors (full or partial height) or
windows, sliding doors or windows, or other openings for the purpose of
remaining open for the serving of food or beverages, the transfer of music, the
use of video monitors, or other such uses, shall be installed on the north
facade.
      3.   Patios and other outdoor spaces for patrons or employees on the
north side of the principal building shall be buffered with solid screening,
such as glass, to mitigate sound transfer to a height of eight feet (8') at the
time of construction of the patio or outdoor area and prior to its use for
patrons and employees.
   D.   Temporary Use Permits: Other planned activities/events on the property
that are not part of the typical activities of the distillery, beer hall, or
commercial kitchen, and which are limited in duration and do not create
anticipated significant impacts to nearby property, City property or right-of-
way will require the submittal of and be subject to the regulation of title 9,
chapter 16, "Temporary Use Permits", of the City Code. Adequate infrastructure,
including provision of parking, must be provided on site unless otherwise
approved by the City Council. The Director of Development Services shall
reserve the right to present any temporary use permit request to the City
Council for approval.
   E.   Mobile Vending Permits: The outdoor operation of food trucks vending
food and beverages on the property shall be governed by title 3, chapter 7,
"Solicitors And Mobile Food Units", of the City Code. (Ord. 2206, 3-20-2017)
113-07: PARKING:
Parking shall be governed by title 9, chapter 15, "Off Street Parking And
Loading", of the City Code, for all uses within the PUD, unless modified by
this section.
   A.   Commercial Kitchen: The commercial kitchen is intended for the use of
food trucks to prepare foods for distribution and consumption elsewhere. A
minimum of three (3) parking spaces per food truck will be provided, one (1) of
those spaces may be a covered space and will count towards meeting the three
(3) spaces per food truck. If the kitchen is to be used for other individuals
and groups in addition to the food trucks, additional parking at a rate of
three (3) spaces for every one thousand (1,000) square feet of gross floor area
will be required.
   B.   Beer Hall: The beer hall use will require one and one-half (11/2)
parking spaces for every one hundred (100) square feet of gross floor area,
including square footage for patron patios and outdoor use areas.
   C.   Distillery: The distillery will require three (3) parking spaces for
every one thousand (1,000) gross square feet. The proposed patio adjacent to
the distillery is intended for the use of employees and distillery equipment.
If the patio is to be used in the future for patrons, a minor modification to
the site plan application will need to be submitted and parking availability
will be checked at that time to determine if the patio will be allowed to be
open to patrons. If space in the distillery is devoted to the consumption of
alcohol greater than that allowed by the State of Iowa as of the date of this
PUD, a permitted conditional use permit for a bar must be submitted to the City
and reviewed by the Board of Adjustment. Additional parking at a rate of one
and one-half (11/2) spaces per one hundred (100) square feet of gross floor
area for the bar portion of the distillery or the use of the patio by patrons
will be required to be accommodated on site. (Ord. 2206, 3-20-2017)
113-08: LANDSCAPING:
Landscaping for open space, parking lots, and screening shall be required as
set forth in title 9, chapter 19, "Landscaping", of the City Code. All
screening and parking lot landscaping requirements are in addition to required
open space landscaping requirements.
   A.   Open Space: Open space landscaping shall be provided according to title
9, chapter 19, "Landscaping", of the City Code.
   B.   Parking: The screening of the parking spaces facing the public street
and those parking spaces directly facing adjacent property will be screened
with vegetation of at least three feet (3') in height and providing one hundred
percent (100%) opacity. Other parking lot landscaping will be required
according to title 9, chapter 19, "Landscaping", of the City Code.
   C.   Graywater Disposal Site: Landscape screening will be provided to screen
the disposal site from the north view. The height of the vegetation should be
enough to screen above ground equipment to one hundred percent (100%) opacity.
   D.   Dumpster Enclosure: Vegetation shall be required to provide opaque
screening of dumpster enclosures on all sides visible from the public right-of-
way or adjacent properties except for the door side.
   E.   Ground Mounted Systems And Equipment: Ground mounted mechanical systems
and other equipment such as transformers, utility boxes, and outdoor distillery
equipment will be screened from public view by vegetation a minimum of three
feet (3') in height at the time of installation and will be expected to grow to
a height that will provide one hundred percent (100%) screening. Screening of
the silos or vats directly related to the distillery manufacturing process will
be exempt from the one hundred percent (100%) screening due to the anticipated
height of this equipment. (Ord. 2206, 3-20-2017)
113-09: GRAYWATER DISPOSAL SITE:
The applicant or property owner will contact the Des Moines Wastewater
Reclamation Authority, or other Governing Body, to determine if the graywater
disposal site will be allowed on the property. It if is allowed, the graywater
dump site will be for the sole use of the food truck operators. The property
owner will take such means as necessary to secure the disposal site from
improper use. (Ord. 2206, 3-20-2017)
113-10: ARCHITECTURE:
The architecture of any new construction within the PUD shall build on and
reinforce the historic context of the existing building or the surrounding
industrial area to create a development identity that recognizes the history
and incorporates the forms and elements typical of the original use of the site
as a railroad repair yard. Materials should be substantial in character, high
quality, durable, and maintain their appearance over a prolonged time. Use of
natural materials is encouraged, composite materials such as fiber cement and
wood composites are appropriate substitutions. Vinyl siding is not allowed.
Changes in materials should be aligned with changes in plan or roof form to
emphasize these changes in building mass. Masonry materials shall start and
stop at changes in wall plane or wrap structural elements to give authenticity
to the material. Fenestration (door and window openings) shall be sized to the
scale of the building and be compatible to the historic context. Trim and
structural elements such as posts or columns shall be sized to the scale of the
building and detailed appropriately to the style. Specific architecture for all
additions or new buildings shall be evaluated as part of the site plan or
permitted conditional use review and approval process.
   A.   Principal Building (Historically A Rail Car Maintenance Building): All
exterior modifications, building additions or attached accessory structures to
the former rail car repair building shall be compatible with the historic
character of the existing building. Design for new construction should
incorporate the form, scale, elements and detailing typical to an 1890s
railyard. Repair and/or replacement shall be of like kind or revert back to the
original historic appearance if not replacing original material. It is strongly
recommended that any alterations or additions be easily reversible or follow
The Secretary of the Interior's Standards for Rehabilitation by the National
Park Service.
   B.   Detached Garage Buildings Or Other New Construction: Building designs
should incorporate the form, scale, elements and detailing typical of late
1800s to early 1900s industrial buildings. Appropriate massing includes one
story and story and a half structures. Roofs shall be pitched, either gable or
shed as typical for the period. Building design should give the appearance of
brick, cast concrete or concrete masonry units for the exposed foundation, wood
siding, sheet metal siding or brick veneer for the remainder of the exterior
walls.
   C.   Decorative Graphics Or Artwork: Decorative graphics or artwork will not
be considered signage if not specific to the activities or tenants within the
development. Decorative graphics or artwork, not commercial in nature, may be
approved through a minor modification to a site plan application and process.
(Ord. 2206, 3-20-2017)
113-11: SIGNAGE REGULATION:
Signage shall comply with all provisions and standards of title 9, chapter 18
of the City Code for the General Industrial Zoning District. (Ord. 2206, 3-20-
2017)
113-12: STORMWATER MANAGEMENT:
A Stormwater Management Plan will be required with the platting of this
property. The Developer will have said Stormwater Management Plan prepared by a
professional engineer licensed in the State of Iowa, in conjunction with the
submittal of a site plan, major modification, eligible minor modifications, or
preliminary plats for the development of the property. The Stormwater
Management Plan shall comply with the City's current design standards for
stormwater management. The method of stormwater management and the stormwater
conveyance system shall be determined prior to City approval of a preliminary
plat.
At time of any of the above actions, ownership and responsibility for all
stormwater detention areas and private stormwater detention outlet structures
will need to be established through the execution of a Stormwater Facility
Maintenance Agreement. (Ord. 2206, 3-20-2017)
113-13: PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS:
The developer shall be responsible for constructing and/or installing the
public infrastructure necessary to support development within the subdivision
in a manner that will assure that the public infrastructure functions at an
acceptable level of service (per the City's Comprehensive Plan) and that it
complies with all City ordinances. At the time of subdivision platting, site
plan, or modification to a site plan, the property owner shall provide the
necessary surety or City acceptable agreements to provide for the construction
and/or installation of all required public infrastructure improvements in
accordance with the City's subdivision ordinance. (Ord. 2206, 3-20-2017)
113-14: TRAFFIC STUDY REQUIRED:
A traffic study, dated December 7, 2016, has been completed and approved by the
City for the purpose of determining traffic impacts and required improvements
that would be necessary for the safe and orderly movement of vehicles into and
around the proposed development. Trip generation estimates from that study
include one thousand one hundred ten (1,110) average daily trips, twenty six
(26) A.M. peak hour trips, and one hundred sixteen (116) P.M. peak hour trips.
Future development applications for major modifications or Pc uses will be
required to comply with the requirements outlined in the traffic impact study
being prepared for this site.
The requirements may include, but are not limited to, auxiliary lanes, access
locations, allowable throat distances at accesses, lane configurations,
alignment, agreements to pay for applicant's share of possible future traffic
signals, etc. Prior to, or in conjunction with the development of any parcel,
or portion of a parcel, the developer shall have the traffic report reviewed by
the City's Traffic Engineer to ensure that the provisions and assumptions of
the original traffic report are still valid and applicable. The future
developer will be required to comply with the requirements outlined in the
traffic impact study being prepared for this site. (Ord. 2206, 3-20-2017)
113-15: SAVINGS CLAUSE:
If any section, provision, sentence, clause, phrase or part of the ordinance
shall be adjudged invalid or unconstitutional, such adjudication shall not
affect the validity of the ordinance as a whole or any provision, section,
subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or part hereof not adjudged invalid or
unconstitutional. (Ord. 2206, 3-20-2017)
113-16: EFFECTIVE DATE:
This ordinance shall be in full force and effect after its passage, approval
and publication as provided by law. (Ord. 2206, 3-20-2017)
113-99: LEGISLATIVE HISTORY:
Ord. 2206, 3-20-2017.
PUD #114
THE PARKWAYS
SECTION:
114-01: Legal Description
114-02: Required Plans
114-03: Conditions
114-04: Requirements
114-05: Architecture
114-06: Signage
114-07: Vehicle Trip Allocation
114-08: Stormwater Management Plan
114-09: Utilities
114-10: Fire Access
114-11: Public Street Lights
114-12: Public Street Improvements
114-13: Violations And Penalties
114-14: Other Remedies
114-15: Savings Clause
114-16: Effective Date
114-99: Legislative History
114-01: LEGAL DESCRIPTION:
A parcel of land being a part of and lying entirely within the south half (S 1/
2), of the northeast quarter (NE 1/4), of section 14, township 78 north, range
26 west of the 5th P.M., West Des Moines, Dallas County, Iowa, and is more
particularly described as follows;
Commencing at the center of section 14,
Thence along and upon the west line of the southwest quarter (SW 1/4), of the
northeast quarter (NE 1/4), of said section 14, N 00°44'17" E, a distance of
1318.17 feet to the northwest corner of the southwest quarter (SW 1/4), of the
northeast quarter (NE 1/4), of said section 14;
Thence along the north line of the southwest quarter (SW 1/4), of the northeast
quarter (NE 1/4), of said section 14, also being the south line of "Bridgewood
South" Subdivision, an official plat, now forming and being part of the City of
West Des Moines, N 83°45'28" E, a distance of 50.37 feet to the easterly right-
of- way line of "South 81st Street" as presently established, also being the
point of beginning;
Thence continuing along said north line, also being the south line of said
"Bridgewood South" Subdivision, N 83°45'28" E, a distance of 1355.38 feet to a
point on a non-tangent curve concave northeasterly, having a radius of 328.00
feet, said point being the westerly corner of Lot 5 of "Gardens at Bridgewood"
plat #2, an official plat, now forming and being a part of the City of West Des
Moines;
Thence running along a curve, said curve being the southwesterly line of said
Lot 5, a distance of 259.39 feet, whose chord bears N 66°38'49" E, 252.68 feet;
Thence continuing along the southerly line of said Lot 5, S 89°21'18" E, a
distance of 112.77 feet to the beginning of a curve concave northerly, having a
radius of 371.00 feet, said point also being the southeast corner of said Lot 5
and the southwest corner of Lot 4;
Thence along a curve, said curve being the southerly line of said Lot 4, a
distance of 100.53 feet, whose chord bears N 82°52'57" E, 100.22 feet to the
beginning of a curve concave southerly, having a radius of 85.00 feet;
Thence running along a curve, said curve being the southerly line of said Lot
4, a distance of 58.87 feet, whose chord bears S 84°58'34" E, 57.70 feet;
Thence running along the extension of the southwesterly right-of- way line of
"South 76th Street" S 65°05'41" E, a distance of 39.03 feet;
Thence S 08°55'37" E, a distance of 99.88 feet to a point on a non-tangent
curve concave northwesterly, having a radius of 650.00 feet;
Thence along said curve a distance of 179.84 feet, whose chord bears N
73°06'49" E, 179.27 feet;
Thence N 64°55'34" E, a distance of 53.93 feet to the beginning of a curve
concave southeasterly, having a radius of 550.00 feet;
Thence along said curve a distance of 239.33 feet, whose chord bears N
77°53'36" E, 237.44 feet;
Thence S 89°24'29" E, a distance of 82.46 feet;
Thence S 44°26'06" E, a distance of 49.47 feet to a point on the westerly
right-of-way line of "Jordan Creek Parkway" as presently established;
Thence along said westerly right-of-way line, S 00°34'53" W, a distance of
952.92 feet to the southerly corner on the east line of Parcel "L", as recorded
in book 2005, page 13730;
Thence along the southeasterly line of said Parcel "L", S 42°08'54" W, a
distance of 82.26 feet to easterly corner on the south line of said Parcel "L";
Thence along the south line of said Parcel "L", also being the northerly right-
of-way line of "Mills Civic Parkway", S 83°41'21" W, a distance of 304.20 feet
to the southwest corner of said Parcel "L";
Thence along the west line of Parcel "L", N 01°48'45" W, a distance of 22.57
feet, to a point on the northerly right-of-way line of "Mills Civic Parkway" as
presently established;
Thence along said northerly right-of-way line, S83°41'21" W, a distance of
1848.90 feet to a point on the east line of a tract of land deeded to the City
of West Des Moines as recorded in book 2003, page 23123;
Thence along said east line, N 00°44'00" E, a distance of 370.44 feet to the
northeast corner of said tract of land;
Thence along north line of said tract of land, S 83°38'54" W, a distance of
278.84 feet to the northwest corner of said tract of land, said corner being on
the easterly right-of-way line of "South 81st Street" as presently established;
Thence along said easterly right-of-way line, N 00°44'17" E, a distance of
864.74 feet to the point of beginning.
Containing 63.367 acres, more or less. Subject to all easements of record.
And
A parcel of land being a part of and lying entirely within Parcel "J" of the
southeast (SE 1/4), of the northeast quarter (NE 1/4), of section 14, township
78 north, range 26 west of the 5th P.M., West Des Moines, Dallas County, Iowa,
as recorded in book 2002, page 13008, and is more particularly described as
follows;
Commencing at the east quarter of section 14,
Thence along and upon the east line of the southeast quarter (SE 1/4), of the
northeast quarter (NE 1/4), of said section 14, N 00°34'53" E, a distance of
1186.15 feet;
Thence N 89°25'07" E, a distance of 60.00 feet to a point on a non-tangent
curve concave southwesterly, having a radius of 25.00 feet, said point also
being on the east line of said Parcel "J";
Thence along said curve a distance of 39.28 feet, whose chord bears N 44°25'49"
W, 35.36 feet;
Thence along the north line of said Parcel "J", also being the southerly right-
of-way line of "Wistful Vista Drive", N 89°26'32" W, a distance of 81.01 to the
point-of beginning;
Thence continuing along the said northerly line of said Parcel "J", N 89°26'32"
W, a distance of 243.77 feet to the beginning of a curve concave northerly,
having a radius of 285.00 feet;
Thence along said curve a distance of 98.27 feet, whose chord bears N 79°26'54"
W, 97.78 feet, to the beginning of a curve concave southerly, having a radius
of 25.00 feet;
Thence along said curve a distance of 32.05 feet, whose chord bears S 74°29'06"
W, 29.90 feet to the beginning of a curve concave easterly, having a radius of
140.00 feet;
Thence along said curve a distance of 70.87 feet, whose chord bears S 17°09'47"
W, 70.12 feet to the beginning of a curve concave northeasterly, having a
radius of 35.00 feet;
Thence along said curve a distance of 71.95 feet, whose chord bears S 56°12'06"
E, 59.93 feet;
Thence N 65°02'12" E, a distance of 33.58 feet to the beginning of a curve
concave southeasterly, having a radius of 650.00 feet;
Thence along said curve a distance of 283.33 feet, whose chord bears N
77°50'04" E, 281.09 feet;
Thence S 89°14'04" E, a distance of 34.28 feet;
Thence N 00°16'23" E, a distance of 15.11 feet to the point of beginning.
Containing 0.412 acres, more or less. Subject to all easements of record.
(Ord. 2221, 5-15-2017)
114-02: REQUIRED PLANS:
The following plans shall be required as a part of the processing of any
development application for any property within The Parkways specific plan:
   A.   Area Development Plan: An area development plan is a plan that
identifies planning units, major circulation patterns, master stormwater
drainage and detention concepts, utilities, shared public spaces, land use
assumptions and proposed densities. It is intended to be a tool used to promote
the communication and cooperation between adjacent property owners and
developers to ensure cohesive and unified development.
An area development plan shall be reviewed by the Plan and Zoning Commission
and approved by the City Council prior to, or in conjunction with, the review
of the specific plan for any property within said specific plan area. No change
to the area development plan shall be made without approval of an amended plan
from the appropriate reviewing bodies.
Attached to this document (exhibit I) or on file with the City Clerk is the
City Council approved area development plan for this property.
   B.   Specific Plan: A specific plan identifies development intent for each
planning unit indicated on the area development plan or more specifically
delineated on the Specific Plan Map. The specific plan shall conform to the
general development intent identified in the approved area development plan, as
well as the Town Center Overlay District Guidelines. The specific plan shall be
reviewed by the Plan and Zoning Commission and adopted by the City Council by
ordinance.
This document shall constitute the specific plan ordinance for The Parkways.
Attached to and made a part of this ordinance is a Specific Plan Map that
illustrates the overall site layout concept for The Parkways (exhibit II). This
document and the associated exhibits (included or on file with the City Clerk)
are intended to specify the components, parameters, and requirements to be
adhered to and implemented in order to ensure the realization of The Parkways
development concept. It is recognized that modifications and changes in
building footprints and layout, including the combining of two (2) smaller
buildings into one larger building, may be necessary in response to market
demands and specific tenants. Additionally, it is recognized that square
footages of one building may be shifted to another or increased to accommodate
specific user's needs. These changes may be allowed with the appropriate City
approvals if the shift does not have a negative impact on the traffic patterns
for the building/area and the total number of vehicle trips does not exceed
that which has been allocated to the overall Parkways development. At the
discretion of the Director of Development Services, changes to the layout of
the development that are deemed to be "major" changes shall require an
amendment to the Specific Plan Map and/or ordinance, whichever is applicable.
Major amendments shall require the review and approval of the Plan and Zoning
Commission and City Council.
Where the Specific Plan Map and specific plan ordinance conflict, the specific
plan ordinance shall prevail.
   C.   Development Applications (Overlay District Site Plans): Site plans for
all buildings and land area within The Parkways development must meet the
intent of the approved specific plan. Site plans shall be submitted to the City
of West Des Moines for review and approval prior to the development of any
portion of the associated supporting lot. Site plans for permitted uses which
comply (as determined by the Director of Development Services) with the design
intent as set forth in this specific plan will be subject to administrative
review and approval by the Director of Development Services. A one-week review
and comment period by each and all-available members of the Plan and Zoning
Commission and City Council shall precede the administrative approval.
If upon review, two (2) or more members of the City Council, Plan and Zoning
Commission, or a combination thereof request such; or if the Director of
Development Services deems the proposed site plan is not in compliance with the
approved specific plan or is potentially controversial, the site plan will be
processed through the traditional full site plan review and approval process.
Site plans for permitted conditional uses (Pc) as defined in the City Code,
unless otherwise amended within this ordinance, shall be approved by the
appropriate review body. At the discretion of the Director of Development
Services, an amendment to The Parkways specific plan ordinance may be required
to bring consistency between the ordinance and site plan development proposed.
An overlay district site plan must be approved prior to the issuance of any
building permit, including footing and foundation permits, for construction of
any structure within the area proposed for development.
   D.   Preliminary And Final Platting: Platting for any parcel shall be at the
discretion of the developer. Platting, if needed for subdivision or right-of-
way dedication, shall be done in accordance with the City's subdivision
ordinance. Lots to be platted without public street frontage, in accordance
with the City Code requirements, may be allowed provided the frontage
requirements of the Code have been met by an abutting or surrounding lot which
is under common ownership under an owners' association, or a cross parking and
access easement has been executed which provides for the unrestricted use and
access of the drives and parking. Platted outlots are not buildable until such
time that they are replatted through the City's subdivision process.
   E.   Roads And Utilities: Unless otherwise specifically restricted by City
Council action, ground work and construction of private roads and utilities may
be started, at the developer's risk, upon approval of a preliminary plat or
overlay district site plan by the City Council. Public street and utility
construction may begin, at the risk of the developer, after approval of the
preliminary plat or overlay district site plan which includes the improvements
by the City Council and construction improvement plans by the City of West Des
Moines.
Prior to approval of the final plat or first overlay district site plan, unless
otherwise allowed by Council, the developer shall provide the appropriate
agreements, easements, and sureties for all public rights-of-way and other
public improvements (utilities, sidewalks, street lights, etc.) within and
associated with the development. (Ord. 2221, 5-15-2017)
114-03: CONDITIONS:
Whereas, title 9 of the West Des Moines City Code includes chapter 9, "Planned
Unit Development District" and establishes certain regulations and guidelines
pertaining to accompanying information required on plat and site plan
documents. Now, therefore, the following conditions, restrictions, and
regulations are adopted as part of this approval, to wit:
In addition to the Specific Plan Map, the following general development
criteria shall be integrated into and made a part of this specific plan
ordinance:
   A.   General Conformance To Subdivision Ordinance: All subdivisions, public
streets, public street rights-of-way, and general development shall adhere to
the standards and design criteria set forth in the West Des Moines subdivision
ordinances and the most current design standards adopted by the City of West
Des Moines pertaining thereto unless otherwise stated within this ordinance.
   B.   General Conformance To Zoning Ordinance: Unless otherwise specified
herein, the development of The Parkways specific plan shall comply with title
9, "Zoning", of the City Code or any other applicable codes.
   C.   Flood Hazard: In all areas within a 100-year frequency flood hazard
zone, or adjoining drainageways, and detention ponding areas involving
potential flood hazards, no building shall be erected that has a lowest floor,
including basements, less than one foot (1') above the determining level of the
100-year frequency flood event, and no building shall be located within twenty
five feet (25') of any easement or property boundary of a major drainageway,
stormwater detention basin, or pond, unless said location is approved as part
of a development entitlement by the City Council and said building is
structurally designed accordingly.
   D.   Cost Of Improvements: Unless otherwise specifically approved by the
City Council, the developer, its successors and/or assigns, if any, shall pay
all planning, engineering, and construction costs for the development of the
planned unit development as required by this ordinance, and shall pay all costs
related to approved site plans, which may include but is not limited to the
cost of all streets, storm sewers, sanitary sewers, water mains and service
lines, drainage-way improvements, detention basins, buffers, and other
improvements as required. No occupancy permits, either temporary or permanent,
shall be issued until all necessary improvements applicable to the area/lot or
structure requesting occupancy are installed and accepted by the City of West
Des Moines. Nothing in this ordinance shall be construed to prevent the
developer, its successors and/or assigns, if any, from entering into private
agreement(s) as it/they may desire to share the cost of improvements. (Ord.
2221, 5-15-2017)
114-04: REQUIREMENTS:
Unless provided otherwise in this ordinance, all general use regulations,
performance standards and provisions set forth in title 9, "Zoning", of the
City Code for the Community Commercial (CMC) District and Office (OF) District
shall apply to the development within The Parkways specific plan area, as more
specifically described below. To the extent that the provisions of this section
conflict with or are more restrictive than similar provisions provided
elsewhere in the West Des Moines zoning ordinance, the provisions of this
section shall control. The following land use design criteria, development
standards, and landscaping regulations shall apply to all parcels within The
Parkways specific plan area:
   A.   Parcels A, B-1 And B-2: For specific plan Parcels A, B-1 and B-2, all
land uses as set forth in title 9, "Zoning", of the City Code for the Office
(OF) District as permitted and permitted conditionally shall apply except as
designated below:
      1.   Permitted Uses: Permitted uses shall include the following:
         a.   All permitted (P) uses allowed within the Office (OF) District
except those that have been prohibited by this ordinance.
         b.   All permitted conditional (Pc) uses allowed within the Office
(OF) District except those that have been prohibited by this ordinance may be
allowed with the approval of the appropriate review body.
      2.   Prohibited Uses: The following permitted and permitted conditional
uses otherwise allowed in the Office (OF) District shall be prohibited:
 
SIC 347     Coating, engraving and allied services
SIC 5812    Eating places, sit down eating places and eating places with
            takeout only - no drive throughs
SIC 7212    Garment pressing and agents for laundries and dry cleaners
SIC 725     Shoe repair and shoeshine parlors
SIC 7299-02 Massage therapy establishments and steam bath services
SIC 7991    Physical fitness facilities
 
      3.   Lot Area: If subdivided, lot areas less than minimum square footage
or acres required by Code for the Office District shall be considered
acceptable if supported by reciprocal ingress/egress and parking easements and
if approved by the appropriate approval body as part of a plat. Multiple
buildings shall be permitted on one lot.
      4.   Building Setback: Buildings shall be set back as follows. The
setback shall be measured from the property line, unless otherwise indicated,
to the visible primary vertical foundation wall. Intermittent encroachment into
the setback for canopies, awnings, building bump-outs, outdoor dining areas,
etc., may be allowed at the discretion of the Director of the Development
Services Department. Building setbacks may overlap required buffers.
         a.   Along S. 81st Street and Coachlight Drive - minimum of thirty
feet (30').
         b.   Along Mills Civic Parkway - minimum of sixty feet (60').
         c.   Along S. 77th Street - minimum of thirty feet (30').
         d.   Setback from adjacent property outside the PUD (west) - minimum
thirty feet (30').
         e.   Setback from adjacent property outside the PUD (north) - minimum
thirty five feet (35'). Vehicle drives, parking and trash enclosures shall not
be located closer than fifty feet (50') to the north property line nor shall
they be located between the north property line and the building. Solid
screening consisting of evergreen landscaping or screening compatible in design
and materials to the primary buildings shall be provided to mitigate all views
of parking, mechanical equipment, and trash enclosures from the adjacent
residential dwellings.
         f.   No setback (0 feet) shall be required between internal PUD lots,
unless otherwise required by building separation requirements within adopted
Building and Fire Codes.
      5.   Building Height:
         a.   The maximum building height for buildings within Parcel A shall
not exceed two (2) stories in height.
         b.   The maximum height for a building constructed on Parcel B-1 shall
not exceed two (2) stories in height.
         c.   Any buildings within Parcel B-2 shall abide by the maximum height
restrictions of the Office (OF) District as measured from the average finished
grade to the top of the parapet wall. An additional twelve feet (12') of height
shall be allowed for each additional ten feet (10') of setback.
      6.   Parking Ratios:
         a.   Parking ratios for office uses shall provide within each lot a
minimum of one space per two hundred (200) square feet of building for
buildings of less than twenty thousand (20,000) square feet of gross floor area
and one space per two hundred twenty five (225) square feet for buildings
greater than twenty thousand (20,000) square feet of gross floor area.
         b.   At the discretion of the Development Services Director, a less
stringent parking calculation may be used provided the applicant can
demonstrate a parking rate less than the above is adequate due to the type of
potential use, shared uses or off-peak uses.
         c.   If shared parking is intended, a shared parking agreement will
need to be executed in conjunction with the approval of an associated overlay
district site plan.
      7.   Parking Setbacks:
         a.   The location of parking and vehicle use areas at major street
intersections shall be discouraged. Parking and vehicle use areas should be
located in areas away from the street and behind the building pad whenever
possible.
         b.   Off-street parking areas shall be set back from the perimeter
boundaries of Parcels A, B-1 and B-2 as follows:
            (1)   Along S. 81st Street - minimum of thirty feet (30').
            (2)   Along Coachlight Drive and S. 77th Street - minimum of
fifteen feet (15').
            (3)   Along Mills Civic Parkway - minimum of thirty feet (30').
            (4)   Setback from adjacent property outside the PUD (west) -
minimum of thirty feet (30').
            (5)   Setback from adjacent property outside the PUD (north) -
minimum of fifty feet (50').
            (6)   There shall be no minimum parking lot setback between
internal lot boundaries if lots are designed as one continuous parking field.
Lots not designed as one shall provide a minimum of ten feet (10') between
parking fields to allow for the placement of landscape vegetation.
         c.   Minimum parking stall measurements and drive aisle widths shall
conform to chapter 15 of the City's zoning ordinance.
         d.   No portion of any parking lot or drive aisle associated with
parking may be located within a required buffer or streetscape.
      8.   Buffers: The provision of adequate buffering and landscaping shall
be more thoroughly evaluated and approved as part of the overlay district site
plan approval. Additional buffer and landscaping may be required at that time
in response to additional details of the use, buildings, parking, loading
docks, mechanical equipment, etc., to be implemented.
         a.   Buffers shall be provided along the perimeter boundaries of
Parcels A, B-1 and B-2 as follows:
            (1)   West - minimum thirty feet (30') from ultimate right-of-way
line of S. 81st Street.
            (2)   South - minimum thirty feet (30') from ultimate street right-
of-way line of Mills Civic Parkway.
            (3)   North - minimum thirty feet (30').
            (4)   East - no buffer required except streetscape required along
S. 77th Street.
            (5)   No buffers between internal PUD parcels shall be required
except to mitigate undesirable site elements and views.
         b.   The implementation of vegetation as indicated below shall be
required. Earth berming shall be implemented along the north property line to
enhance buffering and screening of otherwise negative site elements and to aid
in ensuring year-round screening. In addition, berming and shrub plantings
shall be implemented within the buffer along Mills Civic Parkway and S. 81st
Street to help mitigate views of the adjacent parking lots. Buffers should be
designed to achieve the maximum amount of screening of negative elements from
the maximum number of viewpoints with vegetation layered to ensure adequate
blockage of views and to create depth and a sense of naturalness. Care should
be taken to ensure that "thru-views" under tree canopies are adequately
blocked. It is recognized that some views of businesses are desired; therefore,
buffer vegetation may be clustered and situated to screen parking associated
with the businesses and other negative site elements such as trash enclosures,
transformers, loading docks, etc.
         c.   The minimum landscaping within required buffers shall be provided
as follows. Buffers shall be so designed so as to serve as a visual
continuation of existing adjacent buffers and/or as a unifying element within
the development. Buffers adjacent to streetscapes shall make a natural
transition in order to be visually cohesive.
            (1)   Thirty Foot Buffer:
   (A) One overstory tree and two (2) ornamental or evergreen trees, and six
(6) shrubs shall be provided per thirty five (35) linear feet of required
buffer.
            (2)   Vegetation Substitution:
   (A) Two (2) ornamental trees, one evergreen tree, or six (6) shrubs may be
substituted for one required overstory tree; however, no more than twenty five
percent (25%) of the required number of overstory trees may be substituted.
   (B) A twenty five (25) square foot mass planting of perennials or ornamental
grasses may be substituted for three (3) shrubs.
            (3)   Vegetation In Buffer Is Additional: Landscape vegetation
required within buffer areas is in addition to the landscape vegetation
required of open space, parking areas, and that necessary to achieve adequate
visual mitigation of undesirable site elements and views.
            (4)   Water Features: Ponds, lakes, wetlands, or other water
features may be placed within the buffer area given the following:
   (A) Such water features constantly contain water at a level visible from
adjoining properties and public streets;
   (B) Pond edge treatments are incorporated to enhance the attractiveness of
the element (no "wild overgrown pond edge" allowed); and
   (C) The appropriate water circulation and clarification measures are
implemented, including water fountains or jets when implemented which project
water high enough to be visible from adjoining properties and public streets.
   B.   Parcel C: For specific plan Parcel C, all land uses as set forth in
title 9, "Zoning", of the City Code for the Community Commercial (CMC) District
as permitted and permitted conditionally shall apply except as designated
below:
      1.   Permitted Uses: Permitted uses shall include the following:
         a.   All permitted (P) uses allowed within the Community Commercial
(CMC) District except those that have been prohibited by this ordinance.
         b.   All permitted conditional (Pc) uses allowed within the Community
Commercial (CMC) District except those that have been prohibited by this
ordinance may be allowed with the approval of the appropriate review body.
         c.   The following size and use limitations shall apply to allowed
uses:
 
SIC 5812 Eating places with drive-thrus: a maximum of two (2) drive thru
         restaurants within the development, not including coffee shops.
         Convenience stores with gasoline sales shall be limited to one
SIC 541  establishment within the development. Maximum gas pump numbers and
         canopy size shall be in accordance with City Code for the Community
         Commercial (CMC) Zoning District.
 
      2.   Prohibited Uses: The following permitted and permitted conditional
uses otherwise allowed in the Community Commercial (CMC) District shall be
prohibited:
SIC 4522    Heliport/helistop
SIC 4783    Packing and crating
SIC 5932    Pawnshops
SIC 7299-02 Massage therapy establishments and steam bath services
SIC 75      Automotive repair, services, and parking
SIC 7699    Recreational vehicle repair services
SIC 7699    Household appliance repair services
SIC 7699    Misc. automotive repair services
SIC 806x    Hospitals of any kind or service (general, psychiatric,
            respiratory, etc.)
 
      3.   Lot Area: If subdivided, lot areas less than minimum square footage
or acres required by Code for the CMC District shall be considered acceptable
if supported by reciprocal ingress/egress and parking easements and if approved
by the appropriate approval body as part of a plat. Multiple buildings shall be
permitted on one lot.
      4.   Building Setback: Buildings shall be set back as follows. The
setback shall be measured from the property line, unless otherwise indicated,
to the visible primary vertical foundation wall. Intermittent encroachment into
the setback for canopies, awnings, building bump-outs, outdoor dining areas,
etc., may be allowed at the discretion of the Director of the Development
Services Department.
         a.   Along S. Jordan Creek Parkway, Coachlight Drive and S. 77th
Street - minimum of thirty feet (30').
         b.   Along Mills Civic Parkway - buildings ten thousand (10,000)
square feet or less may be set back a minimum of thirty feet (30'). Buildings
larger than ten thousand (10,000) square feet must be set back a minimum of
sixty feet (60') from the Mills Civic Parkway right-of-way line.
         c.   No setback (0 feet) shall be required between internal PUD lots,
unless otherwise required by building separation requirements within adopted
Building and Fire Codes.
      5.   Building Height:
         a.   All buildings shall abide by the maximum height restrictions of
the CMC District as measured from the average finished grade to the top of the
parapet wall. An additional twelve feet (12') of height shall be allowed for
each additional ten feet (10') of setback.
         b.   Vertical architectural features upon the building itself and
free-standing place-making elements and landmarks such as clock towers may
exceed the maximum allowable height of the CMC District to a maximum height of
forty five feet (45').
      6.   Parking Ratios:
         a.   Parking ratios for eating and drinking places shall provide
within each lot a minimum of one space per two hundred (200) square feet of
gross floor area.
         b.   Parking ratios for all other permitted or permitted conditional
uses shall provide within each lot a minimum of one space per two hundred
twenty five (225) square feet of gross floor area.
         c.   At the discretion of the Development Services Director, a less
stringent parking calculation may be used provided the applicant can
demonstrate a parking rate less than the above is adequate due to the type of
potential use, shared uses or off-peak uses.
         d.   If shared parking is intended, a shared parking agreement will
need to be executed in conjunction with the approval of an associated overlay
district site plan.
      7.   Parking Setbacks:
         a.   The location of parking and vehicle use areas at major street
intersections shall be discouraged. Parking and vehicle use areas should be
located in areas away from the street and behind the building pad whenever
possible.
         b.   Off-street parking areas shall be set back from the perimeter
boundaries of Parcel C as follows:
            (1)   Along S. 77th Street and Coachlight Drive - minimum of
fifteen feet (15').
            (2)   Along S. Jordan Creek Parkway and Mills Civic Parkway -
minimum of thirty feet (30').
            (3)   There shall be no minimum parking lot setback between
internal lot boundaries if lots are designed as one continuous parking field.
Lots not designed as one shall provide a minimum of ten feet (10') between
parking fields to allow for the placement of landscape vegetation.
         c.   Minimum parking stall measurements and drive aisle widths shall
conform to chapter 15 of the City's zoning ordinance.
         d.   No portion of any parking lot or drive aisle associated with
parking may be located within a required buffer or streetscape.
      8.   Vehicle Drive Thrus And Canopy Areas: The intent of this development
is not to encourage the use of automobiles; however, it is recognized that
drive-ups are a key component to the functionality of certain types of
businesses due to their convenience. If, through the design review process,
including an updated traffic analysis, if necessary, it can be demonstrated
that such uses do not cause traffic congestion, do not interfere with
pedestrian movements and can be designed to minimize their presence, a maximum
of six (6) businesses with drive-thrus may be permitted within The Parkways.
Drive-thru facilities may be allowed in conjunction with, but are limited to
the following types of businesses; bank, coffee shop, dry cleaner, pharmacies,
grocery store, and fast food restaurants and coffee shops. A maximum of two (2)
drive-thru fast-food restaurants shall be allowed within The Parkways. Walk-up
or pedestrian ATMs with no vehicle access and loading zones in which the patron
exits their vehicle and loads the merchandise/materials themselves shall be
allowed as needed.
      9.   Buffers: The provision of adequate buffering and landscaping shall
be more thoroughly evaluated and approved as part of the overlay district site
plan. Additional buffer and landscaping may be required at that time in
response to additional details of the use, buildings, parking, loading docks,
mechanical equipment, etc., to be implemented.
         a.   Buffers shall be provided along the perimeter boundaries of
Parcel C as follows:
            (1)   Along Coachlight Drive and S. 77th Street - no buffer
required, however fifteen foot (15') streetscape is required.
            (2)   Along Mills Civic Parkway and S. Jordan Creek Parkway -
minimum thirty feet (30').
            (3)   No buffers between internal PUD parcels shall be required
except to mitigate undesirable site elements and views.
         b.   The implementation of vegetation as indicated below shall be
required. In addition, earthen berms shall be required within buffers to assist
in blocking views of undesirable building elements and parking lots. Buffers
should be designed to achieve the maximum amount of screening of negative
elements from the maximum number of viewpoints with vegetation layered to
ensure adequate blockage of views and to create depth and a sense of
naturalness. Care should be taken to ensure that "thru-views" under tree
canopies are adequately blocked. It is recognized that some views of businesses
are desired; therefore, buffer vegetation may be clustered and situated to
screen parking associated with the businesses and other negative site elements
such as trash enclosures, transformers, loading docks, etc.
         c.   The minimum landscaping within required buffers shall be provided
as follows. Buffers shall be so designed so as to serve as a visual
continuation of existing buffers and/or as a unifying element within the
development. Buffers adjacent to streetscapes shall make a natural transition
in order to be visually cohesive.
            (1)   Thirty Foot Buffer:
   (A) One overstory tree and two (2) ornamental or evergreen trees, and six
(6) shrubs shall be provided per thirty five (35) linear feet of required
buffer.
            (2)   Vegetation Substitution:
   (A) Two (2) ornamental trees, one evergreen tree, or six (6) shrubs may be
substituted for one required overstory tree; however, no more than twenty five
percent (25%) of the required number of overstory trees may be substituted.
   (B) A twenty five (25) square foot mass planting of perennials or ornamental
grasses may be substituted for three (3) shrubs.
            (3)   Vegetation In Buffer Is Additional: Landscape vegetation
required within buffer areas is in addition to the landscape vegetation
required of open space, parking areas, and that necessary to achieve adequate
visual mitigation of undesirable site elements and views.
            (4)   Water Features: Ponds, lakes, wetlands, or other water
features may be placed within the buffer area given the following:
   (A) Such water features constantly contain water at a level visible from
adjoining properties and public streets;
   (B) Pond edge treatments are incorporated to enhance the attractiveness of
the element (no "wild overgrown pond edge" allowed); and
   (C) The appropriate water circulation and clarification measures are
implemented, including water fountains or jets when implemented which project
water high enough to be visible from adjoining properties and public streets.
   C.   Parcels D And E: For specific plan Parcels D and E, the requirements
set forth in title 9, "Zoning", of the City Code for the Open Space (OS)
District shall apply except as designated below:
      1.   Permitted Uses: No land uses, buildings, or parking may be permitted
on Parcels D and E. These parcels may only be used for landscape buffering or
stormwater detention as needed.
      2.   Buffers: Buffers shall be provided within Parcels D and E per the
requirements of a thirty foot (30') buffer, which include, one overstory tree
and two (2) ornamental or evergreen trees, and six (6) shrubs shall be provided
per thirty five (35) linear feet of required buffer.
         a.   Buffers should be designed to achieve the maximum amount of
screening of negative elements from the maximum number of viewpoints with
vegetation layered to ensure adequate blockage of views and to create depth and
a sense of naturalness. Care should be taken to ensure that "thru-views" under
tree canopies are adequately blocked.
         b.   Buffers shall be so designed so as to serve as a visual
continuation of existing buffers and/or as a unifying element within the
development. Buffers adjacent to streetscapes shall make a natural transition
in order to be visually cohesive.
         c.   Buffers shall not encroach within required vision triangles at
road and driveway intersections.
         d.   Ponds, lakes, wetlands, or other water features may be placed
within the buffer area given the following:
            (1)   Such water features constantly contain water at a level
visible from adjoining properties and public streets;
            (2)   Pond edge treatments are incorporated to enhance the
attractiveness of the element (no "wild overgrown pond edge" allowed); and
            (3)   The appropriate water circulation and clarification measures
are implemented, including water fountains or jets when implemented which
project water high enough to be visible from adjoining properties and public
streets.
   D.   Landscaping: The landscaping requirements specified herein are intended
to create an aesthetically pleasing development which enhances the appearance
and character of the City of West Des Moines, while protecting the general
health, safety and welfare of the citizens. Landscaping is required to address
the following primary aspects or consequences of development:
• Open space protection and enhancement
• Mitigation of paving expanses associated with off-street parking
• Visual screening of undesirable views, activities and/or site elements, and
• Street side enhancement ("streetscapes")
At the time of overlay district site plan review for each PUD parcel,
landscaping shall be evaluated to ensure achievement of the standards stated
within this specific plan ordinance. Additional vegetation beyond that required
herein may be required to be implemented in response to additional details of
the use, buildings, parking, site layout, etc. Details regarding specific
varieties, exact quantities, and the minimum size at time of planting shall be
provided and approved as part of the site plan submittal for each PUD parcel
and shall meet the general guidelines in respect to the minimum plant size
traditionally applied to development within the City.
      1.   Open Space: The intent of open space is to allow for a balance
between natural areas and the built environment and to provide for the overall
beautification and "greening" of the City.
         a.   A minimum of twenty five percent (25%) open space shall be
provided within each lot of Parcels A and B.
         b.   A minimum of twenty five percent (25%) open space shall be
provided collectively between Parcels C, D and E.
         c.   A minimum of fifteen percent (15%) open space shall be provided
within each lot of Parcel C.
         d.   Open space shall be considered all areas unencumbered by
buildings or paved areas associated with parking, drive aisles, and loading
docks or zones. Plaza areas, water features and structures such as gazebos,
arbors, pergolas, etc., that are associated with outdoor pedestrian use areas,
as well as designated and enhanced pedestrian walkways through and between
areas within the development may be counted towards fulfilling the minimum open
space requirement.
         e.   Vegetation at a rate of two (2) trees and three (3) shrubs per
three thousand (3,000) square feet of required open space shall be provided
within the parcel.
            (1)   Vegetation Substitution:
   (A) One evergreen tree or six (6) shrubs may be substituted for one required
tree; however, no more than twenty five percent (25%) of the required number of
trees may be substituted unless specifically approved by the Director of
Development Services in order to meet a defined design intent.
   (B) A twenty five (25) square foot mass planting of perennials or ornamental
grasses may be substituted for three (3) shrubs.
         f.   Vegetation required as part of the open space may be placed into
off-street parking areas, streetscapes or required buffers; however the open
space vegetation is in addition to that which would be required of buffers or
parking islands/pods and may not be counted towards fulfilling the minimum
amount of vegetation required for these areas.
      2.   Off-Street Parking Areas:
         a.   All off-street parking areas shall be landscaped to screen their
visibility from street rights-of-way and adjoining property outside of The
Parkways development.
         b.   All off-street parking areas shall be aesthetically improved to
reduce obtrusive characteristics that are inherent to their function. Multiple
landscape islands combined with vegetation shall be incorporated to effectively
eliminate a "sea of asphalt/concrete" and to provide shade thus decreasing heat
reflection back into the environment. Landscape islands and/or pods shall be
implemented in accordance with the following:
            (1)   Islands or open areas shall be located at the terminus end of
all parking rows. Terminal islands shall measure at least ten feet (10') in
width and shall match, at a minimum, the stall length unless otherwise allowed
per the discretion of the Director of Development Services.
            (2)   Linear parking islands that run the length of the parking row
shall be implemented every six (6) rows of parking. Said linear islands shall
measure a minimum of eight feet (8') in width and shall be landscaped to
provide "green" within the parking lot. The incorporation of defined pedestrian
pathways within these linear islands is encouraged.
            (3)   Landscaped islands shall be placed, at a minimum, every
eighteen (18) stalls within a linear row of parking. Landscaped pods (tree
diamonds) within a linear row of parking shall be evenly spaced between the
islands; however, shall be spaced no farther than nine (9) parking stalls from
another landscape pod or landscaped islands. At a minimum, islands shall match
the dimensions of one parking stall and pods shall measure a minimum of six
feet (6') from back-of-curb to back-of-curb. As an alternative to the
implementation of pods within a linear row of parking, the terminal islands at
each end of the row of parking may be increased in width by five feet (5') for
every two (2) pods within the row which are eliminated. In no instance however,
should there be greater than eighteen (18) parking stalls in a row
uninterrupted by a landscape island or pod.
         c.   Landscape vegetation shall be provided as follows:
            (1)   Two (2) trees in each 9' by 34' island.
            (2)   One tree in each 9' by 17' island.
            (3)   One tree in each landscape pod.
            (4)   Additional shrubs, ground covers, grasses, and flowers may be
provided in landscaped islands but is not required.
      3.   Visual Screening:
         a.   Negative Aspects: Views from public streets and adjoining
properties of the negative aspects of development and land uses such as drive-
ups, loading docks; heating, ventilation, or air conditioning (HVAC) units; or
similar electrical or mechanical appurtenances shall be adequately screened.
Said screening shall be achieved by careful selection of location and/or
orientation of the buildings and elements, in combination with the use of
architectural enclosures and/or earth berming and landscaping consisting of
evergreen material for year-round screening.
         b.   Mechanical Equipment: All rooftop mechanical units shall be
screened from ground level views from public streets and adjoining properties
through architecturally incorporated opaque screen walls, raised parapet walls,
penthouse feature, or other opaque material comprised of materials consistent
with the associated primary structure. Screening measures and materials shall
be reviewed as part of the site plan review process.
         c.   Trash Enclosures: Trash receptacles and dumpsters shall be
screened by the use of a permanent enclosure. Whenever possible, the enclosure
should be designed as an attached extension to the primary structure rather
than a free-standing structure. Enclosures shall be constructed of materials
consistent with or complementary to the primary structure. Additionally, the
enclosure should be landscaped to minimize the visual presence and impact of
the structure on surrounding properties, businesses, and public streets.
         d.   Loading Docks: Loading docks shall be screened from adjacent
properties and public rights-of-way by the use of opaque fencing in combination
with landscaping, berming or other architectural elements to soften the
presence of the fence. The vegetation species shall be selected for its density
and height and shall be of sufficient size to provide adequate screening.
         e.   Canopies: Canopies, including gas pump stations and other drive
thru canopies must be designed to incorporate the building's architecture
through the use of similar building materials, roof design and color, including
the application of brick or stone to canopy support columns. When possible,
canopies should be designed as an extension of the building rather than an
added on element.
            (1)   Unless appropriate site design measures are implemented to
mitigate the presence and visibility thereof, canopies shall not be located at
the intersection of major streets.
            (2)   The vehicle use area will be screened through landscaping to
minimize the visual presence and impact of the structure on surrounding
properties, businesses, and public streets. Said screening shall be achieved
through the use of location and/or earth berming and landscaping consisting of
evergreen material for year-round screening.
      4.   Streetscaping: A landscaped edge or "streetscape" shall be provided
along all public streets which are not required to provide a buffer. These
streetscapes are intended to provide desired green to the City, interest,
comfort to pedestrians, visual softening of pavement expanses, bring human
scale to adjoining buildings, minimize heat-reflection, and provide traffic
calming benefits. The streetscape should have a noticeable pattern, design, or
plant variety and should attempt to serve as a distinguishing or identifiable
landmark for the development.
         a.   Unless otherwise required to be located differently due to
presence of existing utilities and/or easements, streetscaping shall be located
within the first fifteen feet (15') parallel and adjacent to the public street
right-of-way or back of curb of private streets and primary access drives.
         b.   Vegetation within streetscape areas shall be provided at a rate
of one tree and three (3) shrubs per thirty five (35) linear feet of
streetscape. A twenty five (25) square foot mass planting of perennials or
ornamental grasses may be substituted for three (3) shrubs.
         c.   Vegetation required of streetscapes shall be in addition to
vegetation required of parking and open space. Vegetation required as part of
open space may be placed into streetscapes; however the open space vegetation
may not be counted towards fulfilling the minimum amount of vegetation required
for the streetscape.
   E.   Pedestrian Use Areas And Elements: The Parkways development, in
alignment with Town Center Overlay District Guidelines, aims to encourage
pedestrian movement and opportunities for pedestrian interaction through a
series of interconnected sidewalks and gathering areas. The attached Specific
Plan Map indicates the locations and type of anticipated plaza areas and
pedestrian corridors. Conceptual illustrations for the plaza areas indicated
are included in the exhibit packet (attached or on file with the City Clerk).
Specific details and final materials and layouts for each of these plaza areas
shall be submitted, reviewed, and approved as part of the site plan for the
associated PUD parcel.
      1.   Pedestrian Elements: The Parkways, in accordance with the Town
Center Overlay District Guidelines, will encourage pedestrian movement and
opportunities for pedestrian interaction through a series of interconnected
sidewalks and gathering areas. The specific plan on file with the City
indicates locations and type of anticipated plaza areas and pedestrian
corridors. Details for each of these plaza areas shall be submitted, reviewed,
and approved as part of the overlay district site plan for each of the PUD
parcels. In addition to the plaza areas indicated on the specific plan map, the
incorporation of plazas and pedestrian use areas shall be encouraged as part of
each building/parcel development.
         a.   These areas shall encourage opportunities for interaction among
pedestrians through the provision of seating opportunities (benches, chairs,
tables, planter walls, etc.). Without compromising the design intent of the
plazas, the developer is encouraged to maximize the number of furniture/seating
opportunities throughout the development. Representations of the site
amenities, including street furniture that will be provided throughout this
development are included in the exhibit packet (attached or on file with the
City Clerk). Although deviations from the illustrations are permissible, the
street furniture is intended to serve as a unifying element throughout the
development.
         b.   A minimum of one area within the development shall provide an
exterior public space appropriate for public gatherings, open air markets,
seasonal events and other activities. If designed and located properly to
provide a protected area for pedestrians without affecting development
circulation, this area can serve a dual purpose of providing parking when not
in use for an event.
         c.   Open space plazas areas shall incorporate a variety of hardscape
landscape materials (stone pavers, stamped concrete, field boulders, etc.) for
visual interest and variety and shall implement landscape vegetation to soften,
enhance, and delineate the areas. All plaza/pedestrian areas are required to
incorporate "green" through the incorporation of planter beds, containers, or
raised planters.
         d.   Appropriate lighting should be incorporated into the plaza areas
and along pedestrian pathways for safety reasons and to extend the usability of
the area into the evening hours. Such lighting may be provided by either pole
mounted fixture or bollard style lighting.
         e.   Plaza areas associated with establishments which serve alcoholic
beverages shall provide a definable boundary (change in material, unmovable
signage, physical feature, etc.) between the private establishments in which
alcohol consumption is allowed and the public area in which it is not. A
physical barrier (fencing, railing, landscaping, etc.) shall prohibit access
into the patio area from the public area; all access into the patio area shall
be through the interior of the establishment. The barrier specifications shall
be reviewed and approved as part of the alcohol permit application.
         f.   Unless provided prior to site development, the installation of
these pedestrian elements shall occur in conjunction with the development of a
specific PUD parcel and shall be completed prior to issuance of a final
occupancy permit.
      2.   Pedestrian Connections: The overall development shall integrate
interconnected pedestrian walkways to allow and encourage pedestrian movement
from one establishment to another within The Parkways development, as well as
to other surrounding developments.
         a.   Pedestrian pathways internal to the development and across
parking areas and drive aisles shall be constructed with contrasting color,
paving material or pavement patterns to the adjoining paving in order to
provide a definable and highly visible crosswalk. Simply striping pedestrian
crosswalks shall not meet the intent of this section.
   F.   Lighting:
      1.   Fixtures used within off-street parking areas shall be consistent
with those illustrated in the exhibits packet (attached or on file with the
City Clerk). Although deviations from the illustrations are permissible, the
fixtures are intended to serve as a unifying element between parcels within the
development.
      2.   Said fixtures less than one hundred feet (100') from the north
property line shall not exceed sixteen feet (16') in height.
      3.   Said fixtures greater than one hundred feet (100') but less than one
hundred fifty feet (150') from the north property line shall not exceed twenty
two feet (22') in height as measured from the ground to the top of the light
structure.
      4.   Said fixtures greater than one hundred fifty feet (150') from the
north property line of The Parkways specific plan shall not exceed twenty eight
feet (28') in height as measured from the ground to the top of the light
structure.
      5.   The footcandle level at the north property line shall be zero (0).
      6.   The footcandle level at all other property lines shall be less than
one.
      7.   Said fixtures are to be downcast, cut-off variety to direct lighting
to parking areas and pedestrian pathways and eliminate glare to neighboring
properties. Bulbs shall not be exposed or extend down past the fixture. Care
should be taken to ensure that adjoining residences are not looking up and into
the bulbs of light fixtures, which may include shields on the fixtures or other
means of shielding glare.
      8.   No wall packs or floodlighting are allowed. In addition to cut-off
fixtures, particular attention shall be given to eliminate hot spots and light
glare. To achieve this, additional measures may include, but are not limited
to, lowering parking lot light levels after business hours, turning off lights
not necessary for security purposes, and use of landscaping for light
screening/blockage.
      9.   As a part of the review of each site plan, a photometric plan must
be submitted. During the review, the applicant must demonstrate how lighting
will not adversely affect adjoining properties.
      10.   Fixtures located one hundred fifty feet (150') or less from the
property line of the existing Bridgewood residential lots to the north shall be
turned off no later than thirty (30) minutes after the closing of the last
business, except those lights necessary for security purposes.
   G.   Cart Corrals: If implemented, cart corrals shall be permanent fixtures
and constructed with masonry, stone, or block. No tenant or product
identification signage for advertising purposes may be located on the cart
corrals. Storage of carts shall be interior to a building or immediately
adjacent to the building with a masonry screen wall of the same materials as
the store face implemented to minimize its presence and completely conceal the
carts. (Ord. 2221, 5-15-2017)
114-05: ARCHITECTURE:
The intent is to create building facades throughout this development that are
varied and articulated to provide visual interest to pedestrians and to
establish a unique identity for the development. The architectural design of
any building within this development shall be acceptable to the City. The
architecture shall attempt to express a creative presentation by careful
attention to exterior building materials and details, use of fenestration, and
change in building mass within the plane and roof design to lessen the
plainness of appearance which can be characteristic of large commercial
buildings. Building design, materials, trim, detailing, and colors shall
provide continuity amongst buildings to unite all structures within the
development into one project concept. All sides to each building shall receive
high quality materials, finishes, and details (360 degree architectural
treatment). There are no "backs" to a building. Materials should be durable,
economically maintained and of a quality that will maintain their appearance
over a prolonged time.
On file with the City are conceptual architectural illustrations of the general
building style and material options. Once City approval is gained on a
particular building design, any alteration in design before or during
construction must be reviewed and approved by the City's Development Services
Department.
   A.   All buildings within this development shall accommodate or incorporate
the following in building design and materials:
      1.   Corporate architecture shall be prohibited. Limited use of
architectural elements characteristic of prototypical architecture may be
allowed at the discretion of the Director of Development Services or the
appropriate reviewing and approval body. Implementation of these architectural
elements shall be minimized and whenever possible modified to give a unique
image to the establishment. No standard corporate building design without
modifications shall be implemented.
      2.   Buildings shall be organized to create a logical and identifiable
relationship with the site and other buildings, open spaces, and pedestrian
circulation paths.
      3.   The use of building articulation and materials which break up the
building mass into modules that respect a pedestrian scale and reflects
proportions similar to other buildings within the development.
      4.   The building's design should meet context and site objectives such
as providing gateways, creating visual and physical linkages and framing or
terminating views.
      5.   Variation in building height, mass and roof forms shall be provided
to create interest while still maintaining an overall building continuity.
Roofs should not be designed as attention- getting devices related to the
reinforcement of signage or as an identifiable corporate image.
      6.   Entrances into buildings should be easily identified through the use
of building design and detailing. Projected or recessed entryways, change in
rooflines, addition of awnings or changes in building material are examples
that can create this effect.
      7.   Shifts in building planes/facades and variation in exterior
materials shall be incorporated to minimize long expanses of wall. Long blank
walls shall be prohibited.
      8.   Variation in materials, material modules, expressed joints,
textures, colors and details should be used to break up the mass of the
buildings. Materials should change with the change in building planes.
      9.   Trim and structural elements such as posts or columns shall be sized
to the scale of the building.
      10.   Whenever possible, ground floor tenant areas should provide the
maximum possible glazing toward sidewalks to provide pedestrians with visual
interest. Use of reflective glass or mirrored glass is discouraged. Efforts
should be made to use clear glass on storefronts, windows and doors to promote
the linkage of the interior and exterior of buildings.
      11.   Natural materials such as brick and stone shall be used as the
major elements of the facade. Architectural precast concrete or metal
acceptable to the City may be incorporated in the design as the major element.
Concrete products shall have integrated color rather than surface applied
paint/staining and should generally have texture for interest; smooth finish
concrete products may be used in conjunction with texture for accent purposes.
The use of EIFS, synthetic stucco or composite materials shall be used in
moderation and primarily used as an accent or trim material and cannot be the
predominate building material. Use of EIFS is limited to areas of the building
six feet (6') above grade and higher and use of vinyl materials is prohibited.
(Ord. 2221, 5-15-2017)
114-06: SIGNAGE:
All proposed ground and exterior wall signage requires a sign permit issued by
the City of West Des Moines through normal sign review procedures. Unless
otherwise prescribed herein, signage shall abide by the standards and
regulations as set forth in title 9, chapter 18, "Signs", of the City Code.
   A.   All Signs: Signs located within three hundred feet (300') of
residential property will be limited to exterior lit signs or halo lighting and
will be required to have a timer to shut off at eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M. or
within one hour of close of the business, if open after eleven o'clock (11:00)
P.M. Signs may be turned back on at five o'clock (5:00) A.M. for uses that are
closed during the night.
   B.   Monument Signs:
      1.   A maximum of one monument sign per driveway entrance shall be
allowed for Parcel A.
      2.   A maximum of one monument sign per frontage shall be allowed for
Parcel B-1.
      3.   A maximum of one monument sign shall be allowed along Mills Civic
Parkway for Parcel B-2. In addition, one monument sign shall also be allowed
per driveway entrance for Parcel B-2.
      4.   A maximum of one monument sign shall be allowed along Mills Civic
Parkway and one monument sign allowed along S. Jordan Creek Parkway for all of
the lots within Parcel C. In addition, one monument sign may be located at the
intersection of Mills Civic Parkway and S. Jordan Creek Parkway.
      5.   Monument signs may be a maximum of five feet (5') tall, thirty five
(35) square feet in size and set back a minimum of ten feet (10') from the
public street right-of-way line. A monument sign may be increased to seven feet
(7') in height and sixty four (64) square feet in size if the sign is set back
a minimum of twenty feet (20') from the public street right-of-way line.
      6.   If a parcel has five hundred feet (500') or more of street frontage,
monument signs shall be separated by a minimum of three hundred feet (300').
      7.   The copy area shall be comprised of individually attached and
illuminated letters or routered sign face with push through letters to create
three dimensional signage and eliminated backlighting of the background areas.
      8.   Said signs shall be landscaped at the base of the structure and
shall have a noticeable base and/or column element comprised of brick or stone.
Ground signs throughout The Parkways development shall be a unifying element,
consistent in design and materials. No additional mounding of soil or berming
shall be allowed to elevate the sign except as required as part of a site plan
for screening purposes.
   C.   Directional Signs: To help facilitate vehicular movement and provide
direction to patrons to various public streets and private internal access
drives, directional signage may be permitted within The Parkways development at
the discretion of the Director of Development Services or their designee. The
primary intent of directional signage is not to draw people off of the public
streets but rather direct them through the streets and drives within the
development. Sign locations are generally intended to be at interior locations
within the development, thus letter size is intended to be only large enough
for a vehicle in close proximity to read it and not such that it is legible
from the exterior of the property and/or public streets. Directional signs
shall not be larger than sixteen (16) square feet and a maximum of four feet
(4') in height. Said signs may only be located on private property within The
Parkways development; shall not be located within public utility easements and
shall be located outside of both pedestrian and vehicle vision triangles at
intersections. A sign permit shall be issued by the City prior to installation
of any direction signs.
   D.   Wall Signs:
      1.   Regulations; Exception: The regulations and provisions set forth in
title 9, chapter 18, "Signs", of the City Code for the designated zoning
classification for the respective parcel shall govern sign design and placement
with the exception of the following: No internally lighted wall signage shall
be allowed on any wall facing residential properties. Wall signage for a tenant
in a multi-tenant building shall be located on the wall area of the tenant's
location within the building.
      2.   Wall Signage Location:
         a.   Single tenant buildings: Wall signage may be located on any
facade; however no sign on one facade may be greater in square footage than
that facade is long (i.e., a 50 foot wall plane may place up to 50 square feet
on said plane).
         b.   Multi-tenant buildings: Wall signage shall only be located on a
wall plane associated with and contiguous to the tenant's leased space.
      3.   Allowance: Wall signage allowed per building or tenant shall be
allowed as follows:
         a.   Single tenant building: Allowed one square foot per one linear
foot based on the longest side.
         b.   Multi-tenant building: Allowed one square foot per one linear
foot of facade which contains the main public entry into the tenant lease area.
In addition, one-half (1/2) square foot per one linear foot of facade which
contains a secondary public entry into the tenant lease area shall be allowed,
provided no lighted wall signage shall be allowed on any wall facing
residential properties. The signage may be divided between allowable per City
Code wall planes; however, no sign on one facade may be greater in square
footage than that facade is long (i.e., for a 20 foot tenant bay; up to 20
square feet may be placed on each side of the building).
         c.   Additional sign allowance for building setbacks greater than two
hundred fifty feet (250') from the public right-of-way that the front of the
building faces shall be allowed in accordance with the City Code. (Ord. 2221,
5-15-2017)
114-07: VEHICLE TRIP ALLOCATION:
A Traffic Impact Study (study) dated March 21, 2017, has been prepared for The
Parkways development. Per the study, The Parkways development has been
allocated two thousand ninety three (2,093) P.M. peak hour trips; one thousand
nine hundred thirteen (1,913) A.M. peak hour trips; and twenty four thousand
nine hundred twenty seven (24,927) ADT trips. As development proposals are
approved the number of vehicle trips generated by the proposed development
(based upon the number of square feet of a proposed specific use in conjunction
with any parameters established in the study) will be subtracted from the total
trips allocated to the development. Approval of this proposed specific plan
does not constitute a guarantee that the proposed plan can be implemented.
Development of all parcels and implementation of desired land uses, including
specific high traffic generating tenants, will be limited by the available
number of trips.
Should anticipated traffic exceed the total trips allocated for The Parkways
development prior to full build out, further development of parcels may be
limited or prohibited. Alternate uses to those planned within the study and
approved as part of this Parkways specific plan ordinance may be allowed,
following completion of an amended traffic study analyzing the proposed
alternative and appropriate City approval of an amendment to the respective
specific plan ordinance and/or map, if necessary, if the existing uses and the
proposed change(s) collectively do not exceed the total trips allocated to the
development. (Ord. 2221, 5-15-2017)
114-08: STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN:
A master stormwater management plan for the entire development which governs
the overall stormwater management of the development shall be submitted to and
approved by the City of West Des Moines. Specific stormwater management plans
demonstrating compliance with the approved Parkways master stormwater
management plan, on file with the City will be required with the development of
each site plan. The specific stormwater plans shall be prepared at the
developer's expense, by a professional engineer licensed in the State of Iowa.
All specific stormwater management plans shall comply with the City's
applicable design standards for stormwater management existing at the time each
site plan is approved. (Ord. 2221, 5-15-2017)
114-09: UTILITIES:
The developer, its successors or assigns, if any, shall construct at its cost,
and if for general public use, dedicate to the City all sanitary sewer mains,
water mains, and storm sewers associated with the Parkways development as
required by the City of West Des Moines' subdivision ordinance in accordance
with applicable City design standards. All necessary easements to allow City
access to public utilities for maintenance and repair purposes shall be
executed prior to approval of an overlay district site plan for each PUD parcel
or prior to the approval and recordation of the first final plat. Unless
otherwise specified within a specific easement document, the City shall not be
responsible for reimbursement, restoration and/or replacement of any
improvements located within the public easements should the City be required to
excavate the public utilities for normal City operations. No occupancy permits,
either temporary or permanent, shall be issued until all necessary improvements
applicable to the area/lot or structure requesting occupancy are installed and
accepted by the City of West Des Moines. Nothing in this ordinance shall be
construed to prevent the developer, its successors and/or assigns, if any, from
entering into private agreement(s) as it/they may desire to share the cost of
improvements.
The placement of public utility easements within buffer parks and landscape
islands within parking areas is discouraged due to the potential conflict
between trees and the need to access the lines for repair. Overstory and
understory trees should be placed off utility lines a minimum distance equal to
the 1:1 excavation trench necessary for the deepest utility. Adequate access
for maintenance vehicles shall be provided into and through the easement areas.
(Ord. 2221, 5-15-2017)
114-10: FIRE ACCESS:
   A.   All internal drive aisles and parking lots shall permit the travel of
the Fire Department's largest vehicle, including adequate accommodation of the
vehicle's turning needs. Approval of unique design solutions to accommodate
fire access may be granted by the City Council if, the solutions proposed are
recommended by the West Des Moines Fire Department.
   B.   At the discretion of the City's Fire Marshal, "No Parking Fire Lane"
areas may be established as necessary to ensure efficient movement and access
of the fire trucks. Unless otherwise privately agreed upon, the developer of
The Parkways development shall be responsible for the procurement and erection
of approved fire lane signage.
   C.   All access drives and drive aisles shall maintain a minimum of twenty
feet (20') of clear pavement.
   D.   A minimum of fourteen feet (14') of vertical clearance over the travel
portion shall be maintained at all times over all vehicle travel ways.
   E.   The developer or its designee shall be responsible for enforcement of
no parking lanes and maintaining adequate clearance of structures and
vegetation along and above all vehicle travel ways regardless if public or
private.
   F.   Adequate fire accesses as determined by the City's Fire Marshal shall
be provided at all times to those areas under construction. (Ord. 2221, 5-15-
2017)
114-11: PUBLIC STREET LIGHTS:
Unless otherwise provided for via a development agreement, at the time of final
platting, the developer shall enter into an agreement with MidAmerican Energy
for the installation of public street lights along all public streets within
and abutting the specific plan area. Payment to MidAmerican Energy or provision
of surety to ensure installation of all public street lights shall be provided
prior to approval and recordation of the first final plat. (Ord. 2221, 5-15-
2017)
114-12: PUBLIC STREET IMPROVEMENTS:
Unless otherwise provided for via the development agreement for this site,
improvements and modifications to adjoining public roads (Mills Civic Parkway,
S. Jordan Creek Parkway and S. 81st Street) as identified within the traffic
study shall be constructed by the City as dictated within the development
agreement or if the developer is required to construct, the improvements must
be accepted by the City Council or the developer may petition the City Council
to provide surety in lieu of public improvement acceptance prior to approval
and recordation of the first final plat. Dedication of permanent right-of-way
to accommodate public road improvements shall be provided as necessary upon
request. Temporary right-of-way required during the construction/installation
shall be provided as necessary. (Ord. 2221, 5-15-2017)
114-13: VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES:
Any person who violates the provisions of this ordinance upon conviction shall
be punished as set forth in section 1-4-1 of the City Code of the City of West
Des Moines, Iowa. (Ord. 2221, 5-15-2017)
114-14: OTHER REMEDIES:
In addition to the provisions set out in the violations and penalties section
herein, the City may proceed in law or equity against any person, firm or
corporation for violation of any section or subsection of this ordinance. (Ord.
2221, 5-15-2017)
114-15: SAVINGS CLAUSE:
If any section, provision, sentence, clause, phrase or part of the ordinance
shall be adjudged invalid or unconstitutional, such adjudication shall not
affect the validity of the ordinance as a whole or any provision, section,
subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or part hereof not adjudged invalid or
unconstitutional. (Ord. 2221, 5-15-2017)
114-16: EFFECTIVE DATE:
This ordinance shall be in full force and effect after its passage, approval
and publication as provided by law. (Ord. 2221, 5-15-2017)
114-99: LEGISLATIVE HISTORY:
Ord. 2221, 5-15-2017.
PUD #115
TRAIL SIDE
SECTION:
115-01: Legal Description
115-02: Sketch Plan
115-03: Intent Of PUD
115-04: Required Plans
115-05: Conditions
115-06: Land Use Design Criteria
115-07: Parking
115-08: Landscaping
115-09: Architecture
115-10: Signage Regulation
115-11: Stormwater Management
115-12: Traffic Study Required
115-13: Savings Clause
115-14: Effective Date
115-99: Legislative History
115-01: LEGAL DESCRIPTION:
Southwoods Plat 2 Lot 2, an official plat now in and forming a part of the City
of West Des Moines, Polk County, Iowa.
(Ord. 2243, 9-5-2017)
115-02: SKETCH PLAN:
Attached hereto and on file with the City is the sketch plan document for the
Trail Side PUD marked exhibit A and is made a part of this rezoning approval.
The sketch plan is a graphic representation of the property included in the PUD
delineating the approximate location and configuration of the PUD parcels for
the purpose of easier reference for the applicable regulations of this
ordinance. Wherever conflict occurs between the written text in this document
and the notations on the sketch plan, the written text shall prevail. (Ord.
2243, 9-5-2017)
115-03: INTENT OF PUD:
The Trail Side PUD intends to provide a framework for development standards
reflective of the realities and constraints of redevelopment of an existing
structure and site, such as parking, and to establish design standards to
reinforce and respect the context of the area and create a neighborhood
identity that recognizes the area's development history. Because of existing
nature of the building and site, certain Zoning Code provisions may need to be
modified to accommodate reuse of the building. All applicable Building and Fire
Codes related to the reuse of the existing building shall apply. (Ord. 2243, 9-
5-2017)
115-04: REQUIRED PLANS:
The following plans shall be required as a part of the processing of any
development application for any property within the PUD:
   A.   Development Applications (Major Modification To A Site Plan, Permitted
Conditional Use Permit, Or Minor Modifications): Major modifications or minor
modifications to a site plan for all development within the PUD must meet the
intent of the approved PUD. Major modifications or minor modifications shall be
submitted to the City of West Des Moines for review and approval prior to the
development or redevelopment of any portion of the property within the PUD.
Major modifications to a site plan for permitted uses which comply (as
determined by the Director of Development Services or designee) with the design
intent as set forth in this PUD will be subject to review via the City's review
process and, if applicable, receive final approval from the City Council
following a recommendation from the Plan and Zoning Commission. Site plans or
use changes for uses identified as permitted conditional (Pc) not otherwise
amended within this ordinance shall require approval from the Board of
Adjustment. At the discretion of the Director of Development Services, an
amendment to the PUD may be required to bring consistency between the ordinance
and site plan development or use proposed. Minor modifications to the site plan
are subject to administrative review via the City's review process unless it is
determined by the Director of Development Services that the minor modification
is subject to review via the City's review process and to receive final
approval from the City Council following a recommendation from the Plan and
Zoning Commission. (Ord. 2243, 9-5-2017)
115-05: CONDITIONS:
Whereas, title 9, chapter 9, "Planned Unit Development District", of the City
Code, establishes certain regulations and guidelines pertaining to accompanying
information required on plat and site plan documents. Now, therefore, the
following conditions, restrictions, and regulations are adopted as part of this
approval:
   A.   General Conditions: In addition to the PUD Sketch Plan Map, the
following general development criteria shall be integrated into and made a part
of this planned unit development.
      1.   General Conformance To Subdivision Ordinance: All subdivisions,
public and private streets, public or private street rights-of-way and general
development shall adhere to the standards and design criteria set forth in the
West Des Moines subdivision ordinance and/or established City policies
pertaining thereto, unless otherwise stated within this ordinance.
      2.   General Conformance To Zoning Ordinance: Unless otherwise specified
herein, the development of the PUD shall comply with the provisions of the West
Des Moines zoning ordinance.
      3.   Building And Fire Code Conformance: All construction or remodeling
shall conform to West Des Moines building codes and West Des Moines fire codes
and addendums.
      4.   Flood Hazard: In all areas within a 100-year frequency flood hazard
zone, or adjoining drainage ways, and detention ponding areas involving
potential flood hazards, no building shall be erected which has a lowest level
floor, including basements, less than one foot (1') above the determined level
of the 100-year frequency flood event. Buildings shall not be permitted within
twenty five feet (25') of any easement or property boundary of a major drainage
way, stormwater detention basin or pond unless said location is approved as
part of the development entitlement by the City Council and said building is
structurally designed accordingly.
Outdoor storage of products directly related to a tenant of the PUD may be
stored in flood hazard zones provided that enclosure is of a design that does
not impede water flow and that the materials stored within the enclosure or on
display within the site are easily moved out of the flood hazard zone when
flooding is projected.
      5.   Developer Responsibilities: The developer, their successors and/or
assigns, if any, shall pay all planning, engineering, and construction costs
for the development of the planned unit development, as required by this
ordinance and approved site plans. Developer shall be responsible for cost of
all streets, storm sewers, sanitary sewers, drainage way improvements,
detention basins, water mains, buffers and other improvements as required of
the development. Developer shall dedicate appropriate rights-of-way and/or
public easements required within the PUD, unless otherwise approved by the City
Council.
      6.   Sanitary Sewer: Any proposed change in approved land use densities
for the PUD will require an analysis of the downstream sanitary sewer capacity
to assure that adequate capacity is available for the proposed change in
approved land use densities.
      7.   Street Lighting: The developer shall be responsible for all costs
associated with the installation of public street lights within or adjacent to
any area proposed to be platted or included within a development. (Ord. 2243,
9-5-2017)
115-06: LAND USE DESIGN CRITERIA:
In addition to the general criteria as stated above, the following land use
regulations, development standards, and design criteria shall apply to the
development of all areas designated on the sketch plan:
All general use regulations and provisions set forth in title 9, "Zoning", of
the West Des Moines City Code for Neighborhood Commercial (NC) Zoning District
shall apply to any development proposal for the property, unless noted
otherwise in this ordinance.
   A.   Uses: All permitted (P) and all permitted conditional (Pc) uses allowed
in the Neighborhood Commercial Zoning District will be allowed in the Trail
Side PUD, except as modified by the following:
         a.   Hardware stores (SIC 5251) less than fifteen thousand (15,000)
gross square feet of tenant space or building area will be allowed as a
permitted use, with additional square footage for outdoor display and storage
in accordance with City Code.
         b.   The following uses shall be prohibited:
 
SIC 2082 Brewery
SIC 2082 Brewery less than five thousand (5,000) square feet in conjunction
         with a tap room
SIC 5813 Drinking places
SIC 79   Event venue
         Any independent storage use
         Any use with a drive through
 
   B.   Building Setbacks: Building setbacks for principal and accessory
structures shall be measured from the ultimate right- of-way line for property
lines abutting a public street or the property lines in all other cases.
   C.   Outdoor Display And Storage: The intent of these provisions is to
respect the Neighborhood Commercial District which is usually adjacent to
residential development. Also, large outdoor storage yards are suited to larger
commercial districts or industrial districts. In consideration of the intent,
the following standards will apply to all uses within the PUD.
      1.   Unless otherwise authorized by the City, outdoor display of
merchandise of an establishment occupying tenant space within the primary
building may be allowed within an area equal to or less than an amount of
square feet that is twenty percent (20%) of the gross square feet of the tenant
space in the principal building. This display area may occupy an area located
adjacent to the tenant space, without encroaching into any sidewalk (a 4 foot
wide sidewalk must be maintained at all times) or parking area.
      2.   Unless otherwise authorized by the City, outdoor storage of larger
or bulk merchandise for an establishment occupying tenant space within the
primary building may occupy an area equal to no more than ten percent (10%) of
the gross square foot of the tenant space in the principal building. All
outdoor storage is expected to be surrounded with an opaque enclosure up to
eight feet (8') tall; no material can exceed the height of the enclosure. This
area shall not be located within required front yard, parking areas or required
open space. As noted in section
115-05 of this ordinance, if the enclosure is situated within a flood hazard
zone, the enclosure shall be of a design that does not impede water flows.
   D.   Temporary Use Permits: No temporary use permits that limit the
availability of parking below the minimum number of stalls required of the
tenant mix and square footages will be permitted. (Ord. 2243, 9-5-2017)
115-07: PARKING:
Parking shall be governed by title 9, chapter 15, "Off Street Parking And
Loading", of the City Code, for all uses within the PUD, unless modified by
this section.
The Trail Side PUD is constrained on parking due to the construction of a
convenience store on Lot 1, Southwoods plat 2 and subsequent platting of the
property leaving one hundred fifty (150) spaces of parking as of July 1, 2017,
for the use of the existing, former grocery store building. Therefore, the uses
of the building need to be carefully planned by the owner to collectively
utilize one hundred fifty (150) parking spaces or less with the option to
increase the parking space count by construction of more parking.
The following parking ratios for each type of use will be used within this PUD
to calculate required parking for the tenant mix discussed for this building.
Any use not identified below, shall be provided parking in accordance with City
Code:
Office: One space per two hundred (200) gross square feet
Retail: One space per two hundred fifty (250) gross square feet
Restaurant: One space per one hundred (100) gross square feet
Fitness center: One space per one hundred fifty (150) gross square feet
Storage space that is directly incidental to a particular tenant: One space per
one thousand (1,000) gross square feet
Assembly of product area that is directly incidental to a particular tenant:
One and one-half (11/2) spaces per one thousand (1,000) square feet (Ord. 2243,
9-5-2017)
115-08: LANDSCAPING:
Landscaping for open space, parking lots, and screening shall be governed by
title 9, chapter 19, "Landscaping", of the City Code. All screening and parking
lot landscaping requirements are in addition to required open space landscaping
requirements.
   A.   Open Space: Open space landscaping shall be provided according to title
9, chapter 19, "Landscaping", of the City Code upon the submittal of a major
modification that changes the building square footage by over two thousand
(2,000) square feet.
   B.   Parking: The screening of the parking spaces facing the public street
and those parking spaces directly facing adjacent property will be screened
with vegetation of at least three feet (3') in height and providing one hundred
percent (100%) opacity. Other parking lot landscaping will be required
according to title 9, chapter 19, "Landscaping", of the City Code and will be
required when the parking lot is reconfigured.
   C.   Dumpster Enclosure: A dumpster enclosure will be required for all waste
disposal carts and containers. The dumpster enclosure shall be constructed from
durable materials consistent with the primary building and in color and pattern
to the principal structure.
   D.   Screening: Ground mounted mechanical systems and other equipment such
as transformers, utility boxes, and wall mounted utilities will be screened
from public view, including the Jordan Creek greenbelt, by vegetation a minimum
of three feet (3') in height at the time of installation and choose a variety
that will be expected to grow to a height that will provide one hundred percent
(100%) screening within two (2) years from installation. Screening of the roof
mounted mechanical shall be screened through architectural means such as screen
walls, parapets, etc. Screening of these elements shall be done upon the
submittal of a minor or major modification which includes relocation or
addition of such elements. (Ord. 2243, 9-5-2017)
115-09: ARCHITECTURE:
The architecture of any new construction or remodel of existing buildings
within the PUD shall build on and reinforce the context of the existing
building and the surrounding commercial areas to create a development identity
that recognizes and incorporates the forms and elements typical of the
surrounding commercial development and is sympathetic to the adjacent
residential neighborhoods. The building(s) within this development shall
accommodate or incorporate the following in building design and materials:
   A.   The design should incorporate the appearance of varied building forms
and profiles within the large structure to help break up the mass of the large
building footprint and encourage forms that provide human scale and interest.
   B.   The use of building articulation and materials which break up the
building mass into modules that respect a pedestrian scale. The overall design
should minimize long expanses of wall at a single height or in one plane. Long
blank walls shall be prohibited. In respect to the areas of the existing
building where long expanses of wall exist and are visible to the public:
      1.   If those areas are not in the scope of a proposed exterior building
modification, exterior enhancements are encouraged, but not required.
      2.   If those areas are included the scope of a proposed exterior
building modification, the exterior design shall accommodate or incorporate
changes in building footprint and materials to visually minimize long expanses
of wall for the entire wall segment.
   C.   Building(s) with multiple tenant spaces shall be designed to articulate
each tenant facade and entry as a separate entity and to provide visual
interest to the building exterior.
   D.   Entrances into buildings should be easily identified through the use of
building design and detailing. Projected or recessed entryways, change in
rooflines, addition of awnings or changes in building material are examples
that can create this effect.
   E.   Variation in materials, material modules, textures, colors and details
should be used to break up the mass of the buildings. Changes in materials
should be aligned with changes in plan or roof form to emphasize changes in
building mass.
   F.   Trim and structural elements such as posts or columns shall be sized to
the scale of the building.
   G.   New materials shall complement existing building materials to provide a
unified design. Materials should be high quality, durable, and maintain their
appearance over a prolonged time. Use of natural materials such as brick and
stone is encouraged, composite materials are appropriate substitutions in
limited areas. Vinyl siding is not allowed. Architectural concrete or metal
acceptable to the City may be incorporated in the design. These materials
should be used in limited areas to offer architectural detail and texture.
Metal panel systems should be detailed with finished edges and have concealed
fasteners. Architectural concrete shall have an integrated color rather than
surface applied paint/staining and should generally have texture for interest.
(Ord. 2243, 9-5-2017)
115-10: SIGNAGE REGULATION:
Any signage not specifically addressed within this ordinance shall comply with
all provisions and standards of title 9, chapter 18, "Signs", of the City Code
for the Neighborhood Commercial Zoning District.
   A.   Wall Signage: All tenant spaces in the Trail Side PUD shall be allowed
exterior wall signage in accordance with the following:
      1.   One and one-half (11/2) square feet of sign area is earned per
linear foot of tenant frontage on the east side of the building facing 50th
Street.
      2.   No signage allowance is granted for any other building facade.
      3.   There is no limit on the number of signs allowed on a building,
unless restricted elsewhere within this Code, however the total amount of sign
area earned, based upon the formulas above, shall not be exceeded.
Additionally, the total amount of sign area that may be placed on any one wall
shall not exceed what that wall would earn at a one square foot per linear foot
of frontage.
      4.   A multi-tenant wall sign may be allowed on any one wall for
identification of all tenants within the building if said sign panel is
architecturally compatible with the building. No additional square footage of
signage to identify tenants will be granted beyond the one and one-half (11/2)
square feet earned from the east facade. (Ord. 2243, 9-5-2017)
115-11: STORMWATER MANAGEMENT:
A stormwater management plan may be required if there is a collective net
increase in impervious surface of two thousand (2,000) square feet or more or
the existing building is demolished and a new structure constructed. The
developer will have said stormwater management plan prepared by a professional
engineer licensed in the State of Iowa, in conjunction with the submittal of a
site plan, major modification, eligible minor modifications, or preliminary
plat for the development of the property. The stormwater management plan shall
comply with the City's current design standards for stormwater management. The
method of stormwater management and the stormwater conveyance system shall be
determined prior to City approval of a preliminary plat.
At time of any of the above actions, ownership and responsibility for all
stormwater detention areas and private stormwater detention outlet structures
will need to be established through the execution of a Stormwater Facility
Maintenance Agreement. (Ord. 2243, 9-5-2017)
115-12: TRAFFIC STUDY REQUIRED:
Future development applications for major modifications or Pc uses will be
required to comply with the requirements outlined within a traffic impact study
prepared for the application.
The requirements may include, but are not limited to, auxiliary lanes, access
locations, allowable throat distances at accesses, lane configurations,
alignment, agreements to pay for applicant's share of possible future traffic
signals, etc. Prior to, or in conjunction with the development of any parcel,
or portion of a parcel, the developer shall have the traffic report reviewed by
the City's Traffic Engineer to ensure that the provisions and assumptions of
the original traffic report are still valid and applicable. The future
developer will be required to comply with the requirements outlined in the
traffic impact study being prepared for this site. (Ord. 2243, 9-5-2017)
115-13: SAVINGS CLAUSE:
If any section, provision, sentence, clause, phrase or part of the ordinance
shall be adjudged invalid or unconstitutional, such adjudication shall not
affect the validity of the ordinance as a whole or any provision, section,
subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or part hereof not adjudged invalid or
unconstitutional. (Ord. 2243, 9-5-2017)
115-14: EFFECTIVE DATE:
This ordinance shall be in full force and effect after its passage, approval
and publication as provided by law. (Ord. 2243, 9-5-2017)
115-99: LEGISLATIVE HISTORY:
Ord. 2243, 9-5-2017.
PUD #116
RB WDM GRAND LLC
SECTION:
116-01: Legal Description
116-02: Sketch Plan
116-03: Intent Of PUD
116-04: Required Plans
116-05: Conditions
116-06: Land Use Design Criteria
116-07: Parking
116-08: Landscaping
116-09: Architecture
116-10: Signage Regulation
116-11: Stormwater Management
116-12: Public Improvements
116-13: Traffic Study Required
116-14: Savings Clause
116-15: Effective Date
116-99: Legislative History
116-01: LEGAL DESCRIPTION:
Mountain Place Lot 4 And Lot 5 and Lot 6, except beginning at the SE corner of
said Lot 6; thence N 0°00'00"E for 197.50 feet; thence S 62°35'38"W for 200
feet; thence S11°14'14"E for 182.81 feet; thence N62°30'16"E for 160 feet to
the point of beginning, on official plat now in and forming a part of the City
of West Des Moines, Polk County, Iowa.
(Ord. 2257, 10-30-2017)
116-02: SKETCH PLAN:
Attached hereto, and on file with the City is the sketch plan document for the
RB WDM Grand LLC PUD marked exhibit A and is made a part of this rezoning
approval. The sketch plan is a graphic representation of the property included
in the PUD. Wherever conflict occurs between the written text in this document
and the notations on the sketch plan, the written text shall prevail. (Ord.
2257, 10-30-2017)
116-03: INTENT OF PUD:
The RB WDM Grand LLC PUD intends to provide a framework for development
standards that respect concerns of the neighbors and facilitates redevelopment
that is compatible with the surrounding established uses. (Ord. 2257, 10-30-
2017)
116-04: REQUIRED PLANS:
The following plans shall be required as a part of the processing of any
development application for any property within the PUD:
   A.   Development Applications: Site plans, permitted conditional use
permits, major modifications or minor modifications to a site plan for all
development within the PUD must meet the intent of the approved PUD. Site
plans, permitted conditional use permits, major modifications or minor
modifications shall be submitted to the City of West Des Moines for review and
approval prior to the development or redevelopment of any portion of the
property within the PUD. Site plans and major modifications to a site plan for
permitted uses which comply (as determined by the Director of Development
Services or designee) with the design intent as set forth in this PUD will be
subject to review via the City's review process and, if applicable, receive
final approval from the City Council following a recommendation from the Plan
and Zoning Commission. Site plans or use changes for uses identified as
permitted conditional use (Pc), not otherwise modified within this ordinance
shall require approval from the Board of Adjustment. At the discretion of the
Director of Development Services, an amendment to the PUD may be required to
bring consistency between the ordinance and site plan development or use
proposed. Minor modifications to the site plan are subject to administrative
review via the City's review process. The Director of Development Services or
designee shall have the discretion to refer any minor modification request to
the Plan and Zoning Commission and City Council for permitted uses or to the
Board of Adjustment for permitted conditional use permits. (Ord. 2257, 10-30-
2017)
116-05: CONDITIONS:
Whereas, title 9, chapter 9, "Planned Unit Development District", of the City
Code, establishes certain regulations and guidelines pertaining to accompanying
information required on plat and site plan documents. Now, therefore, the
following conditions, restrictions, and regulations are adopted as part of this
approval:
   A.   General Conditions: In addition to the PUD Sketch Plan Map, the
following general development criteria shall be integrated into and made a part
of this planned unit development.
      1.   General Conformance To Subdivision Ordinance: All subdivisions,
public and private streets, public or private street rights-of-way and general
development shall adhere to the standards and design criteria set forth in the
West Des Moines subdivision ordinance and/or established City policies
pertaining thereto, unless otherwise stated within this ordinance.
      2.   General Conformance To Zoning Ordinance: Unless otherwise specified
herein, the development of the PUD shall comply with the provisions of the West
Des Moines zoning ordinance.
      3.   Building And Fire Code Conformance: All construction or remodeling
shall conform to West Des Moines building codes and West Des Moines fire codes
and addendums.
      4.   Flood Hazard: In all areas within a 100-year frequency flood hazard
zone, or adjoining drainage ways, and detention ponding areas involving
potential flood hazards, no building shall be erected which has a lowest level
floor, including basements, less than one foot (1') above the determined level
of the 100-year frequency flood event. Buildings shall not be permitted within
twenty five feet (25') of any easement or property boundary of a major drainage
way, stormwater detention basin or pond unless said location is approved as
part of the development entitlement by the City Council and said building is
structurally designed accordingly.
      5.   Developer Responsibilities: The developer, their successors and/or
assigns, if any, shall pay all planning, engineering, and construction costs
for the development of the planned unit development, as required by this
ordinance and approved site plans. Developer shall be responsible for cost of
all streets, storm sewers, sanitary sewers, drainage way improvements,
detention basins, water mains, buffers and other improvements as required of
the development. Developer shall dedicate appropriate rights-of-way and/or
public easements required within the PUD, unless otherwise approved by the City
Council.
      6.   Sanitary Sewer: Any proposed change in approved land use densities
for the PUD will require an analysis of the downstream sanitary sewer capacity
to assure that adequate capacity is available for the proposed change in
approved land use densities.
      7.   Street Lighting: The developer shall be responsible for all costs
associated with the installation of public street lights within or adjacent to
any area proposed to be platted or included within a development. (Ord. 2257,
10-30-2017)
116-06: LAND USE DESIGN CRITERIA:
In addition to the general criteria as stated above, the following land use
regulations, development standards, and design criteria shall apply to the
development of all areas designated on the sketch plan:
All general use regulations and provisions set forth in title 9, "Zoning", of
the West Des Moines City Code for Office (OF) Zoning District shall apply to
any development proposal for the property, unless noted otherwise in this
ordinance.
   A.   Uses: All permitted (P) and all permitted conditional (Pc) uses allowed
in the Office Zoning District will be allowed in the RB WDM Grand LLC PUD,
except as modified by the following:
      1.   It is the intent of the PUD to allow professional and
semiprofessional office uses without attendant retail, manufacturing, assembly
or warehousing.
      2.   The following uses shall be prohibited:
SIC Division A Agriculture, forestry and fishing
SIC Division C Construction
SIC Division D Manufacturing
SIC Division E Transportation, communication, and public utilities, including
               SIC 4225 self service storage facility of any kind
SIC Division F Wholesale trade
SIC 60         Depository institutions (banks)
SIC 61         Nondepository credit unions
SIC 7212       Garment pressing and agents for laundries and dry cleaners
SIC 725        Shoe repair and shoe shine parlors
SIC 7299-02    Massage therapy and establishments and steam bath services
SIC 733        Mailing, reproduction commercial art and photography and
               stenographic services
SIC 78         Motion pictures
SIC 79         Amusement and recreational services, including event venues
SIC 81         Legal services
SIC 82         Educational services
SIC 83         Social services
SIC 84         Museums, art, galleries, botanical and zoological gardens
SIC 866        Religious organizations
SIC 869        Organizations with food or drink service and conference
               facilities
SIC 92         Justice, public order, and safety
Any use with a drive through
Any use with outdoor storage of vehicles, product, or materials
Any use with noise or odors noticeable from the exterior of the building
 
   B.   Building Setbacks: Building setbacks for principal and accessory
structures shall be measured from the ultimate right- of-way line for property
lines abutting a public street or the property lines in all other cases.
   C.   Building Height: Building height shall be limited to one story.
Clearstory or tall entry features may be allowed if in scale with the building
and neighborhood and set back from the north facade of the building so as not
to present a two story mass to the adjacent residential property to the north.
(Ord. 2257, 10-30-2017)
116-07: PARKING:
Parking shall be governed by title 9, chapter 15, "Off Street Parking And
Loading", of the City Code, for all uses within the PUD, unless modified by
this section.
   A.   No drives of any kind will be allowed along the north side of the
building, except that a drive to access a trash enclosure will be allowed when
the western edge of the trash enclosure is located no more than ten feet (10')
to the east of the northwestern corner of the building and sufficient earthen
berming and/or a solid mass of coniferous landscaping is located along the
northern edge of the drive, trash enclosure, and within the first fifteen feet
(15') from the eastern most face of the trash enclosure. At the time of
installation, the coniferous landscaping shall be equal to or greater than the
height of the trash enclosure plus two feet (2'). The minimum height may be
achieved by plantings of appropriate height, or a combination of earthen
berming and plantings. (Ord. 2257, 10-30-2017)
116-08: LANDSCAPING:
Landscaping for open space, parking lots, and screening shall be governed by
title 9, chapter 19, "Landscaping", of the City Code. All screening and parking
lot landscaping requirements are in addition to landscaping required of open
space, buffering, and negative element mitigation.
   A.   A thirty foot (30') buffer will be required along the north property
line of the properties within the PUD. A six foot (6') tall privacy fence will
be required. Landscaping with overstory trees shall be required at a rate of
one tree per twenty five (25) linear feet of buffer. Each tree shall be of an
overstory variety and at time of planting should be at least two inches (2") in
caliper. No shrubs will be required in a buffer area with fence. Parking facing
the buffer area will not be required to be screened as otherwise required in
codes due to the required fencing mitigating headlights and views of the
parking. (Ord. 2257, 10-30-2017)
116-09: ARCHITECTURE:
   A.   The architecture of any new construction or remodel of existing
buildings within the PUD shall build on and reinforce the context of any
existing buildings on site, as well as the surrounding residential and non-
residential areas to create a development identity that recognizes and
incorporates the forms and elements typical of the surrounding development and
is sympathetic to the adjacent residential neighborhoods. All sides to each
building are to receive high quality materials and finishes (360 degree
architectural treatment). There are no "backs" to a building. The building(s)
within this development shall accommodate or incorporate the following in
building design and materials:
      1.   The design should incorporate the appearance of varied building
forms and profiles within the large structure to help break up the mass of the
large building footprint and encourage forms that provide human scale and
interest.
      2.   As indicated in section
116-06 of this ordinance, building height is limited to one story. Vertical
entry or accent elements may project up to ten feet (10') above the highest
point of the main roof element and linear clerestory elements may project up to
six feet (6') above the highest point of the main roof element. Primary roofs
shall be low slope hip, gable or shed roof forms to be sympathetic with the
surrounding residential buildings, secondary flat roof elements may be
incorporated, acknowledging the adjacent non-residential building forms.
      3.   The use of building articulation and materials which break up the
building mass into modules that respect a pedestrian scale. The overall design
should minimize long expanses of wall at a single height or in one plane. Long
blank walls shall be prohibited.
      4.   Entrances into buildings should be easily identified through the use
of building design and detailing. Projected or recessed entryways, change in
rooflines, addition of awnings or changes in building material are examples
that can create this effect.
      5.   Variation in materials, material modules, textures, colors and
details should be used to break up the mass of the buildings. Changes in
materials should be aligned with changes in plan or roof form to emphasize
changes in building mass.
      6.   Trim and structural elements such as posts or columns shall be sized
to the scale of the building.
      7.   Materials used shall be similar to the surrounding buildings to
provide a unified design with the existing context of the site. Materials
should be high quality, durable, and maintain their appearance over a prolonged
time. Natural hard materials such as brick and stone shall be utilized over the
majority of the facade. Vinyl siding is not allowed. Architectural concrete and
concrete masonry units, synthetic stucco, architectural metal panels or
composite materials acceptable to the City may be incorporated in the design.
These materials should be used in limited areas to offer architectural detail
and texture. Metal and other panel systems should be detailed with finished
edges and have concealed fasteners. Architectural concrete shall have an
integrated color rather than surface applied paint/staining and should
generally have texture for interest. (Ord. 2257, 10-30-2017)
116-10: SIGNAGE REGULATION:
Any signage not specifically addressed within this ordinance shall comply with
all provisions and standards of title 9, chapter 18, "Signs", of the City Code
for the Neighborhood Commercial Zoning District. (Ord. 2257, 10-30-2017)
116-11: STORMWATER MANAGEMENT:
A stormwater management plan will be required with the platting or development
of this property. The developer will have said stormwater management plan
prepared by a professional engineer licensed in the State of Iowa, in
conjunction with the submittal of a site plan, major modification, eligible
minor modifications, or preliminary plat for the development of the property.
The stormwater management plan shall comply with the City's current design
standards for stormwater management. The method of stormwater management and
the stormwater conveyance system shall be determined prior to City approval of
a preliminary plat or site plan.
At the time of any of the above actions, ownership and responsibility for all
stormwater detention areas and private stormwater detention outlet structures
will need to be established through the execution of a Stormwater Facility
Maintenance Agreement. (Ord. 2257, 10-30-2017)
116-12: PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS:
The developer shall be responsible for constructing and/or installing the
public infrastructure necessary to support development within the subdivision
in a manner that will assure that the public infrastructure functions at an
acceptable level of service (per the City's Comprehensive Plan) and that it
complies with all City ordinances. At the time of subdivision platting, site
plan, or modification to a site plan, the property owner shall provide the
necessary surety or City acceptable agreements to provide for the construction
and/or installation of all required public infrastructure improvements in
accordance with the City's subdivision ordinance. (Ord. 2257, 10-30-2017)
116-13: TRAFFIC STUDY REQUIRED:
A traffic study, dated August 21, 2017, has been completed and approved by the
City for the purpose of determining traffic impacts and required improvements
that would be necessary for the safe and orderly movement of vehicles into and
around the proposed development. Trip generation estimates from that study
include five hundred twenty (520) average daily trips, thirty four (34) A.M.
peak hour trips, and fifty one (51) P.M. peak hour trips. Future development
applications for major modifications or Pc uses will be required to comply with
the requirements outlined in the traffic impact study being prepared for this
site.
The requirements may include, but are not limited to, auxiliary lanes, access
locations, allowable throat distances at accesses, lane configurations,
alignment, agreements to pay for applicant's share of possible future traffic
signals, etc. Prior to, or in conjunction with the development of any parcel,
or portion of a parcel, the developer shall have the traffic report reviewed by
the City's Traffic Engineer to ensure that the provisions and assumptions of
the original traffic report are still valid and applicable. The future
developer will be required to comply with the requirements outlined in the
traffic impact study being prepared for this site. (Ord. 2257, 10-30-2017)
116-14: SAVINGS CLAUSE:
If any section, provision, sentence, clause, phrase or part of the ordinance
shall be adjudged invalid or unconstitutional, such adjudication shall not
affect the validity of the ordinance as a whole or any provision, section,
subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or part hereof not adjudged invalid or
unconstitutional. (Ord. 2257, 10-30-2017)
116-15: EFFECTIVE DATE:
This ordinance shall be in full force and effect after its passage, approval
and publication as provided by law. (Ord. 2257, 10-30-2017)
116-99: LEGISLATIVE HISTORY:
Ord. 2257, 10-30-2017.
PUD #117
BROWNS WOODS HOLLOW
SECTION:
117-01: Legal Description
117-02: Sketch Plan
117-03: Required Plans
117-04: Conditions
117-05: Parkland Dedication
117-06: Master Property Owners' Association
117-07: Land Use Design Criteria
117-08: Architecture
117-09: Landscaping
117-10: Signage Regulations
117-11: Stormwater Management
117-12: Public Improvements And Right-Of-Way Dedication
117-13: Traffic Reports
117-14: Savings Clause
117-15: Effective Date
117-99: Legislative History
117-01: LEGAL DESCRIPTION:
A tract of land being a part of the northwest 1/4 of section 26, township 78
north, range 25 west of the 5th P.M., West Des Moines, Polk County, Iowa. Said
tract of land being more particularly described as follows:
Beginning at the west 1/4 corner of section 26, township 78 north, range 25
west of 5th P.M., West Des Moines, Polk County, Iowa; thence S00°18'26"E,
420.19 feet along the west line of said section 26; thence S89°34'26"E, 1716.54
feet to the westerly right-of-way of Veterans Parkway as it is presently
established and to a non-tangent 1554.52 feet radius curve concave to the
northwest; thence southwesterly 452.09 feet along said westerly right-of-way
and said curve, said curve has a chord length of 450.50 feet and a chord
bearing of S24°04'33"W, to the south line of said northwest 1/4; thence
N89°51'14"W, 1529.98 feet along said south line to the west 1/4 corner of
section 26 and the point of beginning.
Said tract of land contains 15.623 acres more or less.
Said tract of land being subject to all easements of record.
(Ord. 2290, 4-16-2018)
117-02: SKETCH PLAN:
Attached hereto and made a part of this rezoning approval, for concept
description and delineation is the sketch plan document for the Browns Woods
Hollow PUD marked exhibit A. Wherever conflict occurs between the written text
in this document and the notations on the sketch plan, the written text shall
prevail. The sketch plan is a graphic representation of the property included
in the PUD delineating the approximate location and configuration of the
parcels for the purpose of easier reference for the applicable regulations of
this ordinance. (Ord. 2290, 4-16-2018)
117-03: REQUIRED PLANS:
Prior to or in conjunction with development or transfer of ownership of any
portion of the property covered by this PUD, the following plans shall be
required:
   A.   Preliminary Plat And Final Plat: The area included within the PUD shall
be platted in accordance with the City's subdivision ordinance. Parcels
identified on a plat as outlots shall be unbuildable until such time that the
outlot is re-platted into a developable lot via the preliminary and final
platting processes. (Ord. 2290, 4-16-2018)
117-04: CONDITIONS:
Whereas, title 9, chapter 9, PUD Planned Unit Development District of the City
Code, establishes certain regulations and guidelines pertaining to accompanying
information required on plat and site plan documents. Now, therefore, the
following conditions, restrictions, and regulations are adopted as part of this
approval:
   A.   General Conditions: In addition to the PUD Sketch Plan Map, the
following general development criteria shall be integrated into and made a part
of this planned unit development.
      1.   General Conformance To Subdivision Ordinance: All subdivisions,
public and private streets, public or private street rights-of-way and general
development shall adhere to the standards and design criteria set forth in the
West Des Moines subdivision ordinance and/or established City policies
pertaining thereto, unless otherwise stated within this ordinance.
      2.   General Conformance To Zoning Ordinance: Unless otherwise specified
herein, the development of the Browns Woods Hollow PUD shall comply with the
provisions of the West Des Moines zoning ordinance.
      3.   Flood Hazard: In all areas within a 100-year frequency flood hazard
zone, or adjoining drainage ways, and detention ponding areas involving
potential flood hazards, no building shall be erected which has a lowest level
floor, including basements, less than one foot (1') above the determined level
of the 100-year frequency flood event. Buildings shall not be permitted within
twenty five feet (25') of any easement or property boundary of a major drainage
way, stormwater detention basin or pond unless said location is approved as
part of the development entitlement by the City Council and said building is
structurally designed accordingly.
      4.   Developer Responsibilities: The developer, their successors and/or
assigns, if any, shall pay all planning, engineering, and construction costs
for the development of the planned unit development, as required by this
ordinance and approved site plans and the cost of all streets, storm sewers,
sanitary sewers, drainageway improvements, detention basins, water mains,
buffers and other improvements as required for rights-of-way or public
easements within the Browns Woods Hollow PUD, unless otherwise approved by the
City Council.
      5.   Sanitary Sewer: Any proposed change in approved land use densities
for the PUD will require an analysis of the downstream sanitary sewer capacity
to assure that adequate capacity is available for the proposed change in
approved land use densities.
      6.   Street Lighting: The developer shall be responsible for all costs
associated with the installation of public street lights within or adjacent to
any area proposed to be platted or included within a development.
      7.   Mailboxes: The developer shall be responsible for installation of
any required cluster box units (CBUs/mailboxes) as per the local U.S. Postal
Service Post Office. (Ord. 2290, 4-16-2018)
117-05: PARKLAND DEDICATION:
An area of land calculated by a set formula based upon the density (total
number of dwelling units) of the proposed development is required to be
dedicated for purposes of a public park and greenway as per City Code. A
Parkland Dedication Agreement, acceptable to the Parks and Recreation
Department, detailing the specifics related to the parkland dedication
requirements for the development of any area contained within the PUD is
required prior to the associated final plat being approved. (Ord. 2290, 4-16-
2018)
117-06: MASTER PROPERTY OWNERS' ASSOCIATION:
If deemed applicable, proper action shall be taken to establish a master
property owners' association. The Browns Woods Hollow Property Owners'
Association shall be responsible for the ongoing upkeep and maintenance of any
privately owned common grounds such as the buffer parks, stormwater detention
facilities, greenways, plazas and other common space, as outlined in the
association documents and any other specific development improvements noted as
their responsibility in this ordinance. (Ord. 2290, 4-16-2018)
117-07: LAND USE DESIGN CRITERIA:
In addition to the general criteria as stated above, the following land use
regulations, development standards, and design criteria shall apply to the
development of all areas designated on the sketch plan:
   A.   Parcel A: All general use regulations and provisions set forth in title
9, Zoning of the West Des Moines City Code for Residential Single Family (RS-5)
Zoning District shall apply to Parcel A as identified on the PUD sketch
(exhibit A), unless noted otherwise in this ordinance.
      1.   All lots shall be a minimum of fifty feet (50') in width, except
corner lots which shall provide an additional twenty five feet (25'). No
additional lot width shall be required on those non-corner lots which exceed
five thousand (5,000) square feet in lot size.
      2.   Side yard setbacks will be seven feet (7') minimum to the foundation
of the building, no portion of the structure (overhangs, eaves, bay windows,
fire boxes, egress windows, and the like) shall encroach into this setback more
than two feet (2'). (Ord. 2290, 4-16-2018)
117-08: ARCHITECTURE:
The intent is to provide a variety of building facades throughout this
development for visual interest. This may be accomplished by such things as
variety of building types, attention in application of exterior building
details, use of various window and door styles, change in building mass or roof
forms, and varied use of materials and colors.
   A.   Buildings should use materials such as brick, stone, stucco, siding or
shakes, decorative trim or combination of materials to enhance architectural
style and building elements. Exterior designs should implement appropriately
scaled trim to provide detailing, rationalize facade changes, and provide
visual interest. Changes in materials should generally be aligned with changes
in plane or roof form to emphasize these changes in building mass. Structural
elements such as posts or columns shall be sized to the scale of the building
and detailed appropriately to the style. When used, masonry materials shall
start and stop at changes in wall plane or wrap corners a suitable distance to
give authenticity to the material. Fenestration (door and window openings)
shall be sized to the scale of the building and be compatible to the chosen
architectural style.
   B.   Entrances into buildings should be easily identified through the use of
building design and detailing. Buildings in which the garage projects in front
of the main plane and/or entry to the house should look for ways to draw visual
attention to the entry and away from the garage. Projected or recessed
entryways, porches or extended rooflines along with changes in building
material are examples that can create this effect.
   C.   Detached garages should be clad in the same materials and incorporate
similar architectural details of the primary buildings with the use of roof
forms, windows, doors and other facade detailing. (Ord. 2290, 4-16-2018)
117-09: LANDSCAPING:
Buffering between districts or parcels and uses shall be required as set forth
in title 9, chapter 5 and chapter 19 of the zoning ordinance, except as noted
otherwise in this ordinance.
   A.   All double frontage lots shall provide a minimum thirty foot (30')
buffer in accordance with City Code. Rear yard setbacks for single family lots
are measured from the interior boundary of the buffer.
   B.   No buffer shall be required along the western boundary of the property.
   C.   A thirty foot (30') buffer park shall be provided for all lots adjacent
to Veterans Parkway, with landscaping according to title 9, chapter 19.
   D.   If the parcel to the south is already developed as Residential Medium
Density at the time of the development of this parcel, a thirty foot (30')
buffer park shall be required along the southern boundary of the parcel due to
this change of land use to a lesser density land use than the property to the
south. If the property to the south is approved for a zone change to a lesser
density, then the buffer is no longer required.
   E.   Trees that will encroach into any vehicle or pedestrian use area or
travel lane shall be of a variety that will accommodate pruning to allow for
the minimum clearance height (14 feet over vehicle travel lanes; 8 feet over
pedestrian travel lanes) without adversely affecting the overall natural shape
of the variety. Maintaining trees to these clearance levels is the
responsibility of the property owner.
   F.   No vegetation which obstructs visibility shall be located within the
site triangle of intersecting streets and drives. (Ord. 2290, 4-16-2018)
117-10: SIGNAGE REGULATIONS:
Signage shall comply with all provisions and standards of title 9, chapter 18
of the West Des Moines City Code for the Residential Single Family (RS-5)
Zoning District. (Ord. 2290, 4-16-2018)
117-11: STORMWATER MANAGEMENT:
Stormwater Management Plans prepared by a professional engineer licensed in the
State of Iowa, will be required in conjunction with the submittal of a
preliminary plat. All Stormwater Management Plans shall comply with the City's
current design standards for stormwater management. The method of stormwater
management and the stormwater conveyance system shall be determined prior to
City approval of any development proposal.
At time of platting ownership and repair and maintenance responsibility for all
stormwater detention areas and private stormwater detention outlet structures
will need to be established through the execution of a Stormwater Facility
Maintenance Agreement. (Ord. 2290, 4-16-2018)
117-12: PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS AND RIGHT-OF-WAY DEDICATION:
The developer shall be responsible for constructing and/or installing the
public infrastructure necessary to support development within the subdivision
in a manner that will assure that the public infrastructure functions at an
acceptable level of service (per the City's Comprehensive Plan) and that will
comply with all City ordinances. At the time of subdivision platting into
developable lots, the subdivider shall construct, provide the necessary surety
or City acceptable agreements to provide for the construction and/or
installation of all required public infrastructure improvements in accordance
with the City's subdivision ordinance. (Ord. 2290, 4-16-2018)
117-13: TRAFFIC REPORTS:
A Traffic Impact Study (Traffic Report) dated February 20, 2018, has been
prepared by the City of West Des Moines for the Browns Woods Hollow
development. The Traffic Report caps the traffic generated from all property
within this PUD at four hundred eighty nine (489) average daily trips, with
thirty six (36) A.M. peak hour trips and forty six (46) P.M. peak hour trips.
The Traffic Report, along with previous studies for the area, outlines the
ultimate geometry for the major roadways in the vicinity of the Browns Woods
Hollow development. Prior to, or in conjunction with the subdivision of any
parcel, or portion of a parcel, the developer shall have the traffic report
reviewed by the City's traffic consultant to ensure that the provisions and
assumptions of the original traffic report are still valid and applicable.
(Ord. 2290, 4-16-2018)
117-14: SAVINGS CLAUSE:
If any section, provision, sentence, clause, phrase or part of the ordinance
shall be adjudged invalid or unconstitutional, such adjudication shall not
affect the validity of the ordinance as a whole or any provision, section,
subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or part hereof not adjudged invalid or
unconstitutional. (Ord. 2290, 4-16-2018)
117-15: EFFECTIVE DATE:
This ordinance shall be in full force and effect after its passage, approval
and publication as provided by law. (Ord. 2290, 4-16-2018)
117-99: LEGISLATIVE HISTORY:
Ord. 2290, 4-16-2018.
PUD #118
WDM PUBLIC SERVICES
SECTION:
118-01: Legal Description
118-02: Required Plans
118-03: Intent Of The WDM Public Services Facility PUD
118-04: General Requirements
118-05: Land Use Design Criteria
118-06: Buffering And Screening
118-07: Architecture
118-08: Signage
118-09: Nuisance Control
118-10: Vehicle Traffic Generation And Street Circulation
118-11: Stormwater Management Plan
118-12: Greenway, Trails And Public Art
118-13: Violations And Penalties
118-14: Other Remedies
118-15: Savings Clause
118-16: Effective Date
118-99: Legislative History
118-01: LEGAL DESCRIPTION:
Parcel "BB" book 2013, page 1937 and a part of an acquisition plat book 2009,
page 5064 filed in the Dallas County Recorder's Office and being a part of the
southeast 1/4 of the southeast 1/4 of section 22, the south 1/2 of the
southwest 1/4 of section 23, the north 1/2 of the northwest 1/4 of section 26,
and the northeast 1/4 of the northeast 1/4 of section 27, township 78 north,
range 26 west of the 5th P.M., City of West Des Moines, Dallas County, Iowa and
described as follows:
Beginning at the southwest corner of the northwest 1/4 of the northwest 1/4 of
section 26, township 78 north, range 26 west of the 5th P.M. also being a
southerly corner of said Parcel "BB"; thence north 00°32'57" east along the
south line of said Parcel "BB", 61.81 feet; thence south 83°53'23" west
continuing along said southerly line, 493.76 feet to the southwest corner of
said Parcel "BB"; thence north 00°42'13" east along the west line of said
Parcel "BB", 1593.01 feet to the northwest corner of said Parcel "BB"; thence
north 89°59'09" east along the north line of said Parcel "BB", 1763.44 feet;
thence south 86°12'46" east continuing along said north line, 112.82 feet;
thence north 88°58'59" east continuing along said north line, 2.03 feet to the
northeast corner of said Parcel "BB" and to the northwest corner of said
acquisition plat; thence south 89°51'59" east along the north line of said
acquisition plat, 30.02 feet; thence north 89°55'13" east continuing along said
north line, 69.10 feet; thence south 45°00'29" east continuing along said north
line, 56.51 feet; thence south 00°02'27" east, 787.77 feet; thence southerly
along a curve concave easterly whose radius is 1688.00 feet, whose arc length
is 387.01 feet and whose chord bears south 06°36'52" east, 386.16 feet to the
south line of said acquisition plat; thence south 76°26'17" west along said
southerly line, 188.33 feet to the southeast corner of said Parcel "BB"; thence
south 76°26'17" west along the south line of said Parcel "BB", 1448.69 feet to
the point of beginning and containing 67.64 acres (2,946,269 s.f.).
Property subject to any and all easements of record.
(Ord. 2300, 5-14-2018)
118-02: REQUIRED PLANS:
The following plans shall be required as a part of the processing of any
development application for any property within the PUD:
   A.   Platting: Should it be desired that individual lots be created, the
property shall be platted in accordance with the City's subdivision ordinance
to delineate the property. Lots without public street frontage, in accordance
with the City Code requirements, may be allowed with approval of abutting
property owners and execution of appropriate cross parking and access easements
which provide for the unrestricted use and access of the drives. With the
exception of outlots created for public recreation amenities owned by the City
of West Des Moines, outlots shall be considered not buildable unless re-platted
into a numbered lot. No building permit may be issued until the final plat is
recorded.
   B.   Development Applications: Site plans for parcels within the PUD must
meet the intent of the approved planned unit development plan and shall be
submitted to the City of West Des Moines for review and approval prior to the
development of that portion of the PUD property.
   C.   PUD Sketch Plan: On file with the City is the WDM Public Services PUD
sketch plan detailing the location, anticipated size, use and density of each
PUD parcel. Where the PUD sketch plan and PUD language conflict, the language
shall prevail. (Ord. 2300, 5-14-2018)
118-03: INTENT OF THE WDM PUBLIC SERVICES FACILITY PUD:
To form a cohesive development plan for the future provision of public services
for the City of West Des Moines. The PUD specifies overall development
standards and provides the framework of intended uses to support these services
with a focus on synergy between uses, efficiency of operations and flexibility
to accommodate future needs as the City grows. (Ord. 2300, 5-14-2018)
118-04: GENERAL REQUIREMENTS:
Unless otherwise specified herein, the development of the WDM Public Services
PUD shall comply with the provisions of the City Code.
Whereas, title 9 of the City Code includes chapter 9, Planned Unit Development
District and establishes certain regulations and guidelines pertaining to
accompanying information required on plat and site plan documents. Now,
therefore, the following conditions, restrictions, and regulations are adopted
as part of this approval, to wit:
In addition to the PUD sketch plan, the following general development criteria
shall be integrated into and made a part of this Planned Unit Development
(PUD):
   A.   General Conformance To Subdivision Ordinance: All subdivisions, public
streets, public street rights-of-way, and general development shall adhere to
the standards and design criteria set forth in the West Des Moines subdivision
ordinances and the most current design standards adopted by the City of West
Des Moines pertaining thereto unless otherwise stated within this ordinance.
   B.   General Conformance To Zoning Ordinance: Unless otherwise specified
herein, the development of the PUD shall comply with title 9, "Zoning", of the
City Code or any other applicable codes.
   C.   Flood Hazard: In all areas within a 100-year frequency flood hazard
zone, or adjoining drainageways, and detention ponding areas involving
potential flood hazards, no building shall be erected that has a lowest floor,
including basements, less than five feet (5') above the determining level of
the 100-year frequency flood event, and no building shall be located within
twenty five feet (25') of any easement or property boundary of a major
drainageway, stormwater detention basin, or pond, unless said location is
approved as part of a development entitlement by the City Council and said
building is structurally designed accordingly.
   D.   Improvements: The developer, its successors and/or assigns, if any,
shall pay all planning, engineering, and construction costs for the development
of the PUD as required by this ordinance, and shall pay all costs related to
approved site plans, which may include, but are not limited to, the cost of all
streets, storm sewers, sanitary sewers, water mains and service lines,
drainageway improvements, detention basins, buffers, and other improvements as
required. No final occupancy permits shall be issued until all necessary
improvements applicable to the area/lot or structure requesting occupancy are
installed and accepted by the City of West Des Moines. Nothing in this
ordinance shall be construed to prevent the developer, its successors and/or
assigns, if any, from entering into private agreement(s) as it/they may desire
to share the cost of improvements.
   E.   Parking: Parking shall be provided according to the requirements for
construction and contractor's offices and yards (SIC 15, 16 and 17) for all
service uses with occupied buildings. Parking for uses with no buildings or
buildings not intended for occupancy will be as required in title 9, chapter
15, section 7 of City Code or as determined by the Director of Development
Services. Screening of parking lots shall abide by title 9, chapter 19 of City
Code.
   F.   Fire Access:
      1.   All access drives, internal drive aisles and parking lots shall
permit the travel of the Fire Department's largest vehicle, including adequate
accommodation of the vehicle's turning needs. Approval of unique design
solutions to accommodate fire access may be granted by the City Council if the
solutions proposed are recommended by the West Des Moines Fire Department.
      2.   At the discretion of the City's Fire Marshal, "no parking fire lane"
areas may be established as necessary to ensure efficient movement and access
of the fire trucks. The developer shall be responsible for the procurement and
erection of approved fire lane signage.
      3.   A minimum of fourteen feet (14') of vertical clearance over the
travel portion of all vehicle travel ways shall be maintained at all times.
      4.   The property owner or its designee shall be responsible for
enforcement of no parking lanes and maintaining adequate clearance of
structures and vegetation along and above all vehicle travel ways regardless if
public or private.
      5.   Adequate fire accesses as determined by the City's Fire Marshal
shall be provided at all times to those areas under construction.
   G.   Communication Towers And Related Equipment Buildings:
      1.   Emergency Communications Tower: One emergency communications tower
at a maximum of one hundred ninety nine feet (199') in height, to include the
height of whip antennas, omni-directional antennas, and lightning rods shall be
allowed as a permitted use. The emergency communications tower will be reviewed
and subject to approval through the site plan application process prior to
installation. The emergency communications tower shall be constructed as a
monopole tower, except that an external support structure shall be allowed for
the purposes of locating and affixing non-commercial omni-directional antennas,
microwave antennas, and other radio antennas which operationally cannot be
enclosed in a shielded tower structure. The tower will be required to follow
all provisions set forth in the City Code, except as provided for in this PUD.
      2.   Commercial Wireless Antennas: Commercial wireless antennas may be
added to the emergency communications tower through the review and approval of
a Minor Modification Add Antenna - "Co-Locate" application. All commercial
antennas shall be located within the monopole.
      3.   Prohibited: No additional communication towers will be allowed
within the West Des Moines Public Services PUD.
      4.   Related Equipment Cabinets And Buildings: All related cabinets and
buildings associated with the operation of any communication tower will either
be located within a building whose construction materials will be compatible
with the other buildings located on the site or be screened with opaque fencing
and additional landscape materials, in accordance with provisions set forth in
the City Code for screening. (Ord. 2300, 5-14-2018)
118-05: LAND USE DESIGN CRITERIA:
In addition to the general conditions as stated herein the PUD, the following
criteria shall apply to the area designated on the PUD sketch plan on file in
the City Clerk's Office. The PUD sketch plan document, which is made a part of
this rezoning action, delineates Parcel A, B, and C:
   A.   Parcel A: The following land use, development standards, and use
regulations shall apply to said development of Parcel A:
All permitted (P) and permitted conditional (Pc) uses set forth in title 9,
"Zoning" of the City Code for the Light Industrial (LI) Zoning District, shall
be allowed with the approval of the appropriate review body, except as follows:
The following permitted conditional (Pc) uses shall be considered permitted (P)
uses:
• Heavy construction contractors offices with warehouse component and paved
outdoor storage yards (SIC 16)
• Local and suburban transit, (SIC 4111)
• Terminal & service facility for motor vehicle passenger transportation (SIC
4173)
• Radiotelephone communications (SIC 4812) - including building mounted
antennas or dishes and transmitting/receiving towers
• Fire protection (SIC 9224)
• Unattended fuel pumps
• Product transportation services, garbage collection and transport - not
disposal (SIC 4212)
No building shall be located closer than twenty five feet (25') from the back
of curb of a private street.
   B.   Parcel B: Parcel B is part of the Sugar Creek Basin and will function
as a greenway and contain recreational improvements including a trail. No
development will occur on the parcel other than the proposed recreational or
drainage related improvements. Parcel B cannot be utilized for open space
required of other parcels within the PUD. Required landscaping installed for
screening purposes for Parcel A may encroach on Parcel B.
With the approval of the appropriate review body, the only uses that shall be
allowed within Parcel B as set forth in title 9, "Zoning" of the City Code for
Open Space (OS) Zoning District are: parks, public spaces, trails, and
pedestrian/biking facilities.
   C.   Parcel C: Parcel C is functioning as a drainage way, thus no
development will occur on the parcel other than drainage related improvements
or the proposed access to South 88th Street. Required setbacks for Parcel A can
be measured from the east property line of Parcel C, however no improvements
can be located on Parcel C. Parcel C can be utilized for open space
requirements for other parcels within the PUD. Required open space landscape or
landscaping installed for screening purposes may encroach on Parcel C as long
as drainage is not obstructed. (Ord. 2300, 5-14-2018)
118-06: BUFFERING AND SCREENING:
   A.   Adequate buffering of negative aspects of office, industrial and
service buildings (loading docks, garbage or recycle dumpsters, HVAC mechanical
units, and outdoor storage and service areas) from any public street or trail
and adjoining properties shall be provided, and addressed at the time of the
review of the site development plan. Roof equipment on all structures should be
screened from view by means which are architecturally integrated into the
structure. Buildings shall not be located and designed to expose loading docks
or doors, loading areas or the rear of buildings to public streets unless
appropriately screened from view. All off-street parking lots and loading areas
shall be sufficiently screened from public street views with the use of
landscaping, earth berming and/or wall or fence structures as required by the
City Code and any other applicable ordinances.
   B.   No overstory or evergreen trees may be placed within sewer easements.
Understory trees and shrubs shall be allowed.
   C.   Buffer parks shall apply as required per City Code. (Ord. 2300, 5-14-
2018)
118-07: ARCHITECTURE:
The buildings located on this site are public in nature, and their construction
is meant to stand the test of time while at the same time being made of
materials that are economical yet durable. Improvements to the site shall be
resilient in design to maintain or regain functionality in the face of natural
or man- made disasters.
The intent is to create building facades throughout this development that are
varied and articulated to provide visual interest and to establish a unique
identity for the development. The architectural design of any building within
this development shall be acceptable to the City. The architecture shall
express a creative presentation by careful attention to exterior building
materials and details, use of fenestration, and change in building mass within
the plan and roof design to lessen the plainness of appearance which can be
characteristic of large commercial and industrial buildings. Building design,
details, materials, and colors shall provide continuity amongst buildings to
unite all structures within the development into one project concept. All sides
to each building shall receive high quality materials and finishes. There are
no "backs" to a building (360 degree architectural treatment). Materials should
be durable, economically maintained and of a quality that will maintain their
appearance over a prolonged time. Multiple use of a site by more than one
entity shall be permitted provided that the multiple buildings on the site are
consistent in architectural design and use of materials and organized utilizing
a compatible planned open space, landscape plan, and parking plan to serve and
maintain a unified master plan concept.
On file with the City are conceptual architectural illustrations of the general
architectural style and materials to be implemented within the PUD. Once City
approval is gained on a particular building design, any changes in design
before or during construction must be reviewed and approved by the City's
Development Services Department.
   A.   All buildings within this development shall accommodate or incorporate
the following in building design and materials:
      1.   Corporate architecture shall be prohibited.
      2.   Buildings shall be organized to create a logical and identifiable
relationship with the site and other buildings, open spaces, pedestrian and
vehicle circulation. Site and building design should provide a visual
demarcation of the public versus service areas to provide intuitive wayfinding
for visitors to the development.
      3.   The use of building articulation and materials which break up the
building mass into modules that respect a human scale and reflects proportions
similar to other buildings within the development.
      4.   Variation in building height, mass and roof forms shall be provided
to create interest while still maintaining an overall building continuity.
Roofs should not be designed as attention getting devices related to the
reinforcement of signage or as an identifiable corporate image.
      5.   Entrances into buildings should be easily identified through the use
of building design and detailing. Projected or recessed entryways, change in
rooflines, addition of awnings or changes in building material are examples
that can create this effect.
      6.   Variation in materials, material modules, expressed joints,
textures, colors and details should be used to break up the mass of the
buildings. Materials should change with the change in building planes.
      7.   Shifts in building planes/facades and variation in exterior
materials shall be incorporated to minimize long expanses of wall.
      8.   Efforts should be made to use clear glass on windows and doors and
to define public entries for occupied spaces to promote the linkage of the
interior and exterior of buildings and provide natural light.
      9.   Hard materials such as brick, stone, architectural concrete or
concrete masonry units shall be used as the major elements of the building
facades. Architectural metal, EIFS or synthetic stucco and composite materials
acceptable to the City can be incorporated as minor elements in the design and
not within six feet (6') of grade. Use of vinyl materials is prohibited. Use of
rubber or plastic composite shingles with a minimum thirty (30) year life span
is allowed for roofing on buildings subject to salt exposure.
      10.   Trim and structural elements such as posts or columns shall be
sized to the scale of the building. (Ord. 2300, 5-14-2018)
118-08: SIGNAGE:
The regulations and provisions for signs as set forth in title 9 of the City
Code for the Light Industrial Zoning District shall be met unless otherwise
noted in this ordinance. (Ord. 2300, 5-14-2018)
118-09: NUISANCE CONTROL:
   A.   Odor, vibration, and light shall be abated per the performance
standards for the Light Industrial Zoning District (City Code title 9-10-4:
Specific Use Regulations, section K).
   B.   All uses and site activities shall abide by the noise ordinance (City
Code title 4, chapter 7). (Ord. 2300, 5-14-2018)
118-10: VEHICLE TRAFFIC GENERATION AND STREET CIRCULATION:
The traffic study completed by the City of West Des Moines dated January 26,
2018, and approved for the WDM Public Services PUD parcels estimated a total of
one thousand six hundred thirty three (1,633) average daily trips (ADT); two
hundred seventy one (271) A.M. peak; and two hundred fifty eight (258) P.M.
peak vehicle trips within the development. These numbers constitute the number
of total vehicle trips allocated to the WDM Public Services PUD. The
combination of tenants/uses within the development cannot collectively generate
vehicle trips which exceed that allocated to these parcels as indicated.
Development of each parcel and implementation of desired land uses will be
limited by the available number of trips designated above for the WDM Public
Services PUD, as well as compliance with all applicable regulations within this
ordinance or City Code. The traffic to be generated by these parcels must be
less than or equal to that allocated. The traffic allocation indicated above
shall be an entitlement to the parcels. Traffic generation due to subsequent
redevelopment, expansion or change of use for any parcel shall not exceed the
maximum traffic allocation stated previously for the development. Alternate
uses to that currently anticipated may be allowed, following completion of an
amendment to the approved traffic study analyzing the proposed alternative and
appropriate City approval if the existing uses and the proposed change(s)
collectively do not exceed one thousand six hundred thirty three (1,633)
average daily trips (ADT); two hundred seventy one (271) A.M. peak; and two
hundred fifty eight (258) P.M. peak vehicle trips allocated to these parcels.
(Ord. 2300, 5-14-2018)
118-11: STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN:
   A.   Required: A stormwater management plan will be required with the
development of any portion of the site. The stormwater plan shall be prepared
at the developer's expense, by a professional engineer licensed in the State of
Iowa. The stormwater management plan shall comply with the City's applicable
design standards for stormwater management existing at the time each site plan
is approved.
In addition, the development must adhere to title 7, chapter 8, article G,
"Post-Construction Stormwater Management", of the City Code. The following is a
summary of the requirements of said ordinance; however the summary is not all
inclusive. Refer directly to the ordinance for more details.
At the time of site plan approval, the developer shall execute a stormwater
management facility maintenance covenant and permanent easement agreement. The
agreement shall provide for access to the facility at reasonable times for
periodic inspection by the City to ensure that the facility is maintained in
proper working condition and meets design standards. In addition, the agreement
shall identify the parties responsible for maintenance of any stormwater
facilities as well as plans for periodic inspection and maintenance of said
facilities to ensure proper performance. The agreement shall be binding on all
subsequent owners of land served by the facility and subject to review by the
City. The agreement shall be recorded into the land record at the time of site
plan approval.
   B.   Stormwater Management Considerations: The intent is to manage
stormwater in order to protect and maintain water resources, while creating an
aesthetically pleasing area which enhances the appearance and character of the
City. Following guidance from the West Des Moines Comprehensive Plan, the
facility location may provide a viable opportunity to incorporate sustainable
stormwater infiltration management efforts. Sustainable practices can include
but are not limited to the following, to be implemented as appropriate:
      1.   Permeable paving incorporated in the parking lots;
      2.   Bioinfiltration cells incorporated in the parking medians;
      3.   Bioswales incorporated in drainage ways;
      4.   Bioinfiltration basins. (Ord. 2300, 5-14-2018)
118-12: GREENWAY, TRAILS AND PUBLIC ART:
The WDM Public Services PUD, in alignment with the West Des Moines Park Master
Plan, Trails Master Plan and Public Art Master Plan, aims to encourage
recreational opportunities, pedestrian movement and opportunities to interact
with public art through identified greenway, trails and public art within the
development. Development of these areas and amenities shall comply with the
respective Master Plan requirements and the following guidelines. Details of
the development of each area to be specified, reviewed, and approved at the
time of site plan development. Unless otherwise specified, the installation of
these improvements shall be by the developer(s) of the WDM Public Services PUD.
   A.   Greenway (Parcel B): This parcel is reserved for greenway and
recreation use. Said area shall be platted as an outlot with the intended
purpose as greenway. The developer will be responsible for bank stabilization
and the grading and seeding of Parcel B for erosion control as an interim
condition prior to initiation of greenway improvements. All land for street
right-of-way and all street, sidewalk, water, storm, sanitary sewer
improvements, including sanitary, storm sewer, and water stubs at the property
line, abutting Parcel B shall be provided by the developer.
   B.   Trails:
      1.   Public Trails:
         a.   Public trails adjacent to the property shall be installed in
accordance with the City's Master Trail Plan. The current Trails Master Plan
has the following trails indicated within or adjacent to the PUD: within the
greenway (Parcel B), the south side of Grand Avenue and the west side of S.
88th Street.
         b.   Trails shall be constructed in accordance with the City of West
Des Moines' Standard Specifications for trails intended to serve as an access
route for City maintenance vehicles.
         c.   A minimum of two feet (2') of clear shoulder should be provided
on each side of the trail. A minimum of eight feet (8') of vertical clearance
shall be maintained at all times over all pedestrian travel ways.
   C.   Public Art:
      1.   Art Monument:
         a.   An opportunity for a public art piece may be included as a part
of this PUD. The public art display area will provide for permanent or rotating
temporary installation of public art. Installation of public art is not a
requirement of the PUD and shall be at the discretion of the property owner. If
installed, a seating area and a connection to the adjacent parking area shall
be provided.
      2.   Building/Site Integrated Public Art:
         a.   Design for the public areas of the proposed building and site
improvements should identify opportunities to integrate public art within the
architecture, landscape or required screening and fencing. Funding, artist
selection and implementation shall be as outlined in the West Des Moines Public
Art Master Plan. Incorporation of such is not a requirement of the PUD and
shall be at the discretion of the property owner. (Ord. 2300, 5-14-2018)
118-13: VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES:
Any person who violates the provisions of this ordinance upon conviction shall
be punished as set forth in 1-4-1 of the City Code of the City of West Des
Moines, Iowa. (Ord. 2300, 5-14-2018)
118-14: OTHER REMEDIES:
In addition to the provisions set out in section
118-13 of this ordinance, the City may proceed in law or equity against any
person, firm or corporation for violation of any section or subsection of this
ordinance. (Ord. 2300, 5-14-2018)
118-15: SAVINGS CLAUSE:
If any section, provision, sentence, clause, phrase or part of this ordinance
shall be adjudged invalid or unconstitutional, such adjudication shall not
affect the validity of the ordinance as a whole or any provision, section,
subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or part hereof not adjudged invalid or
unconstitutional. (Ord. 2300, 5-14-2018)
118-16: EFFECTIVE DATE:
This ordinance shall be in full force and effect after its passage, approval
and publication as provided by law. (Ord. 2300, 5-14-2018)
118-99: LEGISLATIVE HISTORY:
Ord. 2300, 5-14-2018.
PUD #119
CEDAR RIDGE
SECTION:
119-01: Legal Description
119-02: Sketch Plan
119-03: Required Plans
119-04: Conditions
119-05: Architecture
119-06: Land Use Design Criteria
119-07: Signage Regulation
119-08: Stormwater Management
119-09: Traffic Reports
119-10: Savings Clause
119-11: Effective Date
119-99: Legislative History
119-01: LEGAL DESCRIPTION:
All of Lots 9 through 26,Llots 30 through 46, street Lots 'C' and 'D', and part
of Street Lot 'B' of Cedar Ridge, being an official plat and all of Outlot 'V',
of Silverwood Plat 1, being an official plat, all within the City of West Des
Moines, Dallas County, Iowa and more particularly described as follows:
   Beginning at the northwest corner of the southeast quarter of the northeast
quarter, section 15, township 78 north, range 26 east of the fifth Principal
Meridian; thence north 83°12'37" east along the northerly line of said Cedar
Ridge, 1271.85 feet to the northwest corner of said Street Lot 'B'; thence
south 00°23'58" west, 412.93 feet; thence south 07°21'24" east, 332.79 feet to
the northerly corner of said Outlot 'V'; thence continuing south 07°21'24" east
along the easterly line of said Outlot 'V', 190.40 feet to the southeast corner
of said Outlot 'V'; thence south 37°29'00" west along the southerly line of
said Outlot ‘V’ and the southwesterly extension of said southerly line, 99.20
feet; thence southwesterly along a curve concave southerly whose radius is
2082.50 feet, whose arc length is 10.94 feet and whose chord bears south
81°08'31" west, 10.94 feet to the easterly line of said lot 14; thence south
00°23'58" west along said easterly line, 207.57 feet; thence southwesterly
continuing along said easterly line and a curve concave southwesterly whose
radius is 25.00 feet, whose arc length is 36.18 feet and whose chord bears
south 41°51'28" west, 33.10; thence south 83°18'58" west along the south line
of said Lots 14 through 9, a distance of 824.27 feet to a southerly corner of
said Lot 9; thence south 82°31'20" west continuing along said south line of Lot
9, a distance of 88.50 feet to the southwest corner of said Lot 9; thence north
00°17'39" east along the west line of said Lot 9, a distance of 283.57 feet to
the southeast corner of said Lot 21; thence south 83°09'31" west along the
south line of said Lot 21, a distance of 299.34 feet to the southwest corner of
said Lot 21; thence north 00°17'39" east along the west line of said Lot 21, a
distance of 124.26 feet to the southeast corner of said Lot 25; thence north
89°38'14" west along the southerly line of said Lots 25 and 26, a distance of
561.73 feet to the southwest corner of said Lot 26; thence north 00°44'43" east
along the westerly line of said Lot 26, a distance of 161.11 feet; thence south
78°55'25" west continuing along said westerly line, 47.00 feet; thence north
01°31'19" east continuing along said westerly line, 79.16 feet to the northwest
corner of said Lot 26; thence north 63°07'06" east along the north line of said
Lot 26, a distance of 248.89 feet to the northeast corner of said Lot 26;
thence northerly along the easterly line of said Lot 27 being a curve concave
easterly whose radius is 60.00 feet, whose arc length is 96.78 feet and whose
chord bears north 19°17'22" east, 86.63 feet to the southeast corner of Lot 28,
said Cedar Ridge; thence northeasterly along the easterly line of said Lot 28
being a curve concave northwesterly whose radius is 50.00 feet, whose arc
length is 35.62 feet and whose chord bears north 45°14'30" east, 34.87 feet;
thence north 24°02'25" east continuing along said easterly line, 28.25 feet;
thence northeasterly continuing along said easterly line being a curve concave
southeasterly whose radius is 208.00 feet, whose arc length is 59.99 feet and
whose chord bears north 32°37'28" east, 59.79 feet to the southeast corner of
Lot 29, said Cedar Ridge; thence northeasterly along the easterly line of said
Lot 29 being a curve concave southeasterly whose radius is 208.00 feet, whose
arc length is 81.57 feet and whose chord bears north 52°12'51" east, 81.04 feet
to the southwest corner of Lot 30, said Cedar Ridge; thence north 26°42'03"
west along the west line of said Lot 30, a distance of 241.09 feet to the
northwest corner of said Lot 30; thence north 83°23'15" east along the north
line of said Cedar Ridge, 300.00 feet to the point of beginning and containing
41.11 acres (1,790,756 square feet). The property is subject to any and all
easements of record. (Ord. 2311, 6-25-2018; Ord. 2378, 8-19-2019)
119-02: SKETCH PLAN:
Attached hereto and made a part of this rezoning approval, for concept
description and delineation is the sketch plan document for the Cedar Ridge PUD
marked exhibit A. Wherever conflict occurs between the written text in this
document and the notations on the sketch plan, the written text shall prevail.
The sketch plan is a graphic representation of the property included in the PUD
delineating the approximate location and configuration of the parcels for the
purpose of easier reference for the applicable regulations of this ordinance.
(Ord. 2311, 6-25-2018; Ord. 2378, 8-19-2019)
119-03: REQUIRED PLANS:
   A.   Preliminary Plat/Final Plat: Prior to or in conjunction with
development of any portion of the property covered by this PUD, said area shall
be platted in accordance with the City's subdivision ordinance.
   B.   Site Plan Development Applications: Prior to development of the
respective parcels, site plans as required per City Code for the proposed
development shall be submitted to the City for review through the development
review process and approval by the appropriate approval body. (Ord. 2311, 6-25-
2018)
119-04: CONDITIONS:
Whereas, title 9, chapter 9, Planned Unit Development District of the City
Code, establishes certain regulations and guidelines pertaining to accompanying
information required on plat and site plan documents. Unless otherwise
specified within a specific development agreement, the following conditions,
restrictions, and regulations are adopted as part of this approval. If there is
a conflict between the PUD and City Code, the more restrictive shall apply:
   A.   General Conditions: In addition to the PUD Sketch Plan Map, the
following general development criteria shall be integrated into and made a part
of this planned unit development.
      1.   General Conformance To Subdivision Ordinance: All subdivisions,
public and private streets and street rights-of-way and general development
shall adhere to the standards and design criteria set forth in the West Des
Moines subdivision ordinance and/or established City policies pertaining
thereto, unless otherwise stated within this ordinance.
      2.   General Conformance To Zoning Ordinance: Unless otherwise specified
herein, the development of the Cedar Ridge PUD shall comply with the provisions
of the title 9, "Zoning", of the City Code or any other applicable codes.
      3.   Flood Hazard: In all areas within a 100-year frequency flood hazard
zone, or adjoining drainage ways, and detention ponding areas involving
potential flood hazards, no building shall be erected which has a minimum
opening elevation (including top of window well) less than two feet (2') above
the determined level of the 100-year frequency flood event. Buildings shall
only be permitted within twenty five feet (25') of any easement or property
boundary of a major drainageway, stormwater detention basin or pond if said
location is approved as part of the development entitlement by the City Council
and said building is structurally designed accordingly.
      4.   Developer Responsibilities: The developer, their successors and/or
assigns, if any, shall pay all planning, engineering, and construction costs
for the development of the planned unit development, as required by this
ordinance and approved plats and site plans. Developer shall be responsible for
the costs of all streets, storm sewers, sanitary sewers, drainageway
improvements, detention basins, water mains, buffers and other improvements as
required for the development. Developer shall dedicate appropriate rights-of-
way or public easements within the Cedar Ridge PUD, unless otherwise approved
by the City Council. No final occupancy permits shall be issued until all
necessary improvements applicable to the area/lot of structure requesting
occupancy are installed and accepted by the City of West Des Moines. Nothing in
this ordinance shall be construed to prevent the developer, its successors and/
or assigns, if any, from entering into private agreement(s) as they may desire
to share the cost of improvements.
      5.   Sanitary Sewer: Any proposed change in approved land use densities
for the PUD will require an analysis of the downstream sanitary sewer capacity
to assure that adequate capacity is available for the proposed change in
approved land use densities.
      6.   Street Lighting: The developer shall be responsible for all costs
associated with the installation of public street lights within or adjacent to
any area proposed to be platted or included within a development.
      7.   Mailboxes: The developer shall be responsible for installation of
any required cluster box units (CBUs) as per the local U.S. Postal Service Post
Office.
      8.   Parkland Dedication: An area of land calculated by a set formula
based upon the residential density of the proposed development will be required
to be dedicated for purposes of a public park and greenway as required per City
Code. With the agreement of the Parks and Recreation Department, in lieu of
dedication of ground, the construction of physical recreational amenities that
will serve the proposed development may be allowed. A Parkland Dedication
Agreement, acceptable to the Park and Recreation Department, detailing the
specifics related to the provision of parkland dedication requirements for the
development of each area contained within the PUD will be required to be
executed prior to the approval of each plat or site plan.
      9.   Property Owners' Association: If necessary, in conjunction with the
recordation of each plat for ground within this development, proper action
shall be taken to establish a property owners' association. The property
owners' association shall be responsible for the ongoing upkeep and maintenance
of any privately owned roadways, shared structures, including development
signs, common grounds such as the buffer parks, stormwater detention
facilities, greenbelts, parks and other specific development improvements noted
as their responsibility in this ordinance.
      10.   Vehicle Circulation: Appropriate vehicle access and interior
vehicle circulation shall be designed to provide maneuverability of emergency
vehicles and allow for the safe and orderly movement of vehicles and
pedestrians.
      11.   Access To Adjacent Properties: The developer shall provide street,
sanitary and water utilities connections to a point that is adjacent and
available to properties directly west of Parcel D.
      12.   Pedestrian Circulation: Pedestrian circulation should be an
integral part of the development. Organize the site so that the buildings frame
and reinforce pedestrian circulation. Sidewalks adjacent to head-in parking
stalls must be a minimum of six feet (6') in width to allow for vehicle
overhang and a minimum of four foot (4') clear pedestrian path.
      13.   Screening Of Negative Elements: Screening of undesirable site
elements such as transformers, mechanical equipment, and loading and service
areas shall be designed as an integral part of the site layout and/or building
design and shall utilize one or more of the following methods:
         a.   Incorporated into the design of the building through the use of
raised parapets or penthouse elements.
         b.   Location behind primary or secondary buildings on site.
         c.   Opaque screen walls or fences.
         d.   Landscaping of sufficient size and appropriate species.
Screening shall be of sufficient height to fully screen the elements and of a
design to provide year-round visual mitigation of views thereof. (Ord. 2311, 6-
25-2018)
119-05: ARCHITECTURE:
The intent is to encourage a sense of place by allowing the imaginative and
efficient utilization of land that engages residents with the street and
neighborhood. Building design within the PUD should reinforce a sense of
community by establishing a unique identity within a cohesive design theme.
This can be accomplished by careful attention to building massing and human
scale, choice of exterior building materials, details and site orientation.
Porches should be made a part of the front facade of dwellings within the PUD
to provide a useable outdoor room and promote community connectedness.
Building design should use materials such as brick, stone, stucco, lap siding
or shakes, decorative trim or similar combination of material which represents
a variation of architectural styles or elements. Materials choices should be
durable, substantial and of a quality that will maintain their appearance over
a prolonged time. Use of natural materials is encouraged, composite materials
such as fiber cement and wood composites are appropriate substitutions. Vinyl
siding may be used only with appropriately scaled trim. (Ord. 2311, 6-25-2018)
119-06: LAND USE DESIGN CRITERIA:
In addition to the general criteria as stated previously, the following land
use design criteria shall apply to the development areas designated on the
sketch plan. The following development standards and use regulations shall
apply to the development parcels:
   A.   Parcel A: All general use regulations and provisions set forth in title
9, Zoning of the West Des Moines City Code for Residential Single-Family
District (RS-5) shall apply to any development proposal for property in Parcel
A as shown on the sketch plan, unless noted otherwise in this ordinance.
      1.   Setbacks And Bulk Regulations: All residential structures shall
comply with a twenty five foot (25') front yard setback, a thirty five foot
(35') rear yard setback and a seven foot (7') side yard. Porches are allowed to
encroach up to eight feet (8') into the front yard setback as long as the porch
is a minimum of six feet (6') in depth in order to provide a useable seating
area.
All setbacks or separations are measured from the closest part of the
foundation. Building projections are allowed to encroach up to two feet (2')
from each building into the minimum setback or separation. No window well or
any ground mounted mechanical equipment may be closer than three feet (3') to a
property line.
It is encouraged that the house design be such that garage doors facing the
street do not extend forward of the front facade of the house to minimize their
dominance within the facade. It is desired but not required that the face of
the garage be set back five feet (5') from the front facade of the home.
      2.   Lot Size: Minimum of five thousand (5,000) square feet.
      3.   Architecture: It is desired that building architecture through
Parcel A should be varied and provide strong visual interest through the use of
design, materials, and detailing. Side and rear building facades shall
incorporate a minimum of two (2) material types. One primary and one accent
material comprised of a different material type, color, or texture than the
primary material. Facades that face a public or private street shall
incorporate a third material of brick or stone in a percentage that provides a
strong visual presence. Masonry materials shall start and stop at an interior
corner created by a change in wall plane or wrap corners a minimum of two feet
(2') to give authenticity to the material. Materials, trim and details used on
the front facade shall be continued around all sides of the building, however,
the level of detail can be reduced on the facades not visible from a street
(public or private) or adjacent properties surrounding the development.
   B.   Parcel B: Parcel B is intended to be developed with a continuum care
retirement community. All general use regulations and provisions set forth in
title 9, zoning of the West Des Moines City Code for Residential High Density
(RH-18), as follows, shall apply to any development proposal for property in
Parcel B, as shown on the sketch plan, unless noted otherwise in this
ordinance.
      1.   Continuum Care Retirement Community: It is the developer's intent
that the majority of the occupants of the dwellings within Parcel B will be of
the age of fifty five (55) and over; however, short-term rehabilitation care
may be provided for individuals under the age of fifty five (55). Dwelling
units shall consist of active senior, assisted living, and skilled care units
with no more than forty percent (40%) of the facility being designated for
active senior dwelling units. Any change to reduce the age restriction (non-
rehabilitation units) or to increase the percentage of active senior units
allowed will require City Council approval of a PUD amendment and may trigger
additional development requirements to provide adequate infrastructure to serve
the development.
      2.   Setbacks And Bulk Regulations: As provided in City Code for the
Residential High Density Zoning District shall be adhered to except for the
following:
         a.   Front and rear yard setbacks shall be a minimum of thirty five
feet (35'). For any building over three (3) stories, there needs to be an
additional ten feet (10') of building setback for each story above three (3)
stories.
      3.   Parking: Parking shall be provided within the site compliant with
title 9, chapter 15 of City Code.
         a.   Parking per the ratios specified for SIC 805: congregate care
facility shall be provided for each assisted living and skilled care dwelling
unit.
         b.   Parking for all other dwelling and community use areas shall
provide parking per the ratios specified for multi family dwelling.
         c.   Any dwelling unit intended to be owner-occupied or for which a
condominium regime is established shall provide a minimum of one (1) 9' x 19'
covered space for each unit. Said covered space may be incorporated into the
dwelling building or be a detached parking garage/structure.
      4.   Landscape Buffering: Parcel B shall provide a landscape buffer along
its western property line in accordance with conditions, methods and standards
stated in title 9, chapter 19, section 8 of the City Code.
      5.   Architecture: All facades of the building shall be treated with the
same level of architectural style and detail (360 degree architecture).
Variations in building form and design such as facade modulation and
articulation (stepping back or extending forward a portion of the building) and
changing the roof height and form by alternating dormers, stepped roofs,
gables, or other roof elements - organized with the changes in plan shall be
incorporated to lessen the plainness of appearance, mitigate the building mass
and repetitive characteristic of large residential buildings. All building
elevations shall incorporate a minimum of three (3) material types. One primary
material, one accent material, comprised of a different material type, color,
or texture from the primary material and a third material comprised of brick or
stone. Masonry materials shall be located principally on the base (lowest)
story of the building and as the majority cladding of that story, and shall
start and stop at an interior corner created by a change in wall plane or wrap
corners a minimum of two feet (2') to give authenticity to the material.
Variation in materials, material modules, and material heights along with
expressed joints, textures, colors and details should be used to break up the
mass of the buildings. The use of trim and detailing such as window and door
trim, band boards, louvers, etc., shall be carried around all sides of the
building and shall be appropriately sized to be noticeable and provide visual
interest and detailing. Entrances into buildings should face the street and be
easily identified through the use of building design and detailing. Door or
window openings shall be incorporated on all sides of the building.
Long blank walls are prohibited. The building and unit plans shall be designed
and organized to provide variety and interest on all sides of the building. If
function dictates the need for a segment of blank wall, its appearance shall be
mitigated with one or more of the following strategies:
         a.   Incorporating minor changes in building footprint and roof forms
along with utilizing a variety of materials for visual interest and to break-up
blank wall expanses.
         b.   Including door or window openings or changes in materials that
mimic openings in a number and size that is in proportion to the other building
facades. Accent windows can be located high enough that they do not interfere
with furniture placement or trigger security concerns, but add interest to the
facade and provide natural light to the interior of the space.
         c.   Building elements such as porches, arcades, awnings and accent
lighting.
Attached garages facing any street shall be designed to minimize their
appearance. When the building contains more than four (4) garage bays per
facade, the garage doors shall be enhanced by the addition of engaged columns,
secondary roof forms or decorative garage doors to mitigate the dominant
appearance of the doors.
Detached garages or accessory structures should be clad in the same materials
and incorporate similar architectural details of the primary buildings with the
use of roof forms, windows, doors and other facade detailing. Portions of
accessory buildings visible from any street or adjacent property shall
incorporate same level of detail as the primary buildings. Detached garages
shall contain no more than eight (8) garage doors per facade.
      6.   Outdoor Living Area: All dwelling units within multi-family
buildings shall provide a defined outdoor living space (deck or patio) with a
minimum usable area of forty (40) square feet and a minimum usable dimension of
five feet (5') deep in either direction. In lieu of outdoor living area for
individual units, area(s) of common defined outdoor living space can be
provided.
   C.   Parcel C: Parcel C is intended to be developed with a special needs
community. All general use regulations and provisions set forth in title 9,
zoning of the West Des Moines City Code for Residential High Density (RH-18),
as follows, shall apply to any development proposal for property in Parcel C,
as shown on the sketch plan, unless noted otherwise in this ordinance.
      1.   Special Needs Community Uses: It is the developer's intent that the
dwelling units within Parcel C be occupied by adults with special needs and
those individuals necessary for support care. Uses within Parcel C are limited
to the following specific groups included within SIC 8361 residential care:
         a.   Dwellings for the mentally handicapped, with health care
incidental.
         b.   Dwellings for the physically handicapped, with health care
incidental.
Caregivers for special needs adults shall be allowed to occupy dwellings along
with the special needs individual. Any change to the groups allowed under the
special needs restriction will require City Council approval of a PUD amendment
and may trigger additional development requirements.
      2.   Setbacks And Bulk Regulations: As provided in City Code for the
Residential High Density Zoning District shall be adhered to except for the
following:
         a.   Front and rear yard setbacks shall be a minimum of thirty five
feet (35'). For any building over four (4) stories, there needs to be an
additional ten feet (10') of building setback for each story above four (4)
stories.
      3.   Parking: Parking shall be provided within the site compliant with
title 9, chapter 15 of City Code.
         a.   The facility shall provide parking per the ratios specified for
"multi-family dwelling" included in title 9, chapter 15, section 7 of City
Code.
         b.   A minimum of one (1) 9' x 19' covered parking space shall be
provided for any dwelling unit intended to be owner-occupied or for which a
condominium regime is established which is not occupied by a special needs
adult or caregiver to a special need adult. Said covered space may be
incorporated into the dwelling building or be a detached parking garage/
structure.
         c.   With the approval of the City Council, installation of a portion
of the parking stalls spaces and garages mentioned above, may be deferred until
such time that the intended occupants of the dwellings changes from adults with
special needs to a traditional market rate apartment complex or a parking
shortage occurs as demonstrated by parking on non-designated parking areas or
parking off-site occurs due to the lack of available parking stalls. Upon
notice by the City, the applicant will be required to provide additional
parking spaces in accordance with City regulations within the first available
construction season. Should the implementation of additional parking be needed,
the applicant shall construct them in compliance with an approved site plan or
minor modification site plan that identifies the location and engineering
details for the stalls and/or covered parking spaces to be constructed.
      4.   Landscape Buffering: Parcel C shall provide a landscape buffer along
its western property line in accordance with conditions, methods and standards
in title 9, chapter 19, section 8 of the City Code.
      5.   Architecture: All facades of the building shall be treated with the
same level of architectural style and detail (360 degree architecture).
Variations in building form and design such as facade modulation and
articulation (stepping back or extending forward a portion of the building) and
changing the roof height and form by alternating dormers, stepped roofs,
gables, or other roof elements - organized with the changes in plan shall be
incorporated to lessen the plainness of appearance, mitigate the building mass
and repetitive characteristic of large residential buildings. All building
elevations shall incorporate a minimum of three (3) material types. One primary
material, one accent material, comprised of a different material type, color,
or texture from the primary material and a third material comprised of brick or
stone. Masonry materials shall be located principally on the base (lowest)
story of the building and as the majority cladding of that story, and shall
start and stop at an interior corner created by a change in wall plane or wrap
corners a minimum of two feet (2') to give authenticity to the material.
Variation in materials, material modules, and material heights along with
expressed joints, textures, colors and details should be used to break up the
mass of the buildings. The use of trim and detailing such as window and door
trim, band boards, louvers, etc., shall be carried around all sides of the
building and shall be appropriately sized to be noticeable and provide visual
interest and detailing. Entrances into buildings should face the street and be
easily identified through the use of building design and detailing. Door or
window openings shall be incorporated on all sides of the building.
Long blank walls are prohibited. The building and unit plans shall be designed
and organized to provide variety and interest on all sides of the building. If
function dictates the need for a segment of blank wall, its appearance shall be
mitigated with one or more of the following strategies:
         a.   Incorporating minor changes in building footprint and roof forms
along with utilizing a variety of materials for visual interest and to break-up
blank wall expanses.
         b.   Including door or window openings or changes in materials that
mimic openings in a number and size that is in proportion to the other building
facades. Accent windows can be located high enough that they do not interfere
with furniture placement or trigger security concerns, but add interest to the
facade and provide natural light to the interior of the space.
         c.   Building elements such as porches, arcades, awnings and accent
lighting.
Attached garages facing any street shall be designed to minimize their
appearance. When the building contains more than four (4) garage bays per
facade, the garage doors shall be enhanced by the addition of engaged columns,
secondary roof forms or decorative garage doors to mitigate the dominant
appearance of the doors.
Detached garages or accessory structures should be clad in the same materials
and incorporate similar architectural details of the primary buildings with the
use of roof forms, windows, doors and other facade detailing. Portions of
accessory buildings visible from any street or adjacent property shall
incorporate same level of detail as the primary buildings. Detached garages
shall contain no more than eight (8) garage doors per facade.
      6.   Outdoor Living Area: All dwelling units within multi-family
buildings shall provide a defined outdoor living space (deck or patio) with a
minimum usable area of forty (40) square feet and a minimum usable dimension of
five feet (5') deep in either direction. In lieu of outdoor living area for
individual units, area(s) of common defined outdoor living space can be
provided.
   D.   Parcel D: All general use regulations and provisions set forth in Title
9, Zoning of the West Des Moines City Code for Residential Single-Family
District (RS-8) shall apply to any development proposal for property in Parcel
D as shown on the sketch plan, unless noted otherwise in this ordinance.
      1.   Setbacks and Bulk Regulations: All residential structures shall
comply with a twenty-five foot (25') front yard setback, a thirty five foot
(35') rear yard setback and a seven foot (7') side yard. Porches are allowed to
encroach up to eight feet (8') into the front yard setback as long as the porch
is a minimum of six feet (6') in depth in order to provide a useable seating
area.
      All setbacks or separations are measured from the closest part of the
foundation. Building projections are allowed to encroach up to two feet (2')
from each building into the minimum setback or separation. No window well or
any ground mounted mechanical equipment may be closer than three feet (3') to a
property line. Rear yard setbacks shall be measured from any required buffer;
buffer and setbacks are not allowed to overlap. Face of garage must be a
minimum of twenty-five feet (25') from the front property line if a public
street or from the sidewalk if a private street.
      2.   Lot Size: Minimum of eight thousand square feet (8,000sf).
      3.   Architecture: It is desired that building architecture within Parcel
D should be varied and provide strong visual interest through the use of
design, materials, and detailing. It's recommended that side and rear building
facades incorporate a minimum of two material types: one primary and one accent
material comprised of a different material type, color, or texture than the
primary material. Facades that face a public or private street should
incorporate a third material of brick or stone in a percentage that provides a
strong visual presence. When utilized, masonry materials shall start and stop
at an interior corner created by a change in wall plane and wrap corners a
minimum of two feet (2') to give authenticity to the material. Materials, trim
and details used on the front façade should be continued around all sides of
the building, however, the level of detail could be reduced on the facades not
visible from a street (public or private) or adjacent properties to the
development. It is encouraged that the house design be such that garage doors
facing the street do not extend forward of the front facade of the house to
minimize their dominance within the facade. It is desired but not required that
the face of the garage be set back five feet (5') from the front facade of the
home.
   E.   Parcel E: Parcel E as shown on the sketch plan shall be reserved and
used for stormwater detention and/or open area. (Ord. 2311, 6-25-2018; Ord.
2378, 8-19-2019)
119-07: SIGNAGE REGULATION:
Signage restrictions shall be imposed to limit and reduce the negative impacts
of sign clutter. Signage within each PUD parcel shall comply with all
provisions of title 9, chapter 18 for zoning district designated for the
parcel. (Ord. 2311, 6-25-2018)
119-08: STORMWATER MANAGEMENT:
Specific Stormwater Management Plans will be required with the development of
each parcel, demonstrating compliance with the approved Cedar Ridge PUD Master
Stormwater Management Plan, on file with the City. The developer will have said
specific Stormwater Management Plans prepared by a professional engineer
licensed in the State of Iowa, in conjunction with the submittal of a specific
development proposal for a parcel within the PUD. All specific Stormwater
Management Plans shall comply with the City's current design standards for
stormwater management. The method of stormwater management and the stormwater
conveyance system shall be determined prior to City approval of any development
within any portion of the property within the Cedar Ridge PUD.
Prior to issuance of a building permit for above ground construction for the
first building within each PUD parcel, ownership and responsibility for
stormwater detention areas and private stormwater detention outlet structures
serving the parcel will need to be established. (Ord. 2311, 6-25-2018)
119-09: TRAFFIC REPORTS:
A Traffic Impact Study (Traffic Report) dated May 3, 2018, has been prepared by
the City of West Des Moines for the Cedar Ridge development. The Traffic Report
caps the traffic generated from all ground within this PUD at one thousand nine
hundred sixty eight (1,968) average daily trips, with one hundred twenty eight
(128) A.M. peak hour trips and one hundred sixty one (161) P.M. peak hour
trips. Prior to, or in conjunction with the development of any parcel, or
portion of a parcel, the developer shall have the traffic report reviewed by
the City's traffic consultant to ensure that the provisions and assumptions of
the original traffic report are still valid and applicable. Approval of this
proposed PUD does not constitute a guarantee that the proposed plan can be
implemented. Development of all parcels will be limited by the available number
of trips. Should anticipated traffic exceed the total trips allocated for the
Cedar Ridge development prior to full build out, further development of parcels
may be limited or prohibited. Alternate uses to those planned within the
Traffic Report and approved as part of PUD may be allowed, following completion
of an amended traffic study analyzing the proposed alternative and appropriate
City approval of an amendment to the respective PUD and/or map, if necessary,
if the existing uses and the proposed change(s) collectively do not exceed the
allocated trips identified above. (Ord. 2311, 6-25-2018)
119-10: SAVINGS CLAUSE:
If any section, provision, sentence, clause, phrase or part of the ordinance
shall be adjudged invalid or unconstitutional, such adjudication shall not
affect the validity of the ordinance as a whole or any provision, section,
subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or part hereof not adjudged invalid or
unconstitutional. (Ord. 2311, 6-25-2018)
119-11: EFFECTIVE DATE:
This ordinance shall be in full force and effect after its passage, approval
and publication as provided by law. (Ord. 2311, 6-25-2018)
119-99: LEGISLATIVE HISTORY:
Ord. 2311, 6-25-2018; Ord. 2378, 8-19-2019.
PUD #120
GRAND RIDGE
SECTION:
120-01: Legal Description
120-02: Sketch Plan
120-03: Development Intent
120-04: Required Plans
120-05: Conditions
120-06: Land Use Design Criteria
120-07: Buffers
120-08: Parkland Dedication
120-09: Master Property Owners' Association
120-10: Tree Preservation
120-11: Architecture
120-12: Signage Regulation
120-13: Stormwater Management
120-14: Public Improvements
120-15: Repealer
120-16: Savings Clause
120-17: Violations And Penalties
120-18: Other Remedies
120-19: Effective Date
120-99: Legislative History
120-01: LEGAL DESCRIPTION:
The south 1/2 of the southeast 1/4 of section 19, Township 78 north, range 25
west of the 5th P.M., Polk County, Iowa, lying north of the centerline of Grand
Avenue as it presently exists, except that part lying west of Interstate no. 35
and except those parts conveyed to the State of Iowa by warranty deeds recorded
in book 3005, page 491 and book 13732, page 407 in the Office of the Polk
County Recorder, Polk County, Iowa
and
The east 33 feet of the south 1/2 SE1/4 of section 19, Township 78 north, range
25 west of the 5th P.M. except the south 740 feet, West Des Moines, Polk
County, Iowa that is all more particularly described as follows:
Beginning at the SE corner of Quail Cove plat 1, an official plat recorded in
book 9044, page 204 at the Polk County Recorder's Office, said SE corner also
being on the west line of Quail Ridge Park, an official plat recorded in book
7836, page 74 at the Polk County Recorder's Office; thence S00°26'13"E, 652.81
feet along a line that coincides the west line of said Quail Ridge Park and the
west line of Quail Meadows West, an official plat recorded in book 8006, page
121 at the Polk County Recorder's Office, to a point on the north right-of-way
line of Grand Avenue as it is presently established; thence S89°49'15"W, 40.38
feet along said north right-of-way line to a point; thence S08°59'54"W 335.71
feet along said north right-of-way line to a point; thence S89°55'23"W, 360.67
feet along said north right-of-way line to a point on the east right-of-way
line of US Interstate I-35; thence N47°49'29"W, 587.13 feet along said east
right-of-way line to a point; thence N19°36'41"W, 622.63 feet along the said
east right- of-way line as established in the acquisition plat recorded in book
13732, page 407 at the Polk County Recorder's Office; thence N22°54'18"W, 1.00
feet along said east right-of-way line as established in the acquisition plat
recorded in book 13581, page 26 at the Polk County Recorder's Office to a point
on the south line of said Quail Cove plat 1; thence N89°49'28"E, 1093.06 feet
along said south line of Quail Cove plat 1 to the point of beginning and
containing 18.96 acres more or less.
(Ord. 2370, 7-1-2019)
120-02: SKETCH PLAN:
Attached hereto and made a part of this rezoning approval, for concept
description and delineation is the Sketch Plan document for the Grand Ridge PUD
marked exhibit "A". The Sketch Plan is a graphic representation of the property
included in the PUD delineating the approximate location and configuration of
the PUD Parcels for the purpose of easier reference for the applicable
regulations of this ordinance. Wherever conflict occurs between the written
text in this document and the notations on the Sketch Plan, the written text
shall prevail. (Ord. 2370, 7-1-2019)
120-03: DEVELOPMENT INTENT:
To provide the framework for a large lot single-family residential neighborhood
that allows for development while encouraging preservation of the site's
natural characteristics and accommodates the channel pattern of the creek
dividing the site. (Ord. 2370, 7-1-2019)
120-04: REQUIRED PLANS:
Prior to or in conjunction with development or transfer of ownership of any
portion of the property covered by this PUD, the following plans shall be
required:
   A.   Preliminary Plat And Final Plat: The PUD area shall be platted in
accordance with the City's Subdivision Ordinance. Parcels created via the Plat-
of-Survey process and platted outlots identified on a plat shall be unbuildable
until such time that the plat-of-survey parcel and/or outlot is re-platted into
a developable lot through the preliminary plat and final plat process. (Ord.
2370, 7-1-2019)
120-05: CONDITIONS:
   A.   Whereas, title 9, chapter 9, PUD Planned Unit Development District of
the City Code, establishes certain regulations and guidelines pertaining to
accompanying information required on plat and site plan documents. Now,
therefore, the following conditions, restrictions, and regulations are adopted
as part of this approval in addition to the PUD Sketch Plan.
      1.   General Conformance To Subdivision Ordinance: All subdivisions,
public and private streets, public or private street rights-of-way and general
development shall adhere to the standards and design criteria set forth in the
West Des Moines Subdivision Ordinance and/or established City policies
pertaining thereto, unless otherwise stated within this ordinance.
      2.   General Conformance To Zoning Ordinance: Unless otherwise specified
herein, the development of the PUD shall comply with the provisions of the West
Des Moines Zoning Ordinance.
      3.   Flood Hazard: In all areas within a 100-year frequency flood hazard
zone, or adjoining drainage ways, and detention ponding areas involving
potential flood hazards, no building shall be erected which has a lowest level
floor, including basements, less than one foot (1') above the determined level
of the 100-year frequency flood event. Buildings shall not be permitted within
twenty five feet (25') of any easement or property boundary of a major drainage
way, stormwater detention basin or pond unless said location is approved as
part of the development entitlement by the City Council and said building is
structurally designed accordingly.
      4.   Developer Responsibilities: The developer, their successors and/or
assigns, if any, shall pay all planning, engineering, and construction costs
for the development of the planned unit development, as required by this
ordinance and approved site plans. Developer shall be responsible for cost of
all streets, storm sewers, sanitary sewers, drainage way improvements,
detention basins, water mains, buffers and other improvements as required of
the development. Developer shall dedicate appropriate rights-of-way and/or
public easements required within the PUD, unless otherwise approved by the City
Council.
      5.   Sanitary Sewer: Any proposed change in approved land use densities
for the PUD will require an analysis of the downstream sanitary sewer capacity
to assure that adequate capacity is available for the proposed change in
approved land use densities.
      6.   Private On-Site Sewer: Private on-site sewer systems will be allowed
on platted Lots 8, 9, and 10 or lots on the northwest corner of the site
gaining access from Cherrywood Drive.
      7.   Street Lighting: The developer shall be responsible for all costs
associated with the installation of public street lights within or adjacent to
any area proposed to be platted or included within a development.
      8.   Mailboxes: The developer shall be responsible for installation of
any required cluster box units (CBUs/mailboxes) required by the local U.S.
Postal Service Post Office.
      9.   Fire Sprinkler System: All homes within the PUD must have a fire
sprinkler system in accordance with West Des Moines Fire Code provisions due to
the length of the streets accessing the development. (Ord. 2370, 7-1-2019)
120-06: LAND USE DESIGN CRITERIA:
In addition to the general criteria as stated above, the following land use
regulations, development standards, and design criteria shall apply to the
development of all areas designated on the Sketch Plan:
   A.   All general use regulations and provisions set forth in title 9, Zoning
of the West Des Moines City Code for Residential Estate (RE-1A) shall apply to
any development proposal for the property, unless noted otherwise in this
ordinance.
      1.   Lot Size: The minimum lot size permitted in this development shall
be forty thousand (40,000) square feet, except Lots 1, 2, and 10 which shall be
no less than thirty thousand (30,000) square feet.
      2.   Lot Width: Minimum lot width shall be no less than one hundred feet
(100') as measured at the front building setback line.
      3.   Building Height: Building height shall be in accordance with the
requirements for the Residential Estate Zoning District as set forth in title
9, chapter 7 of the City Code.
      4.   Building Setbacks: Setbacks for all residential development shall be
as follows:
         a.   Front Yard: A minimum of fifty feet (50'), except Lots 1, 2, 7,
and 10, which will be allowed a minimum thirty five foot (35') front yard
setback.
         b.   Rear Yard: A minimum of fifty feet (50'), except Lots 1, 2, 7,
and 10 which will be allowed a minimum thirty five foot (35') rear yard
setback.
         c.   Side Yard: Twenty feet (20') as measured to the foundation with
no other element of the building encroaching into the setback by more than two
feet (2').
      5.   Detached Structures: For detached structures on Lots 1 and 2, the
maximum size of the total of all structures is one thousand (1,000) gross
square feet. (Ord. 2370, 7-1-2019)
120-07: BUFFERS:
No buffers will be required in this development. The developer or individual
property owner may install additional landscaping along the east boundary
adjacent to the medium density/townhome development and along the interstate
right-of-way as they deem appropriate to mitigate views or buffer adjacent
higher intensity uses. (Ord. 2370, 7-1-2019)
120-08: PARKLAND DEDICATION:
An area of land calculated by a set formula based upon the density (total
number of dwelling units) of the proposed development is required to be
dedicated for purposes of a public park and greenway as per City Code. A
Parkland Dedication Agreement, acceptable to the Park and Recreation
Department, detailing the specifics related to the parkland dedication
requirements for the development of any area contained within the PUD is
required to be executed in conjunction with the final platting of the
subdivision. (Ord. 2370, 7-1-2019)
120-09: MASTER PROPERTY OWNERS' ASSOCIATION:
If deemed applicable, proper action shall be taken to establish a master
property owners' association. The property owners' association shall be
responsible for the ongoing upkeep and maintenance of any common grounds as
outlined in the association documents and any other specific development
improvements noted as their responsibility in this ordinance. (Ord. 2370, 7-1-
2019)
120-10: TREE PRESERVATION:
The intent of this section is to recognize existing areas containing trees of
significant size, value, and quantity such that the environmental aesthetic is
enhanced by these areas. At the time of platting, existing tree cover on the
site shall be protected and any loss mitigated. Removal of trees will be
permitted for diseased, dead, damaged, or of a species not commonly recognized
as being desirable. For all other trees removed one inch (1") of caliper at
breast height of overstory trees shall be provided for every inch of caliper at
breast height of removed trees. At the time of Building Permit Application for
each home, documentation from a certified arborist or ASLA licensed landscape
professional shall be provided to the Development Services Department of the
City, indicating trees to be removed, the reason for tree removal and whether
replacement is required. Tree replacement shall occur prior to issuance of a
final occupancy permit for the home.
   A.   Trees shall not be planted closer than five feet (5') to a sidewalk as
measured from the center of the tree.
   B.   No vegetation which obstructs visibility shall be located within the
site triangle of intersecting streets and private drives, including residential
driveways. (Ord. 2370, 7-1-2019)
120-11: ARCHITECTURE:
The intent of these regulations is to create building facades throughout this
development that are varied and articulated to provide visual interest.
Architectural design for single family dwellings shall accomplish this by
careful attention to exterior building materials and details, use of windows
and doors, and change in building mass within the plan and roof design. Non-
masonry materials, fenestration, and trim used on the front facade shall be
continued around all sides of the building. However, the level of detail can be
reduced on the facades not facing a street. Care should be taken in the design
of the building to keep grading and tree removal to a minimum.
Exteriors of the dwellings and accessory structures shall incorporate materials
such as brick, stone, lap or vertical siding, shakes, decorative trim or
similar combination of material which incorporates elements typical of the
chosen architectural style. Use of natural materials is encouraged, composite
materials such as fiber cement and wood composites are appropriate
substitutions. Vinyl siding may be used only with appropriately scaled and
detailed trim and not as the primary cladding material. Changes in materials
should be aligned with changes in plan or roof form to emphasize these changes
in building mass and shall have the appearance of three-dimensional elements.
Trim and structural elements such as posts or columns shall be sized to the
scale of the building and detailed appropriately to the style. Masonry shall be
incorporated into the building architecture on the front and side facades, and
in a proportion that provides a strong visual presence. Fenestration (door and
window openings) shall be sized to the scale of the building and be compatible
with the chosen architectural style.
Detached garages or accessory structures should incorporate architectural
details of the primary building with the use of roof forms, materials,
fenestration and other facade detailing.
   A.   Garage Orientation: Garages shall be sited to minimize the visual
presence to the street. To facilitate this requirement, acceptable garage
orientations include:
      1.   Street Oriented Garage: Garages that open to the street are strongly
encouraged and desired to be recessed behind the front plane of the house a
minimum of five feet (5'). In no case shall the garage project more than five
feet (5') in front of the plane of the house.
         a.   In situations where the garage is located less than five feet
(5') behind the front plane of the house, the third car garage, if applicable,
must be stepped back a minimum of four feet (4') from the front of the two car
garage with all garage doors to be individual one car doors.
         b.   In situations where the garage projects up to five feet (5') in
front of the plane of the house, a covered porch shall be constructed that is
at least the width equal to twenty five percent (25%) of the total width of the
house and at least five unobstructed feet (5') in depth.
      2.   Side Loaded Garage: Garages that open to a side yard. This garage
orientation can be located in front of the house equal to the building setback
for the house. Side loaded garages should incorporate architectural details
such as windows, doors, and other detailing on the street facade in order to
present a house appearance thus disguising the garage function. (Ord. 2370, 7-
1-2019)
120-12: SIGNAGE REGULATION:
Signage shall comply with all provisions and standards of title 9, chapter 18
of the City Code for the Residential Estate (RE) Zoning District. (Ord. 2370,
7-1-2019)
120-13: STORMWATER MANAGEMENT:
A Stormwater Management Plan will be required with the platting of this
property. The developer will have said Stormwater Management Plan prepared by a
professional engineer licensed in the State of Iowa, in conjunction with the
submittal of a preliminary plat for the development of the property. The
Stormwater Management Plan shall comply with the City's current design
standards for stormwater management. The method of stormwater management and
the stormwater conveyance system shall be determined prior to City approval of
a preliminary plat.
At time of platting, ownership and responsibility for all stormwater detention
areas and private stormwater detention outlet structures will need to be
established through the execution of a Stormwater Facility Maintenance
Agreement prepared by the City with information provided by the developer. This
agreement essentially provides that the property owner will maintain and repair
their stormwater facilities. If they fail to do so, the City will make repairs
or perform maintenance and assess all costs back to the property owner. As part
of the maintenance agreement, the property owner will be responsible to provide
a letter certifying the detention facility is in conformance with the approved
Stormwater Management Plan. The property owner also will need to provide as-
built drawings of the detention facilities. Both the letter and as-builts will
need to be signed and sealed in accordance with chapter 6, 193c-6.1(542B) of
the Iowa Code. (Ord. 2370, 7-1-2019)
120-14: PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS:
The developer shall be responsible for constructing and/or installing the
public infrastructure necessary to support development within the subdivision
in a manner that will assure that the public infrastructure functions at an
acceptable level of service (per the City's Comprehensive Plan) and that it
complies with all City ordinances. Public improvements must be accepted by the
City prior to issuance of any occupancy permit, including temporary occupancy
permits. (Ord. 2370, 7-1-2019)
120-15: REPEALER:
All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with the provisions of this
ordinance are hereby repealed. (Ord. 2370, 7-1-2019)
120-16: SAVINGS CLAUSE:
If any section, provision, sentence, clause, phrase or part of this ordinance
shall be adjudged invalid or unconstitutional, such adjudication shall not
affect the validity of this ordinance as a whole or any provision, section,
subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or part hereof not adjudged invalid or
unconstitutional. (Ord. 2370, 7-1-2019)
120-17: VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES:
Any person who violates the provision of this ordinance upon conviction shall
be punished as set forth in section 1-4-1 of the City Code of the City of West
Des Moines, Iowa. (Ord. 2370, 7-1-2019)
120-18: OTHER REMEDIES:
In addition to the provisions set out in the violations and penalties section
herein, the City may proceed in law or equity against any person, firm or
corporation for violation of any section or subsection of this ordinance. (Ord.
2370, 7-1-2019)
120-19: EFFECTIVE DATE:
This ordinance shall be in full force and effect after its passage, approval
and publication as provided by law. (Ord. 2370, 7-1-2019)
120-99: LEGISLATIVE HISTORY:
Ord. 2370, 7-1-2019.
PUD #121
THE PRESERVE
SECTION:
121-01: Legal Description
121-02: Sketch Plan
121-03: Required Plans
121-04: Conditions
121-05: Land Use Design Criteria
121-06: Signage
121-07: Parkland Dedication
121-08: Master Property Owners Association
121-09: Storm Water Management
121-10: Repealer
121-11: Savings Clause
121-12: Violations And Penalties
121-13: Other Remedies
121-14: Effective Date
121-99: Legislative History
121-01: LEGAL DESCRIPTION:
The southwest 1/4 Section 34, and east ½ of the southeast 1/4 of Section 33,
and the north 18 acres of the northwest 1/4 of the southeast 1/4 of Section 33,
all in Township 78 North, Range 26 West of the 5th P.M., Dallas County, Iowa,
containing 253.8 acres more or less.
And
The south ½ of the northwest 1/4 of Section 3 and the northeast fractional 1/
4 of the northwest 1/4 of Section 3, and the west ½ of the northeast 1/4 of
Section 3, all in Township 77 North, Range 26 West of the 5th P.M., Madison
County, Iowa, containing 194.0 acres more or less.
Total acreage = 447.8 acres (Ord. 2383, 10-21-2019)
121-02: SKETCH PLAN:
Attached hereto and made a part of this rezoning approval, for concept
description and delineation is the Sketch Plan document for The Preserve PUD
marked Exhibit "A". The Sketch Plan is a graphic representation of the property
included in the PUD delineating the approximate location and configuration of
the PUD Parcels for the purpose of easier reference for the applicable
regulations of this Ordinance. Wherever conflict occurs between the written
text in this document and the notations on the Sketch Plan, the written text
shall prevail. (Ord. 2383, 10-21-2019)
121-03: REQUIRED PLANS:
Prior to or in conjunction with development or transfer of ownership of any
portion of the property covered by this PUD, the following plans shall be
required:
   A.   Preliminary Plat and Final Plat: The PUD area shall be platted in
accordance with the City's Subdivision Ordinance. Outlots intended for private
development must be re-platted through the preliminary and final plat process
in accordance with the associated zoning classifications prior to physical
development unless its purpose is to provide for public utilities or publicly
owned or accessible park ground, greenways, or other recreational amenities.
Outlots within a plat shall have the proposed use clearly designated on the
plat document.
   B.   Development Applications (Site Plans): Site plans shall be submitted to
the City of West Des Moines for review and approval prior to the development of
the Residential Medium Density (RM), Neighborhood Commercial (NC) and for
parks, fire station and water utility structures within Agricultural/Open Space
(OS) zoned properties within the PUD area. Site Plans for all phases of
development within The Preserve PUD must meet the intent of the approved PUD
sketch. At the discretion of the Director of Development Services, an amendment
to The Preserve PUD Ordinance may be required to bring consistency between the
ordinance and site plan development proposed.
      Unless otherwise specifically restricted by the City Council, ground work
and construction of private roads and utilities may be started, at the
developer's risk, upon approval of the preliminary plat by the City Council;
however, no construction of structures, including footing and foundations shall
be allowed prior to site plan approval. Public street and utility construction
may begin, at the sole risk of the developer, after approval of the preliminary
plat by the City Council and Public Improvement Plans by the City of West Des
Moines. (Ord. 2383, 10-21-2019)
121-04: CONDITIONS:
Whereas, Title 9, Chapter 9, Planned Unit Development District of the City
Code, establishes certain regulations and guidelines pertaining to accompanying
information required on plat and site plan documents. In addition, the
following conditions, restrictions, and regulations are adopted as part of this
approval:
   A.   General Conditions: In addition to the PUD Sketch Plan Map, the
following general development criteria shall be integrated into and made a part
of this planned unit development.
      1.   Flood Hazard: In all areas within a Base Flood (100 Year), or
adjoining drainage ways, and detention ponding areas involving potential flood
hazards, all buildings proposed to be located in a flood hazard area must be
elevated and designed in accordance with the American Society of Civil
Engineers publication ASCE 24 and no building shall be erected which has a
minimum opening elevation (including top of window well) less than one foot
(1') above the determined level of the Base Flood. In areas where historical
high water levels are above the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) Base Flood
Elevation or special conditions exist, the City may require a Design Flood
Elevation be calculated and used as the Base Flood Elevation for determination
of elevation requirements. Buildings shall only be permitted within twenty five
feet (25') of any easement or property boundary of a major drainageway, storm
water detention basin or pond if said location is approved as part of the
development entitlement by the city council and said building is structurally
designed accordingly.
      2.   Developer Responsibility: Unless otherwise specifically approved by
the City Council, the developer, its successors and/or assigns, if any, shall
pay all planning, engineering, and construction costs for the development of
the planned unit development as required by this Ordinance, and shall pay all
costs related to approved site plans, which may include but is not limited to
the cost of all streets, storm sewers, sanitary sewers, water mains and service
lines, drainage-way improvements, detention basins, and other improvements as
required. Unless otherwise provided for in a separate development agreement, at
the time of subdivision platting within the PUD, the subdivider shall be
responsible for construction and/or installation of all required public
infrastructure improvements in accordance with the City's Subdivision
Ordinance, as indicated herein, and/or as indicated on the approved The
Preserve PUD sketch plan. With any subdivision plat within the PUD, the
subdivider shall be responsible for constructing and/or installing the public
infrastructure necessary to support development within the subdivision in a
manner that will assure that the public infrastructure functions at an
acceptable level of service (per the City's Comprehensive Plan) and that
complies with all City Ordinances. No occupancy permits, either temporary or
permanent, shall be issued until all necessary improvements applicable to the
area/lot or structure requesting occupancy are installed and public
improvements accepted by the City of West Des Moines. Nothing in this Ordinance
shall be construed to prevent the developer, its successors and/or assigns, if
any, from entering into private agreement(s) as it/they may desire to share the
cost of improvements.
      3.   Sanitary Sewer: Any proposed change in approved land use densities
for the PUD will require an analysis of the downstream sanitary sewer capacity
to assure that adequate capacity is available for the proposed change in
approved land use densities.
      4.   Street Lighting: Unless otherwise provided for in a separate
development agreement, the Developer shall be responsible for all costs
associated with the installation of public street lights within or adjacent to
any area proposed to be platted or included within a development.
      5.   Mailboxes: The Developer shall be responsible for installation of
any required Cluster Box Units (CBUs) as per the local U.S. Postal Service Post
Office. (Ord. 2383, 10-21-2019)
121-05: LAND USE DESIGN CRITERIA:
In addition to the general criteria as stated above, the following land use
regulations, development standards, and design criteria shall apply to the
development of all areas designated on the Sketch Plan:
   A.   Parcels A and B: All general use and bulk regulations and provisions
set forth in Title 9, Zoning of the West Des Moines City Code for the Single
Family Residential (R-1) district shall apply to any development proposal for
these parcels, unless noted otherwise in this ordinance.
      1.   Buffers: A minimum sixty-foot (60') buffer park shall be required
along SW Grand Prairie Parkway. Plans detailing the landscape vegetation and
earthen berming within the buffer park shall be provided in accordance with the
West Des Moines buffer ordinance at the time of preliminary platting. The
equivalent of one overstory tree shall be required per thirty five (35) linear
feet of the sixty foot (60') buffer. Evergreen trees or shrubs shall not be
required within the buffer, but may be installed if desired.  
   Installation of the buffer amenities shall occur prior to acceptance of
public improvements associated with the adjacent final plat. If surety is
posted for public improvements to allow for approval and recordation of the
associated final plat before improvements are constructed and accepted (which
allows for the sale of lots and construction of dwellings to commence), the
buffer vegetation and amenities shall be installed prior to issuance of any
occupancy permit, including temporary occupancy permit for any dwelling within
the adjacent final plat. If the time of the year prevents installation of the
vegetation and amenities, to receive an occupancy permit for any dwelling,
surety shall be provided to the City at 1.5 times the cost of the vegetation
and labor to install. In this instance, installation shall occur in the first
possible planting season and prior to June 15th. No additional occupancy
permits, including temporary occupancy permits shall be issued after June 15th
until such time that the buffer vegetation and amenities have been installed to
the satisfaction of the City.
      2.   Architecture: It is desired that building architecture through
Parcels A and B should be varied and provide strong visual interest through the
use of design, materials, and detailing. Side and rear building facades shall
incorporate a minimum of two material types. One primary and one accent
material comprised of a different material type, color, or texture than the
primary material. Facades that face a public or private street shall
incorporate a third material of brick or stone in a percentage that provides a
strong visual presence. Masonry materials shall start and stop at an interior
corner created by a change in wall plane or wrap corners a minimum of two (2)
feet to give authenticity to the material. Materials, trim and details used on
the front façade shall be continued around all sides of the building, however,
the level of detail can be reduced on the facades not visible from a street
(public or private) or adjacent properties surrounding the development.
   B.   Parcels C, D, and F: All general use and bulk regulations and
provisions set forth in Title 9, Zoning of the West Des Moines City Code for
the Residential Medium Density (RM-12) district shall apply to any development
proposal for these parcels, unless noted otherwise in this ordinance.
      1.   Parcel F, as shown on the sketch plan, shall include approximately 5
acres to be reserved for development of a fire station. The property will be
required to be platted at the time that any portion of the adjacent parcels are
platted. The fire station land shall be conveyed to the City according to the
terms of the Raccoon River Land Development Agreement. At the time of site plan
review of the fire station, the city shall be required to install the sixty-
foot (60') buffer park and earthen berming along SW Grand Prairie Parkway as
required below.
      2.   Buffers: A minimum sixty-foot (60') buffer park shall be required
along both sides of SW Grand Prairie Parkway. Plans detailing the landscape
vegetation and earthen berming within the buffer park shall be provided in
accordance with the West Des Moines buffer ordinance at the time of site
planning for adjacent medium-density parcels. The equivalent of one overstory
tree shall be required per thirty five (35) linear feet of the sixty foot (60')
buffer. Evergreen trees or shrubs shall not be required within the buffer, but
may be installed if desired.
   Installation of the buffer amenities shall occur prior to acceptance of
public improvements associated with the adjacent final plat. If surety is
posted for public improvements to allow for approval and recordation of the
associated final plat before improvements are constructed and accepted (which
allows for the sale of lots and construction of dwellings to commence), the
buffer vegetation and amenities shall be installed prior to issuance of any
occupancy permit, including temporary occupancy permit for any dwelling or non-
residential building within the adjacent final plat. If the time of the year
prevents installation of the buffer vegetation and amenities, to receive an
occupancy permit for any dwelling or non-residential building, surety shall be
provided to the City at 1.5 times the cost of the vegetation and labor to
install. In this instance, installation shall occur in the first possible
planting season and prior to June 15th. No additional occupancy permits,
including temporary occupancy permits shall be issued after June 15th until
such time that the buffer vegetation and amenities have been installed to the
satisfaction of the City.
      3.   Architecture: The intent is to encourage a sense of place by
allowing the imaginative and efficient utilization of land that engages
residents with the street and neighborhood. Building design should reinforce a
sense of community by establishing a unique identity within a cohesive design
theme. This can be accomplished by careful attention to building massing and
human scale, choice of exterior building materials, details and site
orientation. Porches are encouraged to be made a part of the front façade of
dwellings to provide a useable outdoor room and promote community
connectedness.
   The following shall apply to the different types of medium density dwellings
proposed within The Preserve PUD:
         a.   Building design for residential uses should use materials such as
brick, stone, stucco, lap siding or shakes, decorative trim or similar
combination of material which represents a variation of architectural styles or
elements. Materials choices should be durable, substantial and of a quality
that will maintain their appearance over a prolonged time. Use of natural
materials is encouraged, composite materials such as fiber cement and wood
composites are appropriate substitutions. Vinyl siding may be used only with
appropriately scaled trim.
         b.   Long blank walls are prohibited. The building and unit plans
shall be designed and organized to provide variety and interest on all sides of
the building. If function dictates the need for a segment of blank wall, its
appearance shall be mitigated with one or more of the following strategies:
            i.   Incorporating minor changes in building footprint and roof
forms along with utilizing a variety of materials for visual interest and to
break-up blank wall expanses.
            ii.   Including door or window openings or changes in materials
that mimic openings in a number and size that is in proportion to the other
building facades. Accent windows can be located high enough that they don't
interfere with furniture placement or trigger security concerns, but add
interest to the façade and provide natural light to the interior of the space.
            iii.   Building elements such as porches, arcades, awnings and
accent lighting.
         c.   Attached garages facing any street shall be designed to minimize
their appearance. When the building contains more than 4 garage bays per
facade, the garage doors shall be enhanced by the addition of engaged columns,
secondary roof forms or decorative garage doors to mitigate the dominant
appearance of the doors.
         d.   Detached garages or accessory structures should be clad in the
same materials and incorporate similar architectural details of the primary
buildings with the use of roof forms, windows, doors and other facade
detailing. Portions of accessory buildings visible from any street or adjacent
property shall incorporate same level of detail as the primary buildings.
Detached garages shall contain no more than eight (8) garage doors per façade.
         e.   Attached Multi-Family Building (Up To 4 Units): It is desired
that building architecture through Parcels C, D and F should be varied and
provide strong visual interest through the use of design, materials, and
detailing. Side and rear building facades shall incorporate a minimum of two
material types. One primary and one accent material comprised of a different
material type, color, or texture than the primary material. Facades that face a
public or private street shall incorporate a third material of brick or stone
in a percentage that provides a strong visual presence. Masonry materials shall
start and stop at an interior corner created by a change in wall plane or wrap
corners a minimum of two (2) feet to give authenticity to the material.
Materials, trim and details used on the front façade shall be continued around
all sides of the building, however, the level of detail can be reduced on the
facades not visible from a street (public or private) or adjacent properties
surrounding the development.
         f.   Attached Multi-Family Building (Greater than 4 Units): All
facades of the building shall be treated with the same level of architectural
style and detail (360 degree architecture). Variations in building form and
design such as facade modulation and articulation (stepping back or extending
forward a portion of the building) and changing the roof height and form by
alternating dormers, stepped roofs, gables, or other roof elements - organized
with the changes in plan shall be incorporated to lessen the plainness of
appearance, mitigate the building mass and repetitive characteristic of large
residential buildings. All building elevations shall incorporate a minimum of
three material types. One primary material, one accent material, comprised of a
different material type, color, or texture from the primary material and a
third material comprised of brick or stone. Masonry materials shall be located
principally on the base (lowest) story of the building and as the majority
cladding of that story, and shall start and stop at an interior corner created
by a change in wall plane or wrap corners a minimum of two (2) feet to give
authenticity to the material. Variation in materials, material modules, and
material heights along with expressed joints, textures, colors and details
should be used to break up the mass of the buildings. The use of trim and
detailing such as window and door trim, band boards, louvers, etc. shall be
carried around all sides of the building and shall be appropriately sized to be
noticeable and provide visual interest and detailing. Entrances into buildings
should face the street and be easily identified through the use of building
design and detailing. Door or window openings shall be incorporated on all
sides of the building.
         g.   Outdoor Living Area: For horizontally attached multi-family
buildings, all dwelling units within the building shall provide a defined
outdoor living space (porch, deck or patio) with a minimum usable area of 100
square feet. For multi-family buildings with vertically attached units, all
dwelling units within the building shall provide a defined outdoor living space
(deck or patio) with a minimum usable area of 40 square feet and a minimum
usable dimension of five (5) feet deep in either direction. Buildings greater
than 4 units may provide area(s) of common defined outdoor living space (of an
area equivalent or greater than the total required area of all units within the
building) in lieu of outdoor living area for individual units. The common
defined outdoor living space(s) must be adjacent or in close proximity to the
building.
   C.   Parcel E: All general use and bulk regulations and provisions set forth
in Title 9, Zoning of the West Des Moines City Code for the Neighborhood
Commercial (NC) district shall apply to any development proposal for the
parcel, unless noted otherwise in this ordinance.
      1.   Land Use: Uses permitted and permitted conditionally shall be
allowed within Parcel E in accordance with the zoning ordinance for the
Neighborhood Commercial (NC) district pursuant to title 9 of the City Code and
with the approval of the appropriate review body.
      2.   Parking: Parking for a planned commercial center constructed in
parcel E shall be calculated according to subsection 9-15-7B, "Planned
Commercial Center", of the city code or, if applicable, for single use
commercial developments as required.
      3.   Buffers: A minimum sixty-foot (60') buffer park shall be required
along SW Grand Prairie Parkway. Plans detailing the landscape vegetation and
earthen berming within the buffer park shall be provided in accordance with the
West Des Moines buffer ordinance at the time of site planning. The equivalent
of one overstory tree shall be required per thirty five (35) linear feet of the
sixty foot (60') buffer. Evergreen trees or shrubs shall not be required within
the buffer, but may be installed if desired.
      Installation of the buffer vegetation and amenities (development branding
signage and sculptures) shall occur prior to acceptance of public improvements
associated with the adjacent final plat. If surety is posted for public
improvements to allow for approval and recordation of the associated final plat
before improvements are constructed and accepted (which allows for the sale of
lots and construction of dwellings to commence), the buffer vegetation and
amenities shall be installed prior to issuance of any occupancy permit,
including temporary occupancy permit for any building within the adjacent final
plat. If the time of the year prevents installation of the buffer vegetation
and amenities, to receive an occupancy permit for a building within the parcel,
surety shall be provided to the City at 1.5 times the cost of the vegetation
and labor to install. In this instance, installation shall occur in the first
possible planting season and prior to June 15th. No additional occupancy
permits, including temporary occupancy permits shall be issued after June 15th
until such time that the buffer vegetation and amenities have been installed to
the satisfaction of the City.
      4.   Architecture: The intent is to create building facades throughout
this development that are varied and articulated to provide visual interest and
to establish a unique identity for the development. Although it is understood
and preferred that not all buildings within this development are identical,
each building will include design elements such as similar building proportion
and roof forms as well as common materials, colors and detailing to provide
continuity amongst buildings and to unite all structures within the development
into one project concept. All sides to each building shall receive high quality
materials, finishes, and details (360 degree architectural treatment). There
are no "backs" to a building. Materials should be durable, economically
maintained and of a quality that will maintain their appearance over a
prolonged time. The architectural design of any building within this
development shall be acceptable to the City.
   All buildings within this development shall accommodate or incorporate the
following in building design and materials:
         a.   Form and Scale: Buildings shall be designed to relate
specifically to the pedestrian in scale and respond to the residential context
of its surroundings. The following techniques shall be used to meet this
objective.
            i.   Buildings shall be organized to create a logical balance and
relationship within the site, open spaces and circulation. The design of
buildings shall meet context and site objectives such as providing gateways,
creating linkages and framing or terminating views.
            ii.   Variation in building height, mass and roof forms shall be
provided while still maintaining an overall building continuity. Shifts in
building planes/facades and variation in exterior materials shall be
incorporated to minimize long expanses of wall.
            iii.   Entrances into buildings shall be easily identified through
the use of building design and detailing. Projected or recessed entryways,
change in rooflines, addition of awnings or changes in building material are
examples that can create this effect.
            iv.   Ground floor areas shall provide the maximum possible glazing
toward pedestrian areas to provide visual interest and to promote the linkage
of the interior and exterior of buildings.
            v.   Fenestration (door and window openings) and trim and
structural elements (such as posts or columns) shall be sized to the scale of
the building and be compatible with the chosen architectural style.
            vi.   A building's roof form and related details/materials are an
integral part of the architectural design aesthetic. Roofs shall not be
designed as attention-getting devices related to the reinforcement of signage
or as an identifiable corporate image.
            vii.   Views of roof and building mounted mechanical equipment
shall mitigate by screening incorporated into the design of the building
through location and the use of parapets, screening walls, or other acceptable
solutions as identified during the review of the site plan.
         b.   Material Quality and Detail:
            i.   Natural materials such as brick and stone shall be used as the
major cladding elements of the facade. Architectural precast concrete,
composite or metal panel acceptable to the City may be incorporated in the
design up to 40% of the cladding area.
               1.   Concrete products shall have integrated color rather than
surface applied paint/staining and should generally have texture for interest;
smooth finish concrete products may be used in conjunction with texture for
accent purposes.
               2.   All composite or metal panel systems must have finished
edges and concealed fasteners. Trim or channels must be the same color as the
panels.
               3.   The use of EIFS or synthetic stucco shall be used in
moderation and primarily used as a minor cladding or trim material. Use of EIFS
is limited to areas of the building seven feet (8') above grade and higher.
               4.   The use of non-architectural metal and vinyl cladding
materials is prohibited.
            ii.   Variation in materials, material modules, expressed joints,
textures, colors and details shall be used to break up the mass of the
buildings. Changes in materials shall be aligned with changes in plan or roof
form to emphasize these changes in building mass and shall have the appearance
of 3-dimensional elements.
         c.   Corporate architecture shall be prohibited. Limited use of
architectural elements characteristic of prototypical architecture may be
allowed at the discretion of the Director of Development Services or the
appropriate reviewing and approval body. Implementation of these architectural
elements shall be minimized and whenever possible modified to give a unique
image to the establishment. No standard corporate building design without
modifications shall be implemented.
   D.   Parcel G: All general use and bulk regulations and provisions set forth
in Title 9, Zoning of the West Des Moines City Code for the Residential Medium
Density (RM-12) district shall apply to any development proposal for the
property, unless noted otherwise in this ordinance.
   Parcel G, as shown on the sketch plan, shall include approximately five (5)
acres to be reserved for development of a water tower Parcel G shall be
required to be platted at the time that any portion of the adjacent parcels are
platted. The water tower land shall be conveyed to the City according to the
terms of the Raccoon River Land Development Agreement.
   E.   Parcel H: All general use and bulk regulations and provisions set forth
in Title 9, Zoning of the West Des Moines City Code for the Residential Estate
(RE-1A) District shall apply to any development proposal for the property,
unless noted otherwise in this ordinance.
      1.   Storm Water: Individual lots within Parcel H shall capture and treat
the water quality volume in accordance with the Iowa Stormwater Management
Manual through design and installation of Best Management Practices (BMPs).
Supporting calculations and construction details are required to be submitted
in conjunction with the building permit for the dwelling structure on each lot
and shall be approved by the City prior to issuance of a building permit,
including footing and foundation permits, for the respective lot.
      2.   Buffers: A minimum sixty-foot (60') buffer park shall be required
along SW Grand Prairie Parkway. Plans detailing the landscape vegetation and
earthen berming within the buffer park shall be provided in accordance with the
West Des Moines buffer ordinance at the time of preliminary platting. The
equivalent of one overstory tree shall be required per thirty-five (35) linear
feet of the sixty-foot (60') buffer. Evergreen trees and shrubs shall not be
required within the buffer but may be installed if desired.  
   Installation of the buffer vegetation and amenities (development branding
signage and sculptures) shall occur prior to acceptance of public improvements
associated with the adjacent final plat. If surety is posted for public
improvements to allow for approval and recordation of the associated final plat
before improvements are constructed and accepted (which allows for the sale of
lots and construction of dwellings to commence), the buffer vegetation and
amenities shall be installed prior to issuance of any occupancy permit,
including temporary occupancy permit for any dwelling within the adjacent final
plat. If the time of the year prevents installation of the buffer vegetation
and amenities, to receive an occupancy permit for any dwelling, surety shall be
provided to the City at 1.5 times the cost of the vegetation and labor to
install. In this instance, installation shall occur in the first possible
planting season and prior to June 15th. No additional occupancy permits,
including temporary occupancy permits shall be issued after June 15th until
such time that the buffer vegetation and amenities have been installed to the
satisfaction of the City.
      3.   Architecture: It is desired that building architecture through
Parcel H should be varied and provide strong visual interest through the use of
design, materials, and detailing. Side and rear building facades shall
incorporate a minimum of two material types. One primary and one accent
material comprised of a different material type, color, or texture than the
primary material. Facades that face a public or private street shall
incorporate a third material of brick or stone in a percentage that provides a
strong visual presence. Masonry materials shall start and stop at an interior
corner created by a change in wall plane or wrap corners a minimum of two (2)
feet to give authenticity to the material. Materials, trim and details used on
the front façade shall be continued around all sides of the building, however,
the level of detail can be reduced on the facades not visible from a street
(public or private) or adjacent properties to parcel H within or outside of The
Preserves development.
      4.   Fire Sprinklering: Homes within Parcel H that are eight thousand
(8,000) square feet or larger (including garages and any structure within
twenty feet (20') of the dwelling) must be fire sprinklered according to the
West Des Moines fire code. Homes on Lots 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8 & 9 of The
Preserve Estates Plat 1 shall be fire sprinklered regardless of size of the
dwelling structure as the homes on those lots will be greater than seven
hundred fifty feet (750') from SW Grand Prairie Parkway. The distance from SW
Grand Prairie Parkway to the dwelling structure shall be determined by the City
Fire Marshal. (Ord. 2383, 10-21-2019; amd. Ord. 2413, 5-4-2020)
121-06: SIGNAGE:
The following signage regulations and design criteria shall apply to the
development of all properties designated on the Sketch Plan:
   A.   Development Entrance Signs: These are signs that are being allowed
within the development to establish and define the project's overall signage
character in terms of color, material, lighting, and to be unifying features
that define the development with through the use of a cohesive theme.
      1.   Illumination: Since these signs will be located within several
possible zoning districts within the development (residential and commercial),
for consistency these signs shall be allowed to be externally illuminated, halo
lighted, or they may be internally illuminated if the light intensity is muted
through the use of materials and/or face applied vinyl consistent with the
development colors as depicted in the preserve signage and identity package on
file with the city.
      2.   Timing of Installation: These sign elements shall be installed at
the time of final platting of the property on which the sign(s) will be placed
and may be located within the buffers along SW Grand Prairie Parkway. At the
time of final platting, an easement shall be recorded for the corresponding
placement of the sign(s) along with acceptable documentation, as determined by
the city that outlines maintenance, repair and removal responsibilities for the
signs.
      3.   Primary Entrance Signs (labeled as 'P' on the PUD sketch map):
Primary Entrance signs shall include the "Preserve" logo, shall not exceed
seven feet (7') in height and the maximum size of the sign copy shall not
exceed twenty-four (24) square feet. If a proposed primary entrance sign meets
the criteria of a landscape sign as permitted according to the current City
sign code, the sign may be increased to eight feet (8') in height. The Primary
Entrance signs shall be allowed at all corners of intersecting streets with SW
Grand Prairie Parkway and shall be setback a minimum of fifteen feet (15') from
the ultimate street right-of-way line of all adjacent roads. The signs may be
located within the buffer along SW Grand Prairie Parkway.
      4.   Secondary Entrance Signs (labeled as 'S' on the PUD sketch map):
Secondary Entrance signs shall include the "Preserve" logo, shall not exceed
six feet (6') in height and the maximum size of the sign copy area shall not
exceed fourteen (14) square feet. If a proposed secondary entrance sign meets
the criteria of a landscape sign as permitted according to the current City
sign code, the sign may be increased to eight feet (8') in height. The
Secondary Entrance signs shall be allowed at all corners of intersecting
streets with SW Grand Prairie Parkway and shall be setback a minimum of ten
feet (10') from the ultimate street right-of-way line. The signs may be located
within the buffer along SW Grand Prairie Parkway.
      5.   Gateway Signs (labeled as 'G' on the PUD sketch map): Gateway signs
shall include the "Preserve" logo, shall not exceed eight feet (8') in height
and the maximum sign copy shall not exceed eleven (11) square feet. A Gateway
sign shall be allowed on each side of SW Grand Prairie Parkway at both the
north and south ends of the development and shall be setback a minimum of ten
feet (10') from the ultimate street right-of-way line. The signs may be located
within the buffer along SW Grand Prairie Parkway.
      6.   Boundary Markers (Labeled as 'M' on the PUD sketch map): Boundary
Markers shall include the "Preserve" logo, shall not exceed eight feet (8') in
height and the maximum area of the sign (from ground to top of sign) shall not
exceed fourteen (14) square feet. Boundary markers shall be setback a minimum
of ten feet (10') from the ultimate street right-of-way line and may be located
within the buffer park area along SW Grand Prairie Parkway.
   B.   Non-Development Monument Signs: Monument signs for individual
properties within the development that are not part of the Preserve development
sign package (i.e. multifamily residential and non-residential properties
within The Preserve PUD) shall comply with current City sign code. Signs
associated with residential development shall not be in addition to Primary or
Secondary Entrance signs: one or the other may be implemented at entrances off
of SW Grand Prairie Parkway. Signs associated with residential development
which take primary access off of a roadway other than SW Grand Prairie Parkway
shall be allowed signage in accordance with city code. All non-development
monument signs are required to incorporate The Preserve logo, including the
identified development colors and materials. To accommodate The Preserve name
or logo to be added to the top of the sign, an additional one foot (1') of
height and eight (8) square feet of sign area shall be permitted in addition to
what would normally be allowed by the City sign code. It is strongly
encouraged, but not required that tenant identification on multi-tenant
commercial signs be of the same font style, size and color. Non-development
monument signs shall be located no closer than one hundred feet (100') from
Primary Entrance Signs or Secondary Entrance Signs.
   C.   Wall Signs: Building wall signage for medium density and commercial
properties shall comply with current City sign code.
   D.   Neighborhood Signs: Neighborhood signs as depicted in The Preserve
Signage and Identity Package shall comply with the regulations for Residential
Subdivision Signs within the current City sign code.(Ord. 2383, 10-21-2019;
amd. Ord. 2413, 5-4-2020)
121-07: PARKLAND DEDICATION:
An area of land calculated by a set formula based upon the density (total
number of dwelling units) of the proposed development is required to be
dedicated for purposes of a public park and greenway as per city code. A
Parkland Dedication Agreement, acceptable to the Parks and Recreation
Department, detailing the specifics related to the Parkland Dedication
requirements for the development of any area contained within the PUD is
required to be executed in conjunction with the preliminary plat for the PUD
area. At the time of final platting of land directly adjacent to the proposed
park and greenway locations, the parcels shall be deeded to the City. (Ord.
2383, 10-21-2019)
121-08: MASTER PROPERTY OWNERS ASSOCIATION:
If deemed applicable, proper action shall be taken to establish a master
property owners association. The property owners association shall be
responsible for the ongoing upkeep and maintenance of any common grounds such
as buffer parks, storm water detention facilities, greenbelts, plazas and other
common space, as outlined in the association documents and any other specific
development improvements noted as their responsibility in this ordinance. (Ord.
2383, 10-21-2019)
121-09: STORM WATER MANAGEMENT:
A Storm Water Management Plan will be required with each preliminary plat for
ground within the PUD area. The Developer will have said Storm Water Management
Plan prepared by a Professional Engineer licensed in the State of Iowa, in
conjunction with the submittal of a preliminary plat for the development of the
property. The Storm Water Management Plan shall comply with the City's current
design standards for storm water management. The method of storm water
management and the storm water conveyance system shall be determined prior to
City approval of a preliminary plat.
At time of final platting, ownership and responsibility for all storm water
detention areas and private storm water detention outlet structures will need
to be established through the execution of a Storm Water Facility Maintenance
Agreement prepared by the City with information provided by the developer. This
agreement essentially provides that the property owner will maintain and repair
their storm water facilities. If they fail to do so, the city will make repairs
or perform maintenance and assess all costs back to the property owner. As part
of the maintenance agreement, the property owner will be responsible to provide
a letter certifying the detention facility in conformance with the approved
Storm Water Management Plan. The property owner also will need to provide as-
built drawings of the detention facilities. The letter and as-built plans will
be required prior to the issuance of a final occupancy permit for the first
dwelling on property which is served by a particular detention facility. Both
the letter and as-builts will need to be signed and sealed in accordance with
Chapter 6, 193C-6.1(542B) of the Iowa Code. (Ord. 2383, 10-21-2019)
121-10: REPEALER:
All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with the provision of this
ordinance are hereby repealed. (Ord. 2383, 10-21-2019)
121-11: SAVINGS CLAUSE:
If any section, provision, sentence, clause, phrase or part of the Ordinance
shall be adjudged invalid or unconstitutional, such adjudication shall not
affect the validity of the Ordinance as a whole or any provision, section,
subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or part hereof not adjudged invalid or
unconstitutional. (Ord. 2383, 10-21-2019)
121-12: VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES:
Any person who violates the provisions of this Ordinance upon conviction shall
be punished as set forth in Section 1-4-1 of the City Code of the City of West
Des Moines, Iowa. (Ord. 2383, 10-21-2019)
121-13: OTHER REMEDIES:
In addition to the provisions set out in the Violations and Penalties Section
herein, the City may proceed in law or equity against any person, firm or
corporation for violation of any section or subsection of this Ordinance. (Ord.
2383, 10-21-2019)
121-14: EFFECTIVE DATE:
This Ordinance shall be in full force and effect after its passage, approval
and publication as provided by law. (Ord. 2383, 10-21-2019)
121-99: LEGISLATIVE HISTORY:
Ord. 2383, 10-21-2019; Ord. 2413, 5-4-2020.
PUD #122
MIDTOWN REDEVELOPMENT
SECTION:
122-01: Legal Description
122-02: Sketch Plan
122-03: Development Intent
122-04: Required Plans
122-05: Conditions
122-06: Requirements
122-07: Density
122-08: Parking
122-09: Architecture
122-10: Landscaping
122-11: Buffering And Transitioning
122-12: Signage Regulation
122-13: Storm Water Management
122-14: Traffic Study
122-15: Repealer
122-16: Savings Clause
122-17: Violations and Penalties
122-18: Other Remedies
122-19: Effective Date
122-99: Legislative History
122-01: LEGAL DESCRIPTION:
Being all that part of Lots 8 and 9 and part of the south 25 feet of Lot 10,
all in Colby's Factory Addition, an official plat now in and forming a part of
the City of West Des Moines, Polk County, Iowa, and more particularly described
as follows;
Beginning at the southwest corner of said Lot 8; thence north 01°08'09" west,
along the west line of said Lots 8 and 9, distance of 563.50 feet to the
northwest corner of said Lot 9; thence north 88°45'42" east, a distance of
22.00 feet; thence north 01°08'09" west, a distance of 25.00 feet; thence north
88°45'42" east, a distance of 378.12 feet; thence south 00°50'53" east, a
distance of 424.70 feet; thence south 66°24'18" west, a distance of 430.65 feet
to the point of beginning, containing 4.63 acres, more or less, and subject to
easements and restrictions of record. (Ord. 2387, 11-18-2019)
122-02: SKETCH PLAN:
Attached hereto and made a part of this rezoning approval, for concept
description and delineation is the Sketch Plan Document for the Midtown
Redevelopment PUD marked Exhibit "A". The Sketch Plan is a graphic
representation of the property included in the PUD delineating the approximate
location and configuration of the Parcels for the purpose of easier reference
for the applicable regulations of this Ordinance. Where the PUD sketch plan and
PUD language conflict, the language shall prevail. (Ord. 2387, 11-18-2019)
122-03: DEVELOPMENT INTENT:
The Midtown Redevelopment PUD intends to provide a framework for development
standards reflective of the realities and constraints of redevelopment and to
establish design standards for infill construction that are appropriate for the
neighborhood. The Midtown Redevelopment PUD is located within the 8th Street
corridor, an area predominantly developed in the 1970's. The corridor is prime
for redevelopment due to the existing compact development pattern, proximity to
transit opportunities and interstate access and the favorable central location
within the metro area. It is the goal of the developer to create a pedestrian
friendly, mixed-use development that expands the commercial opportunities for
the corridor and enhances the area by including residential uses that provide a
population to support the area businesses and additional choices in housing
style, size and affordability for the neighborhood. (Ord. 2387, 11-18-2019)
122-04: REQUIRED PLANS:
   A.   Preliminary Plat/Final Plat: Prior to or in conjunction with
development of any portion of the property covered by this PUD, said area shall
be replatted in accordance with the City's Subdivision Ordinance to delineate
the ground associated with each building, unless a Lot-Tie Agreement is
executed which permanently ties the properties together into one (1) parcel. If
lot-tied, no building may be sold separately from another until the property is
replatted through the City's Subdivision process.
   B.   Site Plan Development Applications: Site plans for buildings within the
Midtown Redevelopment PUD must meet the intent of the PUD. With the exception
of grading done under a City approved grading Permit, prior to development of
the respective PUD or platted parcel, site plans for development shall be
submitted to the City for review through the development review process and
approval by the appropriate approval body. (Ord. 2387, 11-18-2019)
122-05: CONDITIONS:
Whereas, Title 9, Chapter 9, Planned Unit Development District of the City
Code, establishes certain regulations and guidelines pertaining to accompanying
information required on plat and site plan documents. In addition, the
following conditions, restrictions, and regulations are adopted as part of this
approval:
   A.   General Conditions: In addition to the PUD Sketch Plan Map, the
following general development criteria shall be integrated into and made a part
of this planned unit development.
      1.   General Conformance to Subdivision Ordinance: All subdivisions,
public and private streets and street rights-of-way and general development
shall adhere to the standards and design criteria set forth in the West Des
Moines Subdivision Ordinance and/or established City policies pertaining
thereto, unless otherwise stated within this Ordinance.
      2.   General Conformance to Zoning Ordinance: Unless otherwise specified
herein, the development of the Midtown Redevelopment PUD shall comply with the
provisions of the Title 9, "Zoning", of the city code or any other applicable
codes.
      3.   Flood Hazard: In all areas within a Base Flood (100 Year), or
adjoining drainage ways, and detention ponding areas involving potential flood
hazards, all buildings proposed to be located in a flood hazard area must be
elevated and designed in accordance with the American Society of Civil
Engineers publication ASCE 24 and no building shall be erected which has a
minimum opening elevation (including top of window well) less than one foot
(1') above the determined level of the Base Flood. In areas where historical
high-water levels are above the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) Base Flood
Elevation or special conditions exist, the City may require a Design Flood
Elevation be calculated and used as the Base Flood Elevation for determination
of elevation requirements. Buildings shall only be permitted within twenty-five
feet (25') of any easement or property boundary of a major drainageway, storm
water detention basin or pond if said location is approved as part of the
development entitlement by the city council and said building is structurally
designed accordingly.
      4.   Developer Responsibilities: The Developer, their successors and/or
assigns, if any, shall pay all planning, engineering, and construction costs
for the development of the planned unit development, as required by this
Ordinance and approved site plans and the cost of all streets, storm sewers,
sanitary sewers, drainageway improvements, detention basins, water mains,
buffers and other improvements as required for rights-of-way or public
easements within the Midtown Redevelopment PUD, unless otherwise approved by
the City Council.
      5.   Public Street Improvements and Right-Of-Way Dedication: At time of
subdivision platting of ground within the PUD or in conjunction with site
development, whichever occurs first, the subdivider/developer shall be
responsible for construction and/or installation of all required public and
private infrastructure improvements necessary to support development in a
manner that will assure that the infrastructure functions at an acceptable
level of service and in accordance with all city ordinances.
      6.   Sanitary Sewer: Any proposed change in approved land use densities
(commercial or residential) for the PUD will require an analysis of the
downstream sanitary sewer capacity to assure that adequate capacity is
available for the proposed change in approved land use densities.
      7.   Fire Access:
         a.   All access drives, internal drive aisles and parking lots shall
permit the travel of the Fire Department's largest vehicle, including adequate
accommodation of the vehicle's turning needs. Approval of unique design
solutions to accommodate fire access may be granted by the City Council if the
solutions proposed are acceptable to and recommended for approval by the West
Des Moines Fire Department.
         b.   At the discretion of the City's Fire Marshal, "No Parking Fire
Lane" areas may be established as necessary to ensure efficient movement and
access of the fire trucks. The developer shall be responsible for the
procurement and erection of approved fire lane signage.
         c.   A minimum of fourteen feet (14') of vertical clearance over the
travel portion of all vehicle travel ways shall be maintained at all times.
         d.   The property owner or its designee shall be responsible for
enforcement of no parking lanes and maintaining adequate clearance of
structures and vegetation along and above all vehicle travel ways, regardless
if public or private.
         e.   Adequate fire accesses as determined by the City's Fire Marshal
shall be provided at all times to those areas under construction.
      8.   Street Lighting: The Developer shall be responsible for all costs
associated with the installation of public street lights within or adjacent to
any area proposed to be platted or developed.
      9.   Mailboxes: The Developer shall be responsible for installation of
any required Cluster Box Units (CBUs) as per the local U.S. Postal Service Post
Office.
      10.   Parking Interconnect: In the future, a connection to the adjacent
property to the east may be necessary to enhance parking and/or circulation
within the area. At such time that the City deems necessary, the property owner
(s) of ground within the PUD shall construct a twenty-four foot (24') wide
drive connection to the east property line, in a location agreeable to both
properties and the City. (Ord. 2387, 11-18-2019)
122-06: REQUIREMENTS:
Unless provided otherwise in this ordinance, all general use regulations,
performance standards and provisions set forth in title 9, "Zoning", of the
city code for the Support Commercial (SC) Zoning District shall apply to any
development within the Midtown Redevelopment Planned Unit Development. Lots
less than the minimum size required for the Support Commercial zoning district
may be considered acceptable if approved by the city council as part of a
master PUD development plan. To the extent that the provisions of this section
conflict with or are more restrictive than similar provisions provided
elsewhere in the West Des Moines zoning ordinance, the provisions of this
section shall control. The following land use design criteria, development
standards, and landscaping regulations shall apply to parcels within the
Midtown Redevelopment Planned Unit Development:
   A.   Parcel A and B: Parcels A and B are intended to be developed as mixed-
use development with commercial uses and multi-family residential dwellings.
      1.   Permitted Uses: All permitted (P) and permitted conditional (PC)
uses within the Support Commercial (SC) district shall be allowed with the
approval of the appropriate review and approval body, except the following,
which shall be prohibited:
Prohibited Uses
Division SIC Code Use
Prohibited Uses
Division SIC Code Use
A        0783     Ornamental Shrub and Tree Services
E        45-49    Transportation, Communication And Public Utilities
F        55       Automotive Dealer and Service Stations
F        5999     Engine and Motor Equipment and Supply Stores
I        70       Hotels, Rooming Houses, Camps, and Other Lodging Places
I        726      Funeral Service
I        75       Automotive Repair, Services, and Parking
I        7699     Recreational Vehicle Repair Services
I        7699     Agricultural Equipment Repair Services
I        7699     Misc. Automotive Repair Services
I        79       Amusement and Recreational Services
 
      2.   Building Setbacks: For the purposes of this section, the west
property line (8th Street) is considered the front yard, the eastern boundary
of Parcels A and B is considered the rear yard and the north and south
boundaries of Parcels A and B are considered the side yards.
         a.   Primary and Accessory Buildings or Structures: Buildings or
structures shall comply with a minimum forty-five foot (45') front yard setback
as measured from the ultimate right-of-way for 8th Street; a minimum fifty foot
(50') rear yard setback and a minimum fifty foot (50') side yard setback unless
it abuts a like zoning district. In situations of an abutting Support
Commercial property, a zero foot (0') side yard setback shall be required.
Setbacks are measured to the closest structural element including egress window
wells, roof overhangs, bay windows, chimney bump-outs, etc. Trash and generator
enclosures shall not be located in a front yard and shall be allowed to be
located as close as five feet to a rear or side property line, unless shared
between parcels A and B, in which case there shall be no side yard setback
requirement.
         b.   Open Patios: At grade, open-air patios that are defined by
railings, planters or walls shall comply with a minimum five foot (5') front
yard setback as measured from the ultimate right-of-way line for 8th Street and
a minimum five foot (5') rear and side yard setback.
      3.   Building Height: Buildings within Parcels A and B shall not exceed a
maximum building height of fifty-five feet (55') as measured from the average
grade along the foundation of the buildings.
   B.   Parcel C: Parcel C consists of an existing building, included in the
mixed-use development, not to exceed three thousand (3,000) square feet.
      1.   Permitted Uses: All permitted (P) and permitted conditional (PC)
uses within the Support Commercial (SC) district shall be allowed with the
approval of the appropriate review and approval body, except the following,
which shall be prohibited:
Prohibited Uses
Division SIC Code Use
Prohibited Uses
Division SIC Code Use
A        0783     Ornamental Shrub and Tree Services
E        45-49    Transportation, Communication And Public Utilities
F        55       Automotive Dealer and Service Stations
F        5999     Engine and Motor Equipment and Supply Stores
I        70       Hotels, Rooming Houses, Camps, and Other Lodging Places
I        726      Funeral Service
I        75       Automotive Repair, Services, and Parking
I        7699     Recreational Vehicle Repair Services
I        7699     Agricultural Equipment Repair Services
I        7699     Misc. Auto-motive Repair Services
I        79       Amusement and Recreational Services
 
      2.   Building Setbacks: For the purposes of this section, the western
property line (8th Street) is considered the front yard and shall comply with a
minimum thirty-five foot (35') front yard setback as measured from the ultimate
right-of-way for 8th Street. The eastern area of the parcel is considered the
rear yard and shall comply with a minimum fifty-foot (50') setback. A minimum
fifteen-foot (15') setback shall be provided from the north property line and a
minimum forty-five foot (45') setback shall be provided from the south property
line. Trash and generator enclosures shall not be located in a front yard and
shall be allowed to be located as close as five feet to the east or north
property lines and no closer than thirty feet (30') to the south property line.
(Ord. 2387, 11-18-2019; amd. Ord. 2602, 3-18-2024)
122-07: DENSITY:
   A.   Residential Uses: There shall be no maximum density restriction on any
PUD parcel; however, the collective total number of dwellings allowed within
all parcels included in the Midtown Redevelopment PUD shall not exceed ninety-
four (94) dwelling units. Dwelling units may not be located on the first floor
of any building located within parcel A. Dwelling units shall be allowed on the
first floor of a building in parcel B.
   B.   Commercial (Office/Retail) Uses, except Restaurants: The collective
total commercial square footage between all buildings within the Midtown
Redevelopment PUD shall not exceed seven thousand (7,000) square feet. Unless
otherwise provided in this PUD, at a minimum, the first floor of the building
on both parcels A shall consist of only commercial uses.
   C.   Restaurant Uses: Of the collective commercial square footage,
restaurants within Parcels A and B shall not exceed six thousand eight hundred
(6,800) square feet.
(Ord. 2387, 11-18-2019; amd. Ord. 2602, 3-18-2024)
122-08: PARKING:
   A.   Parking Ratios: The parking rates indicated below shall be utilized for
typical commercial uses, restaurants, and multi-family residential dwellings. A
30% reduction to the minimum number of parking stalls required as provided in
title 9, chapter 15 of the city code shall be allowed for all other uses within
the development.
      1.   Commercial (office/retail) uses, excluding restaurants: minimum of
2.25 parking space per one thousand (1,000) square feet of gross floor area.
      2.   Sit down restaurants and drinking establishments: minimum of
thirteen (13) parking spaces per one thousand (1,000) square feet of gross
floor area.
      3.   Residential dwelling units:
         a.   Units with up to 2 bedrooms: minimum of 0.525 parking space per
unit.
         b.   Units with 3 bedrooms or more: minimum of 0.6 parking space per
unit.
      4.   With the approval of the city council and the execution of an
appropriate cross parking agreement, required spaces for one parcel may be
located on a different parcel. If shared parking is utilized, the total parking
spaces provided within the PUD must meet the minimum number of parking stalls
required as outlined for all uses within the PUD.
   B.   Off Street Parking & Loading Areas: All off-street parking and loading/
service areas shall comply with title 9, chapter 15 of the city code.
      1.   All off street parking and loading areas shall be sited and
landscaped to screen their visibility from 8th Street, including associated
sidewalk and adjoining single-family dwellings/lots sharing the south perimeter
PUD boundary line. Parking areas shall be screened year-round to a minimum
height of three feet (3'). No screening is required along the eastern PUD
boundary line.
      2.   Parking stall measurements and drive aisle widths shall conform to
title 9, chapter 15 of the city code.
      3.   It is desired that all off street parking areas be aesthetically
improved to reduce obtrusive characteristics that are inherent to their
function. Landscape islands and/or pods shall be implemented in all new parking
areas in accordance with title 9, chapter 19 of the city code, except that
parking rows immediately adjacent a building face shall only be required to
implement terminal islands at the end of a parking row and shall not be
required to provide intermediate islands within the linear row of parking. The
existing parking area on parcel C shall not be required to be brought into
compliance with city code until such time that the site is redeveloped, or the
parking is reconstructed. Any additions to the existing parking in parcel C
shall be designed and landscaped in accordance with city code
   C.   Off Street Parking Lot Setbacks: Parking shall be in conformance with
title 9, chapter 15 of the city code, except as follows:
      1.   Parking Setback from 8th Street: With the exception of parcel C,
parking shall be setback a minimum of one-hundred feet (100') from the ultimate
street right-of-way for 8th Street. The setback of the existing parking field
within parcel C to the ultimate right-of-way line for 8th Street shall be
considered acceptable as is; however, no modification to the parking field
shall be allowed which would reduce the setback to less than it is at the time
of adoption of this PUD. Should parcel C be redeveloped, a minimum forty-foot
(40') setback shall be provided from the ultimate right-of-way line of 8th
Street.
      2.   Parking Setback from the South PUD Boundary: With the exception of
parcel C, parking shall be setback a minimum of fifteen feet (15') from the
south perimeter boundary line of the PUD. The setback of the existing parking
field within parcel C to the south boundary line shall be considered acceptable
as is; however, no modification to the parking field shall be allowed which
would reduce the setback to less than it is at the time of adoption of this
PUD. If the existing building on Parcel C is ever demolished, the pursuant
development shall provide a minimum fifteen-foot (15') side yard setback from
the southern boundary line.
      3.   Parking Setback from the East and North PUD Boundary: No setback
shall be required from either the east or north boundary line of the PUD;
however, parking along the north shall not have direct access to the east-west
access drive. The appropriate barriers to prohibit direct access to the access
drive shall be installed to force vehicles to go south and connect to the
access drive at a defined point. (Ord. 2387, 11-18-2019)
122-09: ARCHITECTURE:
The intent is to create building façades throughout this development that are
articulated to provide visual interest to pedestrians and to establish a unique
identity for the development. The architectural design of any building within
this development shall be acceptable to the City. The architecture shall
attempt to express a creative presentation by careful attention to exterior
building materials and details, use of fenestration, and change in building
mass within the plane and roof design to lessen the plainness of appearance
which can be characteristic of large commercial and multi-family buildings.
Building design, materials, trim, detailing, and colors shall provide
continuity to unite all structures within the development into one project
concept. All sides to each building shall receive high quality materials,
finishes, and details (360° architectural treatment). There are no "backs" to a
building. Materials should be durable, economically maintained and of a quality
that will maintain their appearance over a prolonged time.
On file with the City are conceptual architectural illustrations of the general
building style, colors and materials. Once site plan approval is gained on a
particular building design, any alteration in design, materials or colors, must
be reviewed and approved by the City's Development Services Department prior to
changes being implemented.
   A.   All buildings within this development shall accommodate or incorporate
the following design approaches:
      1.   Corporate architecture shall be prohibited. Limited use of
architectural elements characteristic of prototypical architecture may be
allowed at the discretion of the Director of Development Services or the
appropriate reviewing and approval body. Implementation of these architectural
elements shall be minimized and whenever possible modified to give a unique
image to the establishment. No standard corporate building design without
modifications shall be implemented.
      2.   Buildings shall be organized to create a logical and identifiable
relationship with the site and other buildings, open spaces, and pedestrian
circulation paths.
      3.   The use of building articulation and materials which break up the
building mass into modules that respect a pedestrian scale and reflects
proportions similar to other buildings within the area.
      4.   The building's design should meet context and site objectives such
as providing gateways, creating visual and physical linkages and framing or
terminating views.
      5.   Variation in building height, mass and roof forms shall be provided
to create interest while still maintaining an overall building continuity.
Roofs should not be designed as attention-getting devices related to the
reinforcement of signage or as an identifiable corporate image.    
      6.   Projections above the roof shall have the appearance of a three-
dimensional element.
      7.   Entrances into buildings should be easily identified through the use
of building design and detailing. Projected or recessed entryways, change in
rooflines, addition of awnings or changes in building material are examples
that can create this effect.
      8.   Shifts in building planes/facades and variation in exterior
materials shall be incorporated to minimize long expanses of wall. Long blank
walls shall be prohibited.
      9.   Variation in materials, material modules, expressed joints,
textures, colors and details should be used to break up the mass of the
buildings. Materials should change with the change in building planes.
      10.   Trim and structural elements such as posts or columns shall be
sized to the scale of the building.
      11.   Whenever possible, ground floor commercial tenant areas should
provide the maximum possible glazing toward sidewalks to provide pedestrians
with visual interest. Use of reflective glass or mirrored glass is discouraged.
Efforts should be made to use clear glass on storefronts, windows and doors to
promote the linkage of the interior and exterior of buildings.
      12.   Architectural design for multi-family units shall include:
         a.   Unit design should incorporate elements such as balconies and
roof decks to reinforce the connection between the residents and the activities
within the development. A minimum of eighty percent (80%) of the multi-family
units within the development must provide a balcony or porch with a minimum
usable area of forty (40) square feet and a minimum usable dimension of five
feet (5') deep in either direction. In lieu of outdoor living area for
individual units, area(s) of common defined and enhanced outdoor living space
can be provided.
         b.   Should covered parking be pursued, the architectural details of
detached garages should incorporate the materials and treatments of the
dwelling, such as windows, doors, trim and materials on all sides of the
garage. For parking incorporated within the primary building, the design should
place the garage doors on a non-street side façade and use screening or design
elements to minimize the dominance of garage doors on the facade.
      13.   Natural, durable materials such as brick and stone shall be used as
the major elements of the façade cladding (40% or greater), primarily on the
lower stories of the building. Use of vinyl materials is prohibited.
         a.   Buildings may incorporate the following materials in addition to
the materials noted above: architectural concrete masonry units (CMU) and
architectural metal or composite panels (acceptable to the City.) All composite
panel or metal cladding must have concealed fasteners. All exposed edges must
have a fully finished edge or be terminated with trim. Trim for the panels
should be finished with the same color as the panel. CMU's shall have
integrated color rather than surface applied paint/staining and should
generally have texture for interest; smooth CMU may be used in conjunction with
texture for accent purposes. The use of EIFS or synthetic stucco shall be used
in limited quantities and primarily as an accent or trim material; located only
on the upper portions of the facades. EIFS or synthetic stucco may not comprise
more that 20% of the cladding material. (Ord. 2387, 11-18-2019)
122-10: LANDSCAPING:
Landscaping must be provided in accordance with City Code unless otherwise
modified within this ordinance. Details regarding specific varieties, exact
quantities, and the minimum size at time of planting shall be provided and
approved as part of the site plan submittal and shall meet the general
guidelines in respect to the minimum plant sizes traditionally applied to
development within the City. The minimum vegetation quantities specified within
this ordinance will need to be provided. The provision of additional vegetation
above the minimum amount required may be necessary to fulfill the intent (i.e.,
visual mitigation/screening) of the required landscaping.
Once site plan approval is gained on a particular parcel, any alteration to
that shown on the approved site plan must be reviewed and approved by the
City's Development Services Department prior to the changes being implemented.
   A.   Open/Green Space: Due to the nature of the intended redevelopment in
respect to existing development patterns, uses, and densities, the amount and
locations of open space and green space/vegetation within the redevelopment
area will vary. As a general rule, the maximum amount of "green" (open lawn
areas and vegetation) should be provided within a site. To allow the most
flexibility in planning, collectively, the development shall attempt to provide
a minimum of twenty five percent (25%) open space across the PUD area; however,
no less than fifteen percent (15%) open space or more than eighty five percent
(85%) impervious surface will be allowed within any one PUD parcel. Plaza and
streetscape areas along with any areas associated with outdoor pedestrian use
may be counted toward fulfilling the minimum open space requirement. Plazas and
outdoor pedestrian use areas to be counted toward fulfilling minimum open space
requirements may be paved (impervious) as long as the paving is part of a
planned hardscape and landscape enhancement of the plaza or pedestrian area.
   B.   Streetscaping: A landscaped edge with pedestrian elements or
"streetscape" shall be provided along 8th Street. The streetscape is intended
to provide desired green to the City, reinforce a district identity, provide
visual screening of parking and other negative site elements, bring human scale
to adjoining buildings and provide traffic calming benefits. The streetscape
shall include vegetation and pedestrian furniture fixtures. Incorporation of
art or other development defining elements are encouraged but may not be used
to promote the identity of the development or a tenant within the development.
Pedestrian elements such as patios and walkways may encroach into the
streetscape area; however, no buildings or off-street parking may encroach.
(Ord. 2387, 11-18-2019)
122-11: BUFFERING AND TRANSITIONING:
Buffering and density transition methods shall be required as set forth in
Title 9, Chapter 19, Section 8E and Title 9, Chapter 5, Section 7C of city
code, except along the south boundary of parcel C until such time that parcel C
is redeveloped. Until redevelopment occurs, no structure or paved area may be
located closer than currently exists at the time of adoption of this PUD. As
possible, landscape vegetation or a solid six-foot (6') fence should be located
along the south boundary line to delineate the line between the development and
the existing single-family lots. (Ord. 2387, 11-18-2019)
122-12: SIGNAGE REGULATION:
Signage restrictions shall be imposed to limit and reduce the negative impacts
of sign clutter. Signage within each PUD parcel shall comply with all
provisions of Title 9, Chapter 18. For mixed use buildings, the commercial
portions of the building shall comply with support commercial (SC) regulations.
Multi-family portions of mixed-use buildings shall comply with the multi-family
sign regulations for the high-density district as found in Title 9, Chapter 18
on the City Code. (Ord. 2387, 11-18-2019)
122-13: STORM WATER MANAGEMENT:
Specific Storm Water Management Plans will be required with the development of
each parcel, demonstrating compliance with the approved Midtown Redevelopment
PUD Master Storm Water Management Plan, on file with the city. The Developer
will have said specific Storm Water Management Plans prepared by a Professional
Engineer licensed in the State of Iowa, in conjunction with the submittal of a
specific development proposals for a parcel within the PUD. All specific Storm
Water Management Plans shall comply with the City's current design standards
for storm water management. The method of storm water management and the storm
water conveyance system shall be determined prior to City approval of any
development within any portion of the property within the Midtown Redevelopment
PUD.
At time of platting or development, ownership and responsibility for all storm
water detention areas and private storm water detention outlet structures will
need to be established. (Ord. 2387, 11-18-2019)
122-14: TRAFFIC STUDY:
A Traffic Impact Study (Traffic Report) dated May 6, 2019, has been prepared by
the City of West Des Moines for the Midtown Redevelopment development. The
Traffic Report caps the traffic generated from all ground within this PUD at
1,839 average daily trips, with 130 AM peak hour trips and 175 PM peak hour
trips. The Traffic Report also outlines the ultimate paving requirements for
the major road ways in the vicinity of the Midtown Redevelopment development.
Prior to, or in conjunction with site plan submittal of any parcel, or portion
of a parcel, the Developer shall have the traffic report reviewed by the City's
traffic consultant to ensure that the provisions and assumptions of the
original traffic report are still valid and applicable. (Ord. 2387, 11-18-2019)
122-15: REPEALER:
All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with the provisions of this
ordinance are hereby repealed. (Ord. 2387, 11-18-2019)
122-16: SAVINGS CLAUSE:
If any section, provision, sentence, clause, phrase or part of the Ordinance
shall be adjudged invalid or unconstitutional, such adjudication shall not
affect the validity of the Ordinance as a whole or any provision, section,
subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or part hereof not adjudged invalid or
unconstitutional. (Ord. 2387, 11-18-2019)
122-17: VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES:
Any person who violates the provisions of this Ordinance upon conviction shall
be punished as set forth in Section 1-4-1 of the City Code of the City of West
Des Moines, Iowa. (Ord. 2387, 11-18-2019)
122-18: OTHER REMEDIES:
In addition to the provisions set out in the Violations and Penalties Section
herein, the City may proceed in law or equity against any person, firm or
corporation for violation of any section or subsection of this Ordinance. (Ord.
2387, 11-18-2019)
122-19: EFFECTIVE DATE:
This Ordinance shall be in full force and effect after its passage, approval
and publication as provided by law. (Ord. 2387, 11-18-2019)
122-99: LEGISLATIVE HISTORY:
Ord. 2387, 11-18-2019.
PUD #123
DOWLING CATHOLIC HIGH SCHOOL
SECTION:
123-01: Legal Description
123-02: Sketch Plan
123-03: Development Intent
123-04: Required Plans
123-05: Conditions
123-06: Requirements
123-07: Communication Towers
123-08: Storm Water Management
123-09: Repealer
123-10: Savings Clause
123-11: Violations and Penalties
123-12: Other Remedies
123-13: Effective Date
123-99: Legislative History
123-01: LEGAL DESCRIPTION:
Lots 4 and 6, golf and country club, lying north of interstate 235 except:
   -   north 35 feet
   -   Executive Plaza plat 1
   -   beginning at the northwest corner of lot 2, executive plaza plat 1,
thence north 212.3 feet, west 20 feet, north 212.3 feet, east 20 feet to the
pob. Containing 1,678,759 s.f. (38.54 ac.) more or less
And
Lot 11, Ashworth, lying north of Interstate 235, except the north 50 feet.
Containing 907,985 s.f. (20.85 ac.) more or less
And
Lots 36, 37, 38, 39 and 40, Golf and Country Club plat 7. Containing 96,649
s.f. (2.22 ac.) more or less. (Ord. 2389, 12-2-2019)
123-02: SKETCH PLAN:
Attached hereto and made a part of this rezoning approval is the Sketch Plan
Document for the Dowling Catholic High School PUD marked Exhibit "A". Only one
developable parcel is included within this PUD. The Sketch Plan reflects the
development concept for the property. Where the PUD sketch plan and PUD
language conflict, the PUD language shall prevail. (Ord. 2389, 12-2-2019)
123-03: DEVELOPMENT INTENT:
The goal of the Dowling Catholic High School PUD is to establish a framework
for continued development and expansion of the campus in a way that will
provide a stellar educational environment for students while fitting within the
context of the established neighborhood. (Ord. 2389, 12-2-2019)
123-04: REQUIRED PLANS:
   A.   Preliminary Plat/Final Plat: Unless a Lot-Tie Agreement is executed
which permanently ties all existing lots associated with the school campus
together into one (1) parcel, prior to or in conjunction with development of
any portion of the property covered by this PUD, said area shall be replatted
in accordance with the City's Subdivision Ordinance to establish one parcel for
development.
   B.   Site Plan Development Applications: The site plan for development of
the property within the Dowling Catholic High School PUD must meet the intent
of the PUD. With the exception of grading done under a City approved Grading
Permit, prior to any improvements occurring within the property, a site plan
detailing the modifications to the site shall be submitted to the City for
review and approval by the appropriate approval bodies. The Development
Services Director, in accordance with city code, shall make the determination
in respect to what level of site plan shall be required for each improvement
project. All property owners within 370' of property contained within this PUD
shall be sent a courtesy notification by mail of any development application
submitted, including Minor Modification applications. (Ord. 2389, 12-2-2019)
123-05: CONDITIONS:
Whereas, Title 9, Chapter 9, Planned Unit Development District of the City
Code, establishes certain regulations and guidelines pertaining to accompanying
information required on plat and site plan documents. In addition, the
following conditions, restrictions, and regulations are adopted as part of this
approval:
   A.   General Conditions: In addition to the PUD Sketch Plan Map, the
following general development criteria shall be integrated into and made a part
of this planned unit development.
      1.   General Conformance to Subdivision Ordinance: All subdivisions,
public and private streets and street rights-of-way and general development
shall adhere to the standards and design criteria set forth in the West Des
Moines Subdivision Ordinance and/or established City policies pertaining
thereto, unless otherwise stated within this Ordinance.
      2.   General Conformance to Zoning Ordinance: Unless otherwise specified
herein, the development of the Dowling Catholic High School PUD shall comply
with the provisions of the Title 9, "Zoning", of the city code or any other
applicable codes.
      3.   Flood Hazard: In all areas within a Base Flood (100 Year), or
adjoining drainage ways, and detention ponding areas involving potential flood
hazards, all buildings proposed to be located in a flood hazard area must be
elevated and designed in accordance with the American Society of Civil
Engineers publication ASCE 24 and no building shall be erected which has a
minimum opening elevation (including top of window well) less than one foot
(1') above the determined level of the Base Flood. In areas where historical
high-water levels are above the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) Base Flood
Elevation or special conditions exist, the City may require a Design Flood
Elevation be calculated and used as the Base Flood Elevation for determination
of elevation requirements. Buildings shall only be permitted within twenty-five
feet (25') of any easement or property boundary of a major drainageway, storm
water detention basin or pond if said location is approved as part of the
development entitlement by the city council and said building is structurally
designed accordingly.
      4.   Developer Responsibilities: The Developer, their successors and/or
assigns, if any, shall pay all planning, engineering, and construction costs
for the development of the planned unit development, as required by this
Ordinance and approved site plans and the cost of all streets, alleys, storm
sewers, sanitary sewers, drainageway improvements, detention basins, water
mains, buffers and other improvements as required for rights-of-way or public
easements within the Dowling Catholic High School PUD, unless otherwise
approved by the City Council.
      5.   Public Street Improvements and Right-Of-Way Dedication: At time of
subdivision platting of ground within the PUD or in conjunction with site
development, whichever occurs first, the subdivider/developer shall be
responsible for construction and/or installation of all required public and
private infrastructure improvements necessary to support development in a
manner that will assure that the infrastructure functions at an acceptable
level of service and in accordance with all city ordinances.
      6.   Sanitary Sewer: Any proposed change in approved land use densities
for the PUD will require an analysis of the downstream sanitary sewer capacity
to assure that adequate capacity is available for the proposed change in
approved land use densities.
      7.   Fire Access:
         a.   All access drives, internal drive aisles and parking lots shall
permit the travel of the Fire Department's largest vehicle, including adequate
accommodation of the vehicle's turning needs. Approval of unique design
solutions to accommodate fire access may be granted by the City Council if the
solutions proposed are acceptable to and recommended for approval by the West
Des Moines Fire Department.
         b.   At the discretion of the City's Fire Marshal, "No Parking Fire
Lane" areas may be established as necessary to ensure efficient movement and
access of the fire trucks. The developer shall be responsible for the
procurement and erection of approved fire lane signage.
         c.   A minimum of fourteen feet (14') of vertical clearance over the
travel portion of all vehicle travel ways shall be maintained at all times.
         d.   The property owner or its designee shall be responsible for
enforcement of no parking lanes and maintaining adequate clearance of
structures and vegetation along and above all vehicle travel ways, regardless
if public or private.
         e.   Adequate fire accesses as determined by the City's Fire Marshal
shall be provided at all times to those areas under construction.
      8.   Loading areas, undesirable building elements (transformers, HVAC
equipment, electrical equipment, gas meters, etc.) and trash enclosures shall
be screened in accordance with city code. Roof mounted HVAC screening shall be
incorporated into the design of the building using raised parapets, screening
walls, penthouse elements, or other acceptable solutions as identified during
the review of the site plan. Wall mounted mechanical equipment, including meter
banks shall be visually screened through architectural components, wing walls,
free standing fencing, or evergreen landscaping that is of sufficient height at
time of installation to effectively screen views of the equipment. Code
requires trash receptacles and dumpsters shall be screened on all sides using a
permanent enclosure, with gates for disposal truck access. The enclosure shall
be comprised of materials consistent with the primary building materials (brick
or stone) of the main building(s). The enclosure shall also be landscaped to
minimize the presence of the enclosure and help anchor the element into the
site.
      9.   Street Lighting: The Developer shall be responsible for all costs
associated with the installation of public streetlights within or adjacent to
any area proposed to be platted or developed. (Ord. 2389, 12-2-2019)
123-06: REQUIREMENTS:
Unless provided otherwise in this ordinance, all general performance standards
and provisions set forth in title 9, "Zoning", of the city code for the
Residential Estates (RE) Zoning District shall apply to any development within
the Dowling Catholic High School Planned Unit Development. To the extent that
the provisions of this section conflict with or are more restrictive than
similar provisions provided elsewhere in the West Des Moines zoning ordinance,
the provisions of this section shall control.
   A.    Use: The property is intended to be developed as an educational
institution campus. Elementary and Secondary Schools (SIC 8211) and associated
accessory uses and structures, such as, but not limited to administrative
buildings, sports fields, parking lots and transportation related structures
and fueling facilities shall be permitted (P) with the approval of the
appropriate review and approval body.
      The current single-family use within lots adjacent to 17th Street
acquired by the school shall be allowed to continue indefinitely if rental
certificates and inspections in accordance with city code are maintained. The
use of the dwelling structures for any use other than single-family shall be
approved by the city and abide by all building and fire code requirements.
Redevelopment of the property shall abide by provisions outlined herein.
   B.   Setbacks: Primary education buildings shall be setback a minimum of
one-hundred feet (100') from all property boundaries. Structures for accessory
uses shall be setback a minimum of fifty feet (50') from all boundaries except
the north (Buffalo Road) which shall abide by primary building setbacks.
   C.   Buffering: A minimum thirty foot (30') wide buffer shall be provided on
school property adjacent to 17th Street and Buffalo Road or the rear yard of a
single-family lot along the east side of 17th Street. A minimum of one (1)
overstory tree, two (2) understory or evergreen trees and six (6) shrubs shall
be provided for every thirty-five (35) linear feet of buffer. Earthen berming
shall not be required within the buffer. Said buffer shall be installed at such
time that an improvement of some kind (such as construction of parking or
building or implementation of athletic fields) is made to the area sharing a
boundary with property adjacent to either 17th Street or Buffalo Road. Vision
triangles at all intersecting vehicle and pedestrian pathways shall be
maintained.
   D.   Off Street Parking & Loading Areas: Unless otherwise modified here
within, all off-street parking and loading/service areas shall comply with
title 9, chapter 15 of the city code.
      1.   Off-street parking lots shall be setback a minimum of forty feet
(40') from all boundaries unless part of a shared parking lot with an adjoining
property.
      2.   All off street parking and loading areas shall be sited and
landscaped to screen visibility thereof from adjoining single-family dwellings
on 17th Street and Buffalo Road not under the school's ownership.
      3.   Through the use of earthen berming, landscape vegetation, solid
fencing or a combination of these, parking areas shall be screened year-round
to a minimum height of three feet (3') in order to prevent headlights from
vehicles within parking areas from shining into adjacent residential
properties. Access drives from off-street parking areas onto adjoining streets
shall be located to prevent headlights from shining directly into a residential
dwelling not under the school's ownership.
      E.   Lighting: With the exception of sports field lighting, all overhead
light fixtures within the site, including along circulation drives and within
parking lots shall be a downcast fixture design with no exposed bulbs. If
deemed necessary, the appropriate shields shall be incorporated into the
fixture to direct the light to the intended target within the school's property
and eliminate visibility of the light itself from residential properties along
both 17th Street and Buffalo Road. All building mounted lighting shall include
shields to direct the light down and to the intended target. No unshielded wall
packs shall be allowed without specific permission from the city. (Ord. 2389,
12-2-2019)
123-07: COMMUNICATION TOWERS:
The following restrictions are established as they pertain to communication
towers within the Dowling Catholic High School PUD.
   A.   No more than three (3) communication towers shall be permitted
   B.   The location of communication towers on the site shall be restricted to
the area described as part of Lot 6, Golf and Country Club, south of Blue
Creek, and north of the northerly right-of-way line of Interstate 235, as it
presently exists.
   C.   No communication tower on the site shall exceed one hundred twenty
(120) feet in height.
   D.   Each communication tower proposed on the site shall be subject to
approval of a Permitted Conditional Use Permit by the West Des Moines City
Council. (Ord. 2389, 12-2-2019)
123-08: STORM WATER MANAGEMENT:
A Storm Water Management Plan may be required in conjunction with site
development plans. The Storm Water Management Plan shall be prepared by a
Professional Engineer licensed in the State of Iowa. The Storm Water Management
Plan shall comply with the City's current design standards for storm water
management. The method of storm water management and the storm water conveyance
system shall be determined prior to City approval of any development plan.
(Ord. 2389, 12-2-2019)
123-09 REPEALER:
All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with the provisions of this
ordinance are hereby repealed. (Ord. 2389, 12-2-2019)
123-10: SAVINGS CLAUSE:
If any section, provision, sentence, clause, phrase or part of the Ordinance
shall be adjudged invalid or unconstitutional, such adjudication shall not
affect the validity of the Ordinance as a whole or any provision, section,
subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or part hereof not adjudged invalid or
unconstitutional. (Ord. 2389, 12-2-2019)
123-11: VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES:
Any person who violates the provisions of this Ordinance upon conviction shall
be punished as set forth in Title 1, Chapter 4, Section 1 of the City Code of
the City of West Des Moines, Iowa. (Ord. 2389, 12-2-2019)
123-12: OTHER REMEDIES:
In addition to the provisions set out in the Violations and Penalties Section
herein, the City may proceed in law or equity against any person, firm or
corporation for violation of any section or subsection of this Ordinance. (Ord.
2389, 12-2-2019)
123-13: EFFECTIVE DATE:
This Ordinance shall be in full force and effect after its passage, approval
and publication as provided by law. (Ord. 2389, 12-2-2019)
123-99: LEGISLATIVE HISTORY:
Ord. 2389, 12-2-2019.
PUD #124
WENDY’S
SECTION:
124-01: Legal Description
124-02: Intent
124-03: Sketch Plan
124-04: Required Plans
124-05: Compliance With Code
124-06: Developer Responsibilities
124-07: Permitted Uses
124-08: Vehicle Trip Allocation
124-09: Stormwater Management Plan
124-10: Public Street Right Of Way Dedication
124-11: Street Design
124-12: Parking
124-13: Drive-Through
124-14: Pedestrian Elements
124-15: Landscaping
124-16: Signage
124-17: Lighting
124-18: Architecture
124-19: Bulk Regulations
124-20: Repealer
124-21: Savings Clause
124-22: Violations And Penalties
124-23: Other Remedies
124-24: Effective Date
124-99: Legislative History
124-01: LEGAL DESCRIPTION:
Legal Description
THE WEST 150.00 FEET OF LOT 6, EXCEPT THE EAST 64.00 FEET AND THE SOUTH 10.00
FEET THEREOF AND LOT 7, EXCEPT THE SOUTH 10.00 FEET THEREOF, McCURNIN PLACE, AN
OFFICIAL PLAT, NOW IN AND FORMING A
PART OF THE CITY OF WEST DES MOINES, POLK COUNTY, IOWA, CONTAINING: (33,073
SQUARE FEET) 0.76 ACRES, MORE OR LESS.
SUBJECT TO ALL EASEMENTS AND AGREEMENTS OF RECORD. (Ord. 2469, 5-3-2021)
124-02: INTENT:
The Wendy’s PUD intends to provide a framework for development standards
reflective of the realities and constraints of redevelopment and to establish
design standards to reinforce the context of the area and create a neighborhood
identity that recognizes the area’s original development history.
The Wendy’s PUD is located within the area identified for redevelopment by the
Grand Avenue Redevelopment Plan. Redevelopment in this area is intended to
create a special district within the City of West Des Moines known as the Val-
Gate District. All development within that district must be in furtherance of
the goals of the Grand Avenue Redevelopment Plan. The City of West Des Moines
Grand Avenue Redevelopment Plan and all appendices and exhibits, as amended,
are hereby adopted and incorporated as part of the Wendy’s PUD.
The Grand Avenue Redevelopment Plan identifies planning units, major street
patterns, access and interconnection points, master stormwater drainage and
detention concepts, utilities, shared public spaces, district streetscape and
signage design, land use assumptions and proposed densities. The intent of the
redevelopment plan is to provide a tool that can be used to promote the
communication and cooperation between adjacent property owners and developers
to ensure cohesive and unified redevelopment.
Properties within the Grand Avenue Redevelopment Plan may be referred to as the
Val-Gate District. (Ord. 2469, 5-3-2021)
124-03: SKETCH PLAN:
Attached hereto (or on file with the city) and made a part of this rezoning
approval, for concept description and delineation is the Sketch Plan document
and building precedent images for Wendy’s PUD. These drawings are a graphic
representation of the property and proposed building included in the PUD for
the purpose of easier reference for the applicable regulations of this
Ordinance. Wherever conflict occurs between the written text in this document
and the notations on the drawings, the written text shall prevail. (Ord. 2469,
5-3-2021)
124-04: REQUIRED PLANS:
The following plans shall be required as a part of the processing of any
development application for any property within the Wendy’s PUD:
   A.   Planned Unit Development: The planned unit development (PUD) identifies
detailed development criteria for each planning unit indicated on the Grand
Avenue Redevelopment Plan or more specifically delineated on the redevelopment
plan map. The planned unit development shall conform to the general development
intent identified in the approved redevelopment plan. The planned unit
development shall be reviewed by the Plan and Zoning Commission and adopted by
the City Council by ordinance.
   This document shall constitute the planned unit development ordinance for
Wendy’s. On file in the city and made a part of this ordinance is a sketch plan
that illustrates the overall site layout concept (Exhibit I). This document and
the referenced documents or exhibits (on file in the city) are intended to
specify the components, parameters, and requirements to be adhered to and
implemented in order to ensure the realization of the Wendy’s PUD. It is
recognized that modifications and changes may be necessary due to changes in
building footprints, site details, and response to market demand. At the
discretion of the Director of Development Services, changes to the layout of
the development that are deemed to be “major” changes shall require an
amendment to the sketch plan and ordinance, if applicable. Major amendments
shall require the review and approval of the Plan and Zoning Commission and
City Council.
   Where the sketch plan and PUD language conflict, the PUD language shall
prevail.
   B.   Development Applications (Site Plans or Major Modification to a Site
Plan): Site plans for development within the Wendy’s PUD must meet the intent
of the approved PUD. Site plans shall be submitted to the City of West Des
Moines for review and approval prior to the development of any portion of the
lot. Site plans for permitted uses which comply (as determined by the Director
of Development Services or designee) with the design intent as set forth in
this PUD will be subject to review via the City’s review process and receive
final approval from the City Council following a recommendation from the Plan
and Zoning Commission. Approval by the Board of Adjustment for any use
designated as a Permitted Conditional (Pc) use shall occur prior to approval of
a subsequent site plan by the City Council following recommendation of the Plan
and Zoning Commission. At the discretion of the Director of Development
Services, an amendment to the Wendy’s PUD may be required to bring consistency
between the ordinance and site plan development proposed. (Ord. 2469, 5-3-2021)
124-05: COMPLIANCE WITH CODE:
Unless otherwise specified herein, the development of Wendy’s PUD shall comply
with the provisions of the West Des Moines city code. (Ord. 2469, 5-3-2021)
124-06: DEVELOPER RESPONSIBILITIES:
   A.   Unless otherwise specifically approved by the City Council, the
developer, its successors and/or assigns, if any, shall pay all planning,
engineering, and construction costs for the development of the Planned Unit
Development as required by this ordinance, and shall pay all costs related to
approved site plans, which may include, but is not limited to, the cost of
storm sewers, sanitary sewers, water mains and service lines, drainageway
improvements, detention basins, buffers, and other improvements as required. No
occupancy permits, either temporary or permanent, shall be issued until all
necessary improvements applicable to the area/lot or structure requesting
occupancy are installed and accepted by the City of West Des Moines. Nothing in
this ordinance shall be construed to prevent the developer, its successors and/
or assigns, if any, from entering into private agreement(s) as it/they may
desire to share the cost of improvements.
   B.   The developer shall be responsible for the maintenance of the area
encompassing the streetscape easement and related public right of way.
   C.   Developer’s responsibilities include all obligations contained in this
section as well as those responsibilities set forth in this ordinance. (Ord.
2469, 5-3-2021)
124-07: PERMITTED USES:
All general use regulations and provisions set forth in title 9, “Zoning”, of
the city code for the Community Commercial district (CMC), shall apply to any
development proposal for the Wendy’s PUD ordinance, unless noted elsewhere
within this ordinance.
   A.   Allowed Uses: Uses to be allowed in the Wendy’s PUD shall be those uses
identified as permitted or permitted conditional for the Community Commercial
(CMC) district, except the following uses normally allowed in the Community
Commercial (CMC) district shall be prohibited in the Wendy’s PUD:
    SIC 4522   Heliport/helistop.
   SIC 4925   Mixed, manufactured, or liquefied petroleum gas production and/or
distribution (except: production and manufacturing).
   SIC 554   Gasoline service stations.
   SIC 592   Liquor stores.
   SIC 5999   Adult entertainment establishment.
   SIC 75      Automotive repair, services, and parking. (Ord. 2469, 5-3-2021)
124-08: VEHICLE TRIP ALLOCATION:
As part of the traffic analysis completed by the City of West Des Moines, the
Wendy’s PUD has been allocated the following vehicle trips: one thousand two
hundred seventeen (1,217) average daily trips (ADT); eighty four (84) P.M. peak
hour trips; and one hundred four (104) A.M. peak hour trips. Alternate uses to
the proposed planned development(s), if within the parameters of the traffic
analysis and approved as part of the Grand Avenue redevelopment plan and this
PUD ordinance may be allowed, following completion of an amendment to the
approved traffic study analyzing the proposed alternative and appropriate City
approval if the existing uses and the proposed change(s) collectively do not
exceed that allocated above to this development. Overall trips for the Val-Gate
District must remain within the caps established for the Val-Gate District as a
whole which were established as part of the Grand Avenue Redevelopment Plan
traffic study. Future redevelopment within the Wendy’s PUD may be limited by
available trips due to traffic generated elsewhere within the district. (Ord.
2469, 5-3-2021)
124-09: STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN:
A master stormwater management plan for the entire Grand Avenue redevelopment
area which governs the overall stormwater management of the Val-Gate District
has been prepared by and approved by the City of West Des Moines. Specific
stormwater management plans which align with the master stormwater management
plan will be required with the development of each site plan. The specific
stormwater plans shall be prepared at the developer’s expense, by a
professional engineer licensed in the state of Iowa. All specific stormwater
management plans shall comply with the city’s applicable design standards for
stormwater management existing at the time each development (site plan) is
approved and demonstrate compliance with the Grand Avenue East master
stormwater management plan. The property owner of the Wendy’s PUD shall be
required to participate in the Grand Avenue East stormwater management
facilities per their pro rata share of stormwater contribution for the Val-Gate
District.
The property owner of the Wendy’s PUD shall also be required to enter into a
postconstruction stormwater management facility maintenance covenant and
permanent easement agreement to guarantee future maintenance of stormwater
facilities. Maintenance responsibilities for the Wendy’s PUD shall be based
upon their pro rata share stormwater contribution for the Grand Avenue East
Storm Sewer Fee District. (Ord. 2469, 5-3-2021)
124-10: PUBLIC STREET RIGHT OF WAY DEDICATION:
In order to maintain the functional class of the city’s roadway system as set
forth in the comprehensive plan, the right of way necessary for Grand Avenue
and the public access road on the east side of the site shall be dedicated to
the city in fee title according to the associated agreement with the City. No
construction may begin on the site until the associated right of way has been
dedicated. In addition, the property owner shall provide at no cost to the city
temporary easements necessary for the construction of public streets adjacent
to the development. (Ord. 2469, 5-3-2021)
124-11: STREET DESIGN:
   A.   Public Streets:
      1.   Grand Avenue shall be built as a four (4) lane roadway, with
dedicated left turn lanes, measuring sixty-five feet (65') from back of curb to
back of curb. Grand Avenue shall contain four (4) through lanes with dedicated
left turn lanes at all major intersections. A dedicated right turn lane will be
constructed for eastbound Grand Avenue traffic approaching 1st Street.
      2.   Public Access Roads shall be constructed by the City on the north
and east sides of the Wendy’s PUD property. (Ord. 2469, 5-3-2021)
124-12: PARKING:
   A.   Off Street Parking:
      1.   Parking stall measurements and drive aisle widths shall conform to
title 9, chapter 15 of the city code.
      2.   It is desired that all off street parking areas be aesthetically
improved to reduce obtrusive characteristics that are inherent to their
function. Parking lot screening shall be accomplished via streetscape
landscaping and hardscaping in accordance with the Grand Avenue Redevelopment
Plan and as described in this ordinance.
   B.   Parking Ratios: Parking shall be provided as specified in chapter 15 of
the city’s zoning code except as further provided herein:
      1.   Restaurants with a drive-through shall provide parking at a minimum
of 12 parking spaces per 1,000 gross square feet of building space. (Ord. 2469,
5-3-2021)
124-13: DRIVE-THROUGH:
If, through the design review process, including a traffic analysis, it can be
demonstrated that a drive-through does not cause traffic congestion, does not
cause the Wendy’s PUD to exceed its trip caps, does not interfere with
pedestrian movements and can be designed to minimize their presence, a maximum
of one drive-through may be permitted within the Wendy’s PUD. The presence of
drive-throughs shall be minimized through the incorporation of the drive-
through into the building architecture rather than as an added on canopy
component and the visual screening through the use of earth berming and
vegetation placement. Said drive-through shall have a minimum stacking capacity
of eleven (11) vehicles (five (5) of which shall be designated for the ordering
station if it is separate from the pickup window) and shall not be permitted to
interfere with traffic on any public street. (Ord. 2469, 5-3-2021)
124-14: PEDESTRIAN ELEMENTS:
The Wendy’s PUD, in alignment with the Grand Avenue Redevelopment Plan, aims to
encourage pedestrian movement and opportunities for pedestrian interaction
through site furniture and benches for pedestrian use along Grand Avenue within
an area of enhanced landscaping. Development of these areas shall comply with
the Grand Avenue Redevelopment Plan guidelines with details of the development
of each area to be specified, reviewed, and approved at the time of site plan
development. Unless otherwise specified, the installation of these pedestrian
elements shall be by the developer of the Wendy’s PUD prior to issuance of a
final occupancy permit for the first building within the Wendy’s PUD. (Ord.
2469, 5-3-2021)
124-15: LANDSCAPING:
Landscaping must be provided in accordance with city code unless otherwise
modified within this ordinance. Details regarding specific varieties, exact
quantities, and the minimum size at time of planting shall be provided and
approved as part of the site plan submittal and shall meet the general
guidelines in respect to the minimum plant sizes traditionally applied to
development within the city. The minimum vegetation quantities specified within
this ordinance will need to be provided. The provision of additional vegetation
above the minimum amount required may be necessary to fulfill the intent (i.e.,
visual mitigation/screening) of the required landscaping.
   A.   Open/Green Space: Due to the nature of the intended redevelopment in
respect to existing development pattern, uses, and densities, the developer of
the Wendy’s PUD shall provide open space and landscaping to meet the intent of
the city’s open space requirements while preserving the ability to reasonably
redevelop land within the Wendy’s PUD. Plaza and streetscape areas along with
any areas associated with outdoor pedestrian use may be counted toward
fulfilling the minimum open space requirement, however, no lot within the
Wendy’s PUD shall contain more than eighty five percent (85%) impervious
surface. In addition:
      1.   Streetscape plantings directly adjacent to a parcel can be counted
toward the open space planting requirements for that parcel.
      2.   A twenty (20) square foot mass planting of perennial flowers or
ornamental grasses may be substituted for three (3) shrubs.
      3.   No substitution for required trees is allowed.
      4.   The incorporation of evergreen vegetation is encouraged to provide
winter substance within the landscape.
      5.   Vegetation required as part of the open space may be placed into off
street parking areas.
   B.   Streetscaping: A landscaped edge with hardscape elements or
“streetscape” shall be provided along Grand Avenue. These streetscapes are
intended to provide desired green to the city, reinforce a district identity,
bring human scale to adjoining buildings and provide traffic calming benefits.
The streetscape shall be accomplished in accordance with the Grand Avenue
Redevelopment Plan streetscaping plans and shall include vegetation, furniture,
and precast stone wall screening elements as shown in the plan. This
streetscape shall be provided along Grand Avenue. Parking areas shall be
screened to a minimum height of three feet (3') by the streetscaping. In
recognizing the unique design and context of the development, an additional
easement along Grand Avenue shall be established to provide area for district
streetscape and to maintain utility corridors. The developer shall provide the
necessary easements at the time of site plan approval.
   C.   Vegetation Placement: Understory trees are an acceptable replacement
for overstory trees and upright evergreen trees within public utility
easements. The presence of utility easements shall not provide a basis for
noncompliance with landscaping provisions found within this ordinance and
within any applicable codes. The placement of public utility easements within
streetscapes is discouraged due to the potential conflict between trees and the
need to access the lines for repair. (Ord. 2469, 5-3-2021)
124-16: SIGNAGE:
All proposed exterior signage requires the review and approval of a sign permit
by the City of West Des Moines. Signage shall be consistent with title 9,
chapter 18 of the city code except as modified herein or within the Grand
Avenue Redevelopment Plan. All signage must be consistent in design with the
Grand Avenue Redevelopment Plan. The following signage may be allowed:
   A.   Business Identification Signs:
      1.   One ground mounted monument sign shall be permitted for the Wendy’s
PUD. Said sign shall be limited in height to five feet (5') and sign area copy
of thirty-five (35) square feet. Said sign shall be set back a minimum of five
feet (5') from the right of way.
      2.   This site shall be allowed one (1) square foot of wall signage per
linear foot of building frontage along Grand Avenue.? The allowed signage may
be divided into multiple signs as long as the total amount of sign area earned,
based upon the formulas above, is not exceeded. Wall signs shall not exceed one
(1) square foot per the building façade’s linear footage (i.e. a twenty feet
(20') long building side is allowed up to twenty (20) square foot of signage).
If the main entry to a building faces away from the street frontage, that wall
area of the building would earn signage at a rate of one-half (1/2) square foot
of sign area per linear footage of said wall.
      3.   Window Signs: Window graphics must be less than twenty-five percent
(25%) of the glazed surface on the windows on the same wall to be allowed as
window signage. Window signage is not counted towards allowed building signage
and no permit is required. If window graphics exceed the twenty-five percent
(25%) allowed, they are counted toward the allowed building signage and would
require a permit.
      4.   Illuminated banding (led) may be allowed on the primary structure,
canopy and/or monument signs if it is approved as part of the architectural
design and meets the intent of the Grand Avenue Redevelopment Plan to reflect
typical 1950's design.
      5.   All signs: Lighted signs will be required to have a timer to shut
off the sign illumination, as required in the City Sign Code, between 11:00 PM
and 5:00 AM unless the business is open later than 11:00 PM, then the signs
shall be shut off within one hour of closing.
   B.   Menu Order Boards: Due to the size of the property and immediately
adjacent roadways, it is recognized that the mitigation of all views of menu
boards from outside of the property may not be possible. Efforts shall be made
through menu order board placement, orientation and letter size to minimize the
identification of Wendy’s that is visible from beyond the property boundaries.
(Ord. 2469, 5-3-2021)
124-17: LIGHTING:
Consistent with the redevelopment plan, the Wendy’s PUD shall incorporate a
variety of light fixtures ranging from parking lot lights and roadway fixtures
to pedestrian pathway lights. Lighting shall be IDA dark sky compliant unless
otherwise approved by the City of West Des Moines. Included within section 6 of
the Grand Avenue Redevelopment Plan are design specifications and requirements
along with sketches and images of the intended lighting series. All lighting
within the PUD area shall abide by these standards and be consistent in
character to that illustrated in the Grand Avenue Redevelopment Plan and the
Val-Gate district’s iconic design intent.
As a part of the review of the site plan, a photometric plan must be submitted.
During the review, the applicant must demonstrate how lighting will not
adversely affect adjoining properties or patrons utilizing the public street
system. Special care must be given to ensure excess light does not spill onto
properties adjacent to, but not part of, the Val-Gate district.
The following general guidelines shall be in addition to the specific
regulations stated within the Grand Avenue Redevelopment Plan regulations:
   A.   Streetlights: The City shall pay the cost of streetlight installation
adjacent to Grand Avenue as a part of the Grand Avenue widening project.
   B.   Parking Luminaries: Fixtures shall be of a design to direct light
downward and shall not have bulbs which are exposed and extend below the frame
of the light fixture. Said fixtures shall not exceed twenty-five feet (25') in
height as measured from the ground to the top of the light structure. Fixtures
used shall be consistent throughout the Wendy’s PUD.
   C.   Building Lighting: No wall packs or floodlighting without shields to
direct the light to its intended target are allowed. In addition to cut off
fixtures, particular attention shall be given to eliminate hot spots and light
glare. Architectural accent lighting in keeping with the design intent of the
Grand Avenue Redevelopment Plan may be allowed if approved as part of the
architectural design.
   D.   Pedestrian Pathways: Bollard or pole lighting may be implemented along
pedestrian pathways. Pole lights shall not exceed fourteen feet (14') as
measured from the ground to the top of the light fixture. (Ord. 2469, 5-3-2021)
124-18: ARCHITECTURE:
Attached to the Grand Avenue Redevelopment Plan as Exhibit VI are illustrative
examples of the architectural concepts which shall serve to guide architectural
choices for all buildings within the Wendy’s PUD. All buildings in the Wendy’s
PUD shall reinforce the aesthetic concept depicted in the Grand Avenue
Redevelopment Plan. Specific architecture for all buildings shall be evaluated
as part of the site plan review and approval process.
   A.   All buildings within the Wendy’s PUD shall accommodate the following in
building design:
      1.   Form And Scale: Buildings should reinforce the aesthetic concept as
depicted by the precedent images contained in the Grand Avenue redevelopment
plan and this PUD. Buildings shall be designed to relate specifically to the
pedestrian in scale and variety. The following techniques should be used to
meet this objective:
         a.   Corporate architecture shall be prohibited except as permissible
by the Grand Avenue redevelopment plan in that it reinforces the iconic imagery
desired for the Val-Gate district.
         b.   Buildings shall be organized to create a logical balance and
relationship with the site, open spaces and circulation.
         c.   The building’s design should meet context and site objectives
such as providing gateways, creating linkages and framing or terminating views.
         d.   Variation in building height, mass and roof forms shall be
provided while still maintaining an overall building continuity.
         e.   Shifts in building planes/facades and variation in exterior
materials shall be incorporated to minimize long expanses of wall.
         f.   Variation in materials, material modules, expressed joints,
textures, colors and details should be used to break up the mass of the
buildings.
         g.   Variation in horizontal planes through the use of materials,
color and projecting forms should be implemented to signify an entry and/or
protect the pedestrian.
         h.   Ground floor retail areas should provide the maximum possible
glazing toward sidewalks to provide pedestrians with visual interest.
         i.   A building’s roof form and related details/materials are an
integral part of the architectural design aesthetic. Roofs should not be
designed as attention getting devices related to the reinforcement of signage
or as an identifiable corporate image unless said identification is in keeping
with the Grand Avenue redevelopment plan aesthetic.
         j.   Efforts shall be made to locate the buildings close to the street
with off street parking behind or to the side of the building.
   B.    Material Quality And Detail: All sides to each building are to receive
high quality materials and finishes (360 degree architectural treatment). There
are no “backs” to a building. However, the level of detail can be reduced on
the facades not facing a street. Materials should be durable, economically
maintained and of a quality that will maintain their appearance over a
prolonged time.
      1.   Primary building materials should include, but are not limited to,
glass, steel, concrete, natural wood, stone, brick, architectural metals and
composite materials acceptable to the City.
      2.   The following materials shall not be used for cladding unless
specifically approved by the city of West Des Moines:
         a.   EIFS or synthetic stucco.
         b.   Concrete masonry units.
         c.   Tilt-up precast concrete systems that are structural in
appearance.
         d.   Materials that are intended for interior use.
      3.   Changes in materials should occur at either inside corners or where
a detail is drawn to specifically accommodate a transition. (Ord. 2469, 5-3-
2021)
124-19: BULK REGULATIONS:
   A.   Lot Size: No minimum lot size shall be required.
   B.   Building Height: The height of a building shall conform to the limits
prescribed by the zoning code for the CMC district unless otherwise
specifically approved by the City Council after a recommendation from the Plan
and Zoning Commission that the additional height is necessary and appropriate
to achieve an architectural intent consistent with the goals of the Grand
Avenue Redevelopment Plan.
   C.   Building Setbacks:
      1.   Unless otherwise specifically stated, setbacks shall be measured
from the ultimate right of way for line of parcels that abut a public street.
Setbacks along boundaries that do not abut a street shall be measured from the
lot boundary.
      2.   Building setbacks are to the main plane of the building excluding
canopies and pedestrian arcades. Primary building setbacks shall be a minimum
of thirty feet (30') from public street rights of way. For the purposes of the
Wendy’s PUD, Grand Avenue and the public access roads east and north of the PUD
area are considered public street rights of way.
         a.   Nothing herein, however, shall be construed as permitting the
location of a building that will interfere with sidewalks, trails, plazas, or
maintenance of utilities.
      3.   Dumpster enclosures shall be setback a minimum of seven feet (7')
from the east, west and north property lines and shall meet the primary
building setback of thirty feet (30') from Grand Avenue.
   D.   Off Street Parking Lot Setbacks: Parking lots shall be set back a
minimum of nine feet (9') from the adjacent property line north, one foot (1')
from the east property line, and ten feet (10') from the Grand Avenue right of
way. (Ord. 2469, 5-3-2021)
124-20: REPEALER:
All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with the provision of this
Ordinance are hereby repealed. (Ord. 2469, 5-3-2021)
124-21: SAVINGS CLAUSE:
If any section, provision, sentence, clause, phrase or part of the Ordinance
shall be adjudged invalid or unconstitutional, such adjudication shall not
affect the validity of the Ordinance as a whole or any provision, section,
subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or part hereof not adjudged invalid or
unconstitutional. (Ord. 2469, 5-3-2021)
124-22: VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES:
Any person who violates the provisions of this Ordinance upon conviction shall
be punished as set forth in Title 1, Chapter 4, Section 1 of the City Code of
the City of West Des Moines, Iowa.(Ord. 2469, 5-3-2021)
124-23: OTHER REMEDIES:
In addition to the provisions set out in the Violations and Penalties Section
herein, the City may proceed in law or equity against any person, firm or
corporation for violation of any section or subsection of this Ordinance. (Ord.
2469, 5-3-2021)
124-24: EFFECTIVE DATE:
This Ordinance shall be in full force and effect after its passage, approval
and publication as provided by law. (Ord. 2469, 5-3-2021)
124-99: LEGISLATIVE HISTORY:
Ord. 2469, 5-3-2021.
PUD #125
SOUTH BRANCH BUSINESS PARK
SECTION:
125-01: Legal Description
125-02: Intent
125-03: Sketch Plan
125-04: Required Plans
125-05: Conditions
125-06: Requirements
125-07: Architecture
125-08: Signage
125-09: Stormwater Management Plan
125-10: Traffic Study
125-11: Repealer
125-12: Violations And Penalties
125-13: Other Remedies
125-14: Savings Clause
125-15: Effective Date
125-99: Legislative History
125-01: LEGAL DESCRIPTION:
(QUIT CLAIM DEED BOOK 16333, PAGE 168)
A PARCEL OF LAND PARTLY IN THE NW1/4 OF THE NW1/4 AND PARTLY IN THE NE1/4 OF
THE NW1/4 OF SECTION 32, TOWNSHIP 78 NORTH, RANGE 25 WEST OF THE FIFTH P.M.,
NOW INCLUDED IN AND FORMING A PART OF THE CITY OF WEST DES MOINES, POLK COUNTY,
IOWA IDENTIFIED AS COUNTY AUDITOR PARCEL 2016-198 ON PLAT OF SURVEY [(BOOK
16214, PAGE 28)], WHICH BY REFERENCE IS MADE A PART THEREOF, MORE PARTICULARLY
DESCRIBED AS FOLLOWS: COMMENCING AT THE NW CORNER OF SAID SECTION 32; THENCE
S00°14'46"E, 254.50 FEET ALONG THE WEST LINE OF SAID NW1/4; THENCE S86°45'43"E,
167.23 FEET TO THE POINT OF BEGINNING; THENCE S63°35'09"E 408.17 FEET; THENCE
S51°28'22"E, 1079.81 FEET; THENCE N89°43'57"E, 1189.22 FEET; THENCE
N00°04'23"W, 1005.03 FEET; THENCE N89°43'11"W, 1331.65 FEET; THENCE
S85°42'10"W, 586.48 FEET; THENCE S78°36'38"W, 216.76 FEET; THENCE S74°12'20"W,
279.84 FEET TO THE POINT OF BEGINNING, CONTAINING 41.52 ACRES. (Ord. 2471, 5-
17-2021)
125-02: INTENT:
The PUD will regulate industrial development to achieve high quality, visually
appealing buildings with properly screened uses due to the proximity of the
property within the PUD to the open space to the north which is anticipated to
become a recreation area for residents and visitors and Interstate 35 and Iowa
Highway 5. It is expected that outdoor elements and activities will be
controlled and all views of negative elements and activities within the site
will be negated. (Ord. 2471, 5-17-2021)
125-03: SKETCH PLAN:
As part of the PUD a sketch plan is attached to the ordinance codified herein
and on file with the Development Services Department which delineates two PUD
Parcels, Parcel ‘A’ zoned for General Industrial development and Parcel ‘B’
zoned for Business Park development. (Ord. 2471, 5-17-2021)
125-04: REQUIRED PLANS:
The following plans shall be required as a part of the processing of any
development application for any property within the South Branch Business Park
PUD:
   A.   Site Plans: Site plans shall be submitted to the City of West Des
Moines for review and approval prior to the development of the respective area
within the PUD. Site Plans are subject to review of the Plan & Zoning
Commission and City Council.
   Unless otherwise provided in the following platting section, prior to the
issuance of any building permit, including footing and foundation permits, for
construction of any structure or physical site improvement an associated site
plan must be approved for the area proposed for development.
   Upon approval of a site plan, any modifications to the site or the
development indicated on an approved site plan, including architectural design,
materials, or color changes, shall be reviewed and approved as part of a Minor
or Major Modification application, as applicable prior to implementation of the
modifications.
   B.   Preliminary and Final Platting: Platting for any PUD parcel shall be at
the discretion of the developer. Platting, if needed for subdivision or right-
of-way dedication, shall be done in accordance with the City’s Subdivision
Ordinance. Platted outlots are not buildable until such time that they are
replatted through the City’s Subdivision process (Preliminary and Final Plat).
   Unless otherwise specifically restricted by City Council action, groundwork
and construction of private roads and utilities may be started, at the
developer’s risk, upon approval by the City Council of a preliminary plat or
site plan which includes details of the improvements. Public street and utility
construction may begin, at the risk of the developer, after the preliminary
plat or site plan which includes details of the improvements area is approved
by the City Council and construction improvement plans approved by the City of
West Des Moines.
   Prior to approval of the final plat or first site plan, unless otherwise
allowed by City Council, the developer shall provide the appropriate
agreements, sureties, and easements for all public rights-of-way and other
public improvements (utilities, sidewalks, street lights, etc.) within and
associated with the development. (Ord. 2471, 5-17-2021)
125-05: CONDITIONS:
Whereas, Title 9 of the West Des Moines City Code includes Chapter 9, PUD
Planned Unit Development District and establishes certain regulations and
guidelines pertaining to accompanying information required on plat and site
plan documents. Now, therefore, the following conditions, restrictions, and
regulations are adopted as part of this approval, to wit:
The following general development criteria shall be integrated into and made a
part of this PUD Ordinance:
   A.   General Conformance to Subdivision Ordinance: All subdivisions, public
streets, public street rights-of-way, and general development shall adhere to
the standards and design criteria set forth in the West Des Moines subdivision
ordinances and the most current design standards adopted by the City of West
Des Moines pertaining thereto unless otherwise stated within this ordinance.
   B.   General Conformance to Zoning Ordinance: Unless otherwise specified
herein, the development of the South Branch Business Park PUD shall comply with
Title 9, Zoning, or any other applicable codes. Any aspect not specifically
addressed within this PUD shall be governed by City Code.
   C.   Flood Hazard: In all areas within a Base Flood (100 Year), or adjoining
drainage ways, and detention ponding areas involving potential flood hazards,
all buildings proposed to be located in a flood hazard area must be elevated
and designed in accordance with the American Society of Civil Engineers
publication ASCE 24 and no building shall be erected which has a minimum
opening elevation (including top of window well) less than one foot (1') above
the determined level of the Base Flood. In areas where historical high water
levels are above the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) Base Flood Elevation or
special conditions exist, the City may require a Design Flood Elevation be
calculated and used as the Base Flood Elevation for determination of elevation
requirements. Buildings shall only be permitted within twenty five feet (25')
of any easement or property boundary of a major drainageway, storm water
detention basin or pond if said location is approved as part of the development
entitlement by the city council and said building is structurally designed
accordingly.
   D.   Developer Responsibilities: Unless otherwise specifically approved by
the City Council, the developer, its successors and/or assigns, if any, shall
pay all planning, engineering, and construction costs for the development of
the planned unit development as required by this Ordinance, and shall pay all
costs related to approved site plans, which may include but is not limited to
the cost of all streets, storm sewers, sanitary sewers (excluding fee district
sewers), water mains and service lines, drainage-way improvements, detention
basins, buffers, and other improvements as determined necessary. Nothing in
this Ordinance shall be construed to prevent the developer, its successors and/
or assigns, if any, from entering into private agreement(s) as it/they may
desire to share the cost of improvements. Dry sanitary sewer and on-site
sanitary installation will be required in the event that public sanitary
service is not available at the time of development.
   No occupancy permits, either temporary or permanent, shall be issued until
all necessary improvements applicable to the area/lot or structure requesting
occupancy are installed and accepted, including public infrastructure by the
City of West Des Moines.
      1.   SE Army Post Road: If this roadway will be a public roadway, the
developer will be responsible for one and a half (1 ½) lanes of paving and all
appurtenances for SE Army Post Road reconstructed to a urban cross section,
including the cul-de-sac, from the end of the cul-de-sac to SE 42nd Street.
Since a half of lane cannot be constructed, if the property owner on the
opposite side of the roadway is unwilling to participate at time of
construction, the applicant will need to construct two (2) full lanes. If the
roadway is private, the developer will be responsible for improving to
accommodate anticipated construction traffic and to city standards necessary to
accommodate emergency response vehicles.
      2.   Traffic Signal at SE Army Post Road and SE 42nd Street: The
developer will be responsible for twenty-five (25) percent of the cost of
installation of a fully functioning traffic signal at the intersection of SE
Army Post Road and SE 42nd Street when deemed warranted. An agreement by the
developer at either the first site plan or final plat, whichever comes first,
will be required to provide for the payment of the signal.
   Improvements and modifications to adjoining public roads as identified
within the traffic study shall be implemented and accepted by the City Council
or the developer may petition the City Council to provide surety in lieu of
public improvement acceptance prior to approval and recordation of the first
final plat or the first site plan, whichever occurs first. Dedication of
permanent right-of-way to accommodate public road improvements shall be
provided as necessary upon request. Temporary right-of-way required during the
construction/installation shall be provided as necessary.
   E.   Public Utilities and Easements: The placement of public utility
easements within landscape buffers and islands within parking areas is
discouraged due to the potential conflict between trees and the need to access
the lines for repair. Overstory and understory trees should be placed off
utility lines a minimum distance equal to the 1:1 excavation trench necessary
for the deepest utility. The placement of utility lines within buffers or
parking lot islands is not justification to negate the provision of landscape
vegetation as required by this ordinance or city code. Adequate access for
maintenance vehicles shall be provided into and through the easement areas.
   All necessary easements to allow City access to public utilities for
maintenance and repair purposes shall be executed prior to the approval and
recordation of the first final plat for all known utility locations and prior
to approval of a site plan for all subsequent utilities within each PUD parcel.
Unless otherwise specified within a specific easement document, the City shall
not be responsible for reimbursement, restoration and/or replacement of any
improvements located within the public easements should the City be required to
excavate the public utilities for normal City operations.
   F.   Shared Parking Agreement: To accommodate a wider range of uses and
avoid potential issues with insufficient parking within parcels or development
sites, the developer should consider establishing a shared parking agreement
between parcels or development sites as part of the first site plan or first
final plat.
   G.   Access: Each site or lot is required to provide two points of access to
the satisfaction of the City. Accesses may be available through a direct
connection to an external roadway or an internal road network of drives or
frontage roads that connects to the external roadway. Access will be evaluated
with each site plan.
   H.   Fire Access: All internal drive aisles and parking lots shall permit
the travel of the Fire Department’s largest vehicle, including adequate
accommodation of the vehicle’s turning needs. Approval of unique design
solutions to accommodate fire access may be granted by the City Council if, the
solutions proposed are recommended by the West Des Moines Fire Department.
      1.   All access drives and drive aisles shall maintain a minimum of
twenty feet (20') of clear pavement.
      2.   A minimum of fourteen feet (14') of vertical clearance over the
travel portion shall be maintained at all times over all vehicle travel ways.
      3.   The developer or its designee shall be responsible for enforcement
of no parking lanes and maintaining adequate clearance of structures and
vegetation along and above all vehicle travel ways regardless if public or
private.
      4.   Adequate fire accesses as determined by the City’s Fire Marshall
shall be provided at all times to those areas under construction.
      5.   At the discretion of the City’s Fire Marshall, “No Parking Fire
Lane” areas may be established as necessary to ensure efficient movement and
access of the fire trucks. The developer of each site plan within the
development shall be responsible for the procurement and erection of approved
fire lane signage.
   I.   Public Streetlights: The developer shall enter into an agreement with
MidAmerican Energy for the installation of public streetlights along all public
streets within and abutting the South Branch Business Park area in conjunction
with the approval of the final plat or first site plan, whichever occurs first.
   J.   Storm Water Management: A signed Storm Water Management Facility
Maintenance Agreement, along with required certifications and as-built drawings
of the detention facilities, shall be submitted by the developer of each parcel
prior to the issuance of a final occupancy permit for a building utilizing the
storm water detention facility.
   K.   Definitions: For the purpose of this ordinance, the following
definitions shall apply:
      1.   Outdoor Storage: Any item, material, equipment, or vehicle that
remains on the property for twenty-four (24) or more consecutive hours. It
shall not be enough to move the outdoor storage within the site or briefly
remove from the site in order to circumvent the twenty-four (24) hour
timeframes.
      2.   Outdoor Display: An arrangement of objects, items, products or other
materials, typically not in a fixed position and capable of rearrangement,
designed and used for the purpose of advertising or identifying a business,
product or service.
      3.   Fleet Vehicle: Motor vehicle(s) operated by an on-premise business
that is generally used on a daily basis (leaves the property) and not intended
for long-haul transportation. Typical examples are vehicles operated by public
utilities, service companies, public safety departments and delivery or
fulfilment companies. Tractor/trailers, construction equipment, trailers and
non-vehicular/non-motorized items used in the normal operations of a business
would not be considered fleet vehicles for the purposes of allowing parking in
a front yard, but instead shall be parked in rear and side yards, if allowed
within the respective PUD parcel. (Ord. 2471, 5-17-2021)
125-06: REQUIREMENTS:
Unless provided otherwise in this Ordinance, all general use regulations,
performance standards and provisions set forth in Title 9, Zoning, of the City
Code shall apply to the development within the South Branch Business Park area.
To the extent that the provisions of this Section conflict with or are more
restrictive than similar provisions provided elsewhere in the West Des Moines
Zoning Ordinance, the provisions of this Section shall control. The following
land use design criteria, development standards and regulations shall apply to
all parcels within the South Brand Business Park area:
   A.   Parcel A:
      1.   Land Use: For all lots or development in Parcel A, all land uses as
set forth in Title 9, Zoning, of the City Code for the General Industrial (GI)
District as permitted and permitted conditionally shall apply except as
designated below:
      a.   Permitted Uses: All Permitted (P) uses allowed within the General
Industrial (GI) district except those that have been prohibited by this
ordinance shall be allowed with approval of the appropriate review body.
      b.   All Permitted Conditional (PC) uses allowed within the General
Industrial (GI) district except those that have been prohibited by this
ordinance may be allowed with the approval of the appropriate review body.
      c.   Prohibited Uses: the following permitted and permitted conditional
uses otherwise allowed in the General Industrial (GI) district shall be
prohibited due to the intent of the PUD and the minimal access to the PUD land:
   SIC 0741      Animal Services for Livestock
   SIC 0872       Lawn and Garden Services
   SIC 2082      Brewery - with tap room
   SIC 2085      Distillery - with tasting room
   SIC 489       Transmitting/Receiving Towers
   SIC 5092-02   Fireworks: sales, storage
   SIC 58         Taproom/Beer Parlor
   SIC 596         Unattended Fuel Pumps for general public use
               (allowed as part of a business located within the site)
   SIC 79         Event venues
   SIC 7991      Physical Fitness Facilities
      2.   Site Development Regulations: Unless provided otherwise here within,
all development within this PUD Parcel A will be governed by the General
Industrial (GI) regulations as stated in city code.
         a.   Outdoor Storage yard and outdoor display areas shall comply with
Title 9, Chapter 6 of City Code.
         b.   Outdoor Storage yards and outdoor display areas shall comply with
Title 9, Chapter 10, Section 4 of City Code. For purposes of application of
regulations, the front yard shall be considered the north side of the PUD
boundary. Mitigation of views shall comply with Visual Screening provisions
stated elsewhere in this PUD ordinance.
         c.   The parking of fleet vehicles (on-site for four (4) or less hours
within a typical eight-hour workday) shall be allowed within the front yard and
shall comply with typical parking lot screening requirements.
         d.   The long-term parking of fleet vehicles (do not leave the
property within a typical workday) and long-term parking of tractor/trailers,
construction equipment, trailers and non-vehicular/non-motorized items related
to an approved business operating within the parcel shall be allowed in the
side or rear yard but shall not be located in the front yard(s). Views of fleet
vehicles parked long-term, equipment, vehicles, trailers or materials shall be
appropriately screened compliant with Visual Screening provisions stated
elsewhere in this PUD ordinance.
         e.   Outdoor storage, outdoor displays, long-term fleet vehicle
parking, tractor/trailers, construction equipment, trailers and non-vehicular/
non-motorized items used in the normal operations of a business shall not
occupy parking spaces otherwise provided to meet minimum number of parking
stall requirements required of the building or use.
   B.   Parcel B:
      1.   Land Use: For all lots or development in Parcel B, all land uses as
set forth in Title 9, Zoning, of the City Code for the Business Park (BP)
District as permitted and permitted conditionally shall apply, except those
that have been prohibited by this ordinance:
         a.   Permitted Uses: All Permitted (P) uses allowed within the
Business Park (BP) district except those that have been prohibited by this
ordinance shall be allowed with approval of the appropriate review body.
         b.   All Permitted Conditional (PC) uses allowed within the Business
Park (BP) district except those that have been prohibited by this ordinance may
be allowed with the approval of the appropriate review body.
         c.   Prohibited Uses: the following permitted and permitted
conditional uses otherwise allowed in the Business Park (BP) district shall be
prohibited due to the intent of the PUD and the minimal access to the PUD land:
   SIC 2082      Brewery - with tap room
   SIC 2085      Distillery - with tasting room
   SIC 489       Transmitting/Receiving Towers
   SIC 5092-02   Fireworks, sales storage
   SIC 58         Taproom/Beer Parlor
   SIC 596         Unattended Fuel Pumps for general public use
               (allowed as part of a business located within the site)
   SIC 79         Event venues
   SIC 7999      Amusement and Recreation Services, NEC with any type of
outdoor activity aspects
   SIC 7999      Betting Information Services, Bookies, Bookmakers, Gambling
Establishments, Gambling machines, Game parlors, Lotteries, Lottery Clubs and
ticket sales to individuals and Off-track betting
   SIC 7999      Carnival operations, Circus companies, Fairs and Rodeo related
activities (offices of such are allowed)
      2.   Site Development Regulations: Unless provided otherwise here within,
all development within this PUD Parcel B will be governed by the Business Park
(BP) regulations as stated in city code.
         a.   Outdoor display shall comply with Title 9, Chapter 10, Section 4
of City Code. For purposes of application of regulations, front yards shall be
considered the north and east side of the PUD boundary. Mitigation of views
shall comply with Visual Screening provisions stated elsewhere in this PUD
ordinance.
         b.   The parking of fleet vehicles (on-site for four (4) or less hours
within a typical eight-hour workday) shall be allowed within the front yard and
shall comply with typical parking lot screening requirements.
         c.   Outdoor storage yards are not allowed. Semi-trailers and other
delivery trucks may be parked at a loading dock as necessary for loading and
unloading; however, other semi-trailers and delivery vehicles waiting for
loading or unloading shall not be staged on-site for more than 24 hours. At any
given time the maximum number of semi-trailers and other delivery trucks within
the site shall not exceed one at each loading dock plus one additional for each
loading dock (e.g. five loading docks - a total of ten semi-trailers/delivery
trucks may be on-site: one at the five loading docks, plus five additional
staged for future loading or unloading). Semi-trailers staged for future
loading or unloading shall be located in rear yards only and must be screened
compliant with Visual Screening provisions stated elsewhere in this PUD
ordinance.
         d.   Outdoor displays, long-term fleet vehicle parking, tractor/
trailers, construction equipment, trailers and non-vehicular/non-motorized
items used in the normal operations of a business shall not occupy parking
spaces otherwise provided to meet minimum number of parking stall requirements
required of the building or use..
   C.   Landscaping: As noted in the PUD intent statement, development of
ground within the PUD will be regulated to achieve attractive and properly
screened uses. It is expected that the public edge of the development will be
enhanced with earthen berms whenever possible and heavily landscaped to provide
for a natural green edge that mitigates views into the site. The landscaping
requirements specified herein are intended to create an aesthetically pleasing
development which enhances the appearance and character of the City of West Des
Moines, while protecting the general health, safety, and welfare of the
citizens. Landscaping is required to address the following primary aspects or
consequences of development:
      -   Open space protection and enhancement
      -   Mitigation of paving expanse associated with off-street parking
      -   Visual screening of undesirable views, activities and/or site
elements
   At the time of site plan review for each PUD parcel, landscaping shall be
evaluated to ensure achievement of the intents and standards stated within this
PUD ordinance. Additional vegetation beyond that required herein may be
required to be implemented in response to additional details of the use,
buildings, vehicle circulation patterns, parking, site layout, etc. Details
regarding specific varieties, exact quantities, and the minimum size at time of
planting shall be provided and approved as part of the site plan submittal for
each PUD parcel and unless otherwise specifically required to achieve a defined
intent shall meet the general guidelines in respect to the minimum plant size
traditionally applied to development within the City.
      1.   Open Space: The intent of open space is to allow for a balance
between natural areas and the built environment and to provide for the overall
beautification and “greening” of the City. The implementation of sufficient
open space vegetation to break up views, soften expanses of hard materials and
anchor built structures into the environment is critical when dealing with
larger industrial warehouses and flex buildings, as well as repetitive,
minimalistic buildings typical of mini-warehousing.
         a.   The minimum open space percentage will be governed by Chapter 7,
Setback and Density Regulations of Title 9, Zoning, of the City Code for the
designated zoning applicable to each PUD parcel.
         b.   Open space shall be considered all areas unencumbered by
buildings or paved areas associated with parking, drive aisles, and loading
docks or zones. Plaza areas, water features and structures such as gazebos,
arbors, pergolas, etc. that are associated with outdoor pedestrian use areas,
as well as designated and enhanced pedestrian walkways through and between
areas within the development may be counted towards fulfilling the minimum open
space requirement.
         c.   The minimum requirement for vegetation is at a rate of two (2)
trees and three (3) shrubs per 3,000 square feet of required open space for
each lot within the development.
         d.   Vegetation substitution: No substitution with shrubs, grasses, or
perennials will be allowed in lieu of trees. Substitution of shrubs with
grasses or other perennials may occur with species being compatible in bulk,
density, and which reach a minimum height of three (3) feet. No more than fifty
percent (50%) of the shrubs may be substituted in this manner.
         e.   Vegetation required as part of the open space may be placed into
off-street parking areas, streetscapes or required buffers; however the open
space vegetation is in addition to that which would be required of buffers or
parking islands/pods and may not be counted towards fulfilling the minimum
amount of vegetation required for these areas.
      2.   Off-Street Parking Areas:
         a.   Unless otherwise required to fulfill Visual Screening regulations
stated within this ordinance, all off-street parking areas shall be screened
through the use of a minimum three (3) foot berm and landscaping to screen
their visibility from public street rights-of-way and adjoining property
outside of the South Branch Business Park development. Landscape materials of
an evergreen variety are desired for year-round screening.
         b.   All off-street parking areas shall be aesthetically improved to
reduce obtrusive characteristics that are inherent to their function. Multiple
landscape islands combined with vegetation shall be incorporated to effectively
eliminate a “sea of asphalt/concrete” and to provide shade thus decreasing heat
reflection back into the environment. Landscape islands and/or pods shall be
implemented in accordance with the following:
            (1)   Islands or open areas shall be located at the terminus end of
all parking rows. Terminal islands shall measure at least ten feet (10') in
width and shall match, at a minimum, the stall length.
            (2)   Landscaped islands shall be placed, at a minimum, every
eighteen (18) stalls within a linear row of parking. Landscaped pods (tree
diamonds) within a linear row of parking shall be evenly spaced between the
islands; however, shall be spaced no farther than nine (9) parking stalls from
another landscape pod or landscaped islands. At a minimum, islands shall match
the dimensions of one (1) parking stall and pods shall measure a minimum of six
feet (6') from back-of-curb to back-of-curb.
            (3)   In lieu of the implementation of pods between islands as
required above, the width of terminal islands may be increased to no less than
eighteen feet (18') in width.
         c.   Landscape Vegetation shall be provided as follows:
            (1)   Two (2) trees in each nine-foot (9') by thirty-four-foot
(34') island.
            (2)   One (1) tree in each nine-foot (9') by seventeen-foot (17')
island.
            (3)   One (1) tree in each landscape pod. If terminal islands are
widened in lieu of installing tree diamonds, the trees that other otherwise
would be required in the tree pods shall be located in the widened terminal
islands.
            (4)   Additional shrubs, ground covers, grasses, and flowers may be
provided in landscaped islands but is not required.
      3.   Visual Screening: As noted in the PUD intent statement, development
of ground within the PUD will be regulated to achieve attractive and properly
screened uses and activities. Due to the potential for future recreational
activities in the area, it is expected that the public edge of the development
will be enhanced with earthen berms and heavily landscaped to provide for a
natural green edge. Mitigation of views into the development shall be provided
for the following aspects as follows:
         a.   Outdoor Storage: All views of outdoor storage as defined in this
ordinance shall be mitigated to 100% opacity with the exception of brief views
into the site at access points. Earthen berming to a minimum height of eight
feet (8') in conjunction with necessary landscape vegetation shall be
implemented along the perimeter(s) of the PUD property as applicable and
feasible due to topography of the area to block views into or through the site.
         b.   Outdoor Display: All views of outdoor display as defined in this
ordinance shall be mitigated to 100% opacity with exception of brief views into
the site at access points. Earthen berming to a minimum height of four feet
(4') in combination with necessary landscape vegetation shall be implemented
along the perimeter(s) of the PUD property as applicable to block views of
displayed items.
         c.   Views of fleet vehicles that typically leave the site daily shall
be mitigated in accordance with Off-Street Parking regulations as provided
within this ordinance.
         d.   Views of fleet vehicles parked long-term, equipment, trailers or
materials shall be mitigated to 100% opacity with exception of brief views into
the site at access points. Earthen berming to a minimum height of eight feet
(8') in combination with necessary landscape vegetation shall be implemented
along the perimeter(s) of the PUD property as applicable to block views of
long-term parked vehicles.
         e.   Mechanical Equipment:
            (1)   Views from streets and adjoining properties of the negative
aspects of development and buildings such as building heating, ventilation, or
air conditioning (HVAC) units, meter banks, or similar electrical or mechanical
appurtenances shall be adequately screened. Said screening shall be achieved
through the implementation of architectural measures (such as wing walls or
equipment rooms) or landscaping consisting of evergreen material for year-round
screening.
            (2)   Views from adjoining roadways, including Iowa Highway 5 and
Interstate 35 of rooftop mechanical units (RTUs) shall be mitigated to minimize
the visible presence of or completely hide the RTUs. Screening measures shall
be reviewed and approved as part of the site plan review process. Architectural
materials used should be consistent in color and materials of the building so
as to best blend into the architecture of the building.
            (3)   The exterior of any through-wall HVAC units (such as PTAC’s)
shall be finished with a color that is compatible with the surrounding building
materials.
         f.   Trash Enclosures & Generators: Trash receptacles, dumpsters and
generators shall be screened by the use of a permanent enclosure. Whenever
possible, the enclosure should be designed as an attached extension to the
primary structure rather than a free-standing structure and shall be located as
far as possible interior to the site. Enclosures shall be constructed of
materials consistent with or complementary to the primary structure.
Additionally, the enclosure should be landscaped to minimize the visual
presence and impact of the structure.
         g.   Loading Docks & Overhead Doors: As much as possible, buildings
should be oriented such that loading docks open to ‘service zones’ (see
Architecture section). Views from adjacent properties and roadways of loading
docks and overhead doors shall be completely mitigated through the placement of
the building, the use of earthen berming with necessary landscape vegetation
consisting of primarily evergreen materials and/or opaque fencing in
combination with landscaping to soften the presence of the fence. The
vegetation species shall be selected for its density and height and shall
achieve screening day one.
      4.   Site topography and grading for detention or retention ponds and
storm water flow paths do not negate fulfillment of the intent of landscaping
required within the site, including the satisfactory achievement of visual
screening as previously specified. The varieties of vegetation will need to be
carefully chosen to accommodate drier conditions that occur on slopes in which
water runs downhill rather than soaking in (more drought tolerant plants) or
potential wet feet from periodic standing water within detention ponds and
overland flowage paths (moisture tolerant plants).
      Ponds, lakes, wetlands, or retention ponds may be placed along the edge
of the development if the following criteria are met:
         a.   Such water features constantly contain water at a level visible
from adjoining properties and public streets.
         b.   Pond edge treatments are incorporated to enhance the
attractiveness of the element (no ‘wild overgrown pond edge’ allowed); and
         c.   The appropriate water circulation and clarification measures are
implemented, including water fountains or jets when implemented which project
water high enough to be visible from adjoining properties and public streets.
   D.   Lighting:
      1.   The foot candle level at all exterior parcel lines shall be less
than one. The foot candle level at interior or common property lines shall be
less than one unless part of a shared parking area or vehicle drive aisle.
      2.   The height of overhead lights shall be analyzed as part of the site
planning process to ensure no impact to drivers on Interstate 35 or Iowa
Highway 5.
      3.   Fixtures are to be downcast, cut-off variety to direct lighting to
parking areas and eliminate glare to neighboring areas. Bulbs shall not be
exposed or extend down past the fixture.
      4.   No wall packs or floodlighting are allowed without appropriate
shields to direct light to their intended target. In addition to cut-off
fixtures, particular attention shall be given to eliminate hot spots and light
glare. To achieve this, additional measures may include, but are not limited
to, lowering parking lot light levels after business hours, turning off lights
not necessary for security purposes, and use of landscaping for light
screening/blockage.
      5.   As a part of the review of each site plan, a photometric plan must
be submitted. During the review, the applicant must demonstrate how lighting
will not adversely affect adjoining properties. (Ord. 2471, 5-17-2021)
125-07: ARCHITECTURE:
With the high-visibility location of the development and proximity to
recreational uses, the intent is to provide industria l develop ment that is as
visually appealing as is reasonable, especially by the public. Therefore, the
building and site design for development within the PUD shall be organized in a
“public zone” and “service zone” development concept. The intent is to create
building facades throughout that are varied and articulated to provide visual
interest and to establish a unique identity for the development yet recognize
the constraints and needs of industrial users. Site and building design should
address the public vs. service zones differently to provide that high-quality
appearance for the development yet balance the functional and security needs of
industrial users.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/082da52c44e30c25b7c604a21715194e08bbd8ec/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3649.png]
All buildings within this development shall accommodate or incorporate the
following in building design and materials:
   A.   Building design and plan layout should orientate the pubic zone
activities (visitor parking, office functions and employee parking and break
areas) along the street façade or adjacent to non-industrial uses and organize
the service zone operations (loading, storage and service areas) in less
visible areas such as at the side or rear of the building, adjacent to other
industrial uses or in areas that provide sufficient screening due to natural
features of the site or installed landscape buffers, screen walls and fencing.
Views of garage or loading dock doors shall be mitigated from the public street
or adjacent property.
   B.   Screening of operations and functions such as loading, outdoor storage,
fabrication yards and service areas shall be designed as an integral part of
the building design to the greatest extent possible.
   C.   Buildings shall be organized to create a logical and identifiable
relationship with the site and other buildings, open spaces, and pedestrian
circulation paths.
   D.   Public Zones:
      1.   In general, building design in the public zone shall provide facades
that are varied and articulated by careful attention to exterior building
materials and details, use of fenestration, and change in building mass within
the plan and roof design to lessen the plainness of appearance which can be
characteristic of large industrial buildings. However, the level of design and
detail can be reduced on the facades not facing a street (service zone) as long
as the building in its entirety is cohesive in design.
      2.   Any building elevations that face a street should avoid the
appearance of being the “back of the building”. Placing office or employee
functions in front of the operations or service areas along the street façade
provides a benefit in building design as these spaces can more easily
accommodate human scale massing and fenestration, providing interest and
transparency along the street. If the building function dictates the need for a
large blank wall facing the street, their appearance can be mitigated with the
following strategies:
         a.   Incorporating minor changes in building footprint and roof forms
along with utilizing a variety of materials for visual interest and to break-up
long blank wall expanses.
         b.   Often fenestration can be incorporated into the design as accent
elements higher up on the façade. These openings can be located high enough
that they don’t interfere with storage and equipment layout or trigger security
concerns but add interest to the façade and provide natural light to the
interior of the space.
         c.   Provide landscaping along the façade in a sufficient mix and
quantity to reduce the imposing scale of the building.
         d.   Continue the same materials and details along all public zone
facades to provide a cohesive appearance.
   E.   Roof Forms: Building design in public zones should have enhanced
cornices on parapets or detail in the primary surface and use rooflines to
define entry areas and emphasize human scale. If roof overhangs or projections
are incorporated in the building design, they should be of sufficient size and
projection to be in proportion to the scale of the building.
   F.   Entryways: Building entries serving the public should be designed as a
visual focal point and provide human scale to a typically large-scale building.
Secondary or services entries to the building can be less prominent in design,
yet still provide a recognizable entry point and shelter from the elements.
   G.   Materials:
      1.   Parcel A (General Industrial).
         a.   Within the public and service zone areas, the following materials
can be utilized: Natural, durable materials such as brick and stone, precast or
cast in place concrete or concrete masonry units and metal or composite
cladding. Other materials that are durable in nature may be implemented if
acceptable to the City as determined as part of the site plan review process.
All hard materials shall have the appearance of three-dimensional elements,
logically terminated at a change in building form or wrapping outside corners
appropriately.
         b.   The use of EIFS or synthetic stucco shall be used in limited
quantities and primarily as an accent or trim material; located only on the
upper portions of the facades. EIFS or synthetic stucco may not comprise more
than twenty percent (20%) of the exterior cladding area.
         c.   Fit and Finish: Exposed edges of cladding material used anywhere
on the building must have a fully finished edge or be terminated with trim.
Concrete and CMU’s shall have integrated color rather than surface applied
paint/staining if a color other than the raw material is implemented.
      2.   Parcel B (Business Park).
         a.   Public Zone facades: Natural, durable materials such as brick and
stone, architectural precast or cast in place concrete or architectural
concrete masonry units shall be used as the major materials used on facades
within the public zone (fifty percent (50%) or greater). The remainder of the
public zone façade areas can utilize architectural metal or composite cladding.
Other materials that are durable in nature may be implemented within the public
zone if acceptable to the City as determined as part of the site plan review
process. All hard materials shall have the appearance of three-dimensional
elements, logically terminated at a change in building form or wrapping outside
corners appropriately.
         b.   Service zone facades: The following materials can be utilized in
addition to the materials noted above: non-architectural precast or cast in
place concrete panels, concrete masonry units (CMU) and metal or composite
cladding.
         c.   The use of EIFS or synthetic stucco shall be used in limited
quantities and primarily as an accent or trim material; located only on the
upper portions of the facades. EIFS or synthetic stucco may not comprise more
than twenty percent (20%) of the exterior cladding area within the public zone
or service zone.
         d.   Fit and Finish: Composite panel or metal cladding utilized for
the public zone facades must have concealed fasteners. Exposed edges of
cladding material used anywhere on the building must have a fully finished edge
or be terminated with trim. Concrete and CMU’s shall have integrated color
rather than surface applied paint/staining and should generally have texture
for interest; smooth CMU may be used in conjunction with texture for accent
purposes. (Ord. 2471, 5-17-2021)
125-08: SIGNAGE:
All proposed ground and exterior wall signage require a sign permit issued by
the City of West Des Moines through normal sign review procedures. Unless
otherwise prescribed herein, signage shall abide by the standards and
regulations as set forth in Title 9, Chapter 18: Signs for the zoning district
designated for each PUD parcel.
Interstate Signs will be allowed in accordance with standards and regulations
set forth in Title 9, Chapter 18: Signs. A maximum of two (2) such signs may be
located along the Iowa Highway 5 frontage provided there is a minimum five
hundred feet (500') of separation between the two signs and one hundred feet
(100') of setback from both the east and west perimeter PUD boundaries. The
allowable copy area shall comply with city code. Tenant(s) within the South
Branch Business Park development may be identified on a sign located on a
different parcel than where the tenant’s business is; however, no business or
tenant shall be identified on more than one (1) sign. No pole signs shall be
allowed within the development. (Ord. 2471, 5-17-2021)
125-09: STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN:
A Master Storm Water Management Plan for the entire development which governs
the overall storm water management of the development shall be submitted to and
approved by the City of West Des Moines as part of the first plat or site plan
approval, whichever occurs first. Specific Storm Water Management Plans
demonstrating compliance with the approved South Branch Business Park Master
Storm Water Management Plan, on file with the City will be required with the
development of each site plan. The Storm Water Management Plans shall be
prepared at the developer’s expense, by a Professional Engineer licensed in the
State of Iowa. All Storm Water Management Plans shall comply with the City’s
applicable design standards for storm water management existing at the time
each site plan is approved. A Storm Water Management Facility Maintenance
Agreement (SWMFMA) shall be provided prior to issuance of the first occupancy
permit, including temporary occupancy. Certifications and as-built information
shall be provided prior to issuance of the first Final Occupancy Permit. If
deemed necessary by the City, an update to the SWMFMA and additional
certifications and as-built information will be required prior to issuance of
subsequent Final Occupancy permits. (Ord. 2471, 5-17-2021)
125-10: TRAFFIC STUDY:
The February 2021 traffic analysis gives preliminary recommendations based on
the proposed land uses. Additional studies will be necessary as the site
develops and more information is known regarding the future land use, site
layout, and access locations. Therefore, the preliminary recommendations for
the adjacent streets and potential access locations are subject to change.
The internal site layout should allow for the safe and orderly movement of
vehicles and pedestrians, as well as emergency vehicle maneuverability. Trucks
need to be able to access the site without blocking traffic on the adjacent
streets, and internal conflicts near the accesses must not cause traffic to
spill back onto the adjacent streets.
Signing, pavement markings, and other traffic control devices on all streets
need to be in conformance with the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices
(MUTCD, Federal Highway Administration). (Ord. 2471, 5-17-2021)
125-11: REPEALER:
All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with the provision of this
Ordinance are hereby repealed. (Ord. 2471, 5-17-2021)
125-12: VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES:
Any person who violates the provisions of this Ordinance upon conviction shall
be punished as set forth in Title 1, Chapter 4, Section 1 of the City Code of
the City of West Des Moines, Iowa. (Ord. 2471, 5-17-2021)
125-13: OTHER REMEDIES:
In addition to the provisions set out in the Violations and Penalties Section
herein, the City may proceed in law or equity against any person, firm or
corporation for violation of any section or subsection of this Ordinance. (Ord.
2471, 5-17-2021)
125-14: SAVINGS CLAUSE:
If any section, provision, sentence, clause, phrase or part of the Ordinance
shall be adjudged invalid or unconstitutional, such adjudication shall not
affect the validity of the Ordinance as a whole or any provision, section,
subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or part hereof not adjudged invalid or
unconstitutional. (Ord. 2471, 5-17-2021)
125-15: EFFECTIVE DATE:
This Ordinance shall be in full force and effect after its passage, approval
and publication as provided by law. (Ord. 2471, 5-17-2021)
125-99: LEGISLATIVE HISTORY:
Ord. 2471, 5-17-2021.
PUD #126
VILLAGE ON JORDAN CREEK
SECTION:
126-01: Legal Description
126-02: Sketch Plan
126-03: Development Intent
126-04: Required Plans
126-05: Conditions
126-06: Requirements
126-07: Buffers
126-08: Lighting
126-09: Architecture
126-10: Landscaping
126-11: Signage Regulation
126-12: Storm Water Management
126-13: Traffic Study
126-14: Repealer
126-15: Savings Clause
126-16: Violations And Penalties
126-17: Other Remedies
126-18: Effective Date
126-99: Legislative History
126-01: LEGAL DESCRIPTION:
A PARCEL OF LAND IN THE NW1/4 NE1/4 & NE1/4 NE1/4 OF SECTION 11, TOWNSHIP 78
NORTH, RANGE 26 WEST OF THE 5TH P.M., CITY OF WEST DES MOINES, DALLAS COUNTY,
IOWA THAT IS MORE PARTICULARLY DESCRIBED AS FOLLOWS:
COMMENCING AS A POINT OF REFERENCE AT THE NE CORNER OF SAID SECTION 11; THENCE
S00°43'20"W, 704.85 FEET ALONG THE EAST LINE OF SAID NE1/4 NE1/4 TO THE NE
CORNER OF BARTLETT FARM PLAT 1, AN OFFICIAL PLAT RECORDED IN BOOK 1998, PAGE
10365 AT THE DALLAS COUNTY RECORDER’S OFFICE; THENCE S84°01'15"W, 83.07 FEET
ALONG THE NORTH LINE OF SAID BARTLETT FARM PLAT 1 TO A POINT ON THE WEST RIGHT-
OF-WAY LINE OF JORDAN CREEK PARKWAY AS IT IS PRESENTLY ESTABLISHED AND RECORDED
IN BOOK 2003, PAGE 13188 AT THE DALLAS COUNTY RECORDER’S OFFICE AND THE POINT
OF BEGINNING; THENCE CONTINUING S84°01'15"W, 710.06 FEET ALONG SAID NORTH LINE
OF BARTLETT FARM PLAT 1 TO THE NW CORNER OF SAID BARTLETT FARM PLAT 1, SAID NW
CORNER ALSO BEING THE NE CORNER OF BARTLETT FARM PLAT 2, AN OFFICIAL PLAT
RECORDED IN BOOK 2000, PAGE 2911 AT THE DALLAS COUNTY RECORDER’S OFFICE; THENCE
S83°59'43"W, 515.19 FEET ALONG THE NORTH LINE OF SAID BARTLETT FARM PLAT 2 TO A
POINT ON THE WEST LINE OF SAID NE1/4 NE1/4; THENCE S83°59'09"W, 66.45 FEET
ALONG SAID NORTH LINE TO A POINT ON THE SE CORNER OF WESTBRIDGE, AN OFFICIAL
PLAT RECORDED IN BOOK 1999, PAGE 13841 AT THE DALLAS COUNTY RECORDER’S OFFICE,
SAID SE CORNER ALSO BEING ON THE SW CORNER OF THE EAST 66.00 FEET OF THE NORTH
705.8 FEET OF THE NW1/4 NE1/4 OF SAID SECTION 11; THENCE N00°39'47"E, 642.86
FEET ALONG THE WEST LINE OF SAID WESTBRIDGE, SAID WEST LINE ALSO BEING THE WEST
LINE OF THE SAID EAST 66.00 FEET OF THE NORTH 705.8 FEET OF THE NW1/4 NE1/4, TO
THE NE CORNER OF LOT 1 OF SAID WESTBRIDGE, SAID NE CORNER ALSO BEING THE SW
CORNER OF ACQUISITION PLAT RECORDED IN BOOK 2017, PAGE 17213 AT THE DALLAS
COUNTY RECORDER’S OFFICE AND LYING ON THE SOUTH RIGHT-OF-WAY LINE OF ASHWORTH
ROAD AS IT IS PRESENTLY ESTABLISHED; THENCE N83°56'53"E, 789.25 FEET ALONG THE
SOUTH LINE OF SAID ACQUISITION PLAT AND SAID SOUTH RIGHT-OF-WAY LINE TO A
POINT; THENCE N87°43'27"E, 303.69 FEET ALONG SAID SOUTH RIGHT-OF-WAY LINE TO A
POINT; THENCE N83°56'53"E, 96.40 FEET ALONG SAID SOUTH RIGHT-OF-WAY LINE TO A
POINT; THENCE S47°39'34"E, 46.53 FEET ALONG SAID SOUTH RIGHT-OF-WAY LINE TO A
POINT ON THE WEST RIGHT-OF-WAY LINE OF SAID JORDAN CREEK PARKWAY; THENCE
S00°43'20"W, 589.15 FEET ALONG SAID WEST RIGHT-OF-WAY LINE TO THE POINT OF
BEGINNING AND CONTAINING 18.81 ACRES MORE OR LESS. (Ord. 2445, 10-19-2020; amd.
Ord. 2476, 6-21-2021)
126-02: SKETCH PLAN:
Attached hereto and made a part of this rezoning approval, for concept
description and delineation is the Sketch Plan Document for the Village on
Jordan Creek PUD marked Exhibit “A”. The Sketch Plan is a graphic
representation of the property included in the PUD delineating the approximate
location and configuration of the Parcels for the purpose of easier reference
for the applicable regulations of this Ordinance. Where the PUD sketch plan and
PUD language conflict, the language shall prevail. (Ord. 2445, 10-19-2020; amd.
Ord. 2476, 6-21-2021)
126-03: DEVELOPMENT INTENT:
The Village on Jordan Creek PUD intends to provide a framework for development
standards reflective of the realities and constraints of infill development and
to establish design standards for construction that are appropriate for the
neighborhood. It is the goal of the developer to create a mixed-use development
that expands the commercial opportunities by providing restaurant and retail
spaces for the corridor and enhances the area by including multifamily
residential uses that provide an alternative housing choice which can support
the area businesses. (Ord. 2445, 10-19-2020; amd. Ord. 2476, 6-21-2021)
126-04: REQUIRED PLANS:
   A.   Preliminary Plat/Final Plat: Platting for any parcel shall be at the
discretion of the developer. Platting, if needed for subdivision or right-of-
way dedication, shall be done in accordance with the City’s Subdivision
Ordinance. As part of development, each PUD area shall be platted to define
specific lots or lot-tied to combine existing lots in accordance with the
City’s Subdivision Ordinance to delineate the ground associated with each
development area. If lot-tied, no building may be sold separately from another
until the property is replatted through the City’s Subdivision process.
   B.   Site Plan Development Applications: Site plans for buildings within the
Village on Jordan Creek PUD must meet the intent of the PUD. With the exception
of grading done under a City approved grading Permit, prior to development of
the respective PUD or platted parcel, site plans for development shall be
submitted to the City for review through the development review process and
approval by the appropriate approval body.
   C.   Roads and Utilities: Unless otherwise specifically restricted by City
Council action, ground work and construction of private roads and utilities may
be started, at the developer’s risk, upon approval of a preliminary plat by the
City Council; however, changes necessary due to subsequent site plan review and
approval shall be at the financial expense of the developer with no cost-share
with or reimbursement from the city. Public street and utility construction may
begin, at the risk of the developer, after approval of the preliminary plat
which includes the improvements by the City Council and construction
improvement plans by the City of West Des Moines.
   Prior to approval of the final plat or first site plan, unless otherwise
allowed by Council, the developer shall provide the appropriate agreements,
easements, and sureties for all public rights-of-way and other public
improvements (utilities, sidewalks, streetlights, etc.) within and associated
with the development. (Ord. 2445, 10-19-2020; amd. Ord. 2476, 6-21-2021)
126-05: CONDITIONS:
Whereas, Title 9, Chapter 9, Planned Unit Development District of the City
Code, establishes certain regulations and guidelines pertaining to accompanying
information required on plat and site plan documents. In addition, the
following conditions, restrictions, and regulations are adopted as part of this
approval:
   A.   General Conditions: In addition to the PUD Sketch Plan Map, the
following general development criteria shall be integrated into and made a part
of this planned unit development:
   B.   The Village on Jordan Creek shall be limited to a mixed-use development
located in Parcel A, a maximum of 5 acres of Medium Density Residential RM-12
zoning located in Parcel B, one acre of Medium Density Residential zoning
consisting of an existing single family detached dwelling and future detached
accessory buildings in Parcel E, and office zoning for the land area of Parcel
C. Parcel D was removed from the original PUD.
   C.   General Conformance to Subdivision Ordinance: All subdivisions, public
and private streets and street rights-of-way and general development shall
adhere to the standards and design criteria set forth in the West Des Moines
Subdivision Ordinance and/or established City policies pertaining thereto,
unless otherwise stated within this Ordinance.
   D.   General Conformance to Zoning Ordinance: Unless otherwise specified
herein, the development of the Village on Jordan Creek PUD shall comply with
the provisions of the Title 9, “Zoning”, of the city code or any other
applicable codes.
   E.   Flood Hazard: In all areas within a 100-year frequency flood hazard
zone, or adjoining drainage ways, and detention ponding areas involving
potential flood hazards, no building shall be erected that has a lowest floor,
including basements, less that one foot (1') above the determining level of the
100-year frequency flood event, and no building shall be located within twenty-
five feet (25') of any easement or property boundary of a major drainage way,
storm water detention basin, or pond, unless said location is approved as part
of a development entitlement by the City Council and said building is
structurally designed accordingly.
   F.   Developer Responsibilities: Unless otherwise agreed upon by the city,
the Developer, their successors and/or assigns, if any, shall pay all planning,
engineering, and construction costs for the development of the planned unit
development, as required by this Ordinance and approved site plans and the cost
of all streets, storm sewers, sanitary sewers, drainage way improvements,
detention basins, water mains, buffers and other improvements as required for
rights-of-way or public easements within the Village on Jordan Creek PUD,
unless otherwise approved by the City Council.
   The obligations of the developer identified herein shall not preclude the
developer from entering into private agreements for shared construction
responsibilities and/or financing with property owners/developers of ground on
adjacent properties and or benefiting from the improvements.
   G.   Public Street Improvements and Right-Of-Way Dedication: Unless
otherwise agreed upon by the city, at time of subdivision platting of ground
within the PUD or in conjunction with site development, whichever occurs first,
the subdivider/developer shall be responsible for construction and/or
installation of all required public and private infrastructure improvements
necessary to support development in a manner that will assure that the
infrastructure functions at an acceptable level of service and in accordance
with all city ordinances.
      1.   76th Street Extension: The extension of 76th Street to Ashworth Road
will be required for the development of the Village on Jordan Creek PUD. The
extension of 76th Street from the existing south terminus of 76th Street to
Ashworth Road shall be completed prior to any occupancy, including temporary
occupancy, of any portion of the multi-use development in Parcel A or any
development of Parcel B and/or C.
      2.   Traffic Signal: The pro rata share of cost of future traffic signal
at 76th and Ashworth Road shall be the responsibility of the development
pursuant to the assessment policy of the city.
      3.   East West Connection: The east west connector street from 76th
Street to Jordan Creek Parkway will be required at the time of development of
Parcel A and shall be completed prior to any occupancy, including temporary
occupancy of the mixed-use development on Parcel A.
   H.   Construction Traffic: All construction traffic shall access the site
from either Jordan Creek Parkway or Ashworth Road. No construction traffic
shall access the development area from Aspen Drive and 76th Street from the
south.
   I.   Sanitary Sewer: Any proposed change in approved land use densities
(office or residential) for the PUD will require an analysis of the downstream
sanitary sewer capacity to assure that adequate capacity is available for the
proposed change in approved land use densities.
   J.   Fire Access:
      1.   All access drives, internal drive aisles and parking lots shall
permit the travel of the Fire Department’s largest vehicle, including adequate
accommodation of the vehicle’s turning needs. Approval of unique design
solutions to accommodate fire access may be granted by the City Council if the
solutions proposed are acceptable to and recommended for approval by the West
Des Moines Fire Department.
      2.   At the discretion of the City’s Fire Marshal, “No Parking Fire Lane”
areas may be established as necessary to ensure efficient movement and access
of the fire trucks. The developer shall be responsible for the procurement and
erection of approved fire lane signage.
      3.   A minimum of fourteen feet (14') of vertical clearance over the
travel portion of all vehicle travel ways shall be maintained at all times.
      4.   The property owner or its designee shall be responsible for
enforcement of no parking lanes and maintaining adequate clearance of
structures and vegetation along and above all vehicle travel ways, regardless
if public or private.
      5.   Adequate fire accesses as determined by the City’s Fire Marshal
shall be provided at all times to those areas under construction.
   K.   Street Lighting: Unless otherwise agreed upon by the City Council, the
Developer shall be responsible for all costs associated with the installation
of public streetlights within or adjacent to any area proposed to be platted or
developed.
   L.   Mailboxes: The Developer shall be responsible for installation of any
required Cluster Box Units (CBUs) as per the local U.S. Postal Service Post
Office. (Ord. 2445, 10-19-2020; amd. Ord. 2476, 6-21-2021)
126-06: REQUIREMENTS:
Unless provided otherwise in this ordinance, all general use regulations,
performance standards and provisions set forth in title 9, “Zoning”, of the
city code for the Office (OF), Support Commercial (SC) or Medium Density
Residential (MD) Zoning Districts based on the attached sketch plan shall apply
to any development within the Village on Jordan Creek Planned Unit Development.
To the extent that the provisions of this section conflict with or are more
restrictive than similar provisions provided elsewhere in the West Des Moines
zoning ordinance, the provisions of this section shall control. The following
land use design criteria, development standards, and landscaping regulations
shall apply to parcels within the Village on Jordan Creek Planned Unit
Development:
   A.   Parcel A: Parcels A is intended as a mixed-use building with commercial
and office uses and multi-family residential apartment dwellings.
      1.   Permitted Uses: All permitted (P) and permitted conditional (PC)
uses within the support commercial (SC) district shall be allowed with the
approval of the appropriate review and approval body, except the following,
which shall be prohibited:
         a.   Prohibited Uses: the following permitted and permitted
conditional uses otherwise allowed in the Support Commercial (SC) District
shall be prohibited:
         SIC Code    Use
         0752      Animal Specialty Services - Overnight Boarding
         0783      Ornamental Shrub and Tree Services
         4225      Self Service Storage Facility
         45-49      Transportation, Communication and Public Utilities
         55         Automotive Dealer and Service Stations
         5999      Engine and Motor Equipment and Supply Stores
         70         Hotels, Rooming Houses, Camps, and Other Lodging Places
         726         Funeral Service
         75         Automotive Repair, Services, and Parking
         7699      Recreational Vehicle Repair Services
         7699      Agricultural Equipment Repair Services
         7699      Misc. Automotive Repair Services
         79         Amusement and Recreational Services
      2.   Density: The following density shall be permitted for the mixed-use
building on Parcel A:
         a.   Residential Uses: The total number of dwelling units allowed
shall not exceed one hundred ninety-nine (199) units.
         b.   Commercial Uses: The total combined gross area for commercial use
(s) (restaurant, retail and office uses) within the development shall not
exceed twenty-seven thousand two hundred and forty (27,240) gross square feet.
            (1)   Restaurant Uses: A maximum of three (3) restaurant uses may
be permitted for the development with a maximum area of twenty-three thousand
six hundred and eighty (23,680) gross square feet. For multiple restaurant uses
to be permitted, the developer/owner must demonstrate differing peak-hours of
service (or days, or seasons) or differing times of peak parking demand, and
that the total parking demand at any one time would be adequately served by the
existing onsite parking spaces designated for commercial uses in addition to
that required for the residential use.
         c.   For any change in use of the existing commercial and restaurant
uses or tenant space(s), the developer/owner shall provide documentation that
the density of use(s) and the parking required for the combined commercial uses
on site can be accommodated by the existing onsite parking spaces designated
for commercial uses in addition to that required for the residential use
provided within the development.
      2.   Building Setback: The primary and accessory building setbacks shall
be measured from the property line, unless otherwise indicated, to the visible
primary vertical foundation wall. Intermittent encroachment into the setback
for canopies, awnings, building bump-outs, outdoor dining areas, etc. may be
allowed at the discretion of the Director of the Development Services
Department.
         a.   North property line (front yard) - Minimum of 70 feet for the
principle building, with attached valet roofed canopy allowed to extend into
the setback
         b.   South property line (front yard) - Minimum of 20 feet to the east
west connection street, with a minimum of 150 feet to the south boundary line
of Parcel A.
         c.   East property line (front yard) - Minimum of 90 feet for the
principle building, with attached structure for outdoor dining allowed to
extend into the setback.
         d.   West property line (front yard) - Minimum of 26 feet.
      3.   Building Height: Maximum height of the principle building shall not
exceed 55 feet as measured from the average grade along the foundation of the
buildings.
      4.   Parking:
         a.   The minimum number of parking stalls provided on site shall be
not less than four hundred and sixty-seven (467) stalls.
         b.   The following minimum parking ratios shall be used for
determining parking requirements for the various tenants within the multi-use
development in Parcel A:
            (1)   Commercial (office/retail/non-residential) uses, excluding
restaurant uses - three and a half (3.5) stalls per one thousand (1,000) gross
square feet of floor area
            (2)   Sit-down restaurant - eight (8) stalls per one thousand
(1,000) square feet for the customer seating areas (front of house) space. One
(1) additional space shall be provided for each employee on the largest peak
shift.
            (3)   Residential - one and a half (1.50) stalls per one (1) or two
(2)-bedroom unit.
            (4)   Residential Visitor - one (1) stall per every ten (10) units.
         c.   Cumulative/Shared parking for uses within parcel A may be allowed
where it can be demonstrated that the peak requirement of occupancies of all
uses within the site occurs at different times during the day. Applicants
wishing to use shared parking as a means of satisfying minimum parking
requirements shall submit a shared parking study/analysis to the Development
Services Department that clearly demonstrates the feasibility of shared
parking. Prior to a change in tenant occupancy, including change in tenants
conducting the same type of commercial activity, parking availability shall be
reevaluated. Only if it is demonstrated by the parking study that there is
sufficient available parking to accommodate all uses (residential and non-
residential) within the development, or, additional parking is provided as
otherwise allowed herein, shall a building permit for Tenant Improvement be
issued.
            (1)   Shared Parking Study/Analysis: The applicant or property
owner shall conduct the parking study - the hiring of an outside agency is at
the applicant/property owner's discretion but is not required. At a minimum the
parking study shall provide details on the density or size and type of the
proposed uses within the development, operational details, number of employees
at peak times, the anticipated rate of parking turnover for each non-
residential use and the anticipated peak parking and traffic loads for all uses
that will be sharing parking spaces. In addition, the applicant shall provide a
minimum one-week of daily counts documenting the number of utilized and vacant
spaces. Such counts shall be done at noon and at six o’clock (6:00) p.m. each
day, as well as fifteen (15) minutes after the indicated start time of peak
times for each of the businesses.
         d.   Alternate Parking: Parking for employees only may be accommodated
with an off-site parking agreement. All parking for residential uses and
patrons of commercial tenants must be provided on-site. Only parking that is
located within one thousand feet (1,000') of the entry into the tenant space
may qualify. Off-site parking shall be connected to the Parcel A by a defined
paved walkable path or sidewalk with crossings of a street occurring at a
defined intersection, preferably signalized. The location of the offsite
parking will only be allowed when the site location is a use with off peak
parking demand from this development or the site has an excess of parking
existing on site.
         e.   Additional parking may be required to be constructed within the
site, including the provision of an additional level on the parking structure
or operations restricted when on-site parking issues or parking in surrounding
neighborhoods becomes a problem and complaints are received. At such time when
it is demonstrated on multiple occurrences that there is not enough parking to
accommodate on-site uses or densities, the City reserves the right to require
modifications in operations or an increase in the number of parking stalls
either through construction on-site or execution of shared-parking agreements.
Prior to implementation of additional parking within the site, submittal and
approval of a Minor Modification Site Plan application will be required which
details the location of additional parking and engineering and design details.
      5.   Off Street Loading Areas: All off-street loading/service areas shall
comply with title 9, chapter 15 of the city code unless noted herein.
         a.   Loading areas located on the south side of the multi-use building
shall be screened from view from the residential properties to the south. If
screening is not feasible adjacent to the building, required screening may be
provided on the south side of the east west public street connection to Jordan
Creek Parkway in addition to any screening necessary adjacent to the building
and vehicle areas.
         b.   Views of overhead doors or loading areas from Ashworth Road,
Jordan Creek Pkwy or 76th Street shall be mitigated.
      6.   Open Space: The southern portion of Parcel A, south of the east west
connection street, may be used for meeting the minimum code required open space
for the mixed-use development. The area south of the east west connector will
be limited in use to open space and recreation functions, including as provided
within the Parkland Dedication Agreement for the mixed-use development.
   B.   Parcel B: For Parcel B, all general use and bulk regulations and
provisions set forth in Title 9, Zoning of the West Des Moines City Code for
the Medium Density Residential (RM-8) district as permitted and permitted
conditionally shall apply
      1.   Density: The transition of densities and transition of building form
requirements of 9-5-7 of the zoning code shall be applied
      2.   Access: A minimum of one point of shared access shall be provided to
Parcel E through Parcel B along the east property line of Parcel E. Such
agreement shall be provided through a written shared access agreement prior to
approval of a Site Plan for the property.
      3.   No Build Easement: Parcel B shall provide a no build easement with a
minimum dimension of ten feet (10') along the full length of the west property
line for the benefit of Parcel E. The six-foot (6') fence required for the
fifteen (15') buffer on Parcel B shall be permitted within the no build
easement but must accommodate access for Parcel E in accordance with the shared
access agreement. Such easement shall be provided prior to approval of a Site
Plan for the property.
   C.   Parcel C: For Parcel C, all general use and bulk regulations and
provisions set forth in Title 9, Zoning of the West Des Moines City Code for
the Office (OF) district shall apply to any development proposal within this
parcel, unless noted otherwise in this ordinance.
      1.   Permitted Uses: All permitted (P) and permitted conditional (PC)
uses within the office (OF) district shall be allowed with the approval of the
appropriate review and approval body, except the following, which shall be
prohibited:
         a.   Prohibited Uses: the following permitted and permitted
conditional uses otherwise allowed in the Office (OF) District shall be
prohibited:
         SIC 347       Coating, engraving and allied services
         SIC 4225       Self-Storage
         SIC 472-473   Passenger and Freight Transportation
         SIC 58          Eating and Drinking Paces
         SIC 701         Hotels and Motels
         SIC 7212      Garment pressing and agents for laundries and dry
cleaners
         SIC 726         Funeral Services
         SIC 7299-02   Massage therapy establishments and steam bath services
         SIC 79          Event Venues
         SIC 7991      Physical fitness facilities
         SIC 7997      Membership Sports & Recreation Clubs
      2.   Building Height: Building(s) within Parcel C located within one
hundred fifty feet (150') of the west property line shall be limited to one
story in height. Outside of the one hundred fifty feet (150'), maximum building
height shall not exceed 3 stories or thirty-six feet (36').
   D.   Parcel D: removed from PUD.
   E.   Parcel E: Parcel E shall be zoned to Medium Density Residential (RM-6)
district and is intended to maintain the property as one single-family detached
dwelling with detached accessory buildings for storage of goods and materials
utilized and owned by Lutheran Church of Hope. Any modifications to the use or
development of the property shall require an amendment to the PUD.
      1.   Building Setbacks:
         a.   Primary Building: The primary building shall maintain the
existing setbacks on the north, west and east sides of the building. Building
addition(s) may be permitted to the south of the existing structure to allow
for the expansion of the existing use and structure.
         b.   Detached Accessory Structure:
            (1)   West & South property line: Minimum of thirty feet (30');
            (2)   North & East property line: No minimum setback.
      2.   Building Size: All new detached accessory structures shall be
limited to a maximum wall length of one hundred feet (100'), with a maximum
height of 2 stories. Landscaping and buffering shall be provided between the
structure and the west property line abutting the single family uses to the
west and shall be provided in accordance with Section 7 of this ordinance.
      3.   Appearance: The design of all new detached accessory structures
shall be in keeping with the context of the area they are located in, with
comparable architectural design, materials and details to the principal
structure, including roof slope, overhangs, etc. Any metal cladding shall be
prefinished and have the appearance of the materials used on the primary
building. Galvanized metal is prohibited as the exterior finish material in
residential zoning districts. (Ord. 2445, 10-19-2020; amd. Ord. 2476, 6-21-
2021; Ord. 2616, 7-1-2024)
126-07: BUFFERS:
The provision of adequate buffering and landscaping shall be more thoroughly
evaluated and approved as part of the site plan approval process. Additional
buffer and landscaping may be required at that time in response to additional
details of the use, buildings, parking, loading docks, mechanical equipment,
etc. to be implemented.
   A.   Buffers shall be provided along the perimeter boundaries as follows:
      1.   Parcel A:
         a.   South: Minimum forty feet (40') from property line. Existing
landscaping shall be preserved in the south ten feet (10') of the buffer area.
         b.   North, East and West: No buffers between internal PUD parcels
shall be required except to mitigate undesirable site elements and views and to
provide for desirable streetscapes.
      2.   Parcel B:
         a.   West - minimum fifteen feet (15') from property line
         b.   South - minimum forty feet (40') from property line. Existing
landscaping shall be preserved in the south ten feet (10') of the buffer area.
         c.   North and East: No buffers required except to mitigate
undesirable site elements and views and to provide for desirable streetscapes.
      3.   Parcel C:
         a.   West: Minimum forty feet (40') from property line
         b.   North, South, and East: No buffers between internal PUD parcels
shall be required except to mitigate undesirable site elements and views and to
provide for desirable streetscapes.
      4.   Parcel E: A minimum thirty feet (30') buffer along the west property
line shall be provided adjacent to any new detached accessory structures
developed after the adoption of the ordinance.
   B.   The implementation of vegetation as indicated below shall be required.
An earthen berm with a minimum height of six feet (6') shall be implemented
along the south property line of parcels A and B and the west property line of
parcel C to enhance buffering and screening of otherwise negative site elements
and to aid in ensuring year-round screening for abutting single family
residential properties. A six-foot (6') solid privacy fence shall be provided
within the 40' buffer along the south property line of Parcel B. Buffers should
be designed to achieve the maximum amount of screening from the maximum number
of viewpoints with vegetation layered to ensure adequate blockage of views and
to create depth and a sense of naturalness. Care should be taken to ensure that
‘thru-views’ under tree canopies are adequately blocked.
      1.   The minimum vegetation within required buffers shall be provided as
follows. Buffers shall be so designed to serve as a visual continuation of
existing adjacent buffers and/or as a unifying element within the development.
         a.   Forty Foot (40') Buffer:
            (1)   One (1) overstory tree and two (2) ornamental or evergreen
trees, and six (6) shrubs shall be provided per thirty-five (35) lineal feet of
required buffer.
         b.   Fifteen Foot (15') Buffer:
            (1)   One (1) overstory tree shall be provided per thirty-five (35)
lineal feet of required buffer. No substitution of the number of over story
trees shall be permitted.
      2.   Vegetation substitution:
         a.   Two (2) ornamental trees, one (1) evergreen tree, or six (6)
shrubs may be substituted for one required overstory tree; however, no more
than twenty-five percent (25%) of the required number of overstory trees may be
substituted.
         b.   A twenty-five (25) square foot mass planting of perennials or
ornamental grasses may be substituted for three (3) shrubs.
      3.   Landscape vegetation required within buffer areas is in addition to
the landscape vegetation required of open space, parking areas, and that
necessary to achieve adequate visual mitigation of undesirable site elements
and views. (Ord. 2445, 10-19-2020; amd. Ord. 2476, 6-21-2021)
126-08: LIGHTING:
Fixtures used within off-street parking areas and wall mounted fixtures are
intended to serve as a unifying element between parcels within the development.
   A.   All fixtures within the PUD are to be downcast, cut-off variety to
direct lighting to parking areas and pedestrian pathways and eliminate glare to
neighboring properties. Bulbs shall not be exposed or extend down past the
fixture. Care should be taken to ensure that adjoining residences are not
looking up and into the bulbs of light fixtures, which may require shields on
the fixtures or other means of shielding glare.
   B.   No wall packs or floodlighting are allowed.
   C.   In addition to cut-off fixtures, particular attention shall be given to
eliminate hot spots and light glare. To achieve this, additional measures may
include, but are not limited to, lowering parking lot light levels after
business hours, turning off lights not necessary for security purposes, and use
of landscaping for light screening/blockage.
   D.   As a part of the review of each site plan, a photometric plan must be
submitted. During the review, the applicant must demonstrate how lighting will
not adversely affect adjoining properties.
   E.   Fixtures located one hundred fifty feet (150') or less from the
property line of the existing single-family residential lots to the south and
west shall not exceed sixteen feet (16') in height.
   F.   The foot candle level at all property lines abutting single family
residential properties shall be less than one (1). (Ord. 2445, 10-19-2020; amd.
Ord. 2476, 6-21-2021)
126-09: ARCHITECTURE:
The intent is to create building facades throughout this development that are
articulated to provide visual interest to pedestrians and to establish a unique
identity for the development. The architectural design of any building within
this development shall be acceptable to the City. The architecture shall
attempt to express a creative presentation by careful attention to exterior
building materials and details, use of fenestration, and change in building
mass within the plane and roof design to lessen the plainness of appearance
which can be characteristic of office and multi-family buildings. Building
design, materials, trim, detailing, and colors shall provide continuity to
unite all structures within the development into one project concept. All sides
to each building shall receive high quality materials, finishes, and details
(360° architectural treatment). There are no “backs” to a building. Materials
should be durable, economically maintained and of a quality that will maintain
their appearance over a prolonged time.
The first site plan approved for development within the PUD shall set the
design theme for the overall PUD. Elements such as materials, colors, and
architecture details from that point forward shall be similarly applied
throughout the remaining developments within the PUD to maintain a consistent
design theme throughout the PUD. Once site plan approval is gained on a
particular building design, any alteration in design, materials or colors, must
be reviewed and approved by the City’s Development Services Department prior to
changes being implemented.
   A.   All buildings within this development shall accommodate or incorporate
the following design approaches:
      1.   Corporate architecture shall be prohibited. Limited use of
architectural elements characteristic of prototypical architecture may be
allowed at the discretion of the Director of Development Services or the
appropriate reviewing and approval body. Implementation of these architectural
elements shall be minimized and whenever possible modified to give a unique
image to the establishment. No standard corporate building design without
modifications shall be implemented.
      2.   Buildings shall be organized to create a logical and identifiable
relationship with the site and other buildings, open spaces, and pedestrian
circulation paths.
      3.   The use of building articulation and materials which break up the
building mass into modules that respect a residential scale and reflects
proportions similar to other buildings within the area.
      4.   The building’s design should meet context and site objectives such
as providing gateways, creating visual and physical linkages and framing or
terminating views.
      5.   Variation in building height, mass and roof forms shall be provided
to create interest while still maintaining an overall building continuity.
Roofs should not be designed as attention-getting devices related to the
reinforcement of signage or as an identifiable corporate image.
      6.   Projections above the roof shall have the appearance of a three-
dimensional element.
      7.   Entrances into buildings should be easily identified through the use
of building design and detailing. Projected or recessed entryways, change in
rooflines, addition of awnings or changes in building material are examples
that can create this effect.
      8.   Shifts in building planes/facades and variation in exterior
materials shall be incorporated to minimize long expanses of wall. Long blank
walls shall be prohibited.
      9.   Variation in materials, material modules, expressed joints,
textures, colors and details should be used to break up the mass of the
buildings. Materials should change with the change in building planes.
      10.   Trim and structural elements such as posts or columns shall be
sized to the scale of the building.
      11.   Whenever possible, ground floor commercial tenant areas should
provide the maximum possible glazing toward sidewalks to provide pedestrians
with visual interest. Use of reflective glass or mirrored glass is prohibited.
Efforts should be made to use clear glass on storefronts, windows and doors to
promote the linkage of the interior and exterior of buildings.
      12.   Architectural design for multi-family units shall include:
         a.   Unit design should incorporate elements such as balconies and
patios to reinforce the connection between the residents and the activities
within the development. A minimum of eighty percent (80%) of the multi-family
units within the development must provide a balcony or porch/patio with a
minimum usable area of forty (40) square feet and a minimum usable dimension of
five feet (5') deep in either direction. In lieu of outdoor living area for
individual units, area(s) of common defined and enhanced outdoor living space
can be provided.
         b.   Should covered parking be pursued, the architectural details of
detached garages should incorporate the materials and treatments of the
dwelling, such as windows, doors, trim and materials on all sides of the
garage. For parking incorporated within the primary building, the design should
place the garage doors on a non-street side façade and on facades not facing
the single-family residential development to the west and south. Screening or
design elements will be required to minimize the dominance of garage doors on
the facade.
      13.   Natural, durable materials such as brick and stone shall be used as
the major elements of the façade cladding (40% or greater), primarily on the
lower stories of the building. Use of vinyl materials is prohibited.
         a.   Buildings may incorporate the following materials in addition to
the materials noted above: architectural concrete masonry units (CMU) and
architectural metal or composite panels (acceptable to the City.) All composite
panel or metal cladding must have concealed fasteners. All exposed edges must
have a fully finished edge or be terminated with trim. Trim for the panels
should be finished with the same color as the panel. CMU’s shall have
integrated color rather than surface applied paint/staining and should
generally have texture for interest; smooth CMU may be used in conjunction with
texture for accent purposes. The use of EIFS or synthetic stucco shall be used
in limited quantities and primarily as an accent or trim material; located only
on the upper portions of the facades. EIFS or synthetic stucco may not comprise
more that 20% of the cladding material. (Ord. 2445, 10-19-2020; amd. Ord. 2476,
6-21-2021)
126-10: LANDSCAPING:
Landscaping must be provided in accordance with City Code unless otherwise
modified within this ordinance. Details regarding specific varieties, exact
quantities, and the minimum size at time of planting shall be provided and
approved as part of the site plan submittal and shall meet the general
guidelines in respect to the minimum plant sizes traditionally applied to
development within the City. The provision of additional vegetation above the
minimum amount required may be necessary to fulfill the intent (i.e., visual
mitigation/screening) of the required landscaping.
Once site plan approval is gained on a particular parcel, any alteration to
that shown on the approved site plan must be reviewed and approved by the
City’s Development Services Department prior to the changes being implemented.
(Ord. 2445, 10-19-2020; amd. Ord. 2476, 6-21-2021)
126-11: SIGNAGE REGULATION:
Signage restrictions shall be imposed to limit and reduce the negative impacts
of sign clutter. Signage within each PUD parcel shall comply with all
provisions of Title 9, Chapter 18 for the identified zoning district for each
parcel.
   A.   All Signs: Signs located within 300' of and facing a residential
property will be limited to exterior lit signs or halo lighting and will be
required to have a timer to shut off at 11:00 PM or within one hour of close of
the business, if open after 11:00 PM. Signs may be turned back on at 5:00 AM
for uses that are closed during the night.
   B.   Wall signage for a tenant in a multi-tenant building shall be located
on the wall area of the tenant’s location within the building. (Ord. 2445, 10-
19-2020; amd. Ord. 2476, 6-21-2021)
126-12: STORM WATER MANAGEMENT:
Specific Storm Water Management Plans will be required with the development of
each parcel, demonstrating compliance with the approved Village on Jordan Creek
PUD Master Storm Water Management Plan, on file with the city. The Developer
will have said specific Storm Water Management Plans prepared by a Professional
Engineer licensed in the State of Iowa, in conjunction with the submittal of a
specific development proposals for a parcel within the PUD. All specific Storm
Water Management Plans shall comply with the City’s current design standards
for storm water management. The method of storm water management and the storm
water conveyance system shall be determined prior to City approval of any
development within any portion of the property within the Village on Jordan
Creek PUD.
At time of platting or development, ownership and responsibility for all storm
water detention areas and private storm water detention outlet structures will
need to be established. (Ord. 2445, 10-19-2020; amd. Ord. 2476, 6-21-2021)
126-13: TRAFFIC STUDY:
A Traffic Impact Study (Traffic Report) dated April 16, 2021, has been prepared
by the City of West Des Moines for the Village on Jordan Creek PUD. The Traffic
Report caps the traffic generated from all ground within this PUD at 3,415
average daily trips, with 173 AM peak hour trips and 309 PM peak hour trips.
Prior to, or in conjunction with site plan submittal of any parcel, or portion
of a parcel, the Developer shall have the traffic report reviewed by the City’s
traffic consultant to ensure that the provisions and assumptions of the
original traffic report are still valid and applicable. (Ord. 2445, 10-19-2020;
amd. Ord. 2476, 6-21-2021)
126-14: REPEALER:
All ordinances of parts of ordinances in conflict with the provisions of this
ordinance are hereby repealed. (Ord. 2445, 10-19-2020; amd. Ord. 2476, 6-21-
2021)
126-15: SAVINGS CLAUSE:
If any section, provision, sentence, clause, phrase or part of this Ordinance
shall be adjudged invalid or unconstitutional, such adjudication shall not
affect the validity of the Ordinance as a whole or any provision, section,
subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or part hereof not adjudged invalid or
unconstitutional. (Ord. 2445, 10-19-2020; amd. Ord. 2476, 6-21-2021)
126-16: VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES:
Any person who violates the provisions of this Ordinance upon conviction shall
be punished as set forth in Title 1, Chapter 4, Section 1 of the City Code of
the City of West Des Moines, Iowa. (Ord. 2445, 10-19-2020; amd. Ord. 2476, 6-
21-2021)
126-17: OTHER REMEDIES:
In addition to the provisions set out in Violations and Penalties Section
herein, the City may proceed in law or equity against any person, firm or
corporation for violation of any section or subsection of this Ordinance. (Ord.
2445, 10-19-2020; amd. Ord. 2476, 6-21-2021)
126-18: EFFECTIVE DATE:
This Ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after its passage,
approval and publication as provided by law. (Ord. 2445, 10-19-2020; amd. Ord.
2476, 6-21-2021)
126-99: LEGISLATIVE HISTORY:
Ord. 2445, 10-19-2020; Ord. 2476, 6-21-2021.
PUD #127
KING’S GROVE
SECTION:
127-01: Legal Description
127-02: Sketch Plan
127-03: Intent
127-04: Required Plans
127-05: Conditions
127-06: Land Use Design Criteria
127-07: Buffers
127-08: Architecture
127-09: Signage Regulation
127-10: Storm Water Management
127-11: Master Property Owners Association
127-12: Parkland Dedication
127-13: Repealer
127-14: Savings Clause
127-15: Violations And Penalties
127-16: Other Remedies
127-17: Effective Date
127-99: Legislative History
127-01: LEGAL DESCRIPTION:
OUTLOT ‘Z’, KING’S GROVE TOWNHOMES PLAT 1, AN OFFICIAL PLAT IN THE CITY OF WEST
DES MOINES, DALLAS COUNTY, IOWA CONTAINING 11.68 ACRES MORE OR LESS. (Ord.
2479, passed 7-6-2021)
127-02: SKETCH PLAN:
Attached hereto and made a part of this rezoning approval, for concept
description and delineation is the Sketch Plan document for the King’s Grove
PUD marked Exhibit “A”. The Sketch Plan is a graphic representation of the
property included in the PUD delineating the approximate location and
configuration of the PUD Parcels for the purpose of easier reference for the
applicable regulations of this Ordinance. Wherever conflict occurs between the
written text in this document and the notations on the Sketch Plan, the written
text shall prevail. (Ord. 2479, passed 7-6-2021)
127-03: INTENT:
To provide the framework of development standards for the incorporation of
traditional single family lots within an existing multi-family residential
development to provide for a mix of housing choices within the PUD area. (Ord.
2479, passed 7-6-2021)
127-04: REQUIRED PLANS:
Prior to or in conjunction with development or transfer of ownership, the
following plans shall be required:
   A.   Preliminary Plat and Final Plat: Prior to development of any portion of
the Single-Family area within PUD Parcel A or additional footprint lots or
dwellings within PUD Parcel B, said areas shall be platted in accordance with
the City’s Subdivision Ordinance.
   Outlots are set aside to provide for common area, storm water management,
private streets, private utilities and other improvements to support the
development such as buffers and guest parking. Outlots are considered
unbuildable unless replatted and detached accessory structures and fences
intended to serve individual dwellings are not allowed within outlots.
   Unless otherwise specifically restricted by City Council action, groundwork
and construction of private roads and utilities may be started, at the
developer’s risk, upon approval by the City Council of a preliminary plat or
site plan which includes details of the improvements. Public street and utility
construction may begin, at the risk of the developer, after the preliminary
plat or site plan which includes details of the improvements area is approved
by the City Council and construction improvement plans approved by the City of
West Des Moines.
   Prior to approval of the final plat, unless otherwise allowed by City
Council, the developer shall provide the appropriate agreements, sureties, and
easements for all public rights-of-way and other public improvements
(utilities, sidewalks, streetlights, etc.) within and associated with the
development.
   B.   Site Plans: No site plans are required for individual single-family
lots within Parcel A; however, Building Permits are required prior to the
initiation of dwelling construction and subsequent site improvements such as
fences, decks, sheds, etc.
   An approved site plan exists for the area contained in Parcel B. Any further
development or modifications to the development from that indicated on an
approved site plan, including architectural design, materials, or color
changes, shall be reviewed and approved as part of a Minor or Major
Modification application, as applicable prior to implementation of the
modifications. (Ord. 2479, passed 7-6-2021)
127-05: CONDITIONS:
Whereas, Title 9, Chapter 9, PUD Planned Unit Development District of the City
Code, establishes certain regulations and guidelines pertaining to accompanying
information required on the plat documents. Now, therefore, the following
conditions, restrictions, and regulations are adopted as part of this approval:
   A.   General Conditions: In addition to the PUD Sketch Plan, the following
general development criteria shall be integrated into and made part of this
planned unit development:
      1.   General Conformance To Subdivision Ordinance: All subdivisions,
public and private streets, public or private street rights-of-way and general
development shall adhere to the standards and design criteria set forth in the
West Des Moines Subdivision Ordinance and/or established City policies
pertaining thereto, unless otherwise stated within this Ordinance.
      2.   General Conformance to Zoning Ordinance: Unless otherwise specified
herein, the development of the PUD shall comply with the provisions of the West
Des Moines Zoning Ordinance.
      3.   Flood Hazard: In all areas within a Base Flood (100 Year), or
adjoining drainage ways, and detention ponding areas involving potential flood
hazards, all buildings proposed to be located in a flood hazard area must be
elevated and designed in accordance with the American Society of Civil
Engineers publication ASCE 24 and no building shall be erected which has a
minimum opening elevation (including top of window well) less than one foot
(1') above the determined level of the Base Flood. In areas where historical
high-water levels are above the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) Base Flood
Elevation or special conditions exist, the City may require a Design Flood
Elevation be calculated and used as the Base Flood Elevation for determination
of elevation requirements. Buildings shall only be permitted within twenty five
feet (25') of any easement or property boundary of a major?drainageway, storm
water detention basin or pond if said location is approved as part of the
development entitlement by the city council and said building is structurally
designed accordingly.
      4.   Developer Responsibilities: The Developer, their successors and/or
assigns, if any, shall pay all planning, engineering, and construction costs
for the development of the planned unit development, as required by this
Ordinance and approved site plans. Developer shall be responsible for cost of
all streets, storm sewers, sanitary sewers, drainage way improvements,
detention basins, water mains, buffers and other improvements as required of
the development. Developer shall dedicate appropriate rights-of-way and/or
public easements required within the PUD, unless otherwise approved by the City
Council.
      5.   Public Infrastructure: The developer shall be responsible for
constructing and/or installing public infrastructure necessary to support
development within the subdivision in a manner that will assure that the public
infrastructure functions at an acceptable level of service (per the City’s
Comprehensive Plan) and that it complies with all City Ordinances. Public
improvements must be accepted by the city prior to issuance of any occupancy
permit, including temporary occupancy permits.
      6.   Sanitary Sewer: Any proposed change in approved land use densities
for the PUD will require an analysis of the downstream sanitary sewer capacity
to assure that adequate capacity is available for the proposed change in
approved land use densities.
      7.   Street Lighting: The Developer shall be responsible for all costs
associated with the installation of public streetlights within or adjacent to
any area proposed to be platted or included within a development.
      8.   Mailboxes: The Developer shall be responsible for installation of
any required Cluster Box Units (CBUs / mailboxes) required by the local U.S.
Postal Service Post Office. Said installations shall follow USPS requirements
provided in USPS Handbook PO 632, or as otherwise amended by the USPS.
      9.   On-Street Parking: To ensure adequate area for the turning movements
of emergency vehicles, on-street parking shall be prohibited as follows:
         a.   In the first thirty-feet (30') on both sides of intersecting
streets;
         b.   In accordance with 6-6-9-5-2 of city code;
         c.   In accordance with 6-6-9-5-3 of city code; and
         d.   Any other areas determined necessary by the Fire Marshal.
   The developer shall be responsible for erecting “No Parking” signage in
these areas. The Homeowner’s Association, or all property owners equally within
the development, shall be responsible for the maintenance and replacement of
any required signage. (Ord. 2479, passed 7-6-2021)
127-06: REQUIREMENTS:
Unless provided otherwise in this Ordinance, all general use regulations,
performance standards and provisions set forth in Title 9, Zoning, of the City
Code shall apply to the development within the King’s Grove PUD area. To the
extent that the provisions of this Section conflict with or are more
restrictive than similar provisions provided elsewhere in the West Des Moines
Zoning Ordinance, the provisions of this Section shall control. The following
land use design criteria, development standards and regulations shall apply to
all parcels within the King’s Grove PUD:
   A.   Parcel A: All general use regulations and provisions set forth in Title
9, Zoning of the West Des Moines City Code for Residential Single Family (RS-5)
shall apply to any development proposal for the parcel, unless noted otherwise
in this ordinance. Parcel A is allowed a maximum of twenty-five (25) dwelling
units.
      1.   Building setbacks shall be provided as follows:
         a.   Dwelling Structures:
            i.   Front Yard: thirty feet (30') as measured from the back of
curb of the private street. A minimum twenty-five-foot (25') setback from the
interior side of the sidewalk to the garage opening shall be provided. In the
case of no sidewalk, a thirty-foot (30') setback to the garage opening shall be
provided.
            ii.   Rear Yard: as set forth in Title 9, Zoning.
            iii.   Side Yard:
               a.   Corner Lots (Lots 12 & 18): thirty feet (30') as measured
from the back of curb of both private streets. A minimum twenty-five-foot (25')
setback from the interior side of the sidewalk to the garage opening shall be
provided. In the case of no sidewalk, a thirty-foot (30') setback to the garage
opening shall be provided.
               b.   All other lots: as set forth in Title 9, Zoning.
         b.   Accessory Structures: As provided in Title 9, Zoning for side and
rear yards. No detached accessory structures shall be allowed in a front yard.
No attached or detached accessory structures shall be allowed within a public
sewer (storm or sanitary) or buffer easement but may be placed within a private
storm easement unless otherwise restricted by Association documents. Detached
accessory structures may be placed within an overland flowage easement in
accordance with any city code regulations and as long as the flow of water is
not impeded.
   B.   Parcel B: All general use regulations and provisions set forth in Title
9, Zoning of the West Des Moines City Code for Residential Medium-Density (RM-
12) shall apply to any development proposal for the parcel, unless noted
otherwise in this ordinance. Parcel B is allowed a maximum of thirty (30)
dwelling units. Development within Parcel B shall comply with the October 15,
2018 approved King’s Grove Townhomes Preliminary Plat and Site Plan drawings.
No exterior building modifications or additions shall be allowed for individual
dwellings; however, like changes to all buildings within Parcel B may be
allowed as provided in section 4B of this ordinance. (Ord. 2479, passed 7-6-
2021)
127-07: BUFFERS:
Buffers in accordance with City Code shall be required along areas of
dissimilar land use (north and east perimeters of the PUD parcel) and along the
frontage of Booneville Road to buffer the dwelling units from the anticipated
significant traffic of Booneville Road. No buffer will be required along the
west perimeter of the PUD parcel as the adjacent property carries the
obligation of providing a buffer due to the current land use designation of a
higher intense use. All buffers in Parcel A shall be planted, mulched and
staked prior to issuance of any occupancy permits for the last five homes
within those lots adjacent to the buffer (anticipated to be Lots 1-15, King’s
Grove Plat 2). All buffers within Parcel B shall be planted, mulched and staked
prior to issuance of any final occupancy permits for units within the second to
last building constructed and no occupancy permits, temporary or final for
units within the last building constructed not already installed. (Ord. 2479,
passed 7-6-2021)
127-08: ARCHITECTURE:
The following exterior design standards and shall apply to all parcels within
the King’s Grove PUD area:
   A.   Parcel A: Unless otherwise required per development covenants, no
exterior design standards apply to the single-family structures. Home design is
encouraged to be varied and provide strong visual interest through the use of
design, materials, and detailing.
   B.   Parcel B: Exterior design, materials and colors shall comply with the
architectural elevations as illustrated approved with the King’s Grove
Townhomes Preliminary Plat and Site Plan, approved on October 15, 2018. (Ord.
2479, passed 7-6-2021)
127-09: SIGNAGE REGULATION:
Signage shall comply with all provisions and standards of Title 9, Chapter 18
for the respective Zoning District identified for each PUD parcel. (Ord. 2479,
passed 7-6-2021)
127-10: STORM WATER MANAGEMENT:
An approved Storm Water Management Plan (SWMP) for the original intended
development of this property is on file with the City. In conjunction with
platting of Parcel A, and any modifications to Parcel B, the SWMP shall be
reviewed and updated if necessary, to ensure compliance with the adopted plan
and the City’s current design standards for storm water management. Said Storm
Water Management Plans shall be prepared by a Professional Engineer licensed in
the State of Iowa, in conjunction with the submittal of a preliminary plat(s)
and site plan(s) for the development of the property. The method of storm water
management and the storm water conveyance system shall be determined prior to
City approval of a preliminary plat or site plan.
If not already established, in conjunction with final platting of Parcel A,
ownership and responsibility for all storm water detention areas and private
storm water detention outlet structures within the entire King’s Grove PUD area
will need to be established through the execution of a Storm Water Facility
Maintenance Agreement prepared by the City with information provided by the
developer. If an agreement already exists, in conjunction with final platting
of Parcel A, the agreement shall be evaluated and updated accordingly if
necessary. This agreement essentially provides that the property owner will
maintain and repair their storm water facilities. If they fail to do so, the
city will make repairs or perform maintenance and assess all costs back to the
property owner. As part of the maintenance agreement, the property owner will
be responsible to provide a letter certifying the detention facility in
conformance with the approved Storm Water Management Plan, as well as provide
as-built drawings of the detention facilities. Both the letter and as-builts
will need to be signed and sealed in accordance with Chapter 6, 193c-6.1(542B)
of the Iowa Code. The letter and as-builts will need to be provided to the City
prior to the issuance of occupancy permits for the final five dwelling
structures within Parcel A. (Ord. 2479, passed 7-6-2021)
127-11: MASTER PROPERTY OWNERS ASSOCIATION:
If deemed applicable, proper action shall be taken to establish a property
owners association. The property owners association shall be responsible for
the ongoing upkeep and maintenance of any common grounds such as but not
limited to buffers, storm water detention facilities, private roads,
greenbelts, plazas and other common space, “No Parking” signage as required and
any other specific development improvements noted as their responsibility in
this ordinance or outlined in the association documents. (Ord. 2479, passed 7-
6-2021)
127-12: PARKLAND DEDICATION:
An area of land calculated by a set formula based upon the density (total
number of dwelling units) of the proposed development is required to be
dedicated for purposes of a public park and greenway as per City Code. A
Parkland Dedication Agreement, acceptable to the Park and Recreation
Department, detailing the specifics related to the parkland dedication
requirements for the development of any area contained within the PUD is
required to be executed in conjunction with the final platting of the
subdivision. (Ord. 2479, passed 7-6-2021)
127-13: REPEALER:
All ordinances of parts of ordinances in conflict with the provisions of this
ordinance are hereby repealed. (Ord. 2479, passed 7-6-2021)
127-14: SAVINGS CLAUSE:
If any section, provision, sentence, clause, phrase or part of this Ordinance
shall be adjudged invalid or unconstitutional, such adjudication shall not
affect the validity of the Ordinance as a whole or any provision, section,
subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or part hereof not adjudged invalid or
unconstitutional. (Ord. 2479, passed 7-6-2021)
127-15: VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES:
Any person who violates the provisions of this Ordinance upon conviction shall
be punished as set forth in Title 1, Chapter 4, Section 1 of the City Code of
the City of West Des Moines, Iowa. (Ord. 2479, passed 7-6-2021)
127-16: OTHER REMEDIES:
In addition to the provisions set out in Violations and Penalties Section
herein, the City may proceed in law or equity against any person, firm or
corporation for violation of any section or subsection of this Ordinance. (Ord.
2479, passed 7-6-2021)
127-17: EFFECTIVE DATE:
This Ordinance shall be in full force and effect after its passage, approval
and publication as provided by law. (Ord. 2479, passed 7-6-2021)
127-99: LEGISLATIVE HISTORY:
Ord. 2479, 7-6-2021.
PUD #128
WESTOWNE SHOPPING CENTER
SECTION:
128-01: Legal Description
128-02: Intent
128-03: Sketch Plan
128-04: Required Plans
128-05: Conditions
128-06: Requirements
128-07: Landscaping
128-08: Vehicle Trip Allocation
128-09: Stormwater Management Plan
128-10: Public Street Right Of Way Dedication
128-11: Signage
128-12: Architecture
128-13: Repealer
128-14: Savings Clause
128-15: Violations And Penalties
128-16: Other Remedies
128-17: Effective Date
128-99: Legislative History
128-01: LEGAL DESCRIPTION:
LOT 3 AND LOT 15, WESTOWN PARK, AN OFFICIAL PLAT AND PARCEL ‘A’ OF SAID LOT 3
AS SHOWN ON THE PLAT OF SURVEY RECORDED IN BOOK 13937, PAGE 101, ALL IN THE
CITY OF WEST DES MOINES, POLK COUNTY, IOWA. EXCEPT THE EAST 10.00 FEET THEREOF.
ALL CONTAINING 21.10 ACRES (919,314 SQUARE FEET). AND LOT 14, WESTOWN PARK, AN
OFFICIAL PLAT IN THE CITY OF WEST DES MOINES, POLK COUNTY IOWA. PROPERTY IS
SUBJECT TO ANY AND ALL EASEMENTS OF RECORD. (Ord. 2485, 8-2-2021)
128-02: INTENT:
The Westowne Shopping Center PUD intends to provide a framework for
improvements reflective of the realities and constraints of redevelopment for
an aging shopping area by enabling an approach that addresses non-conforming
elements and establishes a long range plan to achieve the intent of the City’s
development standards in logical intervals whenever possible. The PUD will also
outline detailed development criteria such as future development opportunities,
architectural building design and details with a cohesive development identity
for existing and new development. (Ord. 2485, 8-2-2021)
128-03: SKETCH PLAN:
Attached hereto (or on file with the city) and made a part of this rezoning
approval, for concept description and delineation is the sketch plan document
and building precedent images for Westowne Shopping Center PUD. These drawings
are a graphic representation of the property and proposed buildings included in
the PUD area for the purpose of easier reference for the applicable regulations
of this Ordinance. Wherever conflict occurs between the written text in this
document and the notations on the drawings, the written text shall prevail.
(Ord. 2485, 8-2-2021)
128-04: REQUIRED PLANS:
The following plans shall be required as a part of the processing of any
development application for any property within the Westowne Shopping Center
PUD:
   A.   Planned Unit Development: This document shall constitute the planned
unit development ordinance for Westowne Shopping Center. On file in the city
and made a part of this ordinance is a sketch plan that illustrates the overall
site layout concept (Exhibit I). This document and the referenced documents or
exhibits (on file in the city) are intended to specify the components,
parameters, and requirements to be adhered to and implemented in order to
ensure the realization of the Westowne Shopping Center PUD. It is recognized
that modifications and changes may be necessary due to changes in building
footprints, site details, and response to market demand. At the discretion of
the Director of Development Services, changes to the layout of the development
that are deemed to be “major” changes shall require an amendment to the sketch
plan and ordinance, if applicable. Major amendments shall require the review
and approval of the Plan and Zoning Commission and City Council.
   Where the sketch plan and PUD language conflict, the PUD language shall
prevail. Where the PUD language conflicts with provisions of the West Des
Moines City Code the PUD language shall prevail.
   B.   Development Applications: Site plans (new, Major Modifications, and
Minor Modifications) for development within the Westowne Shopping Center PUD
must meet the intent of the approved PUD. Site plans (new, Major Modifications
and Minor Modifications) shall be submitted to the City of West Des Moines for
review and approval prior to the development or modifications to any portion of
the lot. New site plans and Major Modifications for permitted uses which comply
(as determined by the Director of Development Services or designee) with the
design intent as set forth in this PUD will be subject to review via the City’s
review process and receive final approval from the City Council following a
recommendation from the Plan and Zoning Commission. Minor Modifications to
previously approved site plans may be approved administratively in accordance
with Title 9 of the City Code. Approval by the Board of Adjustment for any use
designated as a Permitted Conditional (Pc) use shall occur prior to approval of
a subsequent site plan by the City Council. At the discretion of the Director
of Development Services, an amendment to the Westowne Shopping Center PUD may
be required to bring consistency between the ordinance and site plan
development proposed.
   C.   Preliminary and Final Platting: Platting, if needed for subdivision or
right-of-way dedication, shall be done in accordance with the City’s
Subdivision Ordinance. Lots to be platted without public street frontage in
accordance with the City Code requirements, may be allowed provided the
frontage requirements of the Code have been met by an abutting or surrounding
lot which is under common ownership under an owners’ association, or a cross
parking and access easement has been executed which provides for the
unrestricted use and access of the drives and parking. Platted outlots are not
buildable until such time that they are replatted through the City’s
Subdivision process. (Ord. 2485, 8-2-2021)
128-05: CONDITIONS:
Whereas, Title 9 of the West Des Moines City Code includes Chapter 9, PUD
Planned Unit Development District and establishes certain regulations and
guidelines pertaining to accompanying information required on plat and site
plan documents. Now, therefore, the following conditions, restrictions, and
regulations are adopted as part of this approval, to wit:
In addition to the Sketch Map, the following general development criteria shall
be integrated into and made a part of this PUD Ordinance:
   A.   General Conformance to Subdivision Ordinance: All subdivisions, public
streets, public street rights-of-way, and general development shall adhere to
the standards and design criteria set forth in the West Des Moines subdivision
ordinances and the most current design standards adopted by the City of West
Des Moines pertaining thereto unless otherwise stated within this ordinance.
   B.   General Conformance to Zoning Ordinance: Unless otherwise specified
herein, the development of The Westowne Shopping Center PUD shall comply with
Title 9, Zoning, or any other applicable codes.
   C.   Flood Hazard: In all areas within a Base Flood (100 Year), or adjoining
drainage ways, and detention ponding areas involving potential flood hazards,
all buildings proposed to be located in a flood hazard area must be elevated
and designed in accordance with the American Society of Civil Engineers
publication ASCE 24 and no building shall be erected which has a minimum
opening elevation (including top of window well) less than one foot (1') above
the determined level of the Base Flood. In areas where historical high-water
levels are above the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) Base Flood Elevation or
special conditions exist, the City may require a Design Flood Elevation be
calculated and used as the Base Flood Elevation for determination of elevation
requirements. Buildings shall only be permitted within twenty-five feet (25')
of any easement or property boundary of a major?drainageway, storm water
detention basin or pond if said location is approved as part of the development
entitlement by the city council and said building is structurally designed
accordingly.
   D.   Unless otherwise specifically approved by the City Council, the
developer, its successors and/or assigns, if any, shall pay all planning,
engineering, and construction costs for the development of the planned unit
development as required by this Ordinance, and shall pay all costs related to
approved site plans, which may include but is not limited to the cost of all
streets, storm sewers, sanitary sewers, water mains and service lines,
drainage-way improvements, detention basins, buffers, and other improvements as
required. No occupancy permits, either temporary or permanent, shall be issued
until all necessary improvements applicable to the area/lot or structure
requesting occupancy are installed and accepted by the City of West Des Moines.
Nothing in this Ordinance shall be construed to prevent the developer, its
successors and/or assigns, if any, from entering into private agreement(s) as
it/they may desire to share the cost of improvements.
   E.   A private sewer easement of a minimum width of ten feet (10') shall be
provided to serve the properties. The sewer will be required to be public and
meet current design standards if the property is further subdivided in a way
that causes the private sewer to cross more than one (1) lot line. All new
development requiring a site plan application shall be served by a public
sewer. (Ord. 2485, 8-2-2021)
128-06: REQUIREMENTS:
Unless provided otherwise in this Ordinance, all general use regulations,
performance standards and provisions set forth in Title 9, Zoning, of the City
Code for the Regional Commercial (RC) District shall apply to all development
within the Westowne Shopping Center area.
   A.   Land Use: All land uses as set forth in Title 9, Zoning, of the City
Code for Regional Commercial (RC) District as permitted and permitted
conditionally shall apply with approval of the appropriate review body.
      1.   Drive-Throughs: Drive-throughs may be permitted within the Westowne
Shopping Center PUD if through the design review process, including a traffic
analysis, it can be demonstrated that a drive-through does not cause traffic
congestion, is in compliance with Section 8: Traffic Impact Analysis herein,
does not interfere with pedestrian movements and can be designed to minimize
their presence. The presence of drive-throughs shall be minimized through one
or more of the following: the incorporation of the drive-through into the
building architecture rather than as an added-on canopy component; visual
screening through the use of earth berming and vegetation placement; or other
screening measures acceptable to the City. All drive-throughs shall comply with
city code requirements for vehicle queuing.
   B.   Lot Area: Lots less than minimum square footage required by code shall
be considered acceptable if supported by reciprocal ingress/egress and parking
easements; however, no lot shall be less than 30,000 square feet in size or of
a size necessary to ensure development of the site complies with bulk
regulations stated within this ordinance and in city code. Multiple buildings
shall be permitted on one lot. Any lot line that crosses through a building may
necessitate modifications to the existing buildings or measures as part of new
buildings to accommodate Building and Fire Code regulations related to fire
resistive construction and potentially the execution of “No Build” easements or
agreements.
   C.   Building Setback: Buildings on all parcels shall be setback as follows.
The setback shall be measured from the property line, unless otherwise
indicated, to the visible primary vertical foundation wall. Intermittent
encroachment into the setback for canopies, awnings, building bump-outs,
outdoor dining areas, etc. may be allowed at the discretion of the Director of
the Development Services.
      1.   Along Interstate 235 - Minimum of fifty feet (50')
      2.   Along Westown Parkway - Minimum of thirty feet (30')
      3.   Along West Property Line - Minimum of fifty feet (50')
      4.   Along 22nd Street - Minimum of eighty feet (80')
      5.   No setback (0') shall be required between internal PUD lots, unless
otherwise required by building separation requirements within adopted Building
and Fire Codes.
   D.   Internal Drives:
      1.   Per a (title) agreement recorded in Book 6345, Page 373, Polk
County, Iowa, access to and from the existing bank located adjacent to the
northeast corner of the PUD is provided via drive aisles within the Westowne
Shopping Center property. This provision shall be maintained indefinitely.
      2.   In order to provide safe and consistent access of emergency
vehicles, drive aisle design must meet requirements for emergency vehicles
(bearing capacity and turning movements). All internal drives shall be of a
design and surfacing to accommodate emergency response vehicles and shall be
maintained at all times, including snow removal. Drives shall support a minimum
of 75,000 lbs GVW.
      3.   A vehicle drive connection in the southwest corner of the site may
be constructed upon mutual agreement of the property owner of the affected
Westowne Shopping Center property and the property owner to the west or when
otherwise directed by the city to alleviate a safety concern. Said connection
shall give travel priority to the north-south vehicle access drive within this
property that is intended for use by large delivery trucks for the patron at
the south end of the development. Cost of construction of the drive shall be by
agreement and generally with each property owner responsible for of that
portion situated within their respective site. Said drive shall be designed and
constructed compliant with off-street parking requirements.
   E.   Off-Street Parking: It is recognized that existing site conditions in
conjunction with individual lease agreements dictate what can and cannot be
done to bring off-street parking into full compliance with city code
requirements for design and landscaping. While full compliance of existing
areas may not be possible, it is expected that the developer will make a good
faith effort within their power to align lease agreements with opportunity for
modifications aimed at improving compliance. All new development parcels shall
comply with code requirements adopted at the time of development for design,
number and implementation of landscape areas and vegetation.
      1.   Parking Ratios:
         a.   Parking ratios shall be calculated as a Planned Commercial Center
(4.5 spaces per 1,000 square feet of GFA). Minimum parking stall numbers
required and provided within the site shall include the parking required for
the existing bank located adjacent to the northeast corner of the PUD area per
the agreement recorded March 5, 1991.
         b.   Parking spaces in the rear of Parcels A-1 & A-2 can be utilized
to meet parking requirements if the existing granular areas are improved in a
manner to comply with the city’s off-street parking surfacing requirements.
Unless additional public access entries are implemented for businesses adjacent
to this rear parking area, employee parking shall be encouraged in this area.
         c.   If shared parking is intended, if not already existing for all or
parts of the development, a shared parking agreement will need to be executed
in conjunction with the approval of an associated site modification permit.
         d.   At the discretion of the Development Services Director, a less
stringent parking calculation may be used provided the applicant can
demonstrate a parking rate less than the above is adequate due to the type of
potential use within a specific tenant space (e.g., warehouse versus sales
floor), shared uses or offsetting peak uses.
      2.   Setbacks: Parking areas shall be setback from the perimeter
boundaries of the development as follows:
         a.   Along Interstate 235 - Minimum of fifteen feet (15')
         b.   Along Westown Parkway - Parking areas shall not extend closer to
Westown Parkway than the north line of the current paved area. Due to right-of-
way dedication, the parking area may remain within the street right-of-way upon
execution of a city approved hold harmless agreement to the benefit of the
City.
         c.   Along 22nd Street - Minimum of fifteen feet (15'). Existing
parking areas shall not extend closer to 22nd Street than the east line of the
current paved area. Any new lots created along 22nd Street frontage shall
provide a minimum parking lot setback of fifteen feet (15').
         d.   Along West Boundary - Minimum of thirty feet (30').
         e.   There shall be no minimum parking lot setback between internal
lot boundaries if lots are designed as one continuous parking field. Lots not
designed as one shall provide a minimum of five feet (5') between parking
fields.
      3.   Design:
         a.   Minimum parking stall measurements and drive aisle widths per
type of parking (head-in or angled) shall align as closely as possible to
Chapter 15 of the City’s Zoning Ordinance (City Code Title 9). Modifications to
existing aspects shall be as follows:
            (1)   Parking areas shall be restriped to comply as close as
possible to code in conjunction with asphalt overlays (top coating) or
implementation of underground storm water detention facilities or full depth
pavement reconstruction of parking area(s), whichever allows the earliest
opportunity to restripe. Existing stall widths and depths shall be considered
acceptable, however, wherever possible, modifications to obtain closer
compliance with city code shall be undertaken. Provision of minimum drive aisle
width and alignment of parking drive aisles across primary vehicle drive aisles
shall take priority over achievement of code required stall depth. Stall widths
shall be adjusted as possible; however, the loss of parking spaces to achieve
compliance with code shall not be required.
         b.   Parking lot markings shall comply with the Manual on Uniform
Traffic Control Devices (MUTCD).
         c.   A fire truck turn radius sheet shall be provided and approved by
the City’s Fire Marshal prior to modifications of any parking surfaces.
      4.   Parking Lot Landscaping: For purposes of increasing open space
within a site, providing needed visual relief from large expanses of parking,
reduce heat reflection and improving pedestrian comfort, areas of vegetation
within off-street parking areas is required. This site currently provides
several linear parking rows and a few terminal islands, but overall does not
comply with current code requirements. While complete compliance may not be
possible due to lease agreements, it shall be a goal, over time, to increase
the amount of green space within off-street parking areas to be in closer
alignment with city code requirements and achievement of the above stated
purposes. Therefore, the following shall apply within off-street parking areas;
         a.   All current and future unpaved areas within parking lot areas
shall include no less than one (1) tree for every 150 square feet of unpaved
area which is consistent to the vegetation requirement of a 9'x17' parking
island. The implementation of shrubs, ornamental grasses and perennials shall
be optional and at the developer’s discretion. At such time that the conversion
of paved areas is to occur, the property owner shall take the appropriate
measures to mitigate soil compaction and nutrient deficiencies for all areas
intended for implementation of vegetation.
         b.   Existing green areas within the parking field shall remain or be
replaced in equal size elsewhere within an off-street parking area. Within two
(2) years of the adoption of this ordinance, all existing unpaved areas within
the parking lot shall be reviewed for compliance to ‘a’ within this section and
trees added as necessary.
         c.   Existing striped paved islands shall be modified to vegetative
islands at such time that the implementation of underground storm water
detention facilities or full depth pavement replacement (not just top coating)
of parking lot areas occurs. (Ord. 2485, 8-2-2021)
128-07: LANDSCAPING:
Unless otherwise provided within this ordinance, the site shall comply with
provisions and regulations stated in Chapter 19, Landscaping within title 9 of
city code. As a general rule, the maximum possible amount of “green” (unpaved
areas and vegetation) should be provided within the development. Details
regarding specific varieties, exact quantities, and the minimum size at time of
planting shall be provided and approved as part of a new site plan or site plan
modification submittal and shall meet the general guidelines in respect to the
minimum plant sizes traditionally applied to development within the city.
Vegetation required for one purpose shall be in addition to vegetation required
for another purpose, e.g., vegetation to achieve parking lot screening is in
addition to vegetation that is part of open space requirements. The following
landscape and mitigation of views of negative elements shall apply:
   A.   Open Space: Open space shall be considered those areas unencumbered by
buildings and vehicle use drives, loading docks, and off-street parking areas.
Vegetated parking lot islands and tree pods may be counted towards required
open space. Open Space vegetation shall be provided at a rate of two (2) trees
and three (3) shrubs for every 3,000 square feet of required open space.
   As of the June 2021, this site is providing 21% open space with the majority
of the open space being provided along the western property boundary which is
generally not visible to the general public when within the development, as
well as when passing by on the adjacent roadways. Unpaved terminal and linear
parking lot islands and tree pods are critical to increasing the amount of
visible open space and green provided within this site. Ultimately, this site
shall be required to provide a minimum of 23% of the site as open space. This
will be achieved with the required provision of a minimum of 25% open space
within any new lots created, as well as transforming currently paved terminal
islands to vegetative islands and incorporating as much as possible, new
terminal and linear islands and tree pods. Details of the timing of
implementation of respective parking lot improvements is outline in the Parking
section contained within this ordinance.
   B.   Parking Lot Screening: Vegetation necessary to mitigate views of
parking areas from adjoining roadways and properties outside of the Westowne
Shopping Center property shall be provided. Views of parking shall be mitigated
through the implementation of vegetation with or without earthen berming to a
minimum height of three feet (3'). Vegetation shall be located on private
property whenever possible except that vegetation may be located within the
city owned right of way along Westown Parkway or 22nd Street with city approval
of a planting plan. Said vegetation within the right of way shall be limited to
shrubs and understory trees: no large overstory or coniferous trees shall be
allowed. As much as possible, shrubs shall be of a coniferous variety to
provide year-round screening. Parking lot screening shall be implemented by the
end of year 2023.
   C.   Streetscape: A landscaped edge or streetscape intended to bring needed
green to the city, shade and visually soften pavement expanses is desired along
all roadways upon which the public is permitted to travel. The streetscape is
intended to be ornamental in nature and there are no minimum vegetation
requirements; however, landscaping placed along a roadway may be counted toward
fulfilling open space landscape vegetation requirements. Due to the limited
open space and lack of vegetated parking lot islands and pods, trees are
desired, although not required, along 22nd Street and Westown Parkway. As
indicated previously, trees located along Westown Parkway may be located within
city right-of-way but must be of an understory variety.
   D.   Negative Site Elements: Adequate mitigation of views of undesirable
site elements such as, but not limited to loading docks, service areas, garbage
or recycling dumpsters, transformers, utility meters, mechanical equipment,
etc. shall be achieved.
      1.   Mechanical Equipment: Ground, wall mounted, and roof mounted
equipment shall be visually screened in accordance with the following:
         a.   At the time of installation of new equipment.
         b.   At the time of replacement of existing equipment.
         c.   At time of façade improvements adjacent to existing equipment.
         d.   Ground and wall mounted equipment may be screened via the
implementation of vegetation of a coniferous variety of adequate height to
achieve screening at time of implementation or via architectural components
such as screen walls comprised of the materials and colors consistent or
compatible to the surrounding façade to the equipment.
         e.   Roof mounted equipment that is visible from an adjoining roadway
or property outside of the Westowne Shopping Center development shall be
screened by architecturally integrated measures consistent and compatible to
the primary building façade colors and materials.
      2.   Dumpster Enclosures: Enclosures shall be required for all refuse
containers on site, including cardboard recycling and restaurant grease
receptacles. Said enclosures shall be designed and constructed consistent with
Chapter 10, Performance Standards provided within title 9 of city code.
Required enclosures shall be constructed in conjunction with facade
improvements of the tenant spaces which utilize said trash, cardboard or grease
receptacles or within two (2) years of the adoption of this ordinance,
whichever occurs first.
   E.   Buffers: A buffer shall be provided along the west property boundary to
screen views from the property immediately to the west of the back of the
primary building, parking areas, loading docks and service areas. There shall
be no minimum width requirement to this buffer; however, proof of visual
screening achievement must be demonstrated through existing and /or new
vegetation and/or topography. In the event that vegetation dies or is otherwise
removed, replacement trees and shrubs in the same numbers and type in a size as
typically required per Chapter 19, Section 8 shall be installed, or vegetation
numbers and types consistent with that required by code for a 30' wide buffer
shall be provided. Achievement of buffering as outlined herein shall occur
within two (2) years of adoption of this ordinance. In the event that existing
vegetation is removed to accommodate a regional storm water detention facility
that benefits more than the Westowne Shopping Center property, any replacement
of the vegetation necessary for buffering shall be the responsibility of the
City. (Ord. 2485, 8-2-2021)
128-08: VEHICLE TRIP ALLOCATION:
The Westowne Shopping Center Traffic Analysis dated May 25, 2021 estimates the
Westowne Shopping Center PUD will generate thirteen thousand one hundred forty
eight (13,148) average daily trips (ADT); seven hundred thirty nine (739) A.M.
peak hours; and one thousand one hundred eighty eight (1,188) P.M. peak hour
trips. Alternate or additional uses to those shown on this PUD exhibit, if
approved as part of the Westowne Center redevelopment plan and the PUD
ordinance, may be allowed following completion of an amendment to the approved
traffic study indicating the adjacent roadway network has adequate capacity and
all recommendations of the study are implemented. Future redevelopment within
the Westowne Shopping Center PUD may be limited due to traffic generated
elsewhere within the district. (Ord. 2485, 8-2-2021)
128-09: STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN:
A master stormwater management plan for the entire Westowne Shopping Center
redevelopment area which governs the overall stormwater management of the
Westowne Shopping Center has been prepared by and approved by the City of West
Des Moines. An agreement exists in Book 14005, Page 819 in the Polk County
Recorder’s office and amended on February 3, 2020 outlining the implementation
schedule of this plan. Any alternate timelines for the implementation of storm
water management measures from that previously established within the agreement
will require the approval of the City Council.
A regional storm water management facility is being considered which will be
located within this property. Details for the construction and maintenance of
the facility will be detailed in a separate agreement or per modifications to
the existing recorded agreement indicated above. In the event the facility is
located within an existing parking area, minimum parking requirements for the
site shall be appropriately reduce by the number of stalls affected by the
facility. Additionally, as provided in the buffer provisions, any vegetation
that is serving to buffer the west property that is removed to accommodate the
detention facility shall be the responsibility of the city to replace.
Individual stormwater management plans which align with the master stormwater
management plan will be required with the development of each site plan (new
site plan, Major Modification and Minor Modifications that increase net
impervious by more than 2,000sf). The individual stormwater management plans
shall be prepared at the developer’s expense, by a professional engineer
licensed in the state of Iowa. All individual stormwater management plans shall
comply with the city’s applicable design standards for stormwater management
existing at the time each development (site plan) is approved and demonstrate
compliance with the Westowne Shopping Center East master stormwater management
plan.
A Stormwater Management Facility Maintenance Agreement (SWMFMA) exists for this
site. In conjunction with the installation of any new storm water management
facilities within the site, the developer of the Westowne Shopping Center PUD
shall be required to update the SWMFMA to guarantee future maintenance of any
new stormwater facilities. (Ord. 2485, 8-2-2021)
128-10: PUBLIC STREET RIGHT OF WAY DEDICATION:
In order to maintain the functional class of the city’s roadway system as set
forth in the comprehensive plan, any rights of way (120' or 60' from
centerline) necessary for Westown Parkway and 22nd Street will need to be
dedicated upon City request. Existing private improvements that will be within
the streets right-of-way may remain upon execution of a Hold Harmless Agreement
to the benefit of the City; however, no new improvements shall be implemented
without specific approval of the City Council. In addition, when requested, the
developer shall provide, at no cost to the city, temporary easements that may
be necessary for improvements to public streets adjacent to the development.
(Ord. 2485, 8-2-2021)
128-11: SIGNAGE:
Unless otherwise provided herein, all exterior signage shall be in accordance
with Title 9, Chapter 18 of the City Code for the Regional Commercial District
(RC). Implementation of new signage and modifications to existing (wall and
ground) require the review and approval of a Sign Permit by the City of West
Des Moines prior to installation.
   A.   Westown Parkway: Permanent ground signs consistent with code
regulations for number and separation distances to other signs shall be
allowed. Said sign(s) shall be allowed to be a maximum of seven feet (7') in
height and 64 square feet of sign structure, regardless of setback provided.
Upon dedication of additional required right-of-way, and upon provision of a
hold harmless agreement to the benefit of the city, said sign(s) may be located
on city property adjacent to the edge of the existing parking. The location of
sign(s) shall not obstruct visibility at intersections thus the location of any
signs are required to be evaluated and approved in conjunction with the
issuance of the associated sign permit. Any tenant within the development may
be identified on this sign.
   B.   22nd Street: Existing ground signs shall be allowed to remain. No
additional signs shall be allowed, except an additional sign may be allowed
within a lot created in the southeast corner of the development which has a
minimum of 150' of 22nd Street frontage and is a minimum of 30,000 square feet
in size. Said sign on this new lot shall be separated the greatest distance
possible from the ground sign on the next lot to the north. In the event an
existing sign structure is modified, said structure shall be brought into
compliance with city code; however, the sign may be allowed in its current
location if separation requirements stated within code cannot be accommodated.
Only the tenants located within the lot that contains the sign may be
identified.
   C.   I-235 Interstate Sign: A maximum of two (2) interstate signs consistent
with all city code provisions except the provision of required minimum lot
frontage(s), may be allowed along the south boundary. Identification of any
tenant within the Westowne Shopping Center development may be displayed on an
interstate sign regardless whether they are located within the same parcel as
the sign; however, no business or tenant may be located on more than one (1)
interstate sign. (Ord. 2485, 8-2-2021)
128-12: ARCHITECTURE:
The intent is to create building façades throughout this development that are
varied and articulated to provide visual interest to pedestrians and to
establish a unique identity for the development. The architectural design of
any building within this development shall be acceptable to the City. The
architecture shall attempt to express a creative presentation by careful
attention to exterior building materials and details, use of fenestration, and
change in building mass within the plane and roof design to lessen the
plainness of appearance which can be characteristic of large commercial.
Building design, materials, trim, detailing, and colors shall provide
continuity amongst buildings to unite all structures within the development
into one project concept. All sides to each building shall receive high quality
materials, finishes, and details (360° architectural treatment). Materials
should be durable, economically maintained and of a quality that will maintain
their appearance over time.
On file with the City are conceptual architectural illustrations of the general
building style and material options. Once City approval is gained on a
particular building design, any alteration in design before or during
construction must be reviewed and approved by the City’s Development Services
Department.
   A.   All buildings within this development shall accommodate or incorporate
the following in building design and materials:
      1.   Limited use of architectural elements characteristic of prototypical
architecture may be allowed at the discretion of the Director of Development
Services or the appropriate reviewing and approval body. Implementation of
these architectural elements shall be minimized and whenever possible modified
to give a unique image to the establishment. Unmodified corporate or franchise
architecture shall not be implemented unless it reinforces the design theme
identified for the Westowne Shopping Center PUD.
      2.   Buildings shall be organized to create a logical and identifiable
relationship with the site and other buildings, open spaces, and pedestrian
circulation paths.
      3.   The use of building articulation and materials which break up the
building mass into modules that respect a pedestrian scale and reflects
proportions similar to other buildings within the development.
      4.   The building’s design should meet context and site objectives such
as providing gateways, creating visual and physical linkages and framing or
terminating views.
      5.   Variation in building height, mass and roof forms shall be provided
to create interest while still maintaining an overall building continuity.
Roofs should not be designed as attention-getting devices related to the
reinforcement of signage. Roof forms or tower elements that are an identifiable
corporate image should reinforce the design theme identified for the Westowne
Shopping Center PUD.
      6.   Entrances into buildings should be easily identified through the use
of building design and detailing. Projected or recessed entryways, changes in
rooflines, addition of awnings or changes in building material are examples
that can create this effect. Shifts in building planes/facades and variation in
exterior materials shall be incorporated to minimize long expanses of wall.
Long blank walls shall be prohibited.
      7.   Variation in materials, material modules, expressed joints,
textures, colors and details should be used to break up the mass of the
buildings. Materials should change with the change in building planes.
      8.   Trim and structural elements such as posts or columns shall be sized
to the scale of the building and detailed appropriately to the theme. Parapets
and other building elements which extend above rooflines shall be of adequate
depth to provide visual structural integrity. The backs of any visible
architectural element shall be finished with the same materials and treatments
as the other sides of the architectural element.
      9.   Whenever possible, ground floor tenant areas should provide the
maximum possible glazing toward sidewalks to provide pedestrians with visual
interest. Use of reflective glass or mirrored glass is discouraged. Efforts
should be made to use clear glass on storefronts, windows and doors to promote
the linkage of the interior and exterior of buildings.
      10.   Durable materials such as brick, stone, architectural precast or
concrete masonry units shall be used as the major elements of all building
facades. Metal or composite materials may be incorporated in the design as
major exterior materials as acceptable to the City. All composite panel or
metal cladding must have concealed fasteners. All exposed edges must have a
fully finished edge or be terminated with trim. Trim for the panels should be
finished with the same color as the panel or be consistent in detail and color
throughout the center. Concrete products used in new construction shall have
integrated color rather than surface applied paint/staining and should have a
textured finish for interest; smooth finish concrete products may be used in
conjunction with texture for accent purposes. Vinyl products shall be
prohibited. The use of EIFS or synthetic stucco shall be used in limited
quantities and primarily as an accent or trim material; located only on the
upper portions of the facades and cannot be the predominate building material.
      11.   The appropriate measure to fully screen undesirable building
elements, mechanical (both ground and rooftop mounted) and electrical
equipment, including electrical transformers and meters shall be implemented.
When feasible, screening measures shall be incorporated into the building
architecture through the use of wing walls, raised parapets, etc. using
compatible materials to the main building design.
      12.   Canopies: Drop off and other drive-through canopies must be
designed to incorporate the building’s architecture through the use of similar
building materials, roof design and color, with posts or columns sized to the
scale of the canopy. When possible, canopies should be designed as an extension
of the building rather than an added-on element.
   B.   New buildings or building additions within this development shall
accommodate or incorporate the following in building design and materials:
      1.   Material Quality and Detail: All sides to each building are to
receive high quality materials and finishes (360 degree architectural
treatment). There are no “backs” to a building.
      2.   Shifts in building planes/facades and variation in exterior
materials shall be incorporated to minimize long expanses of wall. Long blank
walls are prohibited unless mitigated with the following design elements:
         a.   Vegetation in front of the wall (such as a trellis with climbing
vines or other planted materials like trees and shrubs);
         b.   Incorporation of decorative or accent fenestration (openings do
not need to read through to the interior) or other architectural features;
         c.   Employ small changes in building footprint and massing such as:
projections or indentations with associated variation in wall height organized
with changes in material, addition of roof or awning projections, covered
outdoor areas such as porches or decks or independent structures such as
pergolas or canopies to break up the wall’s surface. (Ord. 2485, 8-2-2021)
128-13: REPEALER:
All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with the provision of this
Ordinance are hereby repealed. (Ord. 2485, 8-2-2021)
128-14: SAVINGS CLAUSE:
If any section, provision, sentence, clause, phrase or part of the Ordinance
shall be adjudged invalid or unconstitutional, such adjudication shall not
affect the validity of the Ordinance as a whole or any provision, section,
subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or part hereof not adjudged invalid or
unconstitutional. (Ord. 2485, 8-2-2021)
128-15: VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES:
Any person who violates the provisions of this Ordinance upon conviction shall
be punished as set forth in Title 1, Chapter 4, Section 1 of the City Code of
the City of West Des Moines, Iowa. (Ord. 2485, 8-2-2021)
128-16: OTHER REMEDIES:
In addition to the provisions set out in the Violations and Penalties Section
herein, the City may proceed in law or equity against any person, firm or
corporation for violation of any section or subsection of this Ordinance. (Ord.
2485, 8-2-2021)
128-17: EFFECTIVE DATE:
This Ordinance shall be in full force and effect after its passage, approval
and publication as provided by law. (Ord. 2485, 8-2-2021)
128-99: LEGISLATIVE HISTORY:
Ord. 2485, 8-2-2021.
PUD #129
MILLS LANDING
SECTION:
129-01: Legal Description
129-02: Intent
129-03: Required Plans
129-04: Conditions
129-05: Requirements
129-06: Architecture
129-07: Signage
129-08: Vehicle Trip Allocation
129-09: Storm Water Management Plan
129-10: Public Utilities And Easements
129-11: Fire Access
129-12: Public Street Lights
129-13: Ingress/Egress Agreement
129-14: Public Street Improvements
129-15: Violations And Penalties
129-16: Other Remedies
129-17: Savings Clause
129-18: Effective Date
129-99: Legislative History
129-01: LEGAL DESCRIPTION:
LOTS 5 AND 6, EXCEPT SOUTH 60TH STREET RIGHT OF WAY AND EXCEPT MILLS CIVIC
PARKWAY RIGHT OF WAY AND ALL OF LOT 7, ALL BEING OF WESTVIEW COUNTRY ESTATES
REPLAT, AN OFFICIAL PLAT IN THE CITY OF WEST DES MOINES, POLK COUNTY, IOWA.
PROPERTY CONTAINS 16.23 ACRES (707,175 S.F.) MORE OR LESS AND IS SUBJECT TO ANY
AND ALL EASEMENTS OF RECORD.
AND EXCEPT
A PART OF LOT 4, MILLS LANDING, AN OFFICIAL PLAT IN THE CITY OF WEST DES
MOINES, POLK COUNTY, IOWA AND MORE PARTICULARLY DESCRIBED AS FOLLOWS:
BEGINNING AT THE SOUTHEAST CORNER OF SAID LOT 4; THENS NORTH 89°38'55" WEST
ALONG THE SOUTH LINE OF SAID LOT 4, A DISTANCE OF 21.17 FEET TO THE WEST CORNER
OF LOT 16, GLEN OAKS PLAT 3, AN OFFICIAL PLAT; THENCE NORTH 13°03'42" EAST,
90.87 FEET TO THE NORTHWEST CORNER OF SAID LOT 16; THENCE SOUTH 00°24'35" EAST
ALONG THE EAST LINE OF SAID LOT 4, A DISTANCE OF 88.65 FEET TO THE POINT OF
BEGINNING AND CONTAINING 0.02 ACRES (938 SQUARE FEET) (PARCEL 2022-1165). (Ord.
2422, 7-6-2020; amd. Ord. 2551, 12-19-2022)
129-02: INTENT:
To develop a residential and commercial development which compliments other
development in the surrounding area by providing a framework for development
standards that respect the adjacent single-family residential areas. The
Specific Plan promotes the intent and the goals of the Town Center Overlay
District. (Ord. 2422, 7-6-2020)
129-03: REQUIRED PLANS:
The following plans shall be required as a part of the processing of any
development application for any property within the Mills Landing Specific
Plan:
   A.   Area Development Plan: An Area Development Plan is a plan that
identifies planning units, major circulation patterns, master storm water
drainage and detention concepts, utilities, shared public spaces, land use
assumptions and proposed densities. It is intended to be a tool used to promote
the communication and cooperation between adjacent property owners and
developers to ensure cohesive and unified development.
   An Area Development Plan shall be reviewed by the Plan and Zoning Commission
and approved by the City Council prior to, or in conjunction with, the review
of the Specific Plan for any property within said specific plan area. No change
to the Area Development Plan shall be made without approval of an amended plan
from the appropriate reviewing bodies. Attached to this document (Exhibit A) or
on file with the City Clerk is the City Council approved Area Development Plan
for this property.
   B.   Specific Plan: A Specific Plan identifies development intent for each
planning unit indicated on the Area Development Plan or more specifically
delineated on the Specific Plan Map. The Specific Plan shall conform to the
general development intent identified in the approved Area Development Plan, as
well as the Town Center Overlay District Guidelines. The Specific Plan shall be
reviewed by the Plan and Zoning Commission and adopted by the City Council by
Ordinance.
   This document shall constitute the Specific Plan Ordinance for Mills
Landing. Attached to and made a part of this ordinance is a Specific Plan Map
that illustrates the overall site layout concept for Mills Landing (Exhibit B).
This document and the associated exhibits (included or on file with the City
Clerk) are intended to specify the components, parameters, and requirements to
be adhered to and implemented to ensure the realization of Mills Landing
development concept. It is recognized that modifications and changes in
building footprints and layout, including the combining of two (2) smaller
buildings into one larger building, may be necessary in response to market
demands and specific tenants. Additionally, it is recognized that square
footages of one (1) building may be shifted to another or increased to
accommodate specific user's needs. These changes may be allowed with the
appropriate City approvals if the shift does not have a negative impact on the
traffic patterns for the building/area and the total number of vehicle trips
does not exceed the total number of trips which has been allocated to the
overall Mills Landing development. At the discretion of the Director of
Development Services, changes to the layout of the development that are deemed
to be 'major' changes shall require an amendment to the Specific Plan Map and/
or Ordinance, whichever is applicable. Major amendments shall require the
review and approval of the Plan and Zoning Commission and City Council.
   Where the Specific Plan Map and Specific Plan Ordinance conflict, the
Specific Plan Ordinance shall prevail.
   C.   Development Applications (Overlay District Site Plans): Site Plans for
all buildings and land area within the Mills Landing development must meet the
intent of the approved Specific Plan. Site plans shall be submitted to the City
of West Des Moines for review and approval prior to the development of any
portion of the associated supporting lot. Site plans for permitted uses which
comply (as determined by the Director of Development Services) with the design
intent as set forth in this Specific Plan will be subject to administrative
review and approval by the Director of Development Services. A one-week review
and comment period by each and all-available members of the Plan and Zoning
Commission and City Council shall precede the administrative approval.
   If upon review, two (2) or more members of the City Council, Plan and Zoning
Commission, or a combination thereof request such; or if the Director of
Development Services deems the proposed site plan is not in compliance with the
approved Specific Plan or is deemed controversial, the site plan will be
processed through the traditional full site plan review and approval process.
At the discretion of the Director of Development Services, an amendment to
Mills Landing Specific Plan Ordinance may be required to bring consistency
between the ordinance and site plan development proposed.
   An overlay district site plan must be approved prior to the issuance of any
building permit, including footing and foundation permits, for construction of
any structure within the area proposed for development.
   D.   An agreement shall be established by the developer for the property
encompassed by the Mills Landing development. This agreement shall identify
requirements for the ongoing upkeep and maintenance of any privately-owned
common grounds, structures, storm water detention, plaza areas in common
ownership, signs, and any other specific development improvements required by
the developer in this ordinance. Said agreements are hereby made a part of this
specific plan ordinance by reference. These agreements shall be executed prior
to the approval of each Overlay District Site Plan for any parcel within the
development.
   In addition, a reciprocal Cross Access/Shared Parking Agreement shall be
executed across all parcels included within the Mills Landing development in
conjunction with the approval of the first overlay district site plan or final
plat, whichever occurs first.
   E.   Preliminary And Final Platting: Platting for any PUD parcel shall be at
the discretion of the developer. Platting, if needed for subdivision or right-
of-way dedication, shall be done in accordance with the City's Subdivision
Ordinance. Lots to be platted without public street frontage, in accordance
with the City Code requirements, may be allowed provided the frontage
requirements of the Code have been met by an abutting or surrounding lot which
is under common ownership under an owners' association, or a perpetual cross
parking and access easement has been executed which provides for the
unrestricted use and access of the drives and parking. Platted outlots are not
buildable until such time that they are replatted through the City's
Subdivision process; however, groundwork and construction of private roads may
be commenced, prior to any such replatting, at the risk of the developer, and
as set forth herein. Lot areas less than minimum square footage or acres
required by code for the zoning districts specified in this ordinance, but no
less than 50,000 square feet each, shall be considered acceptable if supported
by reciprocal ingress/egress and parking easements and if approved by the
appropriate approval body as part of an overlay district site plan, permitted
conditional use permit or plat.
   Unless otherwise specifically restricted by City Council action, groundwork
and construction of private roads and utilities may be started, at the
developer's risk, upon approval of a preliminary plat or overlay district site
plan which includes the improvements approved by the City Council. Public
street and utility construction may begin, at the risk of the developer, after
approval of the preliminary plat or overlay district site plan which includes
the improvements approved by the City Council and construction improvement
plans approved by the City of West Des Moines.
   Prior to approval of the final plat or first overlay district site plan,
unless otherwise allowed by Council, the developer shall provide the
appropriate agreements, sureties, and easements for all public rights-of-way
and other public improvements (utilities, sidewalks, street lights, etc.)
within and associated with the development. (Ord. 2422, 7-6-2020)
129-04: CONDITIONS:
Whereas, Title 9 of the West Des Moines City Code includes Chapter 9, PUD
Planned Unit Development District and establishes certain regulations and
guidelines pertaining to accompanying information required on plat and site
plan documents. Now, therefore, the following conditions, restrictions, and
regulations are adopted as part of this approval, to wit:
In addition to the Specific Plan Map, the following general development
criteria shall be integrated into and made a part of this Specific Plan
Ordinance:
   A.   General Conformance to Subdivision Ordinance: All subdivisions, public
streets, public street rights-of-way, and general development shall adhere to
the standards and design criteria set forth in the West Des Moines subdivision
ordinances and the most current design standards adopted by the City of West
Des Moines pertaining thereto unless otherwise stated within this ordinance.
   B.   General Conformance to Zoning Ordinance: Unless otherwise specified
herein, the development of the Mills Landing Specific Plan shall comply with
Title 9, Zoning, or any other applicable codes.
   C.   Flood Hazard: In all areas within a 100-year frequency flood hazard
zone, or adjoining drainageways, and detention ponding areas involving
potential flood hazards, no building shall be erected that has a lowest floor,
including basements, less that one foot (1') above the determining level of the
100-year frequency flood event, and no building shall be located within twenty-
five feet (25') of any easement or property boundary of a major drainageway,
storm water detention basin, or pond, unless said location is approved as part
of a development entitlement by the City Council and said building is
structurally designed accordingly.
   D.   Unless otherwise specifically approved by the City Council, the
developer, its successors and/or assigns, if any, shall pay all planning,
engineering, and construction costs for the development of the planned unit
development as required by this Ordinance, and shall pay all costs related to
approved site plans, which may include but is not limited to the cost of all
streets, storm sewers, sanitary sewers, water mains and service lines,
drainage-way improvements, detention basins, buffers, and other improvements as
required. No occupancy permits, either temporary or permanent, shall be issued
until all necessary improvements applicable to the area/lot or structure
requesting occupancy are installed and accepted by the City of West Des Moines.
Nothing in this Ordinance shall be construed to prevent the developer, its
successors and/or assigns, if any, from entering into private agreement(s) as
it/they may desire to share the cost of improvements.
   E.   The placement of public utility easements within buffer parks and
landscape islands within parking areas is discouraged due to the potential
conflict between trees and the need to access the lines for repair. Overstory
and understory trees should be placed off utility lines a minimum distance
equal to the 1:1 excavation trench necessary for the deepest utility. Adequate
access for maintenance vehicles shall be provided into and through the easement
areas. (Ord. 2422, 7-6-2020)
129-05: REQUIREMENTS:
Unless provided otherwise in this Ordinance, all general use regulations,
performance standards and provisions set forth in Title 9, Zoning, of the City
Code shall apply to the development within the Mills Landing Specific Plan
area. To the extent that the provisions of this Section conflict with or are
more restrictive than similar provisions provided elsewhere in the West Des
Moines Zoning Ordinance, the provisions of this Section shall control. The
following land use design criteria, development standards, and landscaping
regulations shall apply to all parcels within the Mills Landing Specific Plan
area: In addition to the general criteria as stated previously, the following
land use design criteria shall apply to the development areas designated on the
specific plan. The following development standards and use regulations shall
apply to the development parcels:
   A.   Land Use:
      1.   For all lots or development parcels in Parcel A, all land uses as
set forth in Title 9, Zoning, of the City Code for the Support Commercial (SC)
District as permitted and permitted conditionally shall apply except as
designated below:
         a.   Permitted Uses: All Permitted (P) uses allowed within the Support
Commercial (SC) district except those that have been prohibited by this
ordinance.
         b.   All Permitted Conditional (PC) uses allowed within the Support
Commercial (SC) district except those that have been prohibited by this
ordinance may be allowed with the approval of the appropriate review body.
   A maximum of one restaurant with drive through or coffee shop with drive
through is allowed in Parcel A.
   The following uses shall be prohibited within 200 feet of the east boundary
of Parcel A:
 
SIC 58  Restaurant: Class 1 and 2
SIC 75  Automotive repair and services
SIC 701 Hotels
Other Uses that have noise or lighting components that could be disruptive to
the adjacent residential as determined by the City may have requirements
placed on operations or be prohibited.
 
         c.   Prohibited Uses: the following permitted and permitted
conditional uses otherwise allowed in the Support Commercial (SC) District
shall be prohibited:
SIC 075  Animal Specialty Services, except grooming
SIC 4225 Self-service Storage Facility
SIC 489  Communications Services, NEC
SIC 4925 Mixed, Manufactured, or Liquefied Petroleum Gas Production and/or
         Distribution
SIC 4952 Sanitary Services, Sewerage Systems
SIC 4959 Sanitary Services, NEC
SIC 541  Convenience Stores with or without gasoline sales
SIC 55   Automotive Dealer and Service Stations
SIC 58   Bar/Restaurants, except Class 1 and Class 2 restaurants
SIC 592  Liquor Stores
SIC 596  Unattended Fuel Pumps
SIC 7215 Coin operated laundry and dry cleaning, except pick up and drop off
         only dry cleaning establishments.
SIC 7699 Recreational Vehicle Repair Services
SIC 7699 Agricultural Equipment Repair Services
SIC 7699 Automotive repair services, miscellaneous
SIC 79   Event venues
SIC 82   Educational services, except tutoring
Storage of fleet vehicles
 
         d.   Building Setbacks: Buildings in Parcel A shall be setback from
the perimeter Specific Plan boundary, internal drive and lot lines as follows.
The setback is measured from the property line to the primary vertical
foundation wall of the primary structure.
            (1)   North - minimum of sixty feet (60') from Mills Civic Parkway
to allow for the continuance of the sixty-foot (60') buffer coming from the
east.
            (2)   East - minimum of fifty feet (50') to provide room for a
buffer adjacent to the residential in the Glen Oaks development.
            (3)   West - minimum of 25 feet (25') along S. 60th Street.
            (4)   South - minimum of 15 feet (15') along the internal main
drive to allow for greenspace and plantings.
            (5)   No setback is required from interior common lot lines within
Parcel A, unless otherwise required by building separation regulations in
adopted Building and Fire Codes.
      2.   For all lots in Parcel B, all land uses as set forth in Title 9,
Zoning, of the City Code for the High Density Residential (HD) District as
permitted and permitted conditionally shall apply. The maximum density for any
parcel is sixteen (16) dwelling units per acre. The developer has indicated
that the use for this parcel will be an age-restricted senior facility. Should
the use change in any manner, including removal of age-restrictions, parking
stall and traffic generation numbers will need to be checked to ensure there is
adequate infrastructure for the unrestricted use.
         a.   Parkland dedication is required for residential development.
Parkland and greenway areas are part of the dedication based upon the number of
dwelling units. At the time of the Overlay District Site Plan for each lot is
reviewed, the need for parkland dedication will be determined.
         b.   Building Setback: Buildings in Parcel B shall be setback as
follows. The setback shall be measured from the perimeter Parcel B boundary
line, unless otherwise indicated, to the closest vertical wall of the primary
structure.
            (1)   North - minimum of fifteen feet (15') setback along the
internal drive to allow for greenspace and plantings.
            (2)   East - minimum of fifty feet (50') setback adjacent to the
residential in the Glen Oaks development. Additionally, as provided in City
Code, structures over two stories, building length that exceeds one hundred and
sixty feet (160'), and garage building lengths of one hundred feet (100') or
more are not allowed in the 150' wide building mass transition area as measured
from the perimeter Specific Plan boundary.
            (3)   South - minimum of fifty feet (50') setback adjacent to the
residential in the Glen Oaks development and the independent single-family
residential. Additionally, as provided in City Code, structures over two
stories, building length that exceeds one hundred and sixty feet (160'), and
garage building lengths of one hundred feet (100') or more are not allowed in
the one hundred and fifty (150') wide building mass transition area as measured
from the perimeter Specific Plan boundary.
            (4)   West - minimum twenty-five feet (25') setback adjacent to
South 60th Street.
            (5)   No setback (0') shall be required between interior common lot
lines within Parcel B lots, unless otherwise required by building separation
requirements in adopted Building and Fire Codes.
   B.   Building Height:
      1.   All non-residential buildings immediately adjacent to the east
specific plan boundary shall be limited to two floors. All others shall abide
by the maximum height restrictions of the Support Commercial (SC) district.
With the exception of those immediately adjacent to the east boundary, an
additional twelve feet (12') of height shall be allowed for each additional ten
feet (10') of setback provided from the either the parcel boundary or property
line.
      2.   For the Residential High Density (RH-16) district (Parcel B), within
the building mass transition area of 150 feet measured from the south and east
Specific Plan boundary, buildings or a portion of a building shall not exceed
two stories. Outside of the 150 foot building mass transition area, buildings
are permitted to exceed three stories, but shall be no more than forty-five
(45) feet in height.
   C.   Parking Ratios:
      1.   Parking ratios for restaurants (sit-down and fast-food) shall
provide within each platted lot a minimum of fifteen (15) spaces per one
thousand (1,000) square feet of gross building or use square footage. For
coffee shops, a minimum of ten (10) parking space per one thousand (1,000)
square feet of gross building area or use square footages shall be provided.
Food or drink related establishments with a drive-thru component shall provide
eleven (11) queuing spaces per drive thru. Five (5) of the spaces shall be
designated for the ordering station if it is separate from the pick-up window.
All queuing spaces shall be out of the internal circulation drive and shall not
impede traffic circulation within the site or immediately surrounding area.
      2.   Parking ratios for banks shall be three spaces (3) per one thousand
(1,000) gross square feet, with three (3) queuing spaces per drive-thru lane.
Queuing spaces shall not impede traffic circulation within the site or
immediately surrounding area.
      3.   Parking for senior living uses will be required at a rate of 1.2
spaces per unit, with implementation of cross parking easement.
      4.   Parking ratios for other uses shall be governed by City Code, Title
9, Chapter 15- Parking.
      5.   If not already established as a blanket easement, developers of each
Specific Plan parcel must provide a cross access parking and ingress/egress
easement between the parcels.
   D.   Parking Design:
      1.   The location of parking and vehicle use areas along perimeter
roadways and at major street intersections shall be discouraged. Parking and
vehicle use areas should be located in areas away from the street and behind
the building pad whenever possible.
      2.   Off-street parking areas shall be setback from the perimeter
boundaries of the Mills Landing development as follows:
         a.   North - minimum sixty feet (60').
         b.   East - minimum thirty feet (30').
         c.   South - minimum thirty feet (30').
         d.   West - minimum fifteen feet (15').
         e.   There shall be no minimum parking lot setback between internal
lot boundaries if lots are designed as one continuous parking field. Lots not
designed as one shall provide a minimum of ten feet (10') between parking
fields to allow for the placement of landscape vegetation.
      3.   Minimum parking stall measurements and drive aisle widths shall
conform to City Code, Title 9, Chapter 15: Parking Regulations.
      4.   Parking lot landscaping shall conform to City Code, Title 9, Chapter
19: Landscaping, Section 8, Landscape Provisions, Paragraph 8, Off Street
Parking Areas.
      5.   No portion of any parking lot or drive aisle associated with parking
may be located within a required buffer or streetscape.
   E.   Vehicle Drive Through: It is recognized that drive-throughs are a key
component to the functionality of certain types of businesses due to their
convenience. Walk-up or pedestrian ATMs with no vehicle access; and loading
zones in which the patron exits their vehicle and load merchandise/materials
themselves or enter/exit the main entry of a multi-family building shall be
allowed as needed with the appropriate visual screening measures, subject to
required site plan review and approval.
      1.   The incorporation of drive-up facilities may be limited by the type
of use in association with the available vehicle trips allowed for the entire
Mills Landing development. In all instances, the presence of the drive-ups
shall be minimized through one or a combination of the following methods:
         a.   Integration of a canopy into the building architecture to
eliminate the appearance as an added-on canopy component.
         b.   Situating the drive-thru or canopy between two buildings to limit
the number of views thereof.
         c.   Opaque visual screening through implementation of vegetation,
decorative walls, fencing, earthen berming, etc. to a height of a minimum of
six feet (6') at installation.
      2.   Canopies: Drive thru canopies must be designed to incorporate the
building's architecture through the use of similar building materials, roof
design and color, including the application of brick or stone to canopy support
columns. When possible, canopies should be designed as an extension of the
building rather than an added-on element. Support columns shall be designed to
be in proportion with the canopy size and height, and that dimension shall
extend the full height of the support. Canopies designed such that vehicles
pass under shall have a minimum 14 feet clearance under the canopy, unless a
bypass lane with no canopy if provided. This is to allow emergency vehicle
access to the building.
   F.   Buffers: The provision of adequate buffering, berming and landscaping
shall be thoroughly evaluated and approved as part of the overlay district site
plan approval. Additional buffer and landscaping may be required at that time
in response to additional details of the use, buildings, vehicle circulation
patterns, parking, loading docks, mechanical equipment, etc. to be implemented.
      1.   Buffers shall be provided along the perimeter boundaries of the
Specific Plan area as follows:
         a.   North - minimum sixty feet (60') from ultimate street right-of-
way line of Mills Civic Parkway.
         b.   South - minimum thirty feet (30') from property line.
         c.   West - a minimum twenty-five foot (25') streetscape required in
lieu of buffer from property line of S. 60th Street.
         d.   East - minimum thirty feet (30') from the property line.
         e.   No buffers between Parcel A and Parcel B lots shall be required
except to mitigate undesirable site elements and views, such as parking areas.
      2.   Buffers shall be designed with a minimum three (3) foot berm and
landscaping so as to serve as a visual continuation of existing buffers on
adjacent properties including properties outside of the development and as a
unifying element within the development. Buffers abutting streetscapes shall
make a natural transition through the use of similar vegetation varieties and
design in order to be visually cohesive. Buffers should be designed to achieve
the maximum amount of screening of negative elements from the maximum number of
viewpoints with vegetation layered to ensure adequate blockage of views and to
create depth and a sense of naturalness. Care should be taken to ensure that
'thru-views' under tree canopies are adequately blocked.
      3.   The implementation of vegetation as follows shall be required:
         a.   Thirty Foot (30') Buffer adjacent to the existing single-family
residential zoned areas with the following minimum planting requirements: One
(1) overstory tree or upright evergreen, two (2) understory trees, and six (6)
shrubs shall be provided per thirty-five (35) lineal feet of required buffer.
         b.   Sixty Foot (60') Buffer adjacent to Mills Civic Parkway with the
following minimum planting requirements: One (1) overstory tree or upright
evergreen tree and three (3) shrubs shall be provided per thirty-five (35)
linear feet of required buffer.
         c.   Vegetation substitution: Two (2) ornamental trees or one (1)
evergreen tree may be substituted for one required overstory tree; however, no
more than twenty-five percent (25%) of the required number of overstory trees
may be substituted. A twenty-five (25) square foot mass planting of perennials
or ornamental grasses may be substituted for three (3) shrubs.
      4.   At the southeast corner of the Specific Plan, additional screening
vegetation will be required to buffer the homes within the Glen Oaks
development from the activities in the development.
      5.   Ponds, lakes, wetlands, or other water features may be placed within
the buffer areas, except for the buffer area along Mills Civic Parkway, if the
following criteria are met:
         a.   Such water features constantly contain water at a level visible
from adjoining properties and public streets.
         b.   Pond edge treatments are incorporated to enhance the
attractiveness of the element (no 'wild overgrown pond edge' allowed); and
         c.   The appropriate water circulation and clarification measures are
implemented, including water fountains or jets when implemented which project
water high enough to be visible from adjoining properties and public streets.
   Detention areas or ponds do not negate the requirements for landscaping.
This means that topography and grade changes will accommodate the planting of
overstory trees and that the level of water will be such that plantings near
the water's edge will survive and thrive at that location.
      6.   Landscape vegetation required within buffer areas is in addition to
the landscape vegetation required of open space, parking areas, and that
necessary to achieve adequate visual mitigation of undesirable site elements
and views.
   G.   Landscaping: The landscaping requirements specified herein are intended
to create an aesthetically pleasing development which enhances the appearance
and character of the City of West Des Moines, while protecting the general
health, safety and welfare of the citizens. Landscaping is required to address
the following primary aspects or consequences of development:
      •   Open space protection and enhancement;
      •   Mitigation of paving expanse associated with off-street parking;
      •   Visual screening of undesirable views, activities and/or site
elements; and
      •   Street side enhancement ('streetscapes').
   At the time of overlay district site plan review for each Specific Plan
parcel, landscaping shall be evaluated to ensure achievement of the standards
stated within this specific plan ordinance. Additional vegetation beyond that
required herein may be required to be implemented in response to additional
details of the use, buildings, vehicle circulation patterns, parking, site
layout, etc. Details regarding specific varieties, exact quantities, and the
minimum size at time of planting shall be provided and approved as part of the
site plan submittal for each Specific Plan parcel and shall meet the general
guidelines in respect to the minimum plant size traditionally applied to
development within the City.
      1.   Open Space: The intent of open space is to allow for a balance
between natural areas and the built environment and to provide for the overall
beautification and "greening" of the City.
         a.   A minimum of twenty-five percent (25%) open space shall be
provided within each individual platted lot or development area as identified
on the Specific Plan Map.
         b.   Open space shall be considered all areas unencumbered by
buildings or paved areas associated with parking, drive aisles, and loading
docks or zones. Plaza areas, water features and structures such as gazebos,
arbors, pergolas, etc. that are associated with outdoor pedestrian use areas,
as well as designated and enhanced pedestrian walkways through and between
areas within the development may be counted towards fulfilling the minimum open
space requirement.
         c.   Vegetation at a rate of two (2) trees and three (3) shrubs per
3,000 square feet of required open space shall be provided within the parcel.
         d.   Vegetation substitution: No substitution of shrubs, grasses, or
perennials will be allowed in lieu of trees. Substitution of shrubs with
grasses or other perennials may occur with species being compatible in bulk,
density, and which reach a minimum height of 3 feet. No more than fifty percent
(50%) of the shrubs may be substituted in this manner.
         e.   Vegetation required as part of the open space may be placed into
off-street parking areas, streetscapes or required buffers; however the open
space vegetation is in addition to that which would be required of buffers or
parking islands/pods and may not be counted towards fulfilling the minimum
amount of vegetation required for these areas.
      2.   Off-Street Parking Areas:
         a.   All off-street parking areas shall be screened through the use of
a minimum three (3) foot berm and landscaping to screen their visibility from
public street rights-of-way and adjoining property outside of the Mills Landing
development. Landscape materials of an evergreen variety are encouraged for
year-round screening.
         b.   All off-street parking areas shall be aesthetically improved to
reduce obtrusive characteristics that are inherent to their function. Multiple
landscape islands combined with vegetation shall be incorporated to effectively
eliminate a "sea of asphalt/concrete" and to provide shade thus decreasing heat
reflection back into the environment. Landscape islands and/or pods shall be
implemented in accordance with the following:
            (1)   Islands or open areas shall be located at the terminus end of
all parking rows. Terminal islands shall measure at least ten feet (10') in
width and shall match, at a minimum, the stall length.
            (2)   Linear parking islands that run the length of the parking row
shall be implemented every six (6) rows of parking. Said linear islands shall
measure a minimum of twenty feet (20') in width with pedestrian path included
and shall be landscaped to provide 'green' within the parking lot. Landscape
shall include an ornamental or overstory tree every 9 stalls along the length
of the island.
            (3)   Landscaped islands shall be placed, at a minimum, every
eighteen (18) stalls within a linear row of parking. Landscaped pods (tree
diamonds) within a linear row of parking shall be evenly spaced between the
islands; however, shall be spaced no farther than nine (9) parking stalls from
another landscape pod or landscaped islands. At a minimum, islands shall match
the dimensions of one (1) parking stall and pods shall measure a minimum of six
(6) feet from back-of-curb to back-of-curb.
            (4)   In lieu of the implementation of pods between islands as
required above, the width of all islands may be increased to no less than
fifteen feet (15') in width and a tree in lieu of the pod will be placed in the
grass area in front of the parking stall every 9 spaces if adjacent to open
space.
         c.   Landscape Vegetation shall be provided as follows:
            (1)   Two trees in each 9' by 34' island, if the island is widened
an additional 15 feet as noted above, the vegetation will be increased by an
additional 6 shrubs.
            (2)   One tree in each 9' by 17' island.
            (3)   One tree in each landscape pod.
            (4)   Additional shrubs, ground covers, grasses, and flowers may be
provided in landscaped islands but is not required.
      3.   Visual Screening:
         a.   Mechanical Equipment:
            (1)   Views from streets and adjoining properties of the negative
aspects of development and land uses such as loading docks; heating,
ventilation, or air conditioning (HVAC) units; meter banks, or similar
electrical or mechanical appurtenances shall be adequately screened. Said
screening shall be achieved through the use of architectural enclosures or
landscaping consisting of evergreen material for year-round screening.
            (2)   All rooftop mechanical units shall be screened through
architecturally incorporated opaque screen walls, raised parapet walls,
penthouse feature, or other method approved through the site plan process that
is consistent with the associated primary structure. Screening measures and
materials shall be reviewed as part of the site plan review process.
            (3)   The exterior of any through-wall HVAC units (such as PTAC's)
shall be finished with a color that is compatible with the surrounding building
materials.
         b.   Trash Enclosures: Trash receptacles and dumpsters shall be
screened by the use of a permanent enclosure. Whenever possible, the enclosure
should be designed as an attached extension to the primary structure rather
than a free-standing structure and shall be located as far as possible away
from adjacent residential areas. Enclosures shall be constructed of materials
consistent with or complementary to the primary structure. Additionally, the
enclosure should be landscaped to minimize the visual presence and impact of
the structure on surrounding properties, businesses, and public streets.
         c.   Loading Docks: Loading docks shall be screened from the adjacent
property by the use of landscaping and evergreen materials or opaque fencing in
combination with landscaping to soften the presence of the fence. The
vegetation species shall be selected for its density and height.
         d.   Site and vehicle headlight spillover into adjoining residential
properties within and adjacent to the development is a primary concern. All
vehicle headlight spillover beyond the property boundaries of a developed
parcel shall be completely mitigated through the use of one or more of the
following components: earthen berming, solid fencing, vegetative plantings,
decorative free-standing walls or other measures deemed appropriate. Parking or
drive thru lanes which are oriented such that the lights are directed toward
the single-family residential uses adjacent to the site must have complete
mitigation of light penetration past the Specific Plan boundary.
      4.   Streetscaping: A landscaped edge or 'streetscape' shall be provided
along S. 60th Street. The streetscape is intended to provide desired green to
the City, interest, comfort to pedestrians, visual softening of pavement
expanses, bring human scale to adjoining buildings, minimize heat-reflection,
and provide traffic calming benefits. The streetscape should have a noticeable
pattern, design, or plant variety and should attempt to serve as a
distinguishing or identifiable landmark for the development.
         a.   Unless otherwise required to be located differently due to
presence of existing utilities and/or easements, Streetscaping shall be located
within the first fifteen feet (15') parallel and adjacent to the public street
right-of-way or back of curb of private streets and primary access drives.
         b.   Vegetation within streetscape areas shall be provided at a rate
of one (1) tree and three (3) shrubs per thirty-five (35) lineal feet of
streetscape. A twenty-five (25) square foot mass planting of perennials or
ornamental grasses may be substituted for three (3) shrubs.
         c.   Vegetation required of streetscapes shall be in addition to
vegetation required of parking and open space. Vegetation required as part of
open space may be placed into streetscapes; however, the open space vegetation
may not be counted towards fulfilling the minimum amount of vegetation required
for the streetscape.
   H.   Pedestrian Use Areas And Elements: The Mills Landing development, in
alignment with Town Center Overlay District Guidelines, aims to encourage
pedestrian movement and opportunities for pedestrian interaction through a
series of interconnected sidewalks and gathering areas. The attached Specific
Plan Map indicates the locations and type of anticipated plaza areas and
pedestrian corridors. Specific details and final materials and layouts for each
of these plaza areas shall be submitted, reviewed, and approved as part of the
overlay district site plan for the associated Specific Plan parcel.
      1.   In addition to the plaza areas indicated on the specific plan map,
the incorporation of plazas and pedestrian use areas shall be encouraged as
part of each building/parcel development.
         a.   These areas shall encourage opportunities for interaction among
pedestrians through the provision of seating opportunities (benches, chairs,
tables, planter walls, etc.). Without compromising the design intent of the
plazas, the developer is encouraged to maximize the number of furniture/seating
opportunities throughout the development. Representations of the site
amenities, including street furniture that will be provided throughout this
development are included in the exhibit packet (attached or on file with the
City Clerk). The street furniture is intended to serve as a unifying element
throughout the development.
         b.   Open space plazas areas shall incorporate a variety of hardscape
landscape materials (stone pavers, stamped concrete, field boulders, etc.) for
visual interest and variety and shall implement landscape vegetation to soften,
enhance, and delineate the areas. All plaza/pedestrian areas are required to
incorporate 'green' through the incorporation of planter beds, containers, or
raised planters.
         c.   Appropriate lighting should be incorporated into the plaza areas
and along pedestrian pathways for safety reasons and to extend the usability of
the area into the evening hours. Such lighting may be provided by either pole
mounted fixture or bollard style lighting.
         d.   Plaza areas associated with establishments which serve alcoholic
beverages shall comply with City Code, Chapter 3, Section 2.
         e.   Unless provided prior to site development, the installation of
these pedestrian elements shall occur in conjunction with the development of a
Specific Plan parcel and shall be completed prior to issuance of a final
occupancy permit.
      2.   Pedestrian Connections: The overall development shall integrate
interconnected pedestrian walkways to allow and encourage pedestrian movement
from one establishment to another within the Mills Landing development, as well
as to perimeter public sidewalks.
         a.   Pedestrian pathways internal to the development and across
parking areas and drive aisles shall be constructed with contrasting color,
paving material or pavement patterns to the adjoining paving in order to
provide a definable and highly visible crosswalk. Simply striping pedestrian
crosswalks shall not meet the intent of this section. Pedestrian lighting and
landscaping along the pathway is encouraged to provide a comfortable and safe
feeling to the pedestrian.
   I.   Lighting:
      1.   Fixtures used within off-street parking areas shall be consistent
with those illustrated in the exhibits packet (attached or on file with the
City Clerk). The fixtures are intended to serve as a unifying element between
parcels within the development.
      2.   Said fixtures greater than one hundred fifty feet (150') from the
east and south property line of the Mills Landing lots shall not exceed twenty-
eight feet (28') in height as measured from the ground to the top of the light
structure.
      3.   Said fixtures greater than one hundred feet (100') but less than one
hundred fifty feet (150') from the east and south property line of Mills
Landing shall not exceed twenty two feet (22') in height as measured from the
ground to the top of the light structure.
      4.   Said fixtures less than one hundred feet (100') from the east and
south property line of Mills Landing shall not exceed sixteen feet (16') in
height.
      5.   The foot candle level at the Mills Landing South and East property
line shall be zero (0). Proper shields shall be incorporated into the fixture
to direct all light back to the North and West.
      6.   The foot candle level at all other property lines shall be less than
one.
      7.   Said fixtures are to be downcast, cut-off variety to direct lighting
to parking areas and pedestrian pathways and eliminate glare to neighboring
properties. Bulbs shall not be exposed or extend down past the fixture. Care
should be taken to ensure that adjoining single family homes are not looking up
and into the bulbs of light fixtures.
      8.   No wall packs or floodlighting are allowed, except that sconces or
decorative lighting shall be permitted. In addition to cut-off fixtures,
particular attention shall be given to eliminate hot spots and light glare. To
achieve this, additional measures may include, but are not limited to, lowering
parking lot light levels after business hours, turning off lights not necessary
for security purposes, and use of landscaping for light screening/blockage.
      9.   As a part of the review of each site plan, a photometric plan must
be submitted. During the review, the applicant must demonstrate how lighting
will not adversely affect adjoining properties.
      10.   Fixtures located one hundred fifty feet (150') or less from the
east property line of the existing Glen Oaks residential lots shall be turned
off no later than thirty (30) minutes after the closing of the last business,
except those lights necessary for security purposes.
      11.   Canopy lighting used for drive ups must use a recessed or flush
lighting fixture so that no part of the fixture is visible from the street and
spill over and glare is mitigated. (Ord. 2422, 7-6-2020)
129-06: ARCHITECTURE:
The intent is to create building facades throughout this development that are
varied and articulated to provide visual interest to pedestrians and to
establish a unique identity for the development. The architectural design of
any building within this development shall be acceptable to the City. The
architecture shall attempt to express a creative presentation by careful
attention to exterior building materials and details, use of fenestration, and
change in building mass within the plane and roof design to lessen the
plainness of appearance which can be characteristic of large commercial and
multi-family buildings. Building design, materials, trim, detailing, and colors
shall be identified in the specific plan and be utilized to provide continuity
amongst buildings to unite all structures within the development into one
project concept. All sides to each building shall receive high quality
materials, finishes, and details (360° architectural treatment). There are no
"backs" to a building. Materials should be durable, economically maintained and
of a quality that will maintain their appearance over a prolonged time.
On file with the City are conceptual architectural illustrations of the general
building style and material options. Once City approval is gained on a
particular building design, any alteration in design before or during
construction must be reviewed and approved by the City's Development Services
Department.
   A.   All buildings within this development shall accommodate or incorporate
the following in building design and materials:
      1.   Corporate architecture shall be prohibited. Limited use of
architectural elements characteristic of prototypical architecture may be
allowed at the discretion of the Director of Development Services or the
appropriate reviewing and approval body. Implementation of these architectural
elements shall be minimized and whenever possible modified to give a unique
image to the establishment. No standard corporate building design without
modifications shall be implemented.
      2.   Buildings shall be organized to create a logical and identifiable
relationship with the site and other buildings, open spaces, and pedestrian
circulation paths.
      3.   The use of building articulation and materials which break up the
building mass into modules that respect a pedestrian scale and reflects
proportions similar to other buildings within the development.
      4.   The building's design should meet context and site objectives such
as providing gateways, creating visual and physical linkages and framing or
terminating views.
      5.   Variation in building height, mass and roof forms shall be provided
to create interest while still maintaining an overall building continuity.
Roofs should not be designed as attention-getting devices related to the
reinforcement of signage or as an identifiable corporate image.
      6.   Entrances into buildings should be easily identified through the use
of building design and detailing. Projected or recessed entryways, change in
rooflines, addition of awnings or changes in building material are examples
that can create this effect.
      7.   Shifts in building planes/facades and variation in exterior
materials shall be incorporated to minimize long expanses of wall. Long blank
walls shall be prohibited.
      8.   Variation in materials, material modules, expressed joints,
textures, colors and details should be used to break up the mass of the
buildings. Materials should change with the change in building planes.
      9.   Trim and structural elements such as posts or columns shall be sized
to the scale of the building.
      10.   Whenever possible, ground floor tenant areas should provide the
maximum possible glazing toward sidewalks to provide pedestrians with visual
interest. Use of reflective glass or mirrored glass is discouraged. Efforts
should be made to use clear glass on storefronts, windows and doors to promote
the linkage of the interior and exterior of buildings.
      11.   Natural, durable materials such as brick and stone shall be used as
the major elements of the facade cladding (50% or greater), primarily on the
lower stories of the building. Use of vinyl materials is prohibited.
         a.   Non-residential buildings may incorporate the following materials
in addition to the materials noted above: architectural concrete masonry units
(CMU) and architectural metal or composite panels (acceptable to the City.) All
composite panel or metal cladding must have concealed fasteners. All exposed
edges must have a fully finished edge or be terminated with trim. Trim for the
panels should be finished with the same color as the panel. CMU's shall have
integrated color rather than surface applied paint/staining and should
generally have texture for interest; smooth CMU may be used in conjunction with
texture for accent purposes. The use of EIFS or synthetic stucco shall be used
in limited quantities and primarily as an accent or trim material; located only
on the upper portions of the facades. EIFS or synthetic stucco may not comprise
more that 20% of the cladding material.
         b.   Residential buildings may incorporate the following materials in
addition to the materials noted above: typical residential type materials such
as: wood or composite materials resembling lap or vertical board siding and
shingles. Smooth composite panel, EIFS or synthetic stucco may not comprise
more that 20% of the cladding material. Vinyl siding may be used only with
appropriately scaled trim and not as the majority cladding material. Asphaltic
shingles shall be allowed, provided the shingle materials are of a heavier
grade that produces a shake or shadowing effect and is consistent with the
color and materials used for the development.
   B.   Architectural design for multi-family buildings shall include:
      1.   Building form and materials should provide unique treatment of the
individual units, but still maintain the cohesive design of the development.
Designs that are repetitive in form and material use should be avoided. Unit
design should incorporate elements such as balconies, patios, and roof decks to
reinforce the connection between the residents and the activities within the
development. A minimum of seventy-eight percent (78%) of the multi-family units
within the development must provide a balcony or patio to provide a usable
outdoor space of at least five feet (5') deep.
      2.   The architectural details of detached garages should incorporate the
materials and treatments of the dwelling, such as windows, doors, trim and
materials on all sides of the garage. Garages within the first one hundred and
fifty feet (150') of the Specific Plan area or visible from adjoining
properties outside of the development should incorporate architecture details
through the use of windows, doors and other facade detailing and roof
variations to provide visual interest and break up otherwise blank walls.
Garages shall consist primarily of the same materials as the primary structure,
including the incorporation of brick or stone.
      3.   Building design should minimize the dominance of garage doors on the
facade. Design options that can mitigate the appearance of garages are as
follows:
         a.   Enhanced garage facade design such as the addition of engaged
columns, secondary roof forms or decorative garage doors.
         b.   Limiting the detached garage building size to no more than one
hundred feet (100') in length. In addition, for every eight (8) garage bays,
there must be a total garage building separation of twenty feet (20'). (Ord.
2422, 7-6-2020)
129-07: SIGNAGE:
All proposed ground and exterior wall signage requires a sign permit issued by
the City of West Des Moines through normal sign review procedures. Unless
otherwise prescribed herein, signage shall abide by the standards and
regulations as set forth in Title 9, Chapter 18: Signs. No lighted wall signage
shall be allowed on any wall easily visible to adjacent residential zoned
property. (Ord. 2422, 7-6-2020)
129-08: VEHICLE TRIP ALLOCATION:
A traffic Impact Study (study) dated August 7, 2019, has been prepared for the
Mills Landing development. Per the study, the Mills Landing development has
been allocated 379 p.m. peak hour trips; 302 a.m. peak hour trips; and 4,003
ADT trips. Of these trips, 26 a.m. peak hour trips, 33 p.m. peak hour trips,
and 497 ADT trips shall be allocated to Parcel B. As development proposals are
approved the number of vehicle trips generated by the proposed development
(based upon the number of square feet of a proposed specific use in conjunction
with any parameters established in the study) will be subtracted from the total
trips allocated to the development. Approval of this proposed Specific Plan
does not constitute a guarantee that the proposed plan can be implemented.
Development of all parcels and implementation of desired land uses, including
specific high traffic generating tenants, will be limited by the available
number of trips.
Should the anticipated traffic exceed the total trips allocated for the Mills
Landing development prior to full build out, further development of platted
lots may be limited or prohibited. Alternate uses to those planned within the
study and approved as part of this Mills Landing Specific Plan Ordinance may be
allowed, following completion of an amended traffic study analyzing the
proposed alternative and appropriate city approval of an amendment to the to
the respective specific plan ordinance and/or map, if necessary, if the
existing uses and the proposed change(s) collectively do not exceed the total
trips allocated to the development. (Ord. 2422, 7-6-2020)
129-09: STORM WATER MANAGEMENT PLAN:
A Master Storm Water Management Plan for the entire development which governs
the overall storm water management of the development shall be submitted to and
approved by the City of West Des Moines as part of the Specific Plan approval
along with the execution of a master storm water facility maintenance agreement
and easement. Specific Storm Water Management Plans demonstrating compliance
with the approved Mills Landing Master Storm Water Management Plan, on file
with the City will be required with the development of each site plan. The
Specific Storm Water Plans shall be prepared at the developer's expense, by a
Professional Engineer licensed in the State of Iowa. All Specific Storm Water
Management Plans shall comply with the City's applicable design standards for
storm water management existing at the time each site plan is approved. (Ord.
2422, 7-6-2020)
129-10: PUBLIC UTILITIES AND EASEMENTS:
The developer, its successors or assigns, if any, shall construct at its cost,
dedicate to the City for general public use all public sanitary sewer mains,
water mains, and storm sewers associated with the Mills Landing development as
required by the City of West Des Moines' Subdivision Ordinance in accordance
with applicable City design standards. All necessary easements to allow City
access to public utilities for maintenance and repair purposes shall be
executed prior to approval of an overlay district site plan for each PUD
parcel, shall be executed as a blanket access agreement prior to the approval
of the first overlay district site plan, or prior to the approval and
recordation of the first final plat. Unless otherwise specified within a
specific easement document, the City shall not be responsible for
reimbursement, restoration and/or replacement of any improvements located
within the public easements should the City be required to excavate the public
utilities for normal City operations. No occupancy permits, either temporary or
permanent, shall be issued until all necessary improvements applicable to the
area/lot or structure requesting occupancy are installed and accepted by the
City of West Des Moines. Nothing in this Ordinance shall be construed to
prevent the developer, its successors and/or assigns, if any, from entering
into private agreement(s) as it/they may desire to share the cost of
improvements. (Ord. 2422, 7-6-2020)
129-11: FIRE ACCESS:
   A.   All internal drive aisles and parking lots shall permit the travel of
the Fire Department's largest vehicle, including adequate accommodation of the
vehicle's turning needs. Approval of unique design solutions to accommodate
fire access may be granted by the City Council if, the solutions proposed are
recommended by the West Des Moines Fire Department.
   B.   At the discretion of the City's Fire Marshall, "No Parking Fire Lane"
areas may be established as necessary to ensure efficient movement and access
of the fire trucks. The developer of the Mills Landing development shall be
responsible for the procurement and erection of approved fire lane signage.
   C.   All access drives and drive aisles shall maintain a minimum of twenty
feet (20') of clear pavement.
   D.   A minimum of fourteen feet (14') of vertical clearance over the travel
portion shall be maintained at all times over all vehicle travel ways.
   E.   The developer or its designee shall be responsible for enforcement of
no parking lanes and maintaining adequate clearance of structures and
vegetation along and above all vehicle travel ways regardless if public or
private.
   F.   Adequate fire accesses as determined by the City's Fire Marshall shall
be provided at all times to those areas under construction. (Ord. 2422, 7-6-
2020)
129-12: PUBLIC STREET LIGHTS:
The developer shall enter into an agreement with MidAmerican Energy for the
installation of public street lights along all public streets within and
abutting the Specific Plan area in conjunction with the approval of the final
plat. (Ord. 2422, 7-6-2020)
129-13: INGRESS/EGRESS AGREEMENT:
A public access easement or easements in favor of the City of West Des Moines
allowing unrestricted public access over and through the land within the
Specific Plan area shall be executed prior to the approval of the first overlay
district site plan or the recordation of the first final plat and in
conjunction with the approval and recordation of any future plat(s). (Ord.
2422, 7-6-2020)
129-14: PUBLIC STREET IMPROVEMENTS:
Improvements and modifications to adjoining public roads as identified within
the traffic study shall be implemented and accepted by the City Council or the
developer may petition the City Council to provide surety in lieu of public
improvement acceptance prior to approval and recordation of the first final
plat or the first overlay district site plan, whichever occurs first.
Dedication of permanent right-of-way to accommodate public road improvements
shall be provided as necessary upon request. Temporary right-of-way required
during the construction/installation shall be provided as necessary. (Ord.
2422, 7-6-2020)
129-15: VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES:
Any person who violates the provisions of this Ordinance upon conviction shall
be punished as set forth in Title 1, Chapter 4, Section 1 of the City Code of
the City of West Des Moines, Iowa. (Ord. 2422, 7-6-2020)
129-16: OTHER REMEDIES:
In addition to the provisions set out in the Violations and Penalties Section
herein, the City may proceed in law or equity against any person, firm or
corporation for violation of any section or subsection of this Ordinance. (Ord.
2422, 7-6-2020)
129-17: SAVINGS CLAUSE:
If any section, provision, sentence, clause, phrase or part of the Ordinance
shall be adjudged invalid or unconstitutional, such adjudication shall not
affect the validity of the Ordinance as a whole or any provision, section,
subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or part hereof not adjudged invalid or
unconstitutional. (Ord. 2422, 7-6-2020)
129-18: EFFECTIVE DATE:
This Ordinance shall be in full force and effect after its passage, approval
and publication as provided by law. (Ord. 2422, 7-6-2020)
129-99: LEGISLATIVE HISTORY:
Ord. 2422, 7-6-2020.
PUD #130
LINNWILL HY-VEE
SECTION:
130-01: Legal Description
130-02: Development Intent
130-03: Sketch Plan
130-04: Required Plans
130-05: Compliance With Code
130-06: Developer Responsibilities
130-07: Land Use
130-08: Vehicle Trip Allocation
130-09: Stormwater Management Plan
130-10: Public Street Right Of Way Dedication
130-11: Site Access
130-12: Parking
130-13: Drive-Through Businesses
130-14: Pedestrian Elements
130-15: Landscaping
130-16: Signage
130-17: Lighting
130-18: Architecture
130-19: Bulk Regulations
130-20: Repealer
130-21: Savings Clause
130-22: Violations And Penalties
130-23: Other Remedies
130-24: Effective Date
130-99: Legislative History
130-01: LEGAL DESCRIPTION:
THAT PART OF LOTS TWO (2) AND THREE (3) IN LINNWILL PLAT 2, AN OFFICIAL PLAT,
NOW INCLUDED IN AND FORMING A PART OF THE CITY OF WEST DES MOINES, POLK COUNTY,
IOWA, AS SHOWN IN PLAT OF SURVEY #2018-18 RECORDED OCTOBER 15, 2019 IN BOOK
17544 AT PAGE 254.
AND
LOTS FOUR (4), FIVE (5), SIX (6), SEVEN (7), AND THE NORTH 79.3 FEET OF THE
EAST 60 FEET OF LOT EIGHT (8) IN LINNWILL PLAT 2, AN OFFICIAL PLAT, NOW
INCLUDING IN AND FORMING A PART OF THE CITY OF WEST DES MOINES, POLK COUNTY,
IOWA.
AND
THAT PART OF LOTS TEN (10) AND ELEVEN (11) IN LINNWILL PLAT 2, AN OFFICIAL
PLAT, NOW INCLUDED IN AND FORMING A PART OF THE CITY OF WEST DES MOINES, POLK
COUNTY, IOWA, AS SHOWN IN PLAT OF SURVEY #2020-15 RECORDED APRIL 13, 2020 IN
BOOK 17776 AT PAGE 917. (Ord. 2423, 7-6-2020)
130-02: DEVELOPMENT INTENT:
The Linnwill Hy-Vee PUD intends to provide a framework for development
standards reflective of the realities and constraints of redevelopment and to
establish design standards to reinforce the intent of the Grand Avenue
Redevelopment Plan to respect the context of the area and create a neighborhood
identity that recognizes the area's original development history. The Linnwill
Hy-Vee PUD is located within the area identified for redevelopment by the Grand
Avenue Redevelopment Plan. Redevelopment in this area is intended to create a
special iconic district within the city of West Des Moines known as the Val-
Gate district. All development within this district must be in furtherance of
the goals of the Grand Avenue Redevelopment Plan. The City of West Des Moines
Val-Gate district Grand Avenue Redevelopment Plan and all appendices and
exhibits, as amended, are hereby incorporated as part of the Linnwill Hy-Vee
PUD.
The Grand Avenue Redevelopment Plan identifies major street patterns, access
and interconnection points, district streetscape locations and typical design
including signage and pedestrian elements. The intent of the redevelopment plan
is to provide a tool that can be used to promote the communication and
cooperation between adjacent property owners and developers within the overall
district to create and ensure a cohesive and unified development.
Properties within the Grand Avenue Redevelopment Plan may be referred to as the
Val-Gate district. (Ord. 2423, 7-6-2020)
130-03: SKETCH PLAN:
Attached hereto (or on file with the city) and made a part of this rezoning
approval, for concept description and delineation is the Sketch Plan document
for Linnwill Hy-Vee PUD marked Exhibit "A". The Sketch Plan is a graphic
representation of the property included in the PUD for the purpose of easier
reference for the applicable regulations of this Ordinance. Wherever conflict
occurs between the written text in this document and the notations on the
Sketch Plan, the written text shall prevail. (Ord. 2423, 7-6-2020)
130-04: REQUIRED PLANS:
The following plans shall be required as a part of the processing of any
development application for any property within the Linnwill Hy-Vee PUD:
   A.   Planned Unit Development: A planned unit development (PUD) identifies
detailed development criteria for specific areas within the Grand Avenue
Redevelopment Plan area. The planned unit development shall conform to the
general development intent identified in the approved redevelopment plan. The
planned unit development shall be reviewed by the Plan and Zoning Commission
and adopted by the City Council by ordinance.
   This document shall constitute the Planned Unit Development Ordinance for
Linnwill Hy-Vee. On file in the city is a sketch plan that illustrates the
overall site layout concept (Exhibit "A"). This document and any referenced
documents or exhibits (on file with the city clerk) are intended to specify the
components, parameters, and requirements to be adhered to and implemented in
order to ensure the realization of the Grand Avenue Redevelopment Plan. It is
recognized that modifications and changes may be necessary due to changes in
building footprints, site details, and response to market demand. At the
discretion of the Director of Development Services, changes to the layout of
the development that are deemed to be "major" changes shall require an
amendment to the sketch plan and ordinance, if applicable. Major amendments
shall require the review and approval of the Plan and Zoning Commission and
City Council. Where the sketch plan and PUD language conflict, the PUD language
shall prevail.
   B.   Development Applications (Site Plans or Modifications to a Site Plan):
Site plans for lots within the Linnwill Hy-Vee PUD must meet the intent of the
approved PUD. Site plans for the development of each and all lots shall be
submitted to the City of West Des Moines for review and approval prior to the
development of any portion of the lot. Site plans for permitted uses which
comply (as determined by the Director of Development Services or designee) with
the design intent as set forth in this PUD will be subject to review via the
City's development review process and shall receive final approval from the
City Council following a recommendation from the Plan and Zoning Commission.
Site plans for uses identified as Permitted Conditional (PC) shall require
approval from the Board of Adjustment. At the discretion of the Director of
Development Services, an amendment to the Linnwill Hy-Vee PUD may be required
to bring consistency between the ordinance and site plan development proposed.
(Ord. 2423, 7-6-2020)
130-05: COMPLIANCE WITH CODE:
Unless otherwise specified herein, the development of the Linnwill Hy-Vee PUD
shall comply with the provisions of the West Des Moines city code. (Ord. 2423,
7-6-2020)
130-06: DEVELOPER RESPONSIBILITIES:
   A.   Unless otherwise specifically approved by the City Council, the
developer, its successors and/or assigns, if any, shall pay all planning,
engineering, and construction costs for the development of the Planned Unit
Development as required by this ordinance, and shall pay all costs related to
approved site plans, which may include, but is not limited to, the cost of all
streets, storm sewers, sanitary sewers, water mains and service lines,
drainageway improvements, detention basins, buffers, and other improvements as
required. No occupancy permits, either temporary or permanent, shall be issued
until all necessary improvements applicable to the area/lot or structure
requesting occupancy are installed and accepted by the City of West Des Moines.
Nothing in this ordinance shall be construed to prevent the developer, its
successors and/or assigns, if any, from entering into private agreement(s) as
it/they may desire to share the cost of improvements.
   B.   The cost of traffic signals that may be located at the intersection of
Grand Avenue and the west entrance to the site in the future shall be the
responsibility of the developer and abutting property owners pursuant to the
assessment policy of the city, of which the city shall have no financial
responsibility whatsoever.
   C.   The developer shall be responsible for the maintenance of the area
encompassing the streetscape easement and related public right of way,
including trash removal for the trash receptacles.
   D.   Developer's responsibilities include all obligations contained in this
section as well as those responsibilities set forth in this ordinance. (Ord.
2423, 7-6-2020)
130-07: LAND USE:
All general use regulations and provisions set forth in Title 9, "Zoning", of
the West Des Moines city code for the Community Commercial district (CMC),
shall apply to any development proposal within the Linnwill Hy-Vee PUD area,
unless noted elsewhere within this ordinance.
   A.   Allowed Uses: Uses allowed for parcels within the Linnwill Hy-Vee PUD
shall be those uses identified as permitted or permitted conditional for the
Community Commercial (CMC) district, except as noted below:
      1.   In addition, the following permitted conditional (PC) uses shall be
permitted (P):
 
SIC 5411-0200 Convenience stores: Maximum eight (8) fuel pump islands (16
              vehicle fueling spots)
SIC 7542      Car washes
 
   B.   Prohibited Uses: The following uses normally allowed in the Community
Commercial (CMC) district shall be prohibited in the Linnwill Hy-Vee PUD:
 
SIC 4522      Heliport/helistop
SIC 4925      Mixed, manufactured or liquefied petroleum gas production and/or
              distribution (except: production and manufacturing)
SIC 592       Liquor stores
SIC 5999      Adult entertainment establishment
SIC 6099-9901 Functions related to deposit banking NEC: Check cashing agencies
SIC 6141      Personal credit institutions (a.k.a., delayed deposit lenders)
SIC 75        Automotive repair, services, and parking
 
(Ord. 2423, 7-6-2020)
130-08: VEHICLE TRIP ALLOCATION:
The traffic study completed by the City of West Des Moines dated May 19, 2020
and approved for the Linnwill Hy-Vee PUD parcels estimates a total of 5,853
average daily trips (ADT); 561 A.M. peak; and 446 P.M. peak vehicle trips
collectively for the development. These numbers constitute the number of total
vehicle trips allocated to the Linnwill Hy-Vee PUD. The combination of tenants/
uses within the PUD area cannot collectively generate vehicle trips which
exceed that allocated as indicated.
Development of the PUD area and implementation of desired land uses will be
limited by the available number of trips designated above for the Linnwill Hy-
Vee PUD, as well as compliance with all applicable regulations within this
ordinance or city code. The traffic to be generated must be less than or equal
to that allocated. The traffic allocation indicated above shall be an
entitlement to the PUD area. Traffic generation due to subsequent
redevelopment, expansion or change of use shall not exceed the maximum traffic
allocation stated previously. Alternate uses to that currently anticipated may
be allowed, following completion of an amendment to the approved traffic study
analyzing the proposed alternative and appropriate city approval if the
existing uses and the proposed change(s) collectively do not exceed 5,853
average daily trips (ADT); 561 A.M. peak; and 446 P.M. peak vehicle trips
allocated to these parcels.
Overall trips for the Val-Gate district must remain within the caps established
for the Val-Gate district as a whole which were established as part of the
Grand Avenue Redevelopment Plan traffic study. Future development within the
Linnwill Hy-Vee PUD may be limited by available trips due to traffic generated
elsewhere within the district. (Ord. 2423, 7-6-2020)
130-09: STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN:
A master stormwater management plan (MSWMP) for the entire Grand Avenue
redevelopment area which governs the overall stormwater management of the Val-
Gate district has been prepared by the City of West Des Moines. Specific
stormwater management plans (SWMP) will be required with the submittal of each
site development plan. The specific stormwater plans shall be prepared at the
developer's expense, by a professional engineer licensed in the state of Iowa.
All specific stormwater management plans shall comply with the city's
applicable design standards for stormwater management existing at the time each
development (site plan) is approved. Said SWMP must demonstrate compliance with
the Grand Avenue Redevelopment master stormwater management plan, if available,
at the time of site plan approval.
The developer(s) of the Linnwill Hy-Vee PUD shall be required to participate in
the Grand Avenue redevelopment stormwater management facilities per their pro
rata share of stormwater contribution for the Val-Gate district.
Although it cannot be guaranteed, the city will attempt to structure the
construction of stormwater infrastructure adjacent to the PUD in such a manner
as to minimize the impact on the business operations of Linnwill Hy-Vee. Such
mitigation measures may include limiting construction hours and/or providing
alternate means of access to the site. Additional measures as identified at the
time of storm water infrastructure construction may also be utilized. (Ord.
2423, 7-6-2020)
130-10: PUBLIC STREET RIGHT OF WAY DEDICATION:
In order to maintain the functional class of the city's roadway system as set
forth in the comprehensive plan, the right of way necessary for Grand Avenue
shall be dedicated to the city in fee title. In accordance with right of way
standards for each road classification consistent with the city's comprehensive
plan or as otherwise defined in this ordinance, the developer(s) shall provide
dedication at the time of development. The developer shall provide at no cost
to the city temporary easements necessary for the construction of public
streets within or adjacent to the development. (Ord. 2423, 7-6-2020)
130-11: SITE ACCESS:
Two permanent access drives to the Linnwill Hy-Vee PUD area from Grand Avenue
shall be allowed.
   A.   Access Locations:
      1.   The eastern entrance shall be a shared access with the property to
the east with the execution of a private access easement. Initially, this
access will allow for full turning movements; however, at such time that a
median is constructed on Grand Avenue; the access shall be restricted to a
right in/right out access only.
      2.   The western entrance to the PUD shall be aligned with the future
north/south street on the north side of Grand Avenue. This access will allow
for full turning movements into the site.
      3.   Along the west property line, a temporary driveway shall be located
parallel to the west property line to provide cross access to the property to
the west. This driveway will be removed at such time that the property to the
west redevelops and a connection is made to the driveway stub on the southwest
corner of the Linnwill Hy-Vee PUD.
   B.   Signalized Intersections: A traffic signal at the intersection of Grand
Avenue and the western entrance to the Linnwill Hy-Vee PUD area was not
recommended in the traffic study and should not be allowed unless the city
deems a signal is warranted and will improve the overall safety and operation
of the intersection without negatively affecting the flow of traffic on Grand
Ave. The city may facilitate installation of this signal, but the city shall
have no responsibility for any cost of installing this signal. Dedication of
permanent right of way to accommodate the placement of signals and
appurtenances shall be provided to the city upon request by the city and at no
cost to the city. Temporary construction easements shall also be provided at no
cost to the city. (Ord. 2423, 7-6-2020)
130-12: PARKING:
   A.   Off Street Parking:
      1.   All off street parking areas shall be sited and landscaped to reduce
visibility thereof from street rights of way, residential dwellings, pedestrian
pathways, and adjoining property outside of the Linnwill Hy-Vee PUD. Parking
areas shall be screened to a minimum height of three feet (3').
      2.   Parking stall measurements and drive aisle widths shall conform to
Title 9, Chapter 15 of the city code.
      3.   It is desired that all off street parking areas be aesthetically
improved to reduce obtrusive characteristics that are inherent to their
function. Landscape islands and/or pods shall be implemented in accordance with
title 9, chapter 19 of the city code of West Des Moines except that parking
rows along a building face shall only be required to implement terminal islands
at the end of parking rows and shall not be required to provide intermediate
islands within a linear row of parking.
   B.   Parking Ratios: The minimum number of parking stalls provided shall be
one (1) parking space per two hundred fifty (250) square feet of gross floor
area of the primary building.
   C.   Off Street Parking Lot Setbacks: Parking shall be set back so as to
provide a minimum of ten feet (10') from the ultimate street right of way of
Grand Avenue. Parking shall be set back a minimum of five feet (5') from the
east and south property lines of the Linnwill Hy-Vee PUD. No minimum setback
shall be required along the west property line because of a temporary driveway
parallel to the west property line that will provide cross access to the
property to the west. This driveway will be located on the west property line.
(Ord. 2423, 7-6-2020)
130-13: DRIVE-THROUGH BUSINESSES:
If, through the design review process, including a traffic analysis, it can be
demonstrated that a drive-through does not cause traffic congestion, does not
cause the Linnwill Hy-Vee PUD to exceed its allocated vehicle trips, and does
not interfere with pedestrian movements, a maximum of one drive-through within
the PUD may be permitted, excluding the car wash. Said drive-through shall
provide the minimum queuing required per Title 9, Chapter 15 of the city code
for the use. Queuing for drive-up lanes shall not be permitted to interfere
with traffic on any public street. The presence of drive-ups shall be visually
mitigated through the use of fencing, earthen berming and/or landscape
vegetation placement as appropriate. In addition, drive-through lanes shall be
allowed to be a minimum of thirteen feet (13') wide. (Ord. 2423, 7-6-2020)
130-14: PEDESTRIAN ELEMENTS:
The Linnwill Hy-Vee PUD, in alignment with the Grand Avenue Redevelopment Plan,
aims to encourage pedestrian movement and opportunities for pedestrian
interaction through the implementation of multiple and connected pathways to
and from parcels within the redevelopment area. In addition, to encourage
pedestrian activity, site furniture and benches for pedestrian use shall be
provided along public streets within an area of enhanced landscaping. One (1)
pedestrian area shall be provided for every two hundred linear feet (200') of
frontage (streetscape). Each pedestrian area shall contain at a minimum two (2)
benches and one (1) trash receptacle. These pedestrian areas may be spaced
along the frontage or grouped to create more of a larger plaza area.
Development of these areas shall comply with the Grand Avenue Redevelopment
Plan guidelines with details of the development of each area to be specified,
reviewed, and approved at the time of site plan development. Unless otherwise
specified, the installation of these pedestrian elements shall be by the
developer of the Linnwill Hy-Vee PUD at the time of development. A public
access easement will be required for the streetscape area at the time of final
plat to allow public use of the pedestrian elements and to allow the public
sidewalk to encroach on the developer's property. (Ord. 2423, 7-6-2020)
130-15: LANDSCAPING:
Landscaping must be provided in accordance with city code unless otherwise
modified within this ordinance. Details regarding specific varieties, exact
quantities, and the minimum size at time of planting shall be provided and
approved as part of the site plan submittal and shall meet the general
guidelines in respect to the minimum plant sizes traditionally applied to
development within the city. The minimum vegetation quantities specified within
this ordinance will need to be provided. The provision of additional vegetation
above the minimum amount required may be necessary to fulfill the intent (i.e.,
visual mitigation/screening) of the required landscaping.
   A.   Open/Green Space: Due to the nature of the intended redevelopment in
respect to existing development pattern, uses, and densities, the amount and
locations of open space and green space/vegetation within the redevelopment
area will vary. As a general rule, the maximum amount of "green" (open lawn
areas and vegetation) should be provided within a site. To allow the most
flexibility in planning, the site shall attempt to provide a minimum of twenty
five percent (25%) open space; however, the PUD area shall not contain less
than fifteen percent (15%) open space or more than eighty five percent (85%)
impervious surface. Plaza and streetscape areas along with any areas associated
with outdoor pedestrian use may be counted toward fulfilling the minimum open
space requirement. Plazas and outdoor pedestrian use areas to be counted toward
fulfilling minimum open space requirements may be paved (impervious) as long as
the paving is part of a planned hardscape and softscape enhancement of the
plaza or pedestrian area.
   A minimum of two (2) trees and three (3) shrubs shall be provided for every
three thousand (3,000) square feet of required open space which shall be based
on twenty five percent (25%) of the site regardless of the actual amount
provided. Of the required trees, fifty percent (50%) shall be of an overstory
or evergreen variety unless otherwise done for design intent and specifically
approved by the appropriate reviewing body. No substitution for required trees
is allowed; however, a twenty (20) square foot mass planting of perennial
flowers or ornamental grasses may be substituted for three (3) shrubs. The
incorporation of evergreen vegetation is encouraged to provide winter substance
within the landscape. Vegetation required as part of the open space may be
placed into off street parking areas, streetscape areas or required buffers but
is in addition to vegetation required of open/green space areas.
   B.   Streetscaping: A landscaped edge with hardscape elements or
"streetscape" shall be provided along Grand Avenue. These streetscapes are
intended to provide desired green to the city, reinforce a district identity,
provide visual screening of parking and other negative site elements, bring
human scale to adjoining buildings and provide traffic calming benefits. The
streetscape shall be accomplished in accordance with the Grand Avenue
Redevelopment Plan streetscaping intent and shall include vegetation,
furniture, and ornamental stone wall screening elements as illustrated in the
Redevelopment plan. Monument signs and pedestrian elements such as patios and
walkways may encroach into the streetscape area; however, no buildings or off
street parking may encroach.
   A minimum ten foot (10') streetscape easement shall be provided parallel
with Grand Avenue to provide area for district streetscape, signage and to
maintain utility corridors. The developer shall provide the necessary easement
at the time of final plat.
   Streetscape landscaping shall be placed within the streetscape easement on
the property. Landscape vegetation and amenities such as pedestrian benches and
ornamental wall stones shall be implemented within the streetscape area to
provide screening of off street parking areas to a minimum height of three feet
(3'). To aid in achieving this, a minimum of two (2) trees and ten (10) shrubs
shall be required for every fifty (50) linear feet of streetscape distance. Of
the required number of trees, a minimum of one-half (1/2) must be overstory in
nature. No substitution of shrubs for required trees shall be allowed.
Additionally, three (3) "ornamental wall stones" as illustrated in the Grand
Avenue Redevelopment Plan shall be provided for every one hundred linear feet
(100') of streetscape. It is recommended that the stones be clustered in groups
of at least three (3) stones amongst and between groups of shrubs to provide
mass and screening rather than be equally spaced along the streetscape length.
   C.   Screening of Negative Site Elements: Electrical transformers, trash
dumpsters, service areas and loading docks, heating, ventilation, air
conditioning, generators, utility meters, and other mechanical equipment which
is located on, beside or adjacent to any building or development shall be
visually screened from views from adjacent roadways, pedestrian paths, and
adjoining properties.
   D.   Vegetation Placement: Understory trees are an acceptable replacement
for overstory trees and upright evergreen trees within public utility
easements. The presence of utility easements shall not provide a basis for
noncompliance with landscaping provisions found within this ordinance and
within any applicable codes. The placement of public utility easements within
streetscapes and buffer parks is discouraged due to the potential conflict
between trees and the need to access the lines for repair. (Ord. 2423, 7-6-
2020)
130-16: SIGNAGE:
All proposed exterior signage requires the review and approval of a sign permit
by the city of West Des Moines. All signage shall follow the architectural
theme of the Grand Avenue redevelopment district plan and shall comply with
Title 9, Chapter 18 of the city code except as modified herein or within the
Grand Avenue Redevelopment Plan. Sign design and construction not typically
allowed by code may be permitted by the sign administrator if it is deemed to
carry and reinforce the design intent of the Val-Gate district. Allowance of
alternate design and construction measures shall only be allowed if there is no
other code compliant manner in which to create the sign. The use of LED
illumination for signage emulating "neon style" lighting and relevant to the
architectural theme of the district may be allowed with the approval of the
Development Services Director or their designee. The following additional
modifications to Title 9, Chapter 18 of the city code are hereby made:
   A.   Business Identification Signs:
      1.   Business identification signs, including wall, ground monument, pole
(pylon), roof, and projecting signs shall be consistent with and reinforce the
design intent of the redevelopment plan.
      2.   Roof signs shall be permitted in lieu of or as part of the allowable
wall or canopy signage for the primary building. Said sign must be comprised of
individual letters with the letters extending above the primary building roof
no higher than one-half (1/2) of the height of the letter. A roof sign
associated with the canopy may be placed entirely above the canopy as long as
it is deemed to be part of an architectural element which carries and
reinforces the design intent of the Val-Gate district. Painted roof signs shall
not be allowed. Backer panels are allowed for roof signs as long as they are
contoured around each individual letter.
      3.   A projecting sign shall be permitted as wall signage up to a maximum
of thirty five (35) square feet of the allowed wall signage for a building.
Said sign shall be allowed to extend above the building roof no more than one-
half (1/2) the height of the sign.
      4.   Ground monument signs shall be allowed in accordance with city code
for the CMC district with the following exceptions:
         a.   The main sign structure shall not exceed thirty five (35) square
feet and five feet (5') in height. Up to an additional one foot (1') of height
shall be allowed for columns or other architectural elements.
         b.   Along Grand Avenue, the sign shall be set back from the ultimate
right of way line a minimum of five feet (5') and so as to not block pedestrian
and vehicular visibility at driveway entrances.
      5.   A portion of the allowable wall signage may be located on the fuel
canopy.
      6.   Illuminated banding (led) may be allowed on the primary structure,
canopy and/or monument signs if it is approved as part of the architectural
design.
      7.   Unless for a twenty-four (24) hour establishment, illuminated
business identification signs shall be turned off no later than one hour after
the last retail or restaurant establishment in the Grand Avenue Redevelopment
Plan area closes. (Ord. 2423, 7-6-2020)
130-17: LIGHTING:
Consistent with the redevelopment plan, the Linnwill Hy-Vee PUD shall
incorporate a variety of light fixtures ranging from parking lot lights and
roadway fixtures to pedestrian pathway lights. Lighting shall be IDA dark sky
compliant unless otherwise approved by the City of West Des Moines. Included
within section 6 of the Grand Avenue Redevelopment Plan are design
specifications and requirements along with sketches and images of the intended
lighting series. All lighting within the PUD area shall abide by these
standards and be consistent in character to that illustrated in the Grand
Avenue Redevelopment Plan and the Val-Gate district's iconic design intent.
As a part of the review of each site plan, a photometric plan must be
submitted. During the review, the applicant must demonstrate how lighting will
not adversely affect adjoining properties or patrons utilizing the public
street system. Special care must be given to ensure excess light does not spill
onto properties adjacent to, but not part of, the Val-Gate district.
The following general guidelines shall be in addition to the specific
regulations stated within the Grand Avenue Redevelopment Plan regulations:
   A.   Street Lights: The developer of the Linnwill Hy-Vee PUD shall install
streetlights adjacent to Grand Avenue in conjunction with development of the
PUD area or as otherwise agreed upon by the City to accommodate Grand Avenue
widening.
   B.   Parking Luminaries: Fixtures shall be of a design to direct light
downward and shall not have bulbs which are exposed and extend below the frame
of the light fixture. Said fixtures shall not exceed twenty-five feet (25') in
height as measured from the ground to the top of the light structure. Fixtures
used shall be consistent throughout the Linnwill Hy-Vee PUD.
   C.   Building Lighting: No wall packs, or floodlighting without shields to
direct the light to its intended target are allowed. In addition to cut off
fixtures, particular attention shall be given to eliminate hot spots and light
glare. Architectural accent lighting in keeping with the design intent of the
Val-Gate district Redevelopment Plan may be allowed if approved as part of the
architectural design.
   D.   Fuel Canopy Lighting: All light fixtures attached to a fuel pump island
canopy must be recessed into the canopy with flush mounted lenses. Canopy
lighting shall be designed to illuminate downward and eliminate glare and
spillover lighting.
   E.   Pedestrian Pathways: Bollard or pole lighting shall be implemented
along pedestrian pathways. Pole lights shall not exceed fourteen feet (14') as
measured from the ground to the top of the light fixture. (Ord. 2423, 7-6-2020)
130-18: ARCHITECTURE:
Included within the Grand Avenue Redevelopment Plan is indication of the
architectural style and illustrative examples of the architectural concepts
which shall serve to guide the design of all buildings within the Linnwill Hy-
Vee PUD. All buildings in the PUD shall reinforce the concept depicted in the
Grand Avenue Redevelopment Plan. Specific architecture for all buildings shall
be evaluated as part of the site plan review and approval process.
All buildings within the Linnwill Hy-Vee PUD shall accommodate the following in
building design:
   A.   Form and Scale: Buildings should reinforce the aesthetic concept as
depicted by the precedent images contained in the Grand Avenue Redevelopment
Plan. Buildings shall be designed to relate specifically to the pedestrian in
scale and variety. The following techniques should be used to meet this
objective:
      1.   Corporate architecture shall be prohibited except as permissible by
the Grand Avenue Redevelopment Plan in that it reinforces the iconic imagery
desired for the Val-Gate district.
      2.   Buildings shall be organized to create a logical balance and
relationship with the site, open spaces and circulation.
      3.   The building's design should meet context and site objectives such
as providing gateways, creating linkages and framing or terminating views.
      4.   Variation in building height, mass and roof forms shall be provided
while still maintaining an overall building continuity.
      5.   Shifts in building planes/facades and variation in exterior
materials shall be incorporated to minimize long expanses of wall.
      6.   Variation in materials, material modules, expressed joints,
textures, colors and details should be used to break up the mass of the
buildings.
      7.   Variation in horizontal planes through the use of materials, color
and projecting forms should be implemented to signify an entry and/or protect
the pedestrian.
      8.   Ground floor retail areas should provide the maximum possible
glazing toward sidewalks to provide pedestrians with visual interest.
      9.   A building's roof form and related details/materials are an integral
part of the architectural design aesthetic. Roofs should not be designed as
attention getting devices related to the reinforcement of signage or as an
identifiable corporate image unless said identification is in keeping with the
Grand Avenue Redevelopment Plan aesthetic.
   B.   Material Quality And Detail: All sides to each building are to receive
high quality materials and finishes (360 degree architectural treatment). There
are no "backs" to a building. Materials should be durable, economically
maintained and of a quality that will maintain their appearance over a
prolonged time.
      1.   Primary building materials shall include glass, steel, architectural
precast concrete, stone and brick. The use of natural wood, composite materials
and architectural metals shall be used in moderation and cannot be the
predominate building material. Composite or metal panels shall use concealed
fasteners and have finished edges. Concrete products shall have integrated
color rather than surface applied paint or stain.   
      2.   The following materials shall not be used for cladding unless
specifically approved by the city of West Des Moines as part of the
architectural elevations:
         a.   EIFS or synthetic stucco.
         b.   Concrete masonry units.
         c.   Tilt up precast concrete systems that are structural in
appearance.
         d.   Materials that are intended for interior use.
      3.   Changes in materials should occur at either inside corners or where
a detail is drawn to specifically accommodate a transition. Stone and brick
materials should wrap corners several feet in order to provide authenticity to
the materials. (Ord. 2423, 7-6-2020)
130-19: BULK REGULATIONS:
   A.   Lot Size: No minimum lot size shall be required.
   B.   Building Height: The height of a building shall conform to the limits
prescribed by the zoning code for the CMC district unless otherwise
specifically approved by the City Council after a recommendation from the Plan
and Zoning Commission that the additional height is necessary and appropriate
to achieve an architectural intent consistent with the goals of the Grand
Avenue Redevelopment Plan.
   Canopies shall provide a minimum clearance of fourteen feet (14'). There
shall be no maximum fuel canopy height; however, canopy heights greater than
twenty feet (20') shall only be allowed if the design of the canopy is deemed
to carry and reinforce the design intent of the Val-Gate district.
   C.   Building Setbacks:
      1.   Unless otherwise specifically stated, setbacks shall be measured
from the property line or ultimate street right of way line, whichever is more
restrictive.
      2.   Building setbacks are to the main plane of the building excluding
canopies and pedestrian arcades. It is encouraged that buildings should be
pushed forward to locate adjacent to public and private streets and that
parking should be located to the rear of buildings. Therefore:
         a.   Buildings shall be set back a minimum of fifteen feet (15') from
public streets and from rear and side property lines.
         b.   The closest element of a building located adjacent to a private
street shall be no less than ten feet (10') from the back of curb.
         c.   Nothing herein, however, shall be construed as permitting the
location of a building that will interfere with pedestrian or vehicle
visibility at an intersection, sidewalks, trails, plazas, or maintenance of
utilities.
      3.   A minimum thirty foot (30') building separation shall be maintained
between buildings as measured to the closest points of buildings including
canopies, unless said buildings are physically connected or otherwise designed
and constructed in accordance with applicable building and fire codes to allow
for less of a separation distance.
      4.   A gas station canopy shall be set back a minimum of thirty five feet
(35') from Grand Avenue.
      5.   Dumpster enclosures shall be located no closer than ten feet (10')
from Grand Avenue and a minimum of five feet (5') from all other parcel
boundaries. Dumpsters should be opaquely screened from visibility from Grand
Avenue. Whenever possible, dumpsters should be located and designed as an
extension of the primary building. Freestanding dumpster enclosures should be
located and landscaped to blend with the landscape and minimize their presence.
Building materials for dumpster enclosures shall be consistent with the primary
building materials unless in doing so attention is drawn to the enclosure.
(Ord. 2423, 7-6-2020)
130-20: REPEALER:
All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with the provision of this
Ordinance are hereby repealed. (Ord. 2423, 7-6-2020)
130-21: SAVINGS CLAUSE:
If any section, provision, sentence, clause, phrase or part of the Ordinance
shall be adjudged invalid or unconstitutional, such adjudication shall not
affect the validity of the Ordinance as a whole or any provision, section,
subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or part hereof not adjudged invalid or
unconstitutional. (Ord. 2423, 7-6-2020)
130-22: VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES:
Any person who violates the provisions of this Ordinance upon conviction shall
be punished as set forth in Title 1, Chapter 4, Section 1 of the city code of
the City of West Des Moines, Iowa. (Ord. 2423, 7-6-2020)
130-23: OTHER REMEDIES:
In addition to the provisions set out in the Violations and Penalties Section
herein, the City may proceed in law or equity against any person, firm or
corporation for violation of any section or subsection of this Ordinance. (Ord.
2423, 7-6-2020)
130-24: EFFECTIVE DATE:
This Ordinance shall be in full force and effect after its passage, approval
and publication as provided by law. (Ord. 2423, 7-6-2020)
130-99: LEGISLATIVE HISTORY:
Ord. 2423, 7-6-2020.
PUD #131
THE WILDER PINES
SECTION:
131-01: Legal Description
131-02: Intent
131-03: Sketch Plan
131-04: Required Plans
131-05: Conditions
131-06: Land Use Design Criteria
131-07: Parkland Dedication
131-08: Master Property Owners Association
131-09: Architecture
131-10: Signage Regulation
131-11: Storm Water Management
131-12: Public Improvements
131-13: Repealer
131-14: Savings Clause
131-15: Violations And Penalties
131-16: Other Remedies
131-17: Effective Date
131-99: Legislative History
131-01: LEGAL DESCRIPTION:
Lots 2 and 3 (except the West 27 feet) in Westview Country Estates Replat, an
official plat now included in and forming a part of the City of West Des
Moines, Polk County, Iowa. (Ord. 2425, 8-3-2020)
131-02: INTENT:
The development intent for the PUD is to recognize the context of the
surrounding properties that are developed with larger lots and larger home
footprints while allowing the setbacks of a smaller lot residential zoning
district to respond to site limitations and attempt to preserve trees. (Ord.
2425, 8-3-2020)
131-03: SKETCH PLAN:
Attached hereto, or on file with the City and made a part of this rezoning
approval, for concept description and delineation, is the Sketch Plan document
for The Wilder Pines PUD marked Exhibit "A". Wherever conflict occurs between
the written text in this document and the notations on the Sketch Plan, the
written text shall prevail. (Ord. 2425, 8-3-2020)
131-04: REQUIRED PLANS:
Prior to or in conjunction with development or transfer of ownership of any
portion of the property covered by this PUD, the following plans shall be
required:
   A.   Preliminary Plat and Final Plat: The PUD area shall be platted in
accordance with the City's Subdivision Ordinance. Parcels created via the Plat-
of-Survey process and platted Outlot(s) identified on a plat shall be
unbuildable until such time that the plat-of-survey parcel and/or Outlot is re-
platted into a developable lot through the preliminary plat and final plat
process. (Ord. 2425, 8-3-2020)
131-05: CONDITIONS:
Whereas, Title 9, Chapter 9, PUD Planned Unit Development District of the City
Code, establishes certain regulations and guidelines pertaining to accompanying
information required on plat and site plan documents. Now, therefore, the
following conditions, restrictions, and regulations are adopted as part of this
approval:
   A.   General Conditions: In addition to the PUD Sketch Plan Map, the
following general development criteria shall be integrated into and made a part
of this planned unit development.
      1.   General Conformance to Subdivision Ordinance: All subdivisions,
public and private streets, public or private street rights-of-way and general
development shall adhere to the standards and design criteria set forth in the
West Des Moines Subdivision Ordinance and/or established City policies
pertaining thereto, unless otherwise stated within this Ordinance.
      2.   General Conformance to Zoning Ordinance: Unless otherwise specified
herein, the development of the PUD shall comply with the provisions of the West
Des Moines Zoning Ordinance.
      3.   Flood Hazard: In all areas within a Base Flood (100 Year), or
adjoining drainage ways, and detention ponding areas involving potential flood
hazards, all buildings proposed to be located in a flood hazard area must be
elevated and designed in accordance with the American Society of Civil
Engineers publication ASCE 24 and no building shall be erected which has a
minimum opening elevation (including top of window well) less than one foot
(1') above the determined level of the Base Flood. In areas where historical
high water levels are above the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) Base Flood
Elevation or special conditions exist, the City may require a Design Flood
Elevation be calculated and used as the Base Flood Elevation for determination
of elevation requirements. Buildings shall only be permitted within twenty five
feet (25') of any easement or property boundary of a major drainageway, storm
water detention basin or pond if said location is approved as part of the
development entitlement by the city council and said building is structurally
designed accordingly.
      4.   Developer Responsibilities: The Developer, their successors and/or
assigns, if any, shall pay all planning, engineering, and construction costs
for the development of the planned unit development, as required by this
Ordinance and approved site plans. Developer shall be responsible for cost of
all streets, storm sewers, sanitary sewers, drainage way improvements,
detention basins, water mains, buffers and other improvements as required of
the development. Developer shall dedicate appropriate rights-of-way and/or
public easements required within the PUD, unless otherwise approved by the City
Council.
      5.   Sanitary Sewer: Any proposed change in approved land use densities
for the PUD will require an analysis of the downstream sanitary sewer capacity
to assure that adequate capacity is available for the proposed change in
approved land use densities.
      6.   Street Lighting: The Developer shall be responsible for all costs
associated with the installation of public street lights within or adjacent to
any area proposed to be platted or included within a development.
      7.   Mailboxes: The Developer shall be responsible for installation of
any required Cluster Box Units (CBUs / mailboxes) required by the local U.S.
Postal Service Post Office. (Ord. 2425, 8-3-2020)
131-06: LAND USE DESIGN CRITERIA:
In addition to the general criteria as stated above, the following land use
regulations, development standards, and design criteria shall apply to the
development of all areas designated on the Sketch Plan:
All general use regulations and provisions set forth in Title 9, Zoning of the
West Des Moines City Code for the Residential Single Family (RS-16) district
shall apply to any development proposal for the property, unless noted
otherwise in this ordinance.
   A.   The maximum number of primary dwellings is eleven (11) for this PUD
area.
   B.   The minimum lot size within the PUD is sixteen thousand (16,000) square
feet.
   C.   Setbacks for all lots shall be as follows:
      1.   Front Yard: The minimum front yard setback for the dwelling shall be
fifteen feet (15') from the back of curb of a private street; however, the
garage setback from either the sidewalk or back of curb, whichever is more
restrictive, shall be twenty-five feet (25').
      2.   Rear Yard: The minimum rear yard setback for primary structures
shall be twenty feet (20') measured from the property line. However, no
structure or accessory structure may encroach into the tree preservation area
and buffer.
      3.   Side Yard: The minimum side yard setbacks for primary structures
shall be seven feet (7'). The north property line of Lot 4 shall be considered
a side yard and provide a minimum setback of seven feet (7').
      4.   Detached accessory structures: Detached accessory structures
cumulatively on each lot shall not exceed one thousand (1,000) gross square
feet in size and shall not be located in the front yard (forward of the main
plane of the dwelling). Setback from the rear yard shall be five feet (5')
measured from the interior line of the perimeter buffer and the minimum setback
from the side yard shall be five (5') feet.
      5.   Measurement of setbacks shall comply with City Code, Title 9,
Chapter 7, Section 4, Set back and Density Regulations.
   D.   Tree Preservation and Buffer:
      1.   A thirty foot (30') wide area along the north, east, and south PUD
perimeter boundaries will be preserved with the existing trees that are
generally determined to be worthwhile by a certified arborist or landscape
professional to be in good health and of a desirable species. Removal of trees
will be permitted for diseased, dead, damaged, or of a species not commonly
recognized as being desirable. For every two thousand (2,000) square feet of
tree canopy removed from this area as measured on an aerial photograph after
July 1, 2018, at least one (1) evergreen a minimum of six feet (6') tall or
over-story species tree at least two inches (2") in caliper, is to be planted
on the lot to mitigate the loss of canopy.
      2.   A thirty foot (30') buffer shall be placed along the property line
adjacent to South 60th Street for those lots which have their yards abutting
this property line. This is called a double frontage lot. Landscaping and
berming for this buffer shall be in accordance with City Code, Title 9, Zoning,
Chapter 19, Landscaping.
   E.   Fire Sprinklering: Homes within the PUD that are eight thousand (8,000)
square feet or larger (including garages and any structure within twenty feet
(20') of the dwelling) must be fire sprinklered according to the West Des
Moines fire code.
   F.   Front Entrance Gate: if a front entrance gate is going to be used, the
minimum clearance to drive through the gate will be fourteen feet (14') to
allow emergency services vehicles to enter the development. A knox box, key
card or other means for emergency services and West Des Moines Water Works to
enter the development will need to be provided. (Ord. 2425, 8-3-2020)
131-07: PARKLAND DEDICATION:
An area of land calculated by a set formula based upon the density (total
number of dwelling units) of the proposed development is required to be
dedicated for purposes of a public park and greenway as per city code. A
Parkland Dedication Agreement, acceptable to the Park and Recreation
Department, detailing the specifics related to the Parkland Dedication
requirements for the development of any area contained within the PUD is
required to be provided prior to approval of the first associated Final Plat.
(Ord. 2425, 8-3-2020)
131-08: MASTER PROPERTY OWNERS ASSOCIATION:
If deemed applicable, proper action shall be taken to establish a master
property owners association. The property owners association shall be
responsible for the ongoing upkeep and maintenance of any privately owned
common grounds such as streets and storm water detention facilities as outlined
in the association documents and any other specific development improvements
noted as their responsibility in this ordinance. (Ord. 2425, 8-3-2020)
131-09: ARCHITECTURE:
The intent is to create building designs throughout this development that are
varied and articulated to provide visual interest and appropriate context for
the natural character of the surrounding area along with appropriate scale for
the pedestrian elements of a residential development. Architectural design for
single family units shall accomplish this by careful attention to the use of
exterior building materials and details, locations of windows and doors, and
change in building mass within the plan and roof design. Care should be taken
in the design of the building to keep grading and tree removal to a minimum.
Homes shall use materials such as brick, stone, vertical or lap siding, shakes
and stucco, combining materials along with trim and details to present a mix of
residential architectural styles within the development. Use of natural
materials is encouraged, composite materials such as fiber cement and wood
composites are appropriate substitutions. Vinyl siding may be used only with
appropriately scaled trim and not as the majority cladding material. All
material, trim and details for a building shall be designed appropriately for
chosen architectural style. Materials should change with the change in building
plans. Trim and structural elements such as posts or columns shall be sized to
the scale of the building. When used, masonry materials shall have the
appearance of 3-dimensional elements.
Garages which extend in front of the building plane of the residence portion of
the house shall be no longer across than a distance which makes up more than
50% of the building frontage. There will be no maximum width for garages at or
back from the front plane of the building. Garages may be turned to reduce
visibility of the garage doors. Appropriate architectural detailing shall be
incorporated into the visible side wall of a garage parallel to the street so
as to enhance the architecture and minimize indication that it is garage versus
house. Detached garages or accessory structures should incorporate
architectural details of the primary building with the use of roof forms,
windows, doors and other facade detailing. (Ord. 2425, 8-3-2020)
131-10: SIGNAGE REGULATION:
Signage shall comply with all provisions and standards of Title 9, Chapter 18
for the Residential Single Family (RS-16) Zoning District. (Ord. 2425, 8-3-
2020)
131-11: STORM WATER MANAGEMENT:
A Storm Water Management Plan will be required with the platting of this
property. The Developer will have said Storm Water Management Plan prepared by
a Professional Engineer licensed in the State of Iowa, in conjunction with the
submittal of a preliminary plat for the development of the property. The Storm
Water Management Plan shall comply with the City's current design standards for
storm water management. The method of storm water management and the storm
water conveyance system shall be determined prior to City approval of a
preliminary plat.
At time of platting, ownership and responsibility for all storm water detention
areas and private storm water detention outlet structures will need to be
established through the execution of a Storm Water Facility Maintenance
Agreement prepared by the City with information provided by the developer. This
agreement essentially provides that the property owner will maintain and repair
their storm water facilities. If they fail to do so, the city will make repairs
or perform maintenance and assess all costs back to the property owner. As part
of the maintenance agreement, the property owner will be responsible to provide
a letter certifying the detention facility is in conformance with the approved
Storm Water Management Plan. The property owner also will need to provide as-
built drawings of the detention facilities. Both the letter and as-builts will
need to be signed and sealed in accordance with Chapter 6, 193c-6.1(542B) of
the Iowa Code. (Ord. 2425, 8-3-2020)
131-12: PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS:
The developer shall be responsible for constructing and/or installing the
public infrastructure necessary to support development within the subdivision
in a manner that will assure that the public infrastructure functions at an
acceptable level of service (per the City's Comprehensive Plan) and that it
complies with all City Ordinances. Public improvements must be accepted by the
city prior to issuance of any occupancy permit, including temporary occupancy
permits. (Ord. 2425, 8-3-2020)
131-13: REPEALER:
All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with the provision of this
ordinance are hereby repealed. (Ord. 2425, 8-3-2020)
131-14: SAVINGS CLAUSE:
If any section, provision, sentence, clause, phrase or part of the Ordinance
shall be adjudged invalid or unconstitutional, such adjudication shall not
affect the validity of the Ordinance as a whole or any provision, section,
subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or part hereof not adjudged invalid or
unconstitutional. (Ord. 2425, 8-3-2020)
131-15: VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES:
Any person who violates the provisions of this Ordinance upon conviction shall
be punished as set forth in Title 1, Chapter 4, Section 1 of the City Code of
the City of West Des Moines, Iowa. (Ord. 2425, 8-3-2020)
131-16: OTHER REMEDIES:
In addition to the provisions set out in the Violations and Penalties Section
herein, the City may proceed in law or equity against any person, firm or
corporation for violation of any section or subsection of this Ordinance. (Ord.
2425, 8-3-2020)
131-17: EFFECTIVE DATE:
This Ordinance shall be in full force and effect after its passage, approval
and publication as provided by law. (Ord. 2425, 8-3-2020)
131-99: LEGISLATIVE HISTORY:
Ord. 2425, 8-3-2020.
PUD #132
M&W MINI STORAGE (CUBESMART)
SECTION:
132-01: Legal Description
132-02: Intent
132-03: Sketch Plan
132-04: Compliance With Code
132-05: Site Improvements
132-06: Timing Of Improvements
132-07: Repealer
132-08: Savings Clause
132-09: Violations And Penalties
132-10: Other Remedies
132-11: Effective Date
132-99: Legislative History
132-01: LEGAL DESCRIPTION:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/082da52c44e30c25b7c604a21715194e08bbd8ec/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3944.png]
   Former Iowa State Highway No. 90 is now known as Grand Avenue
   Former Ashawa Road is now known as Delavan Drive
(Ord. 2440, 9-21-2020)
132-02: INTENT:
The intent of this PUD is to formalize the allowance of an operating mini-
storage use within the PUD property while providing for improvements of non-
compliant City Code site elements. (Ord. 2440, 9-21-2020)
132-03: SKETCH PLAN:
Attached hereto and made a part of this rezoning approval, for concept
description and delineation is the Sketch Plan Document for the M&W Mini
Storage (CubeSmart) PUD marked Exhibit "A". The PUD is comprised of one
developed parcel as legally described herein. On file with the City is a site
plan documenting current conditions and improvements to be implemented as
outlined in this ordinance (file #ZC-004808-2020). Wherever conflict occurs
between the written text in this document and the notations on the Sketch Plan
or associated Site Plan, the written text shall prevail. (Ord. 2440, 9-21-2020)
132-04: COMPLIANCE WITH CODE:
Any regulation, standard, provision, or requirement that is not specifically
addressed within this document that is regulated elsewhere in the City Code of
West Des Moines, the requirements of the City Code are applicable and shall be
enforced.
All improvements within and adjacent to the property contained within this PUD
shall adhere to the standards and design criteria set forth in the West Des
Moines City Code and Subdivision Ordinance pertaining thereto, unless otherwise
stated within this Ordinance.
The Developer, their successors, and assigns, if any, shall pay all
construction and engineering costs for all improvements within and adjacent to
the property contained within this PUD required per this ordinance and the West
Des Moines City Code. (Ord. 2440, 9-21-2020)
132-05: SITE IMPROVEMENTS:
   A.   Sidewalks. Public sidewalks shall be constructed along any and all of
the property frontages adjacent to a public roadway. The design and location of
the sidewalk shall be approved by the City as part of Public Improvement Plans
or Site Plan, whichever is deemed applicable by the City Engineer, prior to
installation. If deemed necessary, in conjunction with sidewalk improvement
plans, a Stormwater Management Plan detailing and addressing the impacts of
additional impervious surfacing shall be prepared at the developer's expense,
by a professional engineer licensed in the state of Iowa. Any deviations in
design or location from standard sidewalk improvements will require the
approval of the City Council. All required sidewalks shall be installed within
one (1) year of the adoption of this ordinance unless the City Council requires
or approves an alternate time line.
   B.   Open Space. 19.4% (23,656 square feet) of the site shall be maintained
as open space. Open Space shall be considered those areas unencumbered by
structures, off-street parking, outdoor storage areas, and vehicle use drives,
loading and other areas. A minimum of two (2) trees and three (3) shrubs shall
be provided for every 3,000 sf of open space based on 20% of the site. Minimum
vegetation requirements for one category or landscaping purpose are in addition
to another (i.e. open space vegetation is in addition to vegetation implemented
for screening of parking or outdoor storage).
   C.   Parking and Circulation Drives.
      1.   A minimum of five (5) patron parking spaces shall be provided within
the site. If additional parking is determined to be needed by evidence of
patron vehicles parking on grass areas or adjacent to storage units beyond the
time necessary to load and unload, additional parking, up to a maximum of
eighteen (18) stalls will be required to be implemented. A portion of the
allowed outdoor storage areas will need to be converted to provide the
additional parking so as to not further decrease the percentage of open space
provided within the site. Said converted parking areas will need to comply with
all of the provisions stated within this section, including being paved.
      2.   Off-street parking areas shall be setback a minimum of ten feet
(10') from property boundaries.
      3.   Patron parking shall occur on paved surfaces only. No curbing shall
be required along the perimeter of off-street parking areas.
      4.   Vehicle circulation pathways within the site shall be paved in
accordance with City Code, except no curbing shall be required.
      5.   Views of patron parking areas from adjoining public roadways shall
be screened to a height of three feet (3') through the use of topography,
maximum three-foot (3') fencing or wall or vegetation of a coniferous variety.
      6.   Patron parking areas shall be marked in accordance with the Manual
on Uniform Traffic Control Devices (MUTCD, Federal Highway Administration)
standards.
      7.   Patron parking shall not be used for storage of vehicles or other
items and materials.
      8.   To ensure the ability of emergency response vehicles to circulate
within the site, patron vehicles shall not be parked adjacent to storage units
longer than the time necessary to load or unload items to/from the storage
unit.
   D.   Dumpster Enclosure. At such time that the existing dumpster enclosure
warrants rebuilding due to deterioration of materials, the dumpster shall be
relocated to the northwest corner or within the western outdoor storage area.
   The dumpster enclosure will need to comply with current City Code
regulations regarding materials and access.
   E.   Outdoor Storage. Outdoor storage areas shall not be expanded beyond
what exist at the time of adoption of this ordinance. The outdoor storage of
vehicles and materials shall be allowed along the western boundary of the site
and the western 240 feet of the northern boundary under the following
conditions:
      1.   An eight-foot (8') tall, opaque fence is erected adjacent to all
outdoor storage areas at a minimum ten-foot (10') setback from all property
boundaries.
      2.   No vehicles, including recreational vehicles or materials stored
along the northern boundary shall be visible above the fence.
      3.   Views of the western storage area from the adjoining property to the
south shall be mitigated through topography and/or implementation of
vegetation. Any existing vegetation currently located along the southern
boundary (indicated on the 2020 site plan on file with the City) removed that
results in views of the western storage area shall be replaced with equal
caliper inches of diameter at breast height (dbh) (i.e. a 4" tree removed shall
be replaced with the equivalent of 4" of trees, that is, four 1" trees, two 2"
trees, etc.).
      4.   Screening of views of the western outdoor storage area from the
Grand Avenue frontage shall not be required.
      5.   Gravel surfacing shall be allowed when bounded by either a solid
fence or a minimum six inch (6") wide curb to contain the gravel and prevent
migration of the gravel material into grass areas. Said curb shall be comprised
of a material capable of withstanding the weight of maintenance equipment
without crumbling such as, wood, asphalt, concrete, or other suitable material
approved by the City. Asphalt or concrete pavement shall be required when the
above fence and curbing parameters are not provided.
      6.   No outdoor storage shall be allowed within drive aisles associated
with the covered storage units or at the terminus ends of the buildings. (Ord.
2440, 9-21-2020)
132-06: TIMING OF IMPROVEMENTS:
Unless an alternative time line is specified here within, or approved by the
City Council, the following improvements shall be installed within six (6)
months of the adoption of this ordinance, unless an extension of time is
specifically granted by the City Council. Failure to complete said improvements
or comply with provisions stated above (such as, but not limited to E-5) will
forever render the site void of the opportunity to have an outdoor storage
component as part of the mini storage operation. Upon determination of failure
to comply with the requirements stated above, the property owner shall have
thirty (30) days to remove all outdoor storage areas and return the areas to
grass. Failure to comply within thirty (30) days will result in the violations
and penalties as stated in Section 9 of this ordinance. (Ord. 2440, 9-21-2020)
132-07: REPEALER:
All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with the provision of this
Ordinance are hereby repealed. (Ord. 2440, 9-21-2020)
132-08: SAVINGS CLAUSE:
If any section, provision, sentence, clause, phrase or part of the Ordinance
shall be adjudged invalid or unconstitutional, such adjudication shall not
affect the validity of the Ordinance as a whole or any provision, section,
subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or part hereof not adjudged invalid or
unconstitutional. (Ord. 2440, 9-21-2020)
132-09: VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES:
Any person who violates the provisions of this Ordinance upon conviction shall
be punished as set forth in Title 1, Chapter 4, Section 1 of the City Code of
the City of West Des Moines, Iowa. (Ord. 2440, 9-21-2020)
132-10: OTHER REMEDIES:
In addition to the provisions set out in the Violations and Penalties Section
herein, the City may proceed in law or equity against any person, firm or
corporation for violation of any section or subsection of this Ordinance. (Ord.
2440, 9-21-2020)
132-11: EFFECTIVE DATE:
This Ordinance shall be in full force and effect after its passage, approval
and publication as provided by law. (Ord. 2440, 9-21-2020)
132-99: LEGISLATIVE HISTORY:
Ord. 2440, 9-21-2020.
PUD #133
ERIK'S BIKES
SECTION:
133-01: Legal Description
133-02: Development Intent
133-03: Sketch Plan
133-04: Required Plans
133-05: Compliance With Code
133-06: Developer Responsibilities
133-07: Land Use
133-08: Vehicle Trip Allocation
133-09: Stormwater Management Plan
133-10: Site Access
133-11: Parking
133-12: Pedestrian Elements
133-13: Landscaping
133-14: Signage
133-15: Lighting
133-16: Architecture
133-17: Bulk Regulations
133-18: Repealer
133-19: Savings Clause
133-20: Violations And Penalties
133-21: Other Remedies
133-22: Effective Date
133-99: Legislative History
133-01: LEGAL DESCRIPTION:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/082da52c44e30c25b7c604a21715194e08bbd8ec/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3946.png]
(Ord. 2441, 10-5-2020)
133-02: DEVELOPMENT INTENT:
The Erik's Bikes PUD intends to provide a framework for development standards
reflective of the realities and constraints of redevelopment and to establish
design standards to reinforce the intent of the Grand Avenue Redevelopment Plan
to respect the context of the area and create a neighborhood identity that
recognizes the area's original development history. The Erik's Bikes PUD is
located within the area identified for redevelopment by the Grand Avenue
Redevelopment Plan. Redevelopment in this area is intended to create a special
iconic district within the city of West Des Moines known as the Val-Gate
district. All development within this district must be in furtherance of the
goals of the Grand Avenue Redevelopment Plan. The city of West Des Moines Val-
Gate district Grand Avenue Redevelopment Plan and all appendices and exhibits,
as amended, are hereby incorporated as part of the Erik's Bikes PUD.
The Grand Avenue Redevelopment Plan identifies major street patterns, access
and interconnection points, district streetscape locations and typical design
including signage and pedestrian elements. The intent of the redevelopment plan
is to provide a tool that can be used to promote the communication and
cooperation between adjacent property owners and developers within the overall
district to create and ensure a cohesive and unified development.
Properties within the Grand Avenue Redevelopment Plan may be referred to as the
Val-Gate district. (Ord. 2441, 10-5-2020)
133-03: SKETCH PLAN:
Attached hereto (or on file with the city) and made a part of this rezoning
approval, for concept description and delineation is the Sketch Plan document
for Erik's Bikes PUD marked Exhibit "A". The Sketch Plan is a graphic
representation of the property included in the PUD for the purpose of easier
reference for the applicable regulations of this Ordinance. Wherever conflict
occurs between the written text in this document and the notations on the
Sketch Plan, the written text shall prevail. (Ord. 2441, 10-5-2020)
133-04: REQUIRED PLANS:
The following plans shall be required as a part of the processing of any
development application for any property within the Erik's Bikes PUD:
   A.   Planned Unit Development: A planned unit development (PUD) identifies
detailed development criteria for specific areas within the Grand Avenue
Redevelopment Plan area. The planned unit development shall conform to the
general development intent identified in the approved redevelopment plan. The
planned unit development shall be reviewed by the Plan and Zoning Commission
and adopted by the City Council by ordinance.
   This document shall constitute the Planned Unit Development Ordinance for
Erik's Bikes. On file in the city is a sketch plan that illustrates the overall
site layout concept (Exhibit A). This document and any referenced documents or
exhibits (on file with the city clerk) are intended to specify the components,
parameters, and requirements to be adhered to and implemented in order to
ensure the realization of the Grand Avenue Redevelopment Plan. It is recognized
that modifications and changes may be necessary due to changes in building
footprints, site details, and response to market demand. At the discretion of
the Director of Development Services, changes to the layout of the development
that are deemed to be "major" changes shall require an amendment to the sketch
plan and ordinance, if applicable. Major amendments shall require the review
and approval of the Plan and Zoning Commission and City Council.
   Where the sketch plan and PUD language conflict, the PUD language shall
prevail.
   B.   Development Applications (Site Plans or Modifications to a Site Plan):
Site plans for development within the Erik's Bikes PUD must meet the intent of
the approved PUD. A site plan for the development of the site shall be
submitted to the City of West Des Moines for review and approval prior to the
development of any portion of the lot. Site plans for permitted uses which
comply (as determined by the Director of Development Services or designee) with
the design intent as set forth in this PUD will be subject to review via the
City's development review process and shall receive final approval from the
City Council following a recommendation from the Plan and Zoning Commission.
Site plans for uses identified as Permitted Conditional (PC) shall require
approval from the Board of Adjustment. At the discretion of the Director of
Development Services, an amendment to the Erik's Bikes PUD may be required to
bring consistency between the ordinance and site plan development proposed.
(Ord. 2441, 10-5-2020)
133-05: COMPLIANCE WITH CODE:
Unless otherwise specified herein, the development of the Erik's Bikes PUD
shall comply with the provisions of the West Des Moines city code. (Ord. 2441,
10-5-2020)
133-06: DEVELOPER RESPONSIBILITIES:
   A.   Unless otherwise specifically approved by the City Council, the
developer, its successors and/or assigns, if any, shall pay all planning,
engineering, and construction costs for the development of the Planned Unit
Development as required by this ordinance, and shall pay all costs related to
approved site plans, which may include, but is not limited to, the cost of all
storm sewers, sanitary sewers, water mains and service lines, drainageway
improvements, detention basins, buffers, and other improvements as required. No
occupancy permits, either temporary or permanent, shall be issued until all
necessary improvements applicable to the area/lot or structure requesting
occupancy are installed and accepted by the City of West Des Moines. Nothing in
this ordinance shall be construed to prevent the developer, its successors and/
or assigns, if any, from entering into private agreement(s) as it/they may
desire to share the cost of improvements.
   B.   The developer shall be responsible for the maintenance of the area
encompassing the streetscape easement and related public right of way,
including trash removal for the trash receptacles.
   C.   Developer's responsibilities include all obligations contained in this
section as well as those responsibilities set forth in this ordinance. (Ord.
2441, 10-5-2020)
133-07: LAND USE:
All general use regulations and provisions set forth in title 9, "Zoning", of
the West Des Moines city code for the Community Commercial district (CMC),
shall apply to any development proposal within the Erik's Bikes PUD area,
unless noted elsewhere within this ordinance.
   A.   Allowed Uses: Uses allowed for parcels within Erik's Bikes PUD shall be
those uses identified as permitted or permitted conditional for the Community
Commercial (CMC) district.
   B.   Prohibited Uses: The following uses normally allowed in the Community
Commercial (CMC) district shall be prohibited in the Erik's Bikes PUD:
SIC 4522      Heliport/helistop
SIC 4925      Mixed, manufactured or liquefied petroleum gas production and/or
              distribution (except: production and manufacturing)
SIC 58        Eating and drinking places
SIC 592       Liquor stores
SIC 5999      Adult entertainment establishment
SIC 6099-9901 Functions related to deposit banking NEC: Check cashing agencies
SIC 6141      Personal credit institutions (a.k.a., delayed deposit lenders)
SIC 75        Automotive repair, services, and parking
 
   C.   Drive-Throughs: No drive-throughs, regardless of type, shall be
permitted within the Erik's Bikes PUD. (Ord. 2441, 10-5-2020)
133-08: VEHICLE TRIP ALLOCATION:
The traffic study completed by the city of West Des Moines dated July 20, 2020
and approved for the Erik's Bikes PUD parcels estimates a total of 286 average
daily trips (ADT); 7 A.M. peak; and 29 P.M. peak vehicle trips collectively for
the development. These numbers constitute the number of total vehicle trips
allocated to the Erik's Bikes PUD. The combination of tenants/uses within the
PUD area cannot collectively generate vehicle trips which exceed that allocated
as indicated.
Development of the PUD area and implementation of desired land uses will be
limited by the available number of trips designated above for the Erik's Bikes
PUD, as well as compliance with all applicable regulations within this
ordinance or city code. The traffic to be generated must be less than or equal
to that allocated. The traffic allocation indicated above shall be an
entitlement to the PUD area. Traffic generation due to subsequent
redevelopment, expansion or change of use shall not exceed the maximum traffic
allocation stated previously. Alternate uses to that currently anticipated may
be allowed, following completion of an amendment to the approved traffic study
analyzing the proposed alternative and appropriate city approval if the
existing uses and the proposed change(s) collectively do not exceed 286 average
daily trips (ADT); 7 A.M. peak; and 29 P.M. peak vehicle trips allocated to
this parcel.
Overall trips for the Val-Gate district must remain within the caps established
for the Val-Gate district as a whole which were established as part of the
Grand Avenue Redevelopment Plan traffic study. Future development within the
Erik's Bikes PUD may be limited by available trips due to traffic generated
elsewhere within the district. (Ord. 2441, 10-5-2020)
133-09: STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN:
A master stormwater management plan (MSWMP) for the entire Grand Avenue
redevelopment area which governs the overall stormwater management of the Val-
Gate district has been prepared by the City of West Des Moines. Specific
stormwater management plans (SWMP) will be required with the submittal of each
site development plan. The specific stormwater plans shall be prepared at the
developer's expense, by a professional engineer licensed in the state of Iowa.
All specific stormwater management plans shall comply with the city's
applicable design standards for stormwater management existing at the time each
development (site plan) is approved. Said SWMP must demonstrate compliance with
the Grand Avenue Redevelopment master stormwater management plan, if available,
at the time of site plan approval.
The developer(s) of the Erik's Bikes PUD shall be required to participate in
the Grand Avenue redevelopment stormwater management facilities per their pro
rata share of stormwater contribution for the Val-Gate district. (Ord. 2441,
10-5-2020)
133-10: SITE ACCESS:
Two permanent access drives to the Erik's Bikes PUD shall be allowed.
   A.   Access Locations:
      1.   The northern entrance shall be a shared access with the property to
the west with the execution of a private access easement.
      2.   The southern entrance to the PUD will also be a shared access with
the property to the west. The drive shall be accessed from a new east/west road
from an existing driveway from 1st Street. This access road shall be
constructed by the City. (Ord. 2441, 10-5-2020)
133-11: PARKING:
   A.   Off Street Parking:
      1.   All off street parking areas shall be sited and landscaped to
mitigate visibility thereof from street rights of way and pedestrian pathways.
Parking areas shall be screened to a minimum height of three feet (3').
      2.   Parking stall measurements and drive aisle widths shall conform to
title 9, chapter 15 of the city code.
      3.   It is desired that all off street parking areas be aesthetically
improved to reduce obtrusive characteristics that are inherent to their
function. Landscape islands and/or pods shall be implemented in accordance with
title 9, chapter 19 of the city code of West Des Moines except that parking
rows along a building face shall only be required to implement terminal islands
at the end of parking rows and shall not be required to provide intermediate
islands within a linear row of parking.
   B.   Parking Ratios: The minimum number of parking stalls provided shall be
3.5 parking spaces per one thousand (1,000) square feet of gross floor area of
the primary building. A shared parking agreement will be utilized with the
property to the west to provide a portion of the required parking.
   C.   Off Street Parking Lot Setbacks: Parking shall be set back so as to
provide a minimum of ten feet (10') from the ultimate street right of way of
1st Street and Ashworth Road. No minimum setback shall be required along the
west property line because of shared parking that will be utilized with the
property to the west. (Ord. 2441, 10-5-2020)
133-12: PEDESTRIAN ELEMENTS:
The Erik's Bikes PUD, in alignment with the Grand Avenue Redevelopment Plan,
aims to encourage pedestrian movement and opportunities for pedestrian
interaction through the implementation of multiple and connected pathways to
and from parcels within the redevelopment area. In addition, to encourage
pedestrian activity, site furniture and benches for pedestrian use shall be
provided along public streets within an area of enhanced landscaping. One
pedestrian area shall be provided for every two hundred linear feet (200') of
frontage (streetscape). Each pedestrian area shall contain at a minimum two (2)
benches and one trash receptacle. These pedestrian areas may be spaced along
the frontage or grouped to create more of a larger plaza area. Development of
these areas shall comply with the Grand Avenue Redevelopment Plan guidelines
with details of the development of each area to be specified, reviewed, and
approved at the time of site plan development. Unless otherwise specified, the
installation of these pedestrian elements shall be by the developer of the
Erik's Bikes PUD at the time of development. A public access easement will be
required for the streetscape area at the time of site plan review to allow
public use of the pedestrian elements. (Ord. 2441, 10-5-2020)
133-13: LANDSCAPING:
Landscaping must be provided in accordance with city code unless otherwise
modified within this ordinance. Details regarding specific varieties, exact
quantities, and the minimum size at time of planting shall be provided and
approved as part of the site plan submittal and shall meet the general
guidelines in respect to the minimum plant sizes traditionally applied to
development within the city. The minimum vegetation quantities specified within
this ordinance will need to be provided. The provision of additional vegetation
above the minimum amount required may be necessary to fulfill the intent (i.e.,
visual mitigation/screening) of the required landscaping.
   A.   Open/Green Space: Due to the nature of the intended redevelopment in
respect to existing development pattern, uses, and densities, the amount and
locations of open space and green space/vegetation within the redevelopment
area will vary. As a general rule, the maximum amount of "green" (open lawn
areas and vegetation) should be provided within a site. To allow the most
flexibility in planning, the site shall attempt to provide a minimum of twenty-
five percent (25%) open space; however, the PUD area shall not contain less
than fifteen percent (15%) open space or more than eighty-five percent (85%)
impervious surface. Plaza and streetscape areas along with any areas associated
with outdoor pedestrian use may be counted toward fulfilling the minimum open
space requirement. Plazas and outdoor pedestrian use areas to be counted toward
fulfilling minimum open space requirements may be paved (impervious) as long as
the paving is part of a planned hardscape and softscape enhancement of the
plaza or pedestrian area.
   A minimum of two (2) trees and three (3) shrubs shall be provided for every
three thousand (3,000) square feet of required open space which shall be based
on twenty-five percent (25%) of the site regardless of the actual amount
provided. Of the required trees, fifty percent (50%) shall be of an overstory
or evergreen variety unless otherwise done for design intent and specifically
approved by the appropriate reviewing body. No substitution for required trees
is allowed; however, a twenty (20) square foot mass planting of perennial
flowers or ornamental grasses may be substituted for three (3) shrubs. The
incorporation of evergreen vegetation is encouraged to provide winter substance
within the landscape. Vegetation required as part of the open space may be
placed into off street parking areas, streetscape areas or required buffers but
is in addition to vegetation required of streetscape areas.
   B.   Streetscaping: A landscaped edge with hardscape elements or
"streetscape" shall be provided along 1st Street and Ashworth Road. These
streetscapes are intended to provide desired green to the city, reinforce a
district identity, provide visual screening of parking and other negative site
elements, bring human scale to adjoining buildings and provide traffic calming
benefits. The streetscape shall be accomplished in accordance with the Grand
Avenue Redevelopment Plan streetscaping intent and shall include vegetation,
furniture, and ornamental stone wall screening elements as illustrated in the
Redevelopment plan. Monument signs and pedestrian elements such as patios and
walkways may encroach into the streetscape area; however, no buildings or off-
street parking may encroach.
   A minimum ten-foot (10') streetscape easement shall be provided parallel
with 1st Street and Ashworth Road to provide area for district streetscape,
signage and to maintain utility corridors. The developer shall provide the
necessary easement at the time of final plat.
   Streetscape landscaping shall be placed within the streetscape easement on
the private property. Landscape vegetation and amenities such as pedestrian
benches and ornamental wall stones shall be implemented within the streetscape
area to provide screening of off-street parking areas to a minimum height of
three feet (3'). To aid in achieving this, a minimum of two (2) trees and ten
(10) shrubs shall be required for every fifty linear feet (50') of streetscape
distance. Of the required number of trees, a minimum of one-half (1/2) must be
overstory in nature. No substitution of shrubs for required trees shall be
allowed. Additionally, three (3) "ornamental wall stones" as illustrated in the
Grand Avenue Redevelopment Plan shall be provided for every one hundred linear
feet (100') of streetscape. It is recommended that the stones be clustered in
groups of at least three (3) stones amongst and between groups of shrubs to
provide mass and screening rather than be equally spaced along the streetscape
length.
   C.   Screening Of Negative Site Elements: Electrical transformers, trash
dumpsters, service areas and loading docks, heating, ventilation, air
conditioning, generators, utility meters, and other mechanical equipment which
is located on, beside or adjacent to any building or development shall be
visually screened from views from adjacent roadways, pedestrian paths, and
adjoining properties.
   D.   Vegetation Placement: Understory trees are an acceptable replacement
for overstory trees and upright evergreen trees within public utility
easements. The presence of utility easements shall not provide a basis for
noncompliance with landscaping provisions found within this ordinance and
within any applicable codes. The placement of public utility easements within
streetscapes and buffer parks is discouraged due to the potential conflict
between trees and the need to access the lines for repair. (Ord. 2441, 10-5-
2020)
133-14: SIGNAGE:
All proposed exterior signage or interior signage that is primarily placed to
be viewed from outside of the building requires the review and approval of a
sign permit by the City of West Des Moines. All signage shall follow the
architectural theme of the Grand Avenue Redevelopment Plan and shall comply
with title 9, chapter 18 of the city code except as modified herein or within
the Grand Avenue Redevelopment Plan. Sign design and construction not typically
allowed by code may be permitted by the sign administrator if it is deemed to
carry and reinforce the design intent of the Val-Gate district. Allowance of
alternate design and construction measures shall only be allowed if there is no
other code compliant manner in which to create the sign. The use of LED
illumination for signage emulating "neon style" lighting and relevant to the
architectural theme of the district may be allowed with the approval of the
Development Services Director or their designee. The following additional
modifications to title 9, chapter 18 of the city code are hereby made:
   A.   Business Identification Signs:
      1.   Business identification signs, including wall, ground monument,
roof, and projecting signs shall be consistent with and reinforce the design
intent of the redevelopment plan.
      2.   This site shall be allowed one (1) square foot of wall signage per
linear foot of building frontage along 1st Street and Ashworth Road.? The
allowed signage may be divided into multiple signs as long as the total amount
of sign area earned, based upon the formulas above, is not exceeded. Wall signs
shall not exceed one (1) square foot per the building facade's linear footage
(i.e. a 20' long building side is allowed up to 20 sf of signage). If the front
of a building faces away from the street frontage, that wall area for the front
of the building would earn signage at a rate of one-half (1/2) square foot of
sign area per linear footage of said wall.
      3.   A projecting sign shall be permitted as wall signage up to a maximum
of thirty-five (35) square feet of the allowed wall signage for a building.
Said sign shall be allowed to extend above the building roof no more than one-
half (1/2) the height of the sign.
      4.   Ground monument signs shall be allowed in accordance with city code
for the CMC district with the following exception:
         a.   The main sign structure shall not exceed thirty-five (35) square
feet and five feet (5') in height. Up to an additional one foot (1') of height
shall be allowed for columns or other architectural elements.
      5.   Window Signs: Window graphics must be less than twenty-five percent
(25%) of the glazed surface on the windows on the same wall to be allowed as
window signage, Window signage is not counted towards allowed building signage
and no permit is required. If window graphics exceed the twenty-five percent
(25%) allowed, they are counted toward the allowed building signage and would
require a permit.
      6.   Illuminated banding (led) may be allowed on the primary structure,
canopy and/or monument signs if it is approved as part of the architectural
design.
      7.   All signs: Lighted signs will be required to have a timer to shut
off the sign illumination, as required in the City Sign Code, between 11:00 PM
and 5:00 AM unless the business is open later than 11:00 PM, then the signs
shall be shut off within one hour of closing. (Ord. 2441, 10-5-2020)
133-15: LIGHTING:
Consistent with the redevelopment plan, the Erik's Bikes PUD shall incorporate
a variety of light fixtures ranging from parking lot lights and roadway
fixtures to pedestrian pathway lights. Lighting shall be IDA dark sky compliant
unless otherwise approved by the City of West Des Moines. Included within
section 6 of the Grand Avenue Redevelopment Plan are design specifications and
requirements along with sketches and images of the intended lighting series.
All lighting within the PUD area shall abide by these standards and be
consistent in character to that illustrated in the Grand Avenue Redevelopment
Plan and the Val-Gate district's iconic design intent.
As a part of the review of the site plan, a photometric plan must be submitted.
During the review, the applicant must demonstrate how lighting will not
adversely affect adjoining properties or patrons utilizing the public street
system. Special care must be given to ensure excess light does not spill onto
properties adjacent to, but not part of, the Val-Gate district.
The following general guidelines shall be in addition to the specific
regulations stated within the Grand Avenue Redevelopment Plan regulations:
   A.   Street Lights: The developer of the Erik's Bikes PUD shall pay the cost
of streetlight installation adjacent to 1st Street and Ashworth Road as needed
prior to approval of the associated Erik's Bikes site plan.
   B.   Parking Luminaries: Fixtures shall be of a design to direct light
downward and shall not have bulbs which are exposed and extend below the frame
of the light fixture. Said fixtures shall not exceed twenty-five feet (25') in
height as measured from the ground to the top of the light structure. Fixtures
used shall be consistent throughout the Erik's Bikes PUD.
   C.   Building Lighting: No wall packs or floodlighting without shields to
direct the light to its intended target are allowed. In addition to cut off
fixtures, particular attention shall be given to eliminate hot spots and light
glare. Architectural accent lighting in keeping with the design intent of the
Val-Gate district Redevelopment Plan may be allowed if approved as part of the
architectural design.
   D.   Pedestrian Pathways: Bollard or pole lighting may be implemented along
pedestrian pathways. Pole lights shall not exceed fourteen feet (14') as
measured from the ground to the top of the light fixture. (Ord. 2441, 10-5-
2020)
133-16: ARCHITECTURE:
Included within the Grand Avenue Redevelopment Plan is indication of the
architectural style and illustrative examples of the architectural concepts
which shall serve to guide the design of all buildings within Erik's Bikes PUD.
All buildings in the PUD shall reinforce the concept depicted in the Grand
Avenue Redevelopment Plan. Specific architecture for all buildings shall be
evaluated as part of the site plan review and approval process.
All buildings within the Erik's Bikes PUD shall accommodate the following in
building design:
   A.   Form And Scale: Buildings should reinforce the aesthetic concept as
depicted by the precedent images contained in the Grand Avenue Redevelopment
Plan. Buildings shall be designed to relate specifically to the pedestrian in
scale and variety. The following techniques should be used to meet this
objective:
      1.   Corporate architecture shall be prohibited except as permissible by
the Grand Avenue Redevelopment Plan in that it reinforces the iconic imagery
desired for the Val-Gate district.
      2.   Buildings shall be organized to create a logical balance and
relationship with the site, open spaces and circulation.
      3.   The building's design should meet context and site objectives such
as providing gateways, creating linkages and framing or terminating views.
      4.   Variation in building height, mass and roof forms shall be provided
while still maintaining an overall building continuity.
      5.   Shifts in building planes/facades and variation in exterior
materials shall be incorporated to minimize long expanses of wall.
      6.   Variation in materials, material modules, expressed joints,
textures, colors and details should be used to break up the mass of the
buildings.
      7.   Variation in horizontal planes through the use of materials, color
and projecting forms should be implemented to signify an entry and/or protect
the pedestrian.
      8.   Ground floor retail areas should provide the maximum possible
glazing toward sidewalks to provide pedestrians with visual interest.
      9.   A building's roof form and related details/materials are an integral
part of the architectural design aesthetic. Roofs should not be designed as
attention getting devices related to the reinforcement of signage or as an
identifiable corporate image unless said identification is in keeping with the
Grand Avenue Redevelopment Plan aesthetic.
   B.   Material Quality And Detail: All sides to each building are to receive
high quality materials and finishes (360 degree architectural treatment). There
are no "backs" to a building. Materials should be durable, economically
maintained and of a quality that will maintain their appearance over a
prolonged time.
      1.   Primary building materials shall include glass, steel, architectural
precast concrete, composite materials, stone and brick. The use of natural wood
and architectural metals shall be used in moderation and cannot be the
predominate building material. Composite or metal panels shall use concealed
fasteners and have finished edges. Concrete products shall have integrated
color rather than surface applied paint or stain.   
      2.   The following materials shall not be used for cladding unless
specifically approved by the city of West Des Moines as part of the
architectural elevations:
         a.   EIFS or synthetic stucco.
         b.   Concrete masonry units.
         c.   Tilt up precast concrete systems that are structural in
appearance.
         d.   Materials that are intended for interior use.
      3.   Changes in materials should occur at either inside corners or where
a detail is drawn to specifically accommodate a transition. Stone and brick
materials should wrap corners several feet in order to provide authenticity to
the materials. (Ord. 2441, 10-5-2020)
133-17: BULK REGULATIONS:
   A.   Lot Size: No minimum lot size shall be required.
   B.   Building Height: The height of a building shall conform to the limits
prescribed by the zoning code for the CMC district unless otherwise
specifically approved by the City Council after a recommendation from the Plan
and Zoning Commission that the additional height is necessary and appropriate
to achieve an architectural intent consistent with the goals of the Grand
Avenue Redevelopment Plan.
   C.   Building Setbacks:
      1.   Unless otherwise specifically stated, setbacks shall be measured
from the property line or ultimate street right of way line, whichever is more
restrictive.
      2.   Building setbacks are to the main plane of the building excluding
canopies and pedestrian arcades. It is encouraged that buildings should be
pushed forward to locate adjacent to public and private streets and that
parking should be located to the rear of buildings. Therefore:
         a.   Buildings shall be set back a minimum of ten feet (10') from
public streets and from rear and side property lines.
         b.   Nothing herein, however, shall be construed as permitting the
location of a building that will interfere with pedestrian or vehicle
visibility at an intersection, sidewalks, trails, plazas, or maintenance of
utilities.
      3.   Dumpster enclosures shall be located no closer than fifteen feet
(15') from 1st Street and Ashworth Road and a minimum of five feet (5') from
all other parcel boundaries. Dumpsters should be opaquely screened from
visibility from 1st Street and Ashworth Road. Whenever possible, dumpsters
should be located and designed as an extension of the primary building.
Freestanding dumpster enclosures should be located and landscaped to blend with
the landscape and minimize their presence. (Ord. 2441, 10-5-2020)
133-18: REPEALER:
All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with the provision of this
Ordinance are hereby repealed. (Ord. 2441, 10-5-2020)
133-19: SAVINGS CLAUSE:
If any section, provision, sentence, clause, phrase or part of the Ordinance
shall be adjudged invalid or unconstitutional, such adjudication shall not
affect the validity of the Ordinance as a whole or any provision, section,
subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or part hereof not adjudged invalid or
unconstitutional. (Ord. 2441, 10-5-2020)
133-20: VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES:
Any person who violates the provisions of this Ordinance upon conviction shall
be punished as set forth in Title 1, Chapter 4, Section 1 of the City Code of
the City of West Des Moines, Iowa. (Ord. 2441, 10-5-2020)
133-21: OTHER REMEDIES:
In addition to the provisions set out in the Violations and Penalties Section
herein, the City may proceed in law or equity against any person, firm or
corporation for violation of any section or subsection of this Ordinance. (Ord.
2441, 10-5-2020)
133-22: EFFECTIVE DATE:
This Ordinance shall be in full force and effect after its passage, approval
and publication as provided by law. (Ord. 2441, 10-5-2020)
133-99: LEGISLATIVE HISTORY:
Ord. 2441, 10-5-2020.
PUD #134
THE VILLAGE AT SUGAR CREEK
SECTION:
134-01: Legal Description
134-02: Development Intent
134-03: Sketch Plan
134-04: Required Plans
134-05: Conditions
134-06: Land Use Design Criteria
134-07: Streetscapes And Buffers
134-08: Architecture
134-09: Signage
134-10: Parkland Dedication
134-11: Vehicle Trip Allocations
134-12: Storm Water Management
134-13: Master Property Owners Association
134-14: Fire Access
134-15: Repealer
134-16: Savings Clause
134-17: Violations And Penalties
134-18: Other Remedies
134-19: Effective Date
134-99: Legislative History
134-01: LEGAL DESCRIPTION:
A PARCEL OF LAND IN THE NE1/4 SW1/4, THE NW1/4 SW1/4, AND THE W1/2 NW1/4 SE1/
4 OF SECTION 23, TOWNSHIP 78 NORTH, RANGE 26 WEST OF THE 5TH P.M., CITY OF WEST
DES MOINES, DALLAS COUNTY, IOWA THAT IS MORE PARTICULARLY DESCRIBED AS FOLLOWS:
BEGINNING AT THE CENTER OF SAID SECTION 23; THENCE N83°04'41"E, 653.90 FEET
ALONG THE NORTH LINE OF SAID W1/2 NW1/4 SE1/4 TO THE NE CORNER OF SAID W1/
2 NW1/4 SE1/4, SAID W1/2 NW1/4 SE1/4 ALSO BEING KNOW AS THE WEST 654.48 FEET OF
SAID NW1/4 SE1/4; THENCE S00°24'28"W, 1312.96 FEET ALONG THE EAST LINE OF SAID
W1/2 NW1/4 SE1/4 TO THE SE CORNER OF SAID W1/2 NW1/4 SE1/4; THENCE S83°19'15"W,
655.36 FEET ALONG THE SOUTH LINE OF SAID W1/2 NW1/4 SE1/4 TO THE SE CORNER OF
SAID NE1/4 SW1/4; THENCE S83°26'45"W, 996.17 FEET ALONG THE SOUTH LINE OF SAID
NE1/4 SW1/4 TO A POINT ON THE CENTERLINE OF THE PROPOSED BOONEVILLE ROAD
RELOCATION; THENCE SOUTHWESTERLY ALONG A NON-TANGENT CURVE TO THE RIGHT HAVING
A RADIUS OF 600.00 FEET AND A CHORD BEARING S50°58'00"W, AN ARC LENGTH OF 55.73
FEET ALONG SAID CENTERLINE TO A POINT OF TANGENCY; THENCE S53°37'40"W, 211.10
FEET ALONG SAID CENTERLINE TO A POINT; THENCE NORTHWESTERLY ALONG A NON-TANGENT
CURVE TO THE LEFT HAVING A RADIUS OF 1000.00 FEET AND A CHORD BEARING
N41°47'34"W, AN ARC LENGTH 89.67 FEET TO A POINT OF TANGENCY; THENCE
N44°21'41"W, 526.64 FEET ALONG THE EXISTING CENTERLINE OF SAID BOONEVILLE ROAD
TO A POINT OF CURVATURE; THENCE NORTHWESTERLY ALONG A CURVE TO THE RIGHT HAVING
A RADIUS OF 715.00 FEET AND A CHORD BEARING N39°53'48"W, AN ARC LENGTH OF 65.57
FEET ALONG SAID CENTERLINE TO A POINT OF TANGENCY; THENCE N37°16'10"W, 217.83
FEET ALONG SAID CENTERLINE TO A POINT; THENCE N64°20'40"E, 561.46 FEET TO A
POINT ON THE WEST LINE OF SAID NE1/4 SW1/4; THENCE N00°32'16"E, 533.29 FEET
ALONG SAID WEST LINE TO THE NW CORNER OF SAID NE1/4 SW1/4; THENCE N83°49'59"E,
1312.42 FEET ALONG THE NORTH LINE OF SAID NE1/4 SW1/4 TO THE POINT OF BEGINNING
AND CONTAINING 64.23 ACRES MORE OR LESS. (Ord. 2494, 11-1-2021)
134-02: DEVELOPMENT INTENT:
The Village at Sugar Creek PUD intends to establish a framework for the
integration of a variety of multi-family dwelling types, office and commercial
land uses in a visually cohesive, walkable, and pedestrian focused development
that provides a variety of uses for Des Moines University students and staff,
as well as existing and anticipated surrounding residential developments. The
preservation of natural areas shall be incorporated in the master planning to
enhance and define the development. (Ord. 2494, 11-1-2021)
134-03: SKETCH PLAN:
Attached hereto (or on file with the city) and made a part of this rezoning
approval, for concept description and delineation is the Sketch Plan document
for the Village at Sugar Creek PUD marked Exhibit "A". The Sketch Plan is a
graphic representation of the property included in the PUD delineating the
approximate location and configuration of the PUD Parcels for the purpose of
easier reference for the applicable regulations of this Ordinance. It should be
recognized that the location of streets throughout the development shall define
the final parcel configuration and size. Wherever conflict occurs between the
written text in this document and the notations on the Sketch Plan, the written
text shall prevail. (Ord. 2494, 11-1-2021)
134-04: REQUIRED PLANS:
Prior to or in conjunction with development of any portion of the property
covered by this PUD, the following plans shall be required:
   A.   Preliminary Plat and Final Plat: All ground within the PUD shall be
platted in accordance with the City's Subdivision Ordinance and associated
zoning regulations unless otherwise modified within this ordinance. Outlots
within a plat shall have the proposed use clearly designated on the plat
document. Platted outlots intended for future private development must be re-
platted through the preliminary and final plat process prior to physical
development. Outlots intended to provide for public utilities, or publicly
owned or accessible park ground, greenways, or other recreational amenities are
not required to be replatted prior to development.
   B.   Development Applications Site plans (new, Major Modifications, and
Minor Modifications) for development within the Village at Sugar Creek PUD must
meet the intent of the approved PUD. Site plans (new, Major Modifications and
Minor Modifications) shall be submitted to the City of West Des Moines for
review and approval prior to the development or modifications to any portion of
the lot. New site plans and Major Modifications for permitted uses which comply
(as determined by the Director of Development Services or designee) with the
development intent as set forth in this PUD will be subject to review via the
City's review process and receive final approval from the City Council
following a recommendation from the Plan and Zoning Commission. Minor
Modifications to previously approved site plans may be approved
administratively in accordance with Title 9 of the City Code. Approval by the
Board of Adjustment for any use designated as a Permitted Conditional (Pc) use
shall occur prior to approval of a subsequent site plan by the City Council. At
the discretion of the Director of Development Services, an amendment to the
Village at Sugar Creek PUD may be required to bring consistency between the
ordinance and site plan development proposed.
   Unless otherwise specifically restricted by the City Council, ground work
and construction of private roads and utilities may be started, at the
developer's risk, upon approval of the preliminary plat by the City Council;
however, no construction of structures, including footing and foundations shall
be allowed prior to site plan and final plat approval. Public street and
utility construction may begin, at the sole risk of the developer, after
approval of the preliminary plat by the City Council and Public Improvement
Plans by the City of West Des Moines. (Ord. 2494, 11-1-2021)
134-05: CONDITIONS:
Whereas, Title 9, Chapter 9, Planned Unit Development District of the City
Code, establishes certain regulations and guidelines pertaining to accompanying
information required on plat and site plan documents. In addition, the
following conditions, restrictions, and regulations are adopted as part of this
approval:
   A.   General Conditions: The following general development criteria shall be
integrated into and made a part of this planned unit development.
      1.   General Conformance to Subdivision Ordinance: All subdivisions,
public streets, public street rights of way, and general development shall
adhere to the standards and design criteria set forth in the West Des Moines
subdivision ordinances and the most current design standards adopted by the
city of West Des Moines pertaining thereto unless otherwise stated within this
ordinance.
      2.   General Conformance to Zoning Ordinance: Unless otherwise specified
herein, the development of the Village at Sugar Creek PUD shall comply with
title 9, "Zoning", of the city code or any other applicable codes. To the
extent that the provisions of this ordinance conflict with or are more
restrictive than provisions provided elsewhere in the West Des Moines zoning
ordinance, the provisions of this ordinance shall control.
      3.   Developer Responsibility: Unless otherwise specifically approved by
the City Council, the developer, its successors and/or assigns, if any, shall
pay all planning, engineering, and construction costs for the development of
the planned unit development as required by this Ordinance, and shall pay all
costs related to approved site plans, which may include but is not limited to
the cost of all streets (public and private), storm sewers, sanitary sewers,
water mains and service lines, drainage-way improvements, detention basins, and
other improvements as required. Unless otherwise provided for in a separate
development agreement, at the time of subdivision platting within the PUD, the
subdivider shall be responsible for construction and/or installation of all
required public infrastructure improvements in accordance with the City's
Subdivision Ordinance, as indicated herein, and/or as indicated on the approved
Village at Sugar Creek PUD Sketch Plan Map. With any subdivision plat within
the PUD, the subdivider shall be responsible for constructing and/or installing
the public infrastructure necessary to support development within the
subdivision in a manner that will assure that the public infrastructure
functions at an acceptable level of service (per City policies) and complies
with the West Des Moines Subdivision Ordinance and the Des Moines Metropolitan
Design Standards, as adopted by the City of West Des Moines, unless modified
otherwise in this Ordinance. No occupancy permits, either temporary or
permanent, shall be issued until all necessary improvements applicable to the
area/lot or structure requesting occupancy are installed and public
improvements accepted by the City of West Des Moines. Nothing in this Ordinance
shall be construed to prevent the developer, its successors and/or assigns, if
any, from entering into private agreement(s) as it/they may desire to share the
cost of improvements.
      4.   Flood Hazard: In all areas within a Base Flood (100 Year), or
adjoining drainage ways, and detention ponding areas involving potential flood
hazards, all buildings proposed to be located in a flood hazard area must be
elevated and designed in accordance with the American Society of Civil
Engineers publication ASCE 24 and no building shall be erected which has a
minimum opening elevation (including top of window well) less than one foot
(1') above the determined level of the Base Flood. In areas where historical
high-water levels are above the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) Base Flood
Elevation or special conditions exist, the City may require a Design Flood
Elevation be calculated and used as the Base Flood Elevation for determination
of elevation requirements. Buildings shall only be permitted within twenty-five
feet (25') of any easement or property boundary of a major drainageway, storm
water detention basin or pond if said location is approved as part of the
development entitlement by the City Council and said building is structurally
designed accordingly.
      5.   Sanitary Sewer: The commercial and multi-family land uses proposed
within this PUD are anticipated to generate more waste than the previously
intended business park land use. The existing sanitary infrastructure within
this area may not have sufficient capacity for the PUD proposed land uses. The
developer shall be responsible for infrastructure improvements necessary to
account for additional capacity generated by the land uses. Any further change
in approved land uses and/or densities for the PUD will require a re-analysis
of the sanitary sewer to assure that adequate capacity is available for the
proposed change(s).
      6.   Street Lighting: Unless otherwise provided for in a separate
development agreement, the Developer shall be responsible for all costs
associated with the installation of public and private street lights within or
adjacent to any area included within the development.
      7.   Mailboxes: The Developer shall be responsible for installation of
any required Cluster Box Units (CBUs) as per the local U.S. Postal Service Post
Office.
      8.   The Village at Sugar Creek development shall incorporate an internal
trail and sidewalk system connecting residential areas to Des Moines
University, the commercial village, open natural areas and recreation amenities
and to the City-wide trails and sidewalk system.
      9.   Interior site lighting should be located, designed and directed in
such a way as to mitigate impact on adjacent uses.
         a.   Parking lot fixtures in proximity to residential dwellings on
another property (as measured from the dwelling itself), including properties
outside of the PUD area shall abide by the following:
            (1)   Fixtures greater than 150 feet away shall not exceed twenty-
eight feet (28') in height as measured from the ground to the top of the light
structure.
            (2)   Fixtures greater than 100 feet but less than 150 feet away
shall not exceed twenty-two feet (22') in height as measured from the ground to
the top of the light structure.
            (3)   Fixtures less than 100 feet away shall not exceed sixteen
feet (16') in height.
         b.   The footcandle level at property lines not adjacent to a roadway
shall be less than one.
         c.   All fixtures are to be downcast, cut-off variety to direct
lighting to parking areas and pedestrian pathways and eliminate glare to
neighboring properties. Bulbs shall not be exposed or extend down past the
fixture. Care should be taken to ensure that adjoining properties are not
looking up and into the bulbs of light fixtures. In addition to cut-off
fixtures, particular attention shall be given to eliminate hot spots and light
glare. To achieve this, additional measures may include, but are not limited
to, lowering parking lot light levels after business hours, turning off lights
not necessary for security purposes, and use of landscaping for light
screening/blockage.
         d.   No wall packs or floodlighting are allowed, except that sconces
or decorative lighting shall be permitted.
         e.   As a part of the review of each site plan, a photometric plan
must be submitted. During the review, the applicant must demonstrate how
lighting will not adversely affect adjoining properties.
         f.   Fixtures located 150 feet or less from a residential dwelling on
another property, including properties outside of the PUD area shall be turned
off no later than 30 minutes after the closing of the last business, except
those lights necessary for security purposes. (Ord. 2494, 11-1-2021)
134-06: LAND USE DESIGN CRITERIA:
In addition to the general criteria as stated above, the following land use
regulations, development standards, and design criteria shall apply to the
development of all PUD parcels designated on the Sketch Plan
   A.   Parcel A: The intent of development within this parcel is to provide a
variety of housing options ranging in unit size, building size and design and
dwelling type, including attached and detached townhomes, rowhomes and
apartments.
All bulk regulations and provisions set forth in Title 9, Zoning of the West
Des Moines City Code for the Residential Medium Density (RM-10) district shall
apply to any development proposal within this parcel, unless noted otherwise in
this ordinance. Only residential uses shall be allowed within this parcel.
Number of Dwellings: A maximum of ten (10) dwelling units per acre, or no more
than 400 total dwellings shall be allowed within the 41.0 acres comprised of
Parcels A, C and D collectively. No additional residential dwellings shall be
allowed regardless of if the collective acreage of Parcels A, C and D is
increased. Any reduction in the acreage of these parcels shall result in a
corresponding reduction in the total number of dwellings allowed. The number of
dwellings the area is to be reduced by shall be calculated as the number of
acres the area is reduced from 41.0 multiplied by 10 (DU/acre) with that number
than subtracted from the 400 allowed units.
   B.   Parcel B: The primary intent of development within this parcel is to
allow for commercial and office uses that primarily serve the needs of
students, staff and visitors to the adjacent Des Moines University Campus, as
well as nearby residents. The scale of buildings and intensity of uses shall
respect surrounding residential uses. This area shall be designed with
walkability at its core via enhanced pedestrian walkways physically separated
from vehicle use areas. All buildings within this area shall be visually
cohesive through design, materials and colors and, as much as possible, shall
be integrated with the natural topography of the parcel.
Parcel B shall consist of no more than 21.6 acres.
      1.   All general use and bulk regulations and provisions set forth in
Title 9, Zoning of the West Des Moines City Code for the Support Commercial
(SC) district shall apply to any development proposal within this parcel,
unless noted otherwise in this chapter.
         a.   All permitted (P) and permitted conditional (Pc) uses allowed
within the Support Commercial (SC) zoning district may be allowed with the
approval of the appropriate review body unless otherwise noted in this chapter.
         b.   The following permitted (P) and permitted conditional uses (Pc)
shall have the following allowance:
            (1)   Outdoor patios associated with SIC 58 - Eating and Drinking
Places uses and pedestrian plazas and gathering areas within Parcel B
unassociated with a bar or restaurant shall be exempt from application of
regulations provided in city code 9-10-4.A.18: Outdoor Activity Areas and
Operable Store Fronts.
         c.   The following permitted (P) and permitted conditional uses (Pc)
shall be prohibited within Parcel B:
            (1)    SIC 01      Agricultural Production - Crops
            (2)   SIC 0783    Ornamental Shrub and Tree Services
            (3)   SIC 47       Transportation Services
            (4)   SIC 48       Communications
            (5)   SIC 4925    Mixed, Manufactured or liquefied Petroleum gas
                     production and/or distribution
            (6)   SIC 55       Automotive Dealer and Service Stations
            (7)   SIC 572       Household appliance stores
            (8)   SIC 5999    Misc. Retail Stores, Not Elsewhere Classified -
Engine and Motor Equipment and Supply Stores
            (9)   SIC 70       Hotels, Rooming Houses, Camps, and Other Lodging
Places
            (10)   SIC 726      Funeral Service
            (11)   SIC 7299-03 Dating and Escort Services
            (12)   SIC 75       Automotive Repair, Services, and Parking
            (13)   SIC 7699   Repair Shops and Related Services, Not Elsewhere
Classified, except Lock & Key Services are permitted
            (14)   SIC 79       Amusement and Recreational Services - Event
venue 5,000 sq. ft. or less
            (15)   SIC 92       Justice, Public Order, and Safety
      2.   Number of Dwellings: A maximum of 60 total dwellings shall be
allowed within Parcel B. Said dwellings shall be located above non-residential
uses in a vertical mixed-use building. Free-standing residential only buildings
shall not be allowed. No additional residential dwellings shall be allowed
regardless of if the acreage of Parcel B is increased.
      3.   Building Setbacks:
         a.   Adjacent to S. 81st Street, S. 88th Street and Booneville Road: a
minimum of one hundred feet (100') from the ultimate right-of-way line shall be
provided if vehicle drives or parking, including drive-through lanes are
located between the building and the ultimate right of way line. If the
building is situated such that there is no intervening vehicle drives or
parking, including drive-through lanes between the ultimate right-of-way line
and the building and the building is designed with a pedestrian friendly facade
(e.g., entry doors, glass fronts, plaza areas, patios, etc.), and does not
present as the back of the building, the minimum building setback may be
reduced to a minimum of thirty feet (30').
         b.   Along the north property boundary directly adjacent to the
existing power lines, buildings shall be setback a minimum of thirty feet
(30').
         c.   Along the boundary between Parcels B and D, the minimum building
setback shall be ten feet (10') or as otherwise required to meet Building and
Fire code separation requirements.
      4.   Parking Ratios:
         a.   Restaurants: Ten (10) parking spaces per one thousand (1,000)
square feet of building gross floor area. Restaurants with a drive through
shall follow City Code requirements for vehicle queuing.
         b.   Office and Retail: Three (3) spaces per one thousand (1,000)
square feet of retail and office building gross floor area.
         c.   All other uses not defined herein shall follow city code.
         d.   At the discretion of the Development Services Director, a less
stringent parking calculation may be used provided the applicant can
demonstrate a parking rate less than the above is sufficient due to the type of
potential use, shared uses or off-peak uses.
         e.   If the property is subdivided into two (2) or more lots and/or
shared parking is intended, a shared parking agreement shall be executed in
conjunction with the approval of the subdivision plat.
      5.   Parking Setbacks:
         a.   Parking and vehicle use areas should be located behind the
building pads and in areas out of visibility from adjacent roadways whenever
possible. Adequate screening of views from adjacent roads and adjoining
properties outside of Parcel B of any surface parking, vehicle drive, drive-
through lanes or loading areas shall be appropriately mitigated.
         b.   Off-street parking areas and drive aisles shall be setback from
the perimeter boundaries of Parcel B as follows:
            (1)    Along S. 81st Street, S. 88th Street, and Booneville Road -
Minimum of thirty feet (30').
            (2)   Along Parcels C and D (north Parcel B boundary) - Minimum of
thirty feet (30').
            (3)   Along common property lines within Parcel B - Minimum of five
feet (5') or as necessary to provide for parking lot screening, unless a common
parking field is used, then the no setback shall be required.
      6.   Construction Phasing: Two (2) access drives, acceptable to the
City's Fire Marshal, shall be available for each building. Unless otherwise
allowed by the Fire Marshal, prior to issuance of any occupancy permits,
including temporary occupancy permits, drive connections as shown on the PUD
Sketch Plan shall exist as follows:
         a.   For buildings B-1 and B-2: access drives #1 and #2.
         b.   For building B-3: access drives #2 and #3.
         c.   For buildings B-4 through B-7: access drives #3 and #4.
   C.   Parcel C: The intent of this parcel is to provide land for a future
public park that will be combined with adjacent properties north of the Village
at Sugar Creek PUD area to provide park land for the larger area. The parcel
may only be developed as a park and shall include uses typical of a city park.
Bulk regulations and provisions set forth in Title 9, Zoning of the West Des
Moines City Code for the Agricultural/Open Space (OS) district shall apply to
any development proposal within this parcel, unless noted otherwise in this
chapter, city code or specifically allowed by the City Council.
   D.   Parcel D: The intent of this parcel is to provide additional open areas
and park space for the area. Unless otherwise agreed by the city to take over
ownership, this parcel shall remain under private ownership and all costs for
implementation of improvements and on-going maintenance shall be the
responsibility of the property owner. All bulk regulations and provisions set
forth in Title 9, Zoning of the West Des Moines City Code for the Agricultural/
Open Space (OS) district shall apply to any development proposal within this
parcel, unless noted otherwise in this chapter. (Ord. 2494, 11-1-2021; amd.
Ord. 2539, 9-19-2022)
134-07: STREETSCAPES AND BUFFERS:
Buffering between zoning districts shall be required as set forth in Title 9,
Chapter 19 of the city code. Specifically, a minimum thirty-foot (30') buffer
is required along the east property line of the Village at Sugar Creek
development. A minimum thirty-foot (30') streetscape buffer shall be required
along both sides of new Booneville Road, S 81st Street and the east side of S
88th Street. Vegetation requirements shall abide by City Code as provided for a
30' buffer regardless if a streetscape or buffer. Quality existing trees and
shrubs as determined by a qualified arborist and not otherwise listed on the
City's prohibited tree list or of an Ash variety may be counted toward the
buffer planting requirements. (Ord. 2494, 11-1-2021)
134-08: ARCHITECTURE:
The intent is to create building facades throughout this development that are
varied and articulated to provide visual interest and to establish a unique
identity for each parcel within the development. Although it is understood and
preferred that not all buildings within a parcel are identical, each building
will include design elements as well as common materials, complimentary colors
and detailing to provide continuity amongst buildings and to unite all
structures within a parcel into one project concept. The architectural design
of any building within this development shall be acceptable to the City.
On file with the city are conceptual architectural illustrations of the
building style and material options to be implemented. Final details of actual
design, materials, colors and detailing will be provided at the time of
individual site plan approvals. Once City approval is obtained on a particular
building design, any alteration in design before or during construction must be
reviewed and approved by the City's Development Services Department.
   A.   All buildings within this development shall accommodate or incorporate
the following in building design and materials:
      1.   All sides to each building shall receive high quality materials,
finishes, and details (360 degree architectural treatment). There are no
"backs" to a building.
      2.   Form and Scale: Building design shall consider the scale of the
building and create a distinct and intended transition to the height, bulk, and
scale of the building depending on the surrounding development. Building
entries, front porches for residential uses, pedestrian areas, plazas and
street level uses and functions should be designed to engage the pedestrian
with the activities occurring within them and should be designed to be in the
scale appropriate to the use and function of the space.
      3.   Roof and Building Mounted Mechanical Equipment: Views of equipment
from roadways and adjoining development sites shall be mitigated by screening
incorporated into the design of the building through location and the use of
equipment penthouse, parapets, screening walls, or other acceptable solutions
as identified during the review of the site plan.
      4.   Material Quality and Detail:
         a.   The choice of materials and texture has great visual significance
and can affect the long-term appearance of the city. Proper selection of
exterior building material is directly related to the durability of the
building against weathering and damage from natural forces. Materials should be
durable, economically maintained and of a quality that will maintain their
appearance over a prolonged time. Natural materials such as brick and stone
shall be used as the major cladding elements of the facade. Acceptable cladding
for the balance of the building and trim materials will be determined with the
review of each parcel's site plan.
         b.   Variation in materials, material modules, expressed joints,
textures, colors and details shall be used to break up the mass of the
buildings. Changes in materials shall be aligned with changes in plan or roof
form to emphasize these changes in building mass and shall have the appearance
of 3-dimensional elements.
      5.   Unit design should incorporate elements such as balconies and patios
to reinforce the connection between the residents and the activities within the
development. A minimum of eighty percent (80%) of the multi-family units within
the development must provide a balcony or porch/patio with a minimum usable
area of forty (40) square feet and a minimum usable dimension of five feet (5')
deep in either direction. In lieu of an outdoor living area for individual
units, area(s) of common defined and enhanced outdoor living space can be
provided in a size as determined by the city. (Ord. 2494, 11-1-2021; amd. Ord.
2539, 9-19-2022)
134-09: SIGNAGE:
All signage within the PUD shall be designed, constructed and maintained in
accordance with the West Des Moines Sign Code. The zoning district designated
for application of bulk regulations for each parcel shall govern signage
allowances and design. (Ord. 2494, 11-1-2021)
134-10: PARKLAND DEDICATION:
All residential developments shall abide by the City's Parkland Dedication
regulations. Intended amenities and facilities to fulfill dedication
requirements shall be identified as part of preliminary plat/site plan review
of each PUD parcel or development proposal. A Parkland Dedication Agreement,
acceptable to the Parks and Recreation Department, detailing the specifics
related to the Parkland Dedication requirements for each area developed as
residential is required to be executed in conjunction with the associated site
plan. At the time of final platting of land intended to fulfill park and
greenway requirements, said land shall be deeded to the City. (Ord. 2494, 11-1-
2021)
134-11: VEHICLE TRIP ALLOCATIONS:
A Traffic Impact Study (study) dated June 29, 2022, has been prepared for the
Village at Sugar Creek development. Per the study, the development has been
allocated 10:06 P.M. peak hour trips; 6:93 A.M. peak hour trips; and 12,096
Average Daily Trips (ADT). As development proposals are approved, the number of
vehicle trips generated by the proposed development will be subtracted from the
total trips allocated to the development. Approval of this PUD does not
constitute a guarantee that the proposed plan can be implemented. Development
of all parcels and implementation of desired land uses, including specific high
traffic generating tenants, will be limited by the available number of trips.
Should anticipated traffic exceed the total trips allocated for the Village at
Sugar Creek development prior to full build out, further development of parcels
may be limited or prohibited. Alternate uses to those planned within the study
and approved as part of this PUD ordinance may be allowed, following completion
of an amended traffic study analyzing the proposed alternative and appropriate
City approval of an amendment to the respective PUD ordinance and/or PUD Sketch
map, if necessary, if the existing uses and the proposed change(s) collectively
do not exceed the total trips allocated to the development. (Ord. 2494, 11-1-
2021; amd. Ord. 2539, 9-19-2022)
134-12: STORM WATER MANAGEMENT:
Individual Storm Water Management Plans will be required with each preliminary
plat or site plan for ground within the PUD area. The Developer will have said
Storm Water Management Plans prepared by a Professional Engineer licensed in
the State of Iowa. The Storm Water Management Plans shall comply with the
City's current design standards for storm water management. The method of storm
water management and the storm water conveyance system shall be determined
prior to City approval of a preliminary plat or site plan.
At time of final platting of a developable parcel or site plan if development
is not known at the time of platting, ownership and responsibility for all
storm water detention areas and private storm water detention outlet structures
will need to be established through the execution of a Storm Water Facility
Maintenance Agreement prepared by the City with information provided by the
developer. This agreement essentially provides that the property owner will
maintain and repair their storm water facilities. If they fail to do so, the
city will make repairs or perform maintenance and assess all costs back to the
property owner. Upon installation of storm water management facilities, the
property owner will be responsible to provide as-built drawings and a letter
certifying the detention facility was constructed in conformance with the
approved Storm Water Management Plan. The letter and as-built plans will be
required prior to the issuance of a final occupancy permit for the first
building or residential dwelling on property which is served by a particular
detention facility. Both the letter and as-builts will need to be signed and
sealed in accordance with Chapter 6, 193C-6.1(542B) of the Iowa Code. (Ord.
2494, 11-1-2021)
134-13: MASTER PROPERTY OWNERS ASSOCIATION:
If deemed necessary, proper action shall be taken to establish a property
owners association. The property owners association shall be responsible for
the ongoing upkeep and maintenance of any private infrastructure, common
grounds such as buffer parks, storm water detention facilities, greenbelts,
plazas and other common space, and any other specific development improvements
noted as their responsibility in this ordinance or otherwise determined as part
of the platting or site plan process. (Ord. 2494, 11-1-2021)
134-14: FIRE ACCESS:
   A.   All internal drive aisles and parking lots shall permit the travel of
the Fire Department's largest vehicle, including adequate accommodation of the
vehicle's turning needs. Approval of unique design solutions to accommodate
fire access may be granted by the City Council if, the solutions proposed are
recommended by the West Des Moines Fire Department.
   B.   At the discretion of the City's Fire Marshal, "No Parking Fire Lane"
areas may be established as necessary to ensure efficient movement and access
of the fire trucks. Unless otherwise agreed upon, the developer of the Pavilion
Park development shall be responsible for the procurement and erection of
approved fire lane signage.
   C.   All access drives and drive aisles shall maintain a minimum of twenty
feet (20') of clear pavement.
   D.   A minimum of fourteen feet (14') of vertical clearance over the travel
portion shall be maintained at all times over all vehicle travel ways.
   E.   The developer or its designee shall be responsible for enforcement of
no parking lanes and maintaining adequate clearance of structures and
vegetation along and above all vehicle travel ways regardless if public or
private.
   F.   Adequate fire accesses as determined by the City's Fire Marshal shall
be provided at all times to those areas under construction. (Ord. 2494, 11-1-
2021)
134-15: REPEALER:
All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with the provision of this
ordinance are hereby repealed. (Ord. 2494, 11-1-2021)
134-16: SAVINGS CLAUSE:
If any section, provision, sentence, clause, phrase or part of the Ordinance
shall be adjudged invalid or unconstitutional, such adjudication shall not
affect the validity of the Ordinance as a whole or any provision, section,
subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or part hereof not adjudged invalid or
unconstitutional. (Ord. 2494, 11-1-2021)
134-17: VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES:
Any person who violates the provisions of this Ordinance upon conviction shall
be punished as set forth in Title 1, Chapter 4, Section 1 of the City Code of
the City of West Des Moines, Iowa. (Ord. 2494, 11-1-2021)
134-18: OTHER REMEDIES:
In addition to the provisions set out in the Violations and Penalties Section
herein, the City may proceed in law or equity against any person, firm or
corporation for violation of any section or subsection of this Ordinance. (Ord.
2494, 11-1-2021)
134-19: EFFECTIVE DATE:
This Ordinance shall be in full force and effect after its passage, approval
and publication as provided by law. (Ord. 2494, 11-1-2021)
134-99: LEGISLATIVE HISTORY:
Ord. 2494, 11-1-2021; Ord. 2539, 9-19-2022.
PUD #135
PAVILION PARK
SECTION:
135-01: Legal Description
135-02: Development Intent
135-03: Sketch Plan
135-04: Required Plans
135-05: Conditions
135-06: Land Use Design Criteria
135-07: Buffers
135-08: Architecture
135-09: Signage
135-10: Parkland Dedication
135-11: Vehicle Trip Allocations
135-12: Storm Water Management
135-13: Master Property Owners Association
135-14: Fire Access
135-15: Repealer
135-16: Savings Clause
135-17: Violations And Penalties
135-18: Other Remedies
135-19: Effective Date
135-99: Legislative History
135-01: LEGAL DESCRIPTION:
THE WEST HALF OF SECTION 10, TOWNSHIP 78 NORTH, RANGE 26 WEST OF THE FIFTH
PRINCIPAL MERIDIAN LYING SOUTH OF THE INTERSTATE 80 RIGHT OF WAY AND THE WEST
HALF OF THE SOUTHEAST QUARTER OF SAID SECTION 10; EXCEPT WHISPER RIDGE PLAT 2,
AN OFFICIAL PLAT;
AND
EXCEPT THE INTERSTATE 80 EXCESS AREA ON THE EAST SIDE OF THE SOUTHEAST QUARTER
OF THE NORTHWEST QUARTER OF SAID SECTION 10 AS SHOWN ON THE IOWA DEPARTMENT OF
TRANSPORTATION GRAPHIC EXHIBIT PLAT 1 OF 2 WITH PROJECT NUMBER I-IG-80-3
(12)121;
ALL IN THE CITY OF WEST DES MOINES, DALLAS COUNTY, IOWA AND CONTAINING 264.63
ACRES MORE OR LESS. (Ord. 2407, 3-16-2020)
135-02: DEVELOPMENT INTENT:
The Pavilion Park PUD intends to establish a framework for the integration of
commercial, office and residential land uses in a cohesive and walkable
development pattern that provides a variety of uses to accommodate resident's
needs and activities with a built-in population to support businesses in the
development. Enriching elements such as encouraging both day and evening
activity, emphasizing recreational amenities and encouraging the preservation
of natural areas shall be incorporated in the master planning to enhance and
define the development. (Ord. 2407, 3-16-2020)
135-03: SKETCH PLAN:
Attached hereto (or on file with the city) and made a part of this rezoning
approval, for concept description and delineation is the Sketch Plan document
for Pavilion Park PUD marked Exhibit "A". The Sketch Plan is a graphic
representation of the property included in the PUD delineating the approximate
location and configuration of the PUD Parcels for the purpose of easier
reference for the applicable regulations of this Ordinance. It should be
recognized that the location of streets throughout the development shall define
the final parcel configuration and size. As part of Master Planning as required
below, the final size and shape of the PUD parcels will be confirmed. Wherever
conflict occurs between the written text in this document and the notations on
the Sketch Plan, the written text shall prevail. (Ord. 2407, 3-16-2020)
135-04: REQUIRED PLANS:
Prior to or in conjunction with development or transfer of ownership of any
portion of the property covered by this PUD, the following plans shall be
required:
   A.   Master Plan: A general conceptual layout of the two major roadways
within the Pavilion Park PUD is indicated on the PUD Sketch Plan Map and
generally used to divide the ground included within the PUD into development
parcels. It is acknowledged that a supporting network of roadways will be
necessary to properly develop the PUD area. Prior to development of any portion
of a PUD parcel, a detailed master plan of the entire PUD parcel shall be
required. The master plan shall provide details for the coordination of the
vehicle, bike and pedestrian transportation network, building architecture
themes, locations and relationships, utility networks (storm, sanitary, water,
and fiber), parking facilities, storm water management measures, open space and
recreation areas, buffering, landscape and streetscape themes, and
environmentally sensitive areas to be preserved within each parcel. The
specifics of each master plan are intended to provide unity and continuity
between the various developments within each PUD parcel and the overall PUD.
Development of later master plans, as well as modifications to previously
approved master plans, shall respect the elements established in the earlier
master plan(s). The master plan for each parcel, and any later amendments
necessary for on-going development, shall be reviewed and approved as a public
hearing matter by the City Council, after receiving a recommendation from the
Plan and Zoning Commission, prior to initial or on-going development. It is
recognized that modifications and changes in building footprints and layout,
including the combining of two (2) smaller buildings into one larger building,
may be necessary in response to market demands and specific tenants.
Additionally, unless otherwise specifically restricted within this ordinance,
it is recognized that square footages of buildings may either be shifted from
one building to another or increased or decreased to accommodate specific
users' needs. Assuming adequate sanitary sewer and water infrastructure, these
changes may be allowed if the shift does not drastically alter the master plan
concept, traffic patterns or result in an increase to the total number of
vehicle trips anticipated to be generated within the PUD parcel. At the
discretion of the Director of Development Services, an amendment to an approved
master plan may be required to bring consistency between the master plan and
intended development.
   With the exception of grading when done as part of City approved Grading
Plans, prior to any site work occurring on a parcel, an amendment to the
Pavilion Park PUD Ordinance shall be required along with review of a master
plan for the PUD parcel to establish specific site development regulations,
allowances and prohibitions to be applied to all development proposals within a
subject PUD parcel.
   B.   Preliminary Plat and Final Plat: All ground within the PUD shall be
platted in accordance with the City's Subdivision Ordinance and associated
zoning regulations unless otherwise modified within this ordinance. Platted
outlots intended for future private development must be re-platted through the
preliminary and final plat process prior to physical development. Outlots
intended to provide for public utilities, storm water management, or publicly
owned or accessible park ground, greenways, or other recreational amenities are
not required to be replatted prior to development. Outlots within a plat shall
have the proposed use clearly designated on the plat document.
   C.   Development Applications (Site Plans): With the exception of individual
single-family detached residential lots, site plans shall be submitted to the
City of West Des Moines for review and approval prior to any physical site
development. Site Plans must meet the intent of the approved master plans. At
the discretion of the Director of Development Services, an amendment to the
Pavilion Park PUD Ordinance and/or master plan may be required to bring
consistency between the ordinance and/or master plan and the proposed site
development.
   Unless otherwise specifically restricted by the City Council, ground work
and construction of private roads and utilities may be started, at the
developer's risk, upon approval of the preliminary plat by the City Council;
however, no construction of structures, including footing and foundations shall
be allowed prior to site plan and final plat approval. Public street and
utility construction may begin, at the sole risk of the developer, after
approval of the preliminary plat by the City Council and Public Improvement
Plans by the City of West Des Moines. (Ord. 2407, 3-16-2020)
135-05: CONDITIONS:
Whereas, Title 9, Chapter 9, Planned Unit Development District of the City
Code, establishes certain regulations and guidelines pertaining to accompanying
information required on plat and site plan documents. In addition, the
following conditions, restrictions, and regulations are adopted as part of this
approval:
   A.   General Conditions: The following general development criteria shall be
integrated into and made a part of this planned unit development.
      1.   General Conformance to Subdivision Ordinance: All subdivisions,
public streets, public street rights of way, and general development shall
adhere to the standards and design criteria set forth in the West Des Moines
subdivision ordinances and the most current design standards adopted by the
city of West Des Moines pertaining thereto unless otherwise stated within this
ordinance.
      2.   General Conformance to Zoning Ordinance: Unless otherwise specified
herein, the development of the Pavilion Park PUD shall comply with title 9,
"Zoning", of the city code or any other applicable codes. To the extent that
the provisions of this ordinance conflict with or are more restrictive than
provisions provided elsewhere in the West Des Moines zoning ordinance, the
provisions of this ordinance shall control.
      3.   Developer Responsibility: Unless otherwise specifically approved by
the City Council, the developer, its successors and/or assigns, if any, shall
pay all planning, engineering, and construction costs for the development of
the planned unit development as required by this Ordinance, and shall pay all
costs related to approved site plans, which may include but is not limited to
the cost of all streets, storm sewers, sanitary sewers, water mains and service
lines, drainage-way improvements, detention basins, and other improvements as
required. Unless otherwise provided for in a separate development agreement, at
the time of subdivision platting within the PUD, the subdivider shall be
responsible for construction and/or installation of all required public
infrastructure improvements in accordance with the City's Subdivision
Ordinance, as indicated herein, and/or as indicated on the approved Pavilion
Park PUD Sketch Plan Map and master plans. With any subdivision plat within the
PUD, the subdivider shall be responsible for constructing and/or installing the
public infrastructure necessary to support development within the subdivision
in a manner that will assure that the public infrastructure functions at an
acceptable level of service (per City policies) and complies with the West Des
Moines Subdivision Ordinance and the Des Moines Metropolitan Design Standards,
as adopted by the City of West Des Moines, unless modified otherwise in this
Ordinance. No occupancy permits, either temporary or permanent, shall be issued
until all necessary improvements applicable to the area/lot or structure
requesting occupancy are installed and public improvements accepted by the City
of West Des Moines. Nothing in this Ordinance shall be construed to prevent the
developer, its successors and/or assigns, if any, from entering into private
agreement(s) as it/they may desire to share the cost of improvements.
      4.   Flood Hazard: In all areas within a Base Flood (100 Year), or
adjoining drainage ways, and detention ponding areas involving potential flood
hazards, all buildings proposed to be located in a flood hazard area must be
elevated and designed in accordance with the American Society of Civil
Engineers publication ASCE 24 and no building shall be erected which has a
minimum opening elevation (including top of window well) less than one foot
(1') above the determined level of the Base Flood. In areas where historical
high-water levels are above the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) Base Flood
Elevation or special conditions exist, the City may require a Design Flood
Elevation be calculated and used as the Base Flood Elevation for determination
of elevation requirements. Buildings shall only be permitted within twenty-five
feet (25') of any easement or property boundary of a major drainageway, storm
water detention basin or pond if said location is approved as part of the
development entitlement by the city council and said building is structurally
designed accordingly.
      5.   Sanitary Sewer: Any proposed change in approved land uses and/or
densities for the PUD will require an analysis of the downstream sanitary sewer
capacity to assure that adequate capacity is available for the proposed change
(s).
      6.   Street Lighting: Unless otherwise provided for in a separate
development agreement, the Developer shall be responsible for all costs
associated with the installation of public and private street lights within or
adjacent to any area proposed to be platted or included within a development.
      7.   Mailboxes: The Developer shall be responsible for installation of
any required Cluster Box Units (CBUs) as per the local U.S. Postal Service Post
Office.
      8.   The Pavilion Park development shall incorporate an internal
pedestrian and bicycle trail and sidewalk system connecting various buildings,
open space and recreation areas, public transit and to the City-wide trails and
sidewalk system. Trails and sidewalks shall be required to provide corridors
and pathways to link residential areas with commercial areas, other residential
neighborhoods within the development and recreational amenities.
      9.   Sculptures/art shall be incorporated within non-residential
developments. Potential locations for art and sculptures shall be identified at
the time of master planning of each PUD parcel.
      10.   Interior site lighting and signage should be located, designed and
directed in such a way as to mitigate impact on adjacent uses. Parking lot
lights shall be limited to twenty-five feet (25') in height including the
fixture base and be of a design in which there is not exposed bulbs. Shields
may be required on fixtures located at the perimeter of parking lots and drive
aisles adjacent to residential uses if views of the fixtures cannot be
mitigated in another manner. Illuminated signage which is visible from
residential dwellings shall be turned off one hour after business close until
dawn. (Ord. 2407, 3-16-2020)
135-06: LAND USE DESIGN CRITERIA:
In addition to the general criteria as stated above, the following land use
regulations, development standards, and design criteria shall apply to the
development of all PUD parcels designated on the Sketch Plan:
   A.   Parcel A: The intent of development within this parcel is to provide
for the intermixing of commercial and office uses with supporting high density
residential to allow opportunities for employees to live in close proximity to
work and provide patrons to support the businesses and encourage both day and
night activity. It is intended that a strong pedestrian and bike network will
be provided throughout the parcel, along with opportunities for transit routes
and stops. All sites within the parcel shall be visually unified through the
implementation of a cohesive building and landscaping design theme.
   Unless provided otherwise in this ordinance, all general use regulations,
performance standards and provisions set forth in title 9, "Zoning", of the
City Code for the Regional Commercial (RC) District shall apply to any
development within Parcel A, unless noted otherwise in this ordinance.
      1.   Land Use: All Permitted (P) and Permitted Conditional (Pc) uses
permissible within the Regional Commercial (RC) and Office (OF) districts shall
be allowed with the approval of the appropriate review body. Additionally, High
Density Residential (RH-18) use is permitted within the parcel. The amount of
high density residential development shall comprise a minimum of fifteen
percent (15%), but not to exceed twenty five percent (25%), of the developable
ground within Parcels A and C, collectively. Developable ground shall be
considered those areas of the site unencumbered by roadways (public or
private), wetlands, creeks, or steep slopes that cannot be developed.
   B.   Parcel B: The intent of development within this parcel is to recognize
and complement the existing use context of adjacent medium density developed
ground and provide a transition to the more intense commercial and office use
intended within ground to the west.
   All general use and bulk regulations and provisions set forth in Title 9,
Zoning of the West Des Moines City Code for the Office (OF) district shall
apply to any development proposal within this parcel, unless noted otherwise in
this ordinance.
      1.   Land Use: All Permitted (P) and Permitted Conditional (Pc) uses
permissible within the Regional Commercial (RC), Office (OF) and Residential
Medium Density (RM-12) districts shall be allowed with the approval of the
appropriate review body.
      2.   Land Use Restriction: No Regional Commercial land uses (including
buildings and parking lots) shall be permitted within one hundred fifty feet
(150') of the eastern perimeter boundary of Parcel B.
      3.   Buffers: A minimum thirty foot (30') landscape buffer with a minimum
three foot (3') berm shall be required along the east property line of Parcel
B. The required buffer shall be planted as set forth in Title 9, Chapter 19 of
the city code and shall be installed at the time of first development within
the PUD parcel.
      4.   Building Massing: Office and residential uses within one hundred
fifty feet (150') of the eastern property line of Parcel B shall be restricted
to a maximum of two (2) stories in height. The length of building walls
adjacent to and parallel to the east property line shall not exceed one hundred
sixty feet (160') in length. There shall be no limitation on building square
footage.
   C.   Parcel C: The intent of development within this parcel is to provide
for the intermixing of commercial and office uses but with a higher proportion
of office use than commercial use. The multi-family allowed within this area is
not only to allow employees to live in close proximity to work and provide
patrons to support the businesses and encourage both day and night activity,
but also to serve as a transitional use to the single-family land use intended
to the east. In addition to providing opportunities for transit routes and
stops, it is intended that a strong pedestrian and bike network will be
provided throughout the parcel, including pathway connections to the
residential areas to the north, east and south. All commercial and office sites
within the parcel shall be visually unified through the implementation of a
cohesive building and landscaping design theme. Residential developments within
the parcel shall be visually cohesive through the use of a similar color and
material pallet; however, building design shall present more of a residential
look and may differ from the commercial/office area.
   Unless provided otherwise in this ordinance, all general use regulations,
performance standards and provisions set forth in title 9, "Zoning", of the
City Code for the Office (OF) District shall apply to any development within
Parcel C, unless noted otherwise in this ordinance.
      1.   Land Use: All Permitted (P) and Permitted Conditional (Pc) uses
permissible within the Regional Commercial (RC) and Office (OF) districts shall
be allowed with the approval of the appropriate review body. Additionally, High
Density Residential (RH-18) use is permitted within Parcel C. The amount of
high density residential development shall comprise a minimum of fifteen
percent (15%), but not to exceed twenty five percent (25%), of the developable
ground within Parcels A and C, collectively. Developable ground shall be
considered those areas of the site unencumbered by roadways (public or
private), wetlands, creeks, or steep slopes that cannot be developed.
      2.   Land Use Restriction: No Regional Commercial land uses (including
buildings and parking lots) shall be permitted within one hundred fifty feet
(150') of the perimeter boundary of Parcel C which is adjacent to residential
uses in another PUD parcel, including residential uses on the opposite of a
street.
      3.   Building Massing: All buildings within one hundred fifty feet (150')
of the property line of single family lots shall be a maximum of two (2)
stories in height. Individual buildings along the boundary of Parcel C shall
not exceed one hundred sixty feet (160') in length. The one hundred fifty foot
(150') distance shall be measured from the property line of the single family
lots, not from the perimeter boundary of Parcel C.
   D.   Parcel D: The intent of development within this parcel is to allow the
opportunity for single-family detached dwellings thus providing for an
additional type of living option than the multi-family provided within other
PUD parcels. A strong network of pedestrian and bike pathway connections shall
be provided to link residential areas with commercial areas, other residential
neighborhoods within the development and recreational amenities.
   All general use and bulk regulations and provisions set forth in Title 9,
Zoning of the West Des Moines City Code for the Residential Single Family (RS-
5) district shall apply to any development proposal within this parcel, unless
noted otherwise in this ordinance.
      1.   Front Yard Setbacks: Front yard setbacks within the RS-5 district
may be reduced to twenty feet (20'), however, the front of garages shall be
setback a minimum of twenty five feet (25') from the street right-of-way line
or sidewalk edge, whichever is more interior to the private area of the lot to
allow for vehicle parking without overhanging the sidewalk and impeding
pedestrian movements. Open porches, as defined in City Code, with a minimum
depth of 6 feet (6'), are allowed to encroach up to 8 feet (8') into the twenty
foot (20') front yard setback.
      2.   For corner single family residential lots on which a buffer is
located on the street side yard, the buffer and building setback line are
permitted to overlap; however, the full buffer width needs to be provided even
if the setback is less than the required buffer width. For double frontage
lots, the required rear yard setback is in addition to the 30' buffer.
   E.   Parcel E: The intent of development within this parcel is to allow for
single family detached dwellings, thus providing for an additional type of
living option than the multi-family provided within other PUD parcels. A strong
network of pedestrian and bike pathway connections shall be provided to link
residential areas with commercial areas, other residential neighborhoods within
the development and recreational amenities.
   All general use and bulk regulations and provisions set forth in Title 9,
Zoning of the West Des Moines City Code for the Residential Single Family (RS-
5) district shall apply to any development proposal within this parcel, unless
noted otherwise in this ordinance.
      1.   For corner single family residential lots on which a buffer is
located on the street side yard, the buffer and building setback line are
permitted to overlap; however, the full buffer width needs to be provided even
if the setback is less than the required buffer width. For double frontage
lots, the required rear yard setback is in addition to the thirty foot (30')
buffer.
   F.   Parcel F: The intent of development within this parcel is to allow for
additional office development opportunities along the major east-west roadway
while respecting the existing single-family estate subdivision immediately to
the south of the Pavilion Park development. It is intended that a strong
pedestrian and bike network will be provided throughout the parcel, including
pathway connections to commercial and residential areas within the development.
All office development within the parcel shall be visually unified through the
implementation of a cohesive building and landscaping design theme.
   All general use and bulk regulations and provisions set forth in Title 9,
Zoning of the West Des Moines City Code for the Office (OF) district shall
apply to any development proposal within this parcel, unless noted otherwise in
this ordinance.
      1.   Buffers: Buffers as outlined below shall be installed at the time of
first development within the parcel. Vegetation should be intentionally located
within the buffer (generally meaning at the highest points) to achieve the
greatest amount of mitigation of views of buildings and parking lots, including
both vehicle and overhead lights, from the adjoining residential. Of the trees
required, a minimum of 50% of the trees shall be coniferous to provide for
year-round screening.
         a.   Along South PUD Boundary: A minimum one hundred foot (100')
landscape buffer shall be required along the south property line of Parcel F.
Drive aisles or parking lots may be allowed to encroach into the one hundred
foot (100') buffer a maximum of twenty feet (20') when it can be clearly
demonstrated vehicle headlights and parking lot lighting is properly mitigated.
Buffer vegetation shall be provided at a rate of three (3) overstory or
evergreen trees, six (6) understory trees and 18 shrubs per thirty-five (35)
linear feet of buffer.
         b.   Along the Eastern PUD Boundary: A minimum thirty (30') landscape
buffer shall be required along the eastern property line of Parcel F. No
encroachment into the buffer shall be allowed. One overstory or evergreen tree,
two (2) understory trees and six (6) shrubs shall be provided for every thirty-
five (35) linear feet of buffer. Required evergreen plantings within the buffer
shall be placed at the highest point of the buffer to provide for the most
effective buffering.
      2.   Building Massing: Office uses within one hundred fifty feet (150')
of the property line of adjacent single family residences to the south and east
shall be a maximum of two (2) stories in height. The length of building walls
adjacent to and parallel to the south and east property line of Parcel F shall
not exceed one hundred sixty feet (160') in length. There shall be no
limitation on building square footage.
   G.   Parcel G: The intent of development within in this parcel is to allow
the opportunity for additional single-family detached dwellings options while
respecting the existing single-family estate subdivision immediately to the
south of the Pavilion Park development. It is intended that a range of single-
family lot sizes will be provided from north to south across this parcel.
Larger lots will be provided along the south boundary of the parcel, with a
decrease in lot sizes as development moves north. A strong network of
pedestrian and bike pathway connections shall be provided to link residential
areas with commercial areas, other residential neighborhoods within the
development and recreational amenities.
   All general use and bulk regulations and provisions set forth in Title 9,
Zoning of the West Des Moines City Code for Residential Single Family (RS-12)
shall apply to any development proposal within this parcel, unless noted
otherwise in this ordinance.
      1.   Along the southern two-hundred feet (200') of Parcel G, the minimum
lot size for residential lots shall be 15,000 square feet.
      2.   All lots within the PUD parcel shall provide a minimum of forty feet
(40') of street frontage and a minimum lot width of seventy-five feet (75') as
measured at the front building setback line.
      3.   For corner single family residential lots on which a buffer is
located on the street side yard, the buffer and building setback line are
permitted to overlap; however, the full buffer width needs to be provided even
if the setback is less than the required buffer width. For double frontage
lots, the required rear yard setback is in addition to the 30' buffer. (Ord.
2407, 3-16-2020; amd. Ord. 2488, 9-7-2021)
135-07: BUFFERS:
Buffering between zoning districts and differing uses internal within PUD
parcels A, B and C shall not be required as set forth in Title 9, Chapter 19 of
the city code. However, buffer widths and planting requirements as required per
Title 9, Chapter 19 shall be provided along the perimeter of a PUD parcel,
including PUD parcels A, B and C when a use adjacent to the PUD perimeter is
different than the land use along the perimeter within an adjacent PUD parcel.
The burden of provision of the buffer shall lie with the parcel that contains
the more intense use.
Additionally, a minimum thirty-foot (30') wide buffer with landscape vegetation
shall be provided along all major and minor arterials and major collector
roadways within the Pavilion Park PUD development. Landscape vegetation shall
be provided at a rate consistent with the vegetation requirements outlined in
Title 9, Chapter 19 of the city code for a thirty-foot (30') buffer. Landscape
vegetation shall be installed along the length of the roadway at the time of
development of the first site within a PUD parcel adjacent to the roadway and
prior to issuance of the first final occupancy permit for any structure within
the respective parcel. (Ord. 2407, 3-16-2020)
135-08: ARCHITECTURE:
The intent is to create building facades throughout this development that are
varied and articulated to provide visual interest and to establish a unique
identity for each parcel within the development. Although it is understood and
preferred that not all buildings within a parcel are identical, each building
will include design elements as well as common materials, complimentary colors
and detailing to provide continuity amongst buildings and to unite all
structures within a parcel into one project concept. The architectural design
of any building within this development shall be acceptable to the City.
As part of the master plan for each parcel, conceptual architectural
illustrations of the general building style and material options shall be
provided. Final details of actual design, materials, colors and detailing will
be provided at the time of individual site plan approvals. Once City approval
is obtained on a particular building design, any alteration in design before or
during construction must be reviewed and approved by the City's Development
Services Department.
   A.   All buildings except single family dwellings within this development
shall accommodate or incorporate the following in building design and
materials:
      1.   All sides to each building shall receive high quality materials,
finishes, and details (360 degree architectural treatment). There are no
"backs" to a building.
      2.   Form and Scale: Building design shall consider the scale of the
building and create a distinct and intended transition to the height, bulk, and
scale of the building depending on the surrounding development. Building
entries, front porches for residential uses, pedestrian areas, plazas and
street level uses and functions should be designed to engage the pedestrian
with the activities occurring within them and should be designed to be in the
scale appropriate to the use and function of the space.
      3.   Roof and Building Mounted Mechanical Equipment: Views of equipment
from roadways and adjoining development sites shall be mitigated by screening
incorporated into the design of the building through location and the use of
equipment penthouse, parapets, screening walls, or other acceptable solutions
as identified during the review of the site plan.
      4.   Material Quality and Detail:
         a.   The choice of materials and texture has great visual significance
and can affect the long-term appearance of the city. Proper selection of
exterior building material is directly related to the durability of the
building against weathering and damage from natural forces. Materials should be
durable, economically maintained and of a quality that will maintain their
appearance over a prolonged time. Natural materials such as brick and stone
shall be used as the major cladding elements of the facade. Acceptable cladding
for the balance of the building and trim materials will be determined with each
parcel's master plan.
         b.   Variation in materials, material modules, expressed joints,
textures, colors and details shall be used to break up the mass of the
buildings. Changes in materials shall be aligned with changes in plan or roof
form to emphasize these changes in building mass and shall have the appearance
of 3-dimensional elements.
      5.   Corporate architecture shall be prohibited. Limited use of
architectural elements characteristic of prototypical architecture may be
allowed at the discretion of the Director of Development Services or the
appropriate reviewing and approval body. Implementation of these architectural
elements shall be minimized and whenever possible modified to give a unique
image to the establishment. No standard corporate building design without
modifications shall be implemented.
      6.   Outdoor Living Area: All commercial and office uses as well as
dwelling units within multi-family buildings shall provide a defined public
plaza or outdoor living space. Minimum usable area and design criteria will be
determined with each parcel's master plan.
   B.   Architecture for Single Family Dwellings: The design of single family
dwellings is intended to encourage a sense of place by providing building
designs that engages residents with the street and neighborhood. Building
design should reinforce this sense of community by establishing a unique
identity. This can be accomplished by careful attention to building massing and
human scale, choice of exterior building materials, details and site
orientation. Porches are encouraged to be made a part of the front facade of
dwellings to provide a useable outdoor space. (Ord. 2407, 3-16-2020)
135-09: SIGNAGE:
All signage within the PUD shall be designed, constructed and maintained in
accordance with the West Des Moines Sign Code. The zoning district designated
for application of bulk regulations for each parcel shall govern signage
allowances and design. (Ord. 2407, 3-16-2020)
135-10: PARKLAND DEDICATION:
All residential developments shall abide by the City's Parkland Dedication
regulations. Intended amenities and facilities to fulfill dedication
requirements shall be identified as part of the first Master Plan for a PUD
parcel. A Parkland Dedication Agreement, acceptable to the Parks and Recreation
Department, detailing the specifics related to the Parkland Dedication
requirements for each area developed as residential is required to be executed
in conjunction with the associated final plat or site plan, whichever is
approved first. At the time of final platting of land intended to fulfill park
and greenway requirements, said land shall be deeded to the City. (Ord. 2407,
3-16-2020)
135-11: VEHICLE TRIP ALLOCATIONS:
A Traffic Impact Study (study) dated February 24, 2020, has been prepared for
the Pavilion Park development. Per the study, the development has been
allocated 4,878 P.M. peak hour trips; 3,410 A. M. peak hour trips; and 53,635
Average Daily Trips (ADT). As development proposals are approved the number of
vehicle trips generated by the proposed development (based upon the number of
square feet of a proposed specific use or residential dwellings in conjunction
with any parameters established in the study) will be subtracted from the total
trips allocated to the development. Approval of this PUD does not constitute a
guarantee that the proposed plan can be implemented. Development of all parcels
and implementation of desired land uses, including specific high traffic
generating tenants, will be limited by the available number of trips.
Should anticipated traffic exceed the total trips allocated for the Pavilion
Park development prior to full build out, further development of parcels may be
limited or prohibited. Alternate uses to those planned within the study and
approved as part of this PUD ordinance may be allowed, following completion of
an amended traffic study analyzing the proposed alternative and appropriate
City approval of an amendment to the respective PUD ordinance PUD Sketch map
and/or PUD Parcel Master Plan, if necessary, if the existing uses and the
proposed change(s) collectively do not exceed the total trips allocated to the
development. (Ord. 2407, 3-16-2020)
135-12: STORM WATER MANAGEMENT:
A Master Storm Water Management Plan shall be required in conjunction with the
initial master planning for each PUD parcel. Individual Storm Water Management
Plans consistent with the Master Storm Water Management Plan will be required
with each preliminary plat for ground within the PUD area. The Developer will
have said Storm Water Management Plans prepared by a Professional Engineer
licensed in the State of Iowa. The Storm Water Management Plans shall comply
with the City's current design standards for storm water management. The method
of storm water management and the storm water conveyance system shall be
determined prior to City approval of a preliminary plat.
At time of final platting, ownership and responsibility for all storm water
detention areas and private storm water detention outlet structures will need
to be established through the execution of a Storm Water Facility Maintenance
Agreement prepared by the City with information provided by the developer. This
agreement essentially provides that the property owner will maintain and repair
their storm water facilities. If they fail to do so, the city will make repairs
or perform maintenance and assess all costs back to the property owner. Upon
installation of storm water management facilities, the property owner will be
responsible to provide as-built drawings and a letter certifying the detention
facility was constructed in conformance with the approved Storm Water
Management Plan. The letter and as-built plans will be required prior to the
issuance of a final occupancy permit for the first building or residential
dwelling on property which is served by a particular detention facility. Both
the letter and as-builts will need to be signed and sealed in accordance with
Chapter 6, 193C-6.1(542B) of the Iowa Code. (Ord. 2407, 3-16-2020)
135-13: MASTER PROPERTY OWNERS ASSOCIATION:
If deemed necessary, proper action shall be taken to establish a property
owners association. The property owners association shall be responsible for
the ongoing upkeep and maintenance of any private infrastructure, common
grounds such as buffer parks, storm water detention facilities, greenbelts,
plazas and other common space, and any other specific development improvements
noted as their responsibility in this ordinance or otherwise determined as part
of the platting or site plan process. (Ord. 2407, 3-16-2020)
135-14: FIRE ACCESS:
   A.   All internal drive aisles and parking lots shall permit the travel of
the Fire Department's largest vehicle, including adequate accommodation of the
vehicle's turning needs. Approval of unique design solutions to accommodate
fire access may be granted by the City Council if, the solutions proposed are
recommended by the West Des Moines Fire Department.
   B.   At the discretion of the City's Fire Marshal, "No Parking Fire Lane"
areas may be established as necessary to ensure efficient movement and access
of the fire trucks. Unless otherwise agreed upon, the developer of the Pavilion
Park development shall be responsible for the procurement and erection of
approved fire lane signage.
   C.   All access drives and drive aisles shall maintain a minimum of twenty
feet (20') of clear pavement.
   D.   A minimum of fourteen feet (14') of vertical clearance over the travel
portion shall be maintained at all times over all vehicle travel ways.
   E.   The developer or its designee shall be responsible for enforcement of
no parking lanes and maintaining adequate clearance of structures and
vegetation along and above all vehicle travel ways regardless if public or
private.
   F.   Adequate fire accesses as determined by the City's Fire Marshal shall
be provided at all times to those areas under construction. (Ord. 2407, 3-16-
2020)
135-15: REPEALER:
All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with the provision of this
ordinance are hereby repealed. (Ord. 2407, 3-16-2020)
135-16: SAVINGS CLAUSE:
If any section, provision, sentence, clause, phrase or part of the Ordinance
shall be adjudged invalid or unconstitutional, such adjudication shall not
affect the validity of the Ordinance as a whole or any provision, section,
subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or part hereof not adjudged invalid or
unconstitutional. (Ord. 2407, 3-16-2020)
135-17: VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES:
Any person who violates the provisions of this Ordinance upon conviction shall
be punished as set forth in Title 1, Chapter 4, Section 1 of the City Code of
the City of West Des Moines, Iowa. (Ord. 2407, 3-16-2020)
135-18: OTHER REMEDIES:
In addition to the provisions set out in the Violations and Penalties Section
herein, the City may proceed in law or equity against any person, firm or
corporation for violation of any section or subsection of this Ordinance. (Ord.
2407, 3-16-2020)
135-19: EFFECTIVE DATE:
This Ordinance shall be in full force and effect after its passage, approval
and publication as provided by law. (Ord. 2407, 3-16-2020)
135-99: LEGISLATIVE HISTORY:
Ord. 2407, 3-16-2020; Ord. 2488, 9-7-2021.
PUD #136
JORDAN RIDGE
SECTION:
136-01: Legal Description
136-02: Development Intent
136-03: Sketch Plan
136-04: Required Plans
136-05: Conditions
136-06: Land Use Design Criteria
136-07: Streetscape
136-08: Architecture
136-09: Signage
136-10: Parkland Dedication
136-11: Vehicle Trip Allocations
136-12: Storm Water Management
136-13: Property Owners Association
136-14: Fire Access
136-15: Repealer
136-16: Savings Clause
136-17: Violations And Penalties
136-18: Other Remedies
136-19: Effective Date
136-99: Legislative History
136-01: LEGAL DESCRIPTION:
PARCEL 21-76 OF SECTION 23 AND SECTION 24, OF TOWNSHIP 78 NORTH, RANGE 26 WEST
OF THE 5TH P.M., AN OFFICIAL PARCEL RECORDED IN BOOK 2021, PAGE 24416 AT THE
DALLAS COUNTY RECORDER'S OFFICE, AND THE E1/2 NW1/4 OF SAID SECTION 23, CITY OF
WEST DES MOINES, DALLAS COUNTY, IOWA THAT IS MORE PARTICULARLY DESCRIBED AS
FOLLOWS:
BEGINNING AT THE NE CORNER OF SAID PARCEL 21-76, SAID NE CORNER ALSO BEING ON
THE WEST RIGHT OF WAY LINE OF S. JORDAN CREEK PARKWAY AS IT IS PRESENTLY
ESTABLISHED IN BOOK 2004, PAGE 294 AT THE DALLAS COUNTY RECORDER'S OFFICE;
THENCE S24°11'07"W, 653.22 FEET ALONG THE EAST LINE OF SAID PARCEL 21-76, SAID
EAST LINE COINCIDES WITH SAID WEST RIGHT-OF-WAY LINE, TO A POINT OF CURVATURE;
THENCE SOUTHERLY ALONG A CURVE TO THE LEFT HAVING A RADIUS OF 1355.74 FEET AND
A CHORD BEARING S01°27'43"E, AN ARC LENGTH OF 1213.74 FEET ALONG SAID WEST
RIGHT-OF-WAY LINE TO A POINT OF TANGENCY; THENCE S27°06'33"E, 1413.67 FEET
ALONG SAID WEST RIGHT-OF-WAY LINE TO A POINT OF CURVATURE; THENCE SOUTHEASTERLY
ALONG A CURVE TO THE RIGHT HAVING A RADIUS OF 1827.36 FEET AND A CHORD BEARING
S19°46'50"E, AN ARC LENGTH OF 467.47 FEET ALONG SAID WEST RIGHT-OF-WAY LINE A
POINT OF TANGENCY; THENCE S12°27'07"E, 130.04 FEET ALONG SAID WEST RIGHT-OF-WAY
LINE TO A POINT ON THE CENTERLINE BOONEVILLE ROAD AS IT IS ESTABLISHED IN BOOK
440, PAGE 65 AT THE DALLAS COUNTY RECORDER'S OFFICE, SAID POINT ALSO BEING ON
THE NORTH LINE OF THE PLAT OF SURVEY RECORDED IN BOOK 7, PAGE 485 AT THE DALLAS
COUNTY RECORDER'S OFFICE; THENCE S82°14'23"W, 87.76 FEET ALONG SAID CENTERLINE
AND SAID NORTH LINE TO A POINT; THENCE S78°07'29"W, 244.40 FEET ALONG SAID
CENTERLINE AND SAID NORTH LINE TO A POINT; THENCE S82°01'23"W, 591.58 FEET
ALONG SAID CENTERLINE AND SAID NORTH LINE TO THE NW CORNER OF SAID PLAT OF
SURVEY RECORDED IN BOOK 7, PAGE 485 AT THE DALLAS COUNTY RECORDER'S OFFICE;
THENCE S00°37'56"E, 14.44 FEET ALONG THE WEST LINE OF SAID PLAT OF SURVEY TO A
POINT ON THE SOUTH LINE OF THE NE1/4 SE1/4 OF SAID SECTION 23; THENCE
S83°19'15"W, 55.21 FEET ALONG SAID SOUTH LINE TO THE SW CORNER OF THE E1/2 NE1/
4 SE1/4 OF SAID SECTION 23; THENCE N00°03'20"E, 1317.20 FEET ALONG THE WEST
LINE OF SAID E1/2 NE1/4 SE1/4 TO THE NW CORNER OF SAID E1/2 NE1/4 SE1/4, SAID
NW CORNER ALSO BEING ON THE SOUTH LINE OF SAID NE1/4 OF SECTION 23; THENCE
S83°06'34"W, 653.49 FEET ALONG SAID SOUTH LINE TO THE SE CORNER OF THE SW1/
4 NE1/4 OF SAID SECTION 23; THENCE S83°04'41"W, 1307.79 FEET ALONG SAID SOUTH
LINE OF THE NE1/4 TO THE CENTER OF SAID SECTION 23, SAID CENTER OF SECTION ALSO
BEING THE SE CORNER OF SAID PARCEL 21-76; THENCE N00°29'27"E, 608.01 FEET ALONG
THE WEST LINE OF SAID PARCEL 21-76, SAID WEST LINE ALSO BEING THE WEST LINE OF
SAID NE1/4, TO A POINT; THENCE N50°35'11"W, 186.35 FEET TO A POINT; THENCE
NORTHEASTERLY ALONG A CURVE TO THE RIGHT HAVING A RADIUS OF 2200.00 FEET AND A
CHORD BEARING N38°13'21"E, AN ARC LENGTH OF 11.24 FEET TO A POINT OF TANGENCY;
THENCE N38°22'08"3E, 14.70 FEET TO A POINT OF CURVATURE; THENCE NORTHERLY ALONG
A CURVE TO THE LEFT HAVING A RADIUS OF 850.00 FEET AND A CHORD BEARING
N19°25'48"E, AN ARC LENGTH OF 561.93 FEET TO A POINT OF TANGENCY; THENCE
N00°29'27"E, 620.02 FEET ALONG A LINE THAT 50.00 FEET EAST OF AND PARALLEL WITH
THE WEST LINE OF SAID PARCEL 21-76 TO A POINT ON THE NORTH LINE OF SAID PARCEL
21-76; THENCE N80°47'37"E, 210.11 FEET TO A POINT OF CURVATURE; THENCE
NORTHEASTERLY ALONG A CURVE TO THE LEFT HAVING A RADIUS OF 1560.00 FEET AND A
CHORD BEARING N71°53'58"E, AN ARC LENGTH OF 484.33 FEET TO A POINT OF TANGENCY;
THENCE N63°00'19"E, 45.06 FEET TO A POINT OF CURVATURE; THENCE NORTHEASTERLY
ALONG A CURVE TO THE LEFT HAVING A RADIUS OF 1060.00 FEET AND A CHORD BEARING
N52°27'31"E, AN ARC LENGTH OF 390.24 FEET TO A POINT OF TANGENCY; THENCE
N41°54'43"E, 327.37 FEET TO A POINT OF CURVATURE; THENCE EASTERLY ALONG A CURVE
TO THE RIGHT HAVING A RADIUS OF 740.00 FEET AND A CHORD BEARING N77°57'43"E, AN
ARC LENGTH OF 931.21 FEET TO A POINT OF TANGENCY; THENCE S65°59'16"E, 185.75
FEET TO THE POINT OF BEGINNING AND CONTAINING 128.79 ACRES MORE OR LESS
(Ord. 2499, 12-6-2021)
136-02: DEVELOPMENT INTENT:
The Jordan Ridge PUD intends to establish a framework for the integration of a
variety of residential land uses and dwelling types while preserving as much of
the natural environment as possible. The presence of creeks, heavily treed
areas and steep slopes warrant a conservation or cluster subdivision approach
with careful siting of buildings and shifting of density from these
environmental areas to more buildable areas. (Ord. 2499, 12-6-2021)
136-03: SKETCH PLAN:
Attached hereto (or on file with the city) and made a part of this rezoning
approval, for concept description and delineation is the Sketch Plan document
for Jordan Ridge PUD marked Exhibit "A" to Ordinance 2499. The Sketch Plan is a
graphic representation of the property included in the PUD and generally
delineates the approximate location and configuration of the PUD Parcels for
the purpose of easier reference for the applicable regulations of this
Ordinance. It should be recognized that the location of streets throughout the
development shall define the final parcel configuration and size. As part of
platting and site planning, the final size and shape of the PUD parcels will be
confirmed. Wherever conflict occurs between the written text in this document
and the notations on the Sketch Plan, the written text shall prevail. (Ord.
2499, 12-6-2021)
136-04: REQUIRED PLANS:
Prior to or in conjunction with development or transfer of ownership of any
portion of the property covered by this PUD, the following plans shall be
required:
   A.   Preliminary Plat and Final Plat: All ground within the PUD shall be
platted in accordance with the City's Subdivision Ordinance and associated
zoning regulations unless otherwise modified within this ordinance. Platted
outlots intended for future private development must be re-platted through the
preliminary and final plat process prior to physical development with the
exception of Outlots intended to provide for public utilities, storm water
management, or publicly owned or accessible park ground, greenways, or other
recreational amenities which are not required to be replatted prior to
development. Outlots within a plat shall have the proposed use clearly
designated on the plat document.
   B.   Development Applications:
      1.   Site Plans and Major and Minor Modifications: With the exception of
individual single-family detached residential developments, site plans shall be
submitted to the City of West Des Moines for review and approval prior to any
physical site development. At the discretion of the Director of Development
Services, an amendment to the Jordan Ridge PUD Ordinance may be required to
bring consistency between the ordinance and the proposed site development.
Unless otherwise specifically restricted by the City Council, ground work and
construction of private roads and utilities may be started, at the developer's
risk, upon approval of the preliminary plat by the City Council; however, no
construction of structures, including footing and foundations shall be allowed
prior to site plan and/or final plat approval. Public street and utility
construction may begin, at the sole risk of the developer, after approval of
the preliminary plat by the City Council and Public Improvement Plans by the
City of West Des Moines.
      2.   Grading Plans: Rough grading of a parcel or development site may
commence prior to approval of plats and site plans with approval of a Grading
Permit by the City Engineer. (Ord. 2499, 12-6-2021)
136-05: CONDITIONS:
Whereas, Title 9, Chapter 9, Planned Unit Development District of the City
Code, establishes certain regulations and guidelines pertaining to accompanying
information required on plat and site plan documents. In addition, the
following conditions, restrictions, and regulations are adopted as part of this
approval:
   A.   General Conditions: The following general development criteria shall be
integrated into and made a part of this planned unit development.
      1.   General Conformance to Subdivision Ordinance: All subdivisions,
public streets, public street rights of way, and general development shall
adhere to the standards and design criteria set forth in the West Des Moines
subdivision ordinances and the most current design standards adopted by the
city of West Des Moines pertaining thereto unless otherwise stated within this
ordinance.
      2.   General Conformance to Zoning Ordinance: Unless otherwise specified
herein, the development of the Jordan Ridge PUD shall comply with title 9,
"Zoning", of the city code or any other applicable codes. To the extent that
the provisions of this ordinance conflict with or are more restrictive than
provisions provided elsewhere in the West Des Moines zoning ordinance, the
provisions of this ordinance shall control.
      3.   Developer Responsibility: Pursuant to the Development Agreement
("Agreement") approved by the City on September 7, 2021, in exchange for
dedication of the right-of-way by the developer for the installation of
Stagecoach Drive, City shall install at its cost the initial two (2) lanes of
an ultimate four (4) lane arterial street comprising Stagecoach Drive,
including all rough and final grading and underground public infrastructure
including water main, fiber conduit, and storm sewer, located on or adjacent to
the Property between the terminus of and aligning with the existing Stagecoach
Drive on the east and continuing through the anticipated intersection with S.
78th Street on the west, all as more fully shown on Exhibit "B" of the
Agreement. As further provided in the Agreement, the City waives and disclaims
its right to levy a special assessment as provided by Iowa Code 384.37 - 79 for
the construction or installation of Stagecoach Drive, including any extension
of Stagecoach Drive, if and when made, within any portion of the Property.
Unless otherwise specifically approved by the City Council, the developer, its
successors and/or assigns, if any, shall pay all remaining planning,
engineering, and construction costs for the development of the planned unit
development as required by this Ordinance, and shall pay all costs related to
approved site plans, which may include but is not limited to the cost of all
streets, storm sewers, sanitary sewers, water mains and service lines,
drainage-way improvements, detention basins, and other improvements as
required. With any subdivision plat within the PUD, the subdivider shall be
responsible for constructing and/or installing the public infrastructure
consistent with the requirements of the Traffic Impact Study necessary to
support development within the PUD in a manner that will assure that the public
infrastructure functions at an acceptable level of service (per City policies)
and complies with the West Des Moines Subdivision Ordinance and the Des Moines
Metropolitan Design Standards, as adopted by the City of West Des Moines,
unless modified otherwise in this Ordinance. Jordan Ridge, LLC, its successors
and assigns shall have no cost or obligation related to any future widening or
improvement to Jordan Creek Parkway unless such widening or improvement is
directly related to the Jordan Ridge development as evidenced by a traffic
impact study or other objective measurement. No occupancy permits, either
temporary or permanent, shall be issued until all necessary improvements
applicable to the area/lot or structure requesting occupancy are installed and
public improvements accepted by the City of West Des Moines. Nothing in this
Ordinance shall be construed to prevent the developer, its successors and/or
assigns, if any, from entering into private agreement(s) as it/they may desire
to share the cost of improvements.
      4.   Flood Hazard: In all areas within a Base Flood (100 Year), or
adjoining drainage ways, and detention ponding areas involving potential flood
hazards, all buildings proposed to be located in a flood hazard area must be
elevated and designed in accordance with the American Society of Civil
Engineers publication ASCE 24 and no building shall be erected which has a
minimum opening elevation (including top of window well) less than one foot
(1') above the determined level of the Base Flood. In areas where historical
high-water levels are above the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) Base Flood
Elevation or special conditions exist, the City may require a Design Flood
Elevation be calculated and used as the Base Flood Elevation for determination
of elevation requirements. Buildings shall only be permitted within twenty-five
feet (25') of any easement or property boundary of a major drainageway, storm
water detention basin or pond if said location is approved as part of the
development entitlement by the City Council and said building is structurally
designed accordingly.
      5.   Sanitary Sewer: The multi-family land uses proposed within this PUD
are anticipated to generate more waste than the previously intended low density
residential land use. The existing sanitary infrastructure within this area may
not have sufficient capacity for the PUD proposed land uses. The developer
shall be responsible for infrastructure improvements necessary to account for
additional capacity generated by the land uses. Any further change in approved
land uses and/or densities for the PUD will require a reanalysis of the
sanitary sewer to assure that adequate capacity is available for the proposed
change(s).
      6.   Street Lighting: Unless otherwise provided for in a separate
development agreement, the Developer shall be responsible for all costs
associated with the installation of public and private streetlights within or
adjacent to any area proposed to be platted or included within a development.
      7.   Mailboxes: The Developer shall be responsible for installation of
any required Cluster Box Units (CBUs) as per standards of the local U.S. Postal
Service Post Office.
      8.   Sidewalks: Standard sidewalks shall be installed along all public
roadways within and adjoining the PUD area. Each parcel within the PUD shall
implement pedestrian connections to the public sidewalk and trail network.
Additionally, to the extent possible given topography of the PUD area, internal
pedestrian and bicycle trail and sidewalk systems shall be implemented within
each PUD parcel, connecting to other PUD parcels, open space and recreation
areas, Des Moines University campus and commercial and other residential
neighborhoods of adjacent developments.
      9.   Interior site lighting should be located, designed and directed in
such a way as to mitigate impact on adjacent uses.
         a.   Parking lot fixtures in proximity to residential dwellings on
another property (as measured from the dwelling itself), including properties
outside of the PUD area shall abide by the following:
            (1)   Fixtures greater than 150 feet away shall not exceed twenty-
eight feet (28') in height as measured from the ground to the top of the light
structure.
            (2)   Fixtures greater than 100 feet but less than 150 feet away
shall not exceed twenty-two feet (22') in height as measured from the ground to
the top of the light structure.
            (3)   Fixtures less than 100 feet away shall not exceed sixteen
feet (16') in height.
         b.   The footcandle level at property lines not adjacent to a roadway
shall be less than one (1).
         c.   All fixtures are to be downcast, cut-off variety to direct
lighting to parking areas and pedestrian pathways and eliminate glare to
neighboring properties. Bulbs shall not be exposed or extend down past the
fixture. Care should be taken to ensure that adjoining properties are not
looking up and into the bulbs of light fixtures. In addition to cut-off
fixtures, particular attention shall be given to eliminate hot spots and light
glare. To achieve this, additional measures may include, but are not limited
to, lowering parking lot light levels after business hours, turning off lights
not necessary for security purposes, and use of landscaping for light
screening/blockage.
         d.   No wall packs or floodlighting are allowed without shields to
direct the light downward, except that sconces or decorative lighting shall be
permitted to cast light against a wall to highlight architectural elements or
add visual interest.
         e.   As a part of the review of each site plan, a photometric plan
must be submitted. During the review, the applicant must demonstrate how
lighting will not adversely affect adjoining properties. (Ord. 2499, 12-6-2021)
136-06: LAND USE DESIGN CRITERIA:
In addition to the general criteria as stated above, the following land use
regulations, development standards, and design criteria shall apply to the
development of all PUD parcels designated on the Sketch Plan:
Overall Residential Density: The 131.5-acre Jordan Ridge PUD shall be allowed a
total of 711 residential dwelling units or generally six (6) dwelling units per
acre. To aid in preserving natural areas, individual PUD parcels may exceed six
(6) dwelling units per acre as long as the overall total number of dwellings
allowed within the PUD is not exceeded.
   A.   Parcels A & D: The environmental aspects within these parcels greatly
impact how much of the parcel is developable. In alignment with the overall PUD
intent of preserving the environmental aspects as much as possible, multi-
story, vertically attached dwellings (apartment buildings) are intended.
All bulk regulations and provisions set forth in Title 9, Zoning of the West
Des Moines City Code for the Residential Medium Density (RM-6) district shall
apply to any development proposal within these parcels, unless noted otherwise
in this ordinance. Only residential uses shall be allowed within the parcels.
      1.   Buffers/Streetscape: All views from public roadways and adjoining
properties of off-street parking and negative site elements such as mechanical
equipment, trash receptacles, garage doors, loading areas, etc. shall be
mitigated.
         a.   Development directly adjacent to S. Jordan Creek Parkway is not
anticipated. Any existing vegetation disturbed or removed within the first
thirty feet (30') adjacent to the road right-of-way line, shall be replaced.
Vegetation replacement types and numbers of trees and shrubs provided shall
comply with city code requirements for a thirty-foot (30') buffer.
         b.   A minimum thirty foot (30') wide landscaped buffer shall be
provided along the western and south boundaries of Parcels A.
         c.   A minimum thirty foot (30') wide landscaped buffer shall be
required along the western boundary of Parcel D.
         d.   Buffers and perimeter setback lines shall be allowed to overlap;
however, no building or paving improvements of any kind shall be located within
a required buffer.
         e.   See Streetscape section.
         f.   Existing trees and shrubs may be credited towards provision of
the buffer/streetscape plantings when an ISA (International Society of
Arboriculture) certified arborist provides documentation confirming that the
tree is high quality, a desired variety, not on the City's prohibited tree list
or of an Ash variety and in a thriving condition. If existing vegetation is not
sufficient to mitigate views of elements stated above, additional trees and
shrubs shall be implemented to achieve mitigation of views.
   B.   Parcel B: Combined with Parcel C.
   C.   Parcel C: This parcel contains two ridgelines with significant slopes
and much of parcel covered with trees. To capitalize on the trees and natural
walk-out lots created by the slopes, and to meet the PUD intent of preserving
natural areas, this parcel will be developed with single-family estate-type
detached dwellings thus providing for an additional type of living option than
provided within other PUD parcels and the overall area.
All general use and bulk regulations and provisions set forth in Title 9,
Zoning of the West Des Moines City Code for the Residential Single Family (RS-
30) district shall apply to any development proposal within this parcel, unless
noted otherwise in this ordinance. Only residential uses shall be allowed
within the parcel.
      1.   Lot Size: The minimum lot size permitted within this development
shall be thirty thousand (30,000) square feet and shall provide a minimum of
one hundred (100) feet in width as measured at the building setback line.
      2.   Setbacks:
         a.   Primary Dwelling Structure: thirty-five-foot (35') front and rear
yard; eight-foot (8') and twelve-foot (12') side yard setbacks. Buildings shall
be set as close as possible to the thirty-five foot (35') front yard setback
line to preserve as many trees as possible and minimize the grading of the
site.
         b.   Detached Accessory Structures: Shall not be located front of the
rear plane of the dwelling and shall provide a minimum seven foot (7') side and
rear yard setback, except double frontage lots which have a buffer along the
rear lot line shall provide a minimum thirty-five foot (35') setback.
      3.   Buffers:
         a.   A thirty-foot (30') wide buffer shall be located along S. 81st
Street. The buffer and building setback line are permitted to overlap; however,
the full thirty-foot (30') buffer width needs to be provided even if the
required primary or detached accessory setback is less than the required buffer
width. Buffer plantings consistent with city code shall be implemented prior to
the issuance of an occupancy permit, including temporary occupancy permit for
the lots adjacent to S. 81st Street.
         b.   A thirty-foot (30') wide buffer shall be located along the rear
lot line of any double frontage lots (front and rear lot line abut a street).
The buffer and rear yard setback are not allowed to overlap: the thirty-foot
(30') rear yard setback shall be measured from the interior (non-street) side
of the buffer. No structures shall be located within the buffer with the
exception of fencing per city code with permission by the City Council. Buffer
plantings consistent with city code shall be implemented prior to the issuance
of an occupancy permit, including temporary occupancy permit for double
frontage lots.
         c.   Existing trees may be credited towards provision of the buffer
plantings when an ISA (International Society of Arboriculture) certified
arborist provides documentation confirming that the tree is high quality, not
on the City's prohibited tree list or of an Ash variety and in thriving
condition.
      4.   Fire Suppression:
         a.   Homes that are eight thousand (8,000) square feet or larger
(including garage, all livable floors including attics if used as habitable
space, and all covered or enclosed structures attached or within twenty feet
(20') of the dwelling) must be fire sprinklered in accordance with the West Des
Moines Fire Code.
         b.   Homes on those lots that are all or in part located greater than
seven hundred fifty feet (750') from the eastern curb of S. 81st Street must be
fire sprinklered regardless of the size of the dwelling structure. The City's
Fire Marshal shall have final say regarding the distance from S. 81st Street to
the lot and thus whether fire sprinklering will be required for a lot.
   D.   Parcel E: All bulk regulations and provisions set forth in Title 9,
Zoning of the West Des Moines City Code for the Residential Medium Density
district shall apply to any development proposal within this parcel, unless
noted otherwise in this ordinance. Only residential uses shall be allowed
within the parcel with a maximum of twenty-eight (28) dwelling units allowed.
   1.   Buffer/Streetscape: A thirty foot (30') wide buffer shall be provided
along S. Jordan Creek Parkway. Existing trees may be credited towards provision
of the buffer plantings when an ISA (International Society of Arboriculture)
certified arborist provides documentation confirming that the tree is high
quality, a desired variety, not on the City's prohibited tree list or of an Ash
variety and in thriving condition. Areas lacking sufficient vegetation to
comply with standard city code requirements shall implement additional
vegetation. (Ord. 2499, 12-6-2021; amd. Ord. 2568, 7-5-2023; Ord. 2598, 2-5-
2024)
136-07: STREETSCAPE:
Streetscapes are intended to be ornamental in nature, bringing green to the
City, shade and mitigation of heat reflection and visually softening the
harshness of pavement expanses. Unless a buffer is specifically provided for
elsewhere here within, a minimum thirty-foot (30') streetscape shall be
required along S. Jordan Creek Parkway, Stagecoach Drive, S. 81st Street, both
sides of new Booneville Road and the north side of existing Booneville Road.
Streetscape vegetation requirements shall follow City Code as provided for type
and number of plantings for a thirty foot (30') wide buffer. Existing trees may
be credited towards provision of the streetscape plantings when an ISA
(International Society of Arboriculture) certified arborist provides
documentation confirming that the tree is high quality, a desired variety, not
on the City's prohibited tree list or of an Ash variety and in a thriving
condition. (Ord. 2499, 12-6-2021)
136-08: ARCHITECTURE:
The intent is to create building facades throughout this development that are
articulated to provide visual interest to pedestrians and to establish a unique
identity for the development. Although it is understood and preferred that not
all buildings within a parcel are identical, each building will include design
elements as well as common materials, complimentary colors and detailing to
provide continuity amongst buildings and to unite all structures within a
parcel into one project concept.
The architectural design of any multi-family building within this development
shall be acceptable to the City. Building design shall provide careful
attention to exterior building materials and details, use of fenestration, and
change in building mass within the plane and roof design to lessen the
plainness of appearance which can be characteristic of multi-family buildings.
An approved material palette is on file with Development Services that provides
the variety of materials appropriate for use within the multi-family parcels of
the PUD. The first site plan approved for multi-family development within the
PUD shall set the design theme for the overall PUD. Final details of actual
design, materials, colors and detailing will be provided at the time of
individual site plan approvals. Once City approval is obtained on a particular
building design, any alteration in design before or during construction must be
reviewed and approved by the City's Development Services Department.
   A.   All buildings except single family dwellings within this development
shall accommodate or incorporate the following in building design and
materials:
      1.   All sides to each building shall receive high quality materials,
finishes, and details (360 degree architectural treatment). There are no
"backs" to a building.
      2.   Buildings shall be organized to create a logical and identifiable
relationship with the site and other buildings, open spaces, and pedestrian
circulation paths.
      3.   The building's design should meet context and site objectives such
as providing gateways, creating visual and physical linkages and framing or
terminating views.
      4.   Projections above the roof shall have sufficient depth to appear as
an integrated three-dimensional element.
      5.   Form And Scale:
         a.   Building design shall consider the scale of the building and
create a distinct and intended transition to the height, bulk, and scale of the
building depending on the immediately surrounding development. Building
articulation and materials which break up the building mass into modules that
respect a residential scale and reflects proportions similar to other buildings
within the area shall be incorporated. Shifts in building planes/facades and
variation in exterior materials shall be incorporated to minimize long expanses
of wall. Long blank walls shall be prohibited.
         b.   Building entries, front porches for residential uses, pedestrian
areas, plazas and street level uses and functions should be designed to engage
the pedestrian with the activities occurring within them and should be designed
to be in the scale appropriate to the use and function of the space. Entrances
into buildings should be easily identified through the use of building design
and detailing. Projected or recessed entryways change in rooflines, addition of
awnings or changes in building material are examples that can create this
effect.
         c.   Trim and structural elements such as posts or columns shall be
sized to the scale of the building.
      6.   Material Quality And Detail:
         a.   Materials should be durable, economically maintained and of a
quality that will maintain their appearance over a prolonged time. The choice
of materials and texture has great visual significance and can affect the long-
term appearance of the city. Proper selection of exterior building material is
directly related to the durability of the building against weathering and
damage from natural forces. Materials should be durable, economically
maintained and of a quality that will maintain their appearance over a
prolonged time. Natural materials such as brick and stone shall be used as the
major elements of the façade cladding (40% or greater), primarily on the lower
stories of the building.
         b.   Variation in materials, material modules, expressed joints,
textures, colors and details shall be used to break up the mass of the
buildings. Changes in materials shall be aligned with changes in plan or roof
form to emphasize these changes in building mass and shall have the appearance
of 3-dimensional elements.
         c.   Buildings may incorporate the following materials in addition to
the materials noted above: architectural concrete masonry units (CMU) and
architectural metal or composite panels (acceptable to the City). All composite
panel or metal cladding must have concealed fasteners. All exposed edges must
have a fully finished edge or be terminated with trim. Trim for the panels
should be finished with the same color as the panel. CMU's shall have
integrated color rather than surface applied paint/staining and should
generally have texture for interest; smooth CMU may be used in conjunction with
texture for accent purposes. The use of EIFS or synthetic stucco shall be used
in limited quantities and primarily as an accent or trim material; located only
on the upper portions of the facades. EIFS or synthetic stucco may not comprise
more that twenty percent (20%) of the cladding material. The use of vinyl
materials is prohibited.
      7.   Outdoor Living Area: All dwelling units within multi-family
buildings shall provide a defined public plaza or outdoor living space.
         a.   Unit design should incorporate elements such as balconies and
patios to reinforce the connection between the residents and the activities
within the development. A minimum of eighty percent (80%) of the multi-family
units within the development must provide a balcony or porch/patio with a
minimum usable area of forty (40) square feet and a minimum usable dimension of
five feet (5') in either direction. In lieu of outdoor living area for
individual units, common defined and enhanced, suitably sized area(s) relative
to the number of residents within the development, outdoor living space(s) can
be provided.
         b.   Should covered parking be pursued, the architectural details of
detached garages should incorporate the materials and treatments of the
dwelling, such as windows, doors, trim and materials on all sides of the
garage. For parking incorporated within the primary building, the design should
place the garage doors on a non-street side façade and on facades not facing
single-family residential developments. Screening or design elements will be
required to minimize the dominance of garage doors on the facade.
      8.   Roof and Building Mounted Mechanical Equipment: Views of equipment
from roadways and adjoining development sites shall be mitigated by screening
incorporated into the design of the building through location and the use of
equipment penthouse, parapets, screening walls, or other acceptable solutions
as identified during the review of the site plan.
   B.   Architecture For Single Family Dwellings: The design of single-family
detached dwellings is intended to encourage a sense of place by providing
building designs that engages residents with the street and neighborhood.
Building design should reinforce this sense of community by establishing a
unique identity. This can be accomplished by careful attention to building
massing and human scale, choice of exterior building materials, details and
site orientation. Porches are encouraged to be made a part of the front façade
of dwellings to provide a useable outdoor space. (Ord. 2499, 12-6-2021)
136-09: SIGNAGE:
All signage within the PUD shall be designed, constructed and maintained in
accordance with the West Des Moines Sign Code. The zoning district designated
for application of bulk regulations for each parcel shall govern signage
allowances and design for the parcel. (Ord. 2499, 12-6-2021)
136-10: PARKLAND DEDICATION:
An area of land calculated by a set formula based upon the density (total
number of dwelling units) of the proposed development is required to be
dedicated for purposes of a public park and greenway as per city code. A
Parkland Dedication Agreement, acceptable to the Park and Recreation
Department, detailing the specifics related to the Parkland Dedication
obligations for the development of any area contained within the PUD is
required to be submitted. Intended amenities and facilities to fulfill
dedication requirements shall be identified as part of preliminary plat/site
plan review of a PUD parcel. A Parkland Dedication Agreement, acceptable to the
Parks and Recreation Department, detailing the specifics related to the
Parkland Dedication requirements for each area developed as residential is
required to be executed in conjunction with the associated final plat or site
plan, whichever is approved first. At the time of final platting of land
intended to fulfill park and greenway requirements, said land shall be deeded
to the City. (Ord. 2499, 12-6-2021)
136-11: VEHICLE TRIP ALLOCATIONS:
A Traffic Impact Study (study) dated September 3, 2021, has been prepared for
the Jordan Ridge development. Per the study, the development has been allocated
348 P.M. peak hour trips; 262 A.M. peak hour trips; and 4,147 Average Daily
Trips (ADT). As development proposals are approved the number of vehicle trips
generated by the proposed development (based upon the number of residential
dwellings in conjunction with any parameters established in the study) will be
subtracted from the total trips allocated to the development. Approval of this
PUD does not constitute a guarantee that the proposed plan can be implemented.
Development of all parcels and implementation of desired land uses, including
specific high traffic generating tenants, will be limited by the available
number of trips.
Should anticipated traffic exceed the total trips allocated for the Jordan
Ridge development prior to full build out, further development of parcels may
be limited or prohibited. Alternate uses to those planned within the study and
approved as part of this PUD ordinance may be allowed, following completion of
an amended traffic study analyzing the proposed alternative and appropriate
City approval of an amendment to the respective PUD ordinance and/or PUD Sketch
map, if necessary, if the existing uses and the proposed change(s) collectively
do not exceed the total trips allocated to the development. (Ord. 2499, 12-6-
2021)
136-12: STORM WATER MANAGEMENT:
Individual Storm Water Management Plans will be required with each preliminary
plat for ground within the PUD area. The Developer will have said Storm Water
Management Plans prepared by a Professional Engineer licensed in the State of
Iowa. The Storm Water Management Plans shall comply with the City's current
design standards for storm water management. The method of storm water
management and the storm water conveyance system shall be determined prior to
City approval of a preliminary plat.
At time of final platting, ownership and responsibility for all storm water
detention areas and private storm water detention outlet structures will need
to be established through the execution of a Storm Water Facility Maintenance
Agreement prepared by the City with information provided by the developer. This
agreement essentially provides that the property owner will maintain and repair
their storm water facilities. If they fail to do so, the city will make repairs
or perform maintenance and assess all costs back to the property owner. Upon
installation of storm water management facilities, the property owner will be
responsible to provide as-built drawings and a letter certifying the detention
facility was constructed in in conformance with the approved Storm Water
Management Plan. The letter and as-built plans will be required prior to the
issuance of a final occupancy permit for the first building or residential
dwelling on property which is served by a particular detention facility. Both
the letter and as-builts will need to be signed and sealed in accordance with
Chapter 6, 193C-6.1(542B) of the Iowa Code. (Ord. 2499, 12-6-2021)
136-13: PROPERTY OWNERS ASSOCIATION:
If deemed necessary, proper action shall be taken to establish development
specific property owners' associations, as well as a master association if
necessary. The owners association(s) shall be responsible for the ongoing
upkeep and maintenance of any private infrastructure, common grounds such as
buffer parks, storm water detention facilities, greenbelts, plazas and other
common space, and any other specific development improvements noted as their
responsibility in this ordinance or otherwise determined as part of the
platting or site plan process. (Ord. 2499, 12-6-2021)
136-14: FIRE ACCESS:
   A.   All internal drive aisles and parking lots shall permit the travel of
the Fire Department's largest vehicle, including adequate accommodation of the
vehicle's turning needs. Approval of unique design solutions to accommodate
fire access may be granted by the City Council if, the solutions proposed are
recommended by the West Des Moines Fire Department.
   B.   At the discretion of the City's Fire Marshal, "No Parking Fire Lane"
areas may be established as necessary to ensure efficient movement and access
of the fire trucks. Unless otherwise agreed upon, the developer of the Jordan
Ridge development shall be responsible for the procurement and erection of
approved fire lane signage.
   C.   All access drives and drive aisles shall maintain a minimum of twenty
feet (20') of clear pavement.
   D.   A minimum of fourteen feet (14') of vertical clearance over the travel
portion shall be maintained at all times over all vehicle travel ways.
   E.   The developer or its designee shall be responsible for enforcement of
no parking lanes and maintaining adequate clearance of structures and
vegetation along and above all vehicle travel ways regardless if public or
private.
   F.   Adequate fire accesses as determined by the City's Fire Marshal shall
be provided at all times to those areas under construction. (Ord. 2499, 12-6-
2021)
136-15: REPEALER:
All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with the provision of this
ordinance are hereby repealed. (Ord. 2499, 12-6-2021)
136-16: SAVINGS CLAUSE:
If any section, provision, sentence, clause, phrase or part of the Ordinance
shall be adjudged invalid or unconstitutional, such adjudication shall not
affect the validity of the Ordinance as a whole or any provision, section,
subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or part hereof not adjudged invalid or
unconstitutional. (Ord. 2499, 12-6-2021)
136-17: VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES:
Any person who violates the provisions of this Ordinance upon conviction shall
be punished as set forth in Title 1, Chapter 4, Section 1 of the City Code of
the City of West Des Moines, Iowa. (Ord. 2499, 12-6-2021)
136-18: OTHER REMEDIES:
In addition to the provisions set out in the Violations and Penalties Section
herein, the City may proceed in law or equity against any person, firm or
corporation for violation of any section or subsection of this Ordinance. (Ord.
2499, 12-6-2021)
136-19: EFFECTIVE DATE:
This Ordinance shall be in full force and effect after its passage, approval
and publication as provided by law. (Ord. 2499, 12-6-2021)
136-99: LEGISLATIVE HISTORY:
Ord. 2499, 12-6-2021; Ord. 2568, 7-5-2023.
PUD #137
JORDAN CREEK TOWER
SECTION:
137-01: Legal Description
137-02: Development Intent
137-03: Required Plans
137-04: Conditions
137-05: Fire Access
137-06: Developer Responsibility
137-07: Requirements
137-08: Architecture
137-09: Signage
137-10: Parkland Dedication
137-11: Vehicle Trip Allocation
137-12: Storm Water Management Plan
137-13: Property Owners Association
137-14: Repealer
137-15: Savings Clause
137-16: Violations And Penalties
137-17: Other Remedies
137-19: Effective Date
137-99: Legislative History
137-01: LEGAL DESCRIPTION:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/082da52c44e30c25b7c604a21715194e08bbd8ec/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4148.png]
(Ord. 2502, 2-7-2022)
137-02: DEVELOPMENT INTENT:
The Jordan Creek Tower Specific Plan intends to establish a framework for the
integration of a mix of land uses on the site, including multi-family
residential, restaurants, retail and offices. (Ord. 2502, 2-7-2022)
137-03: REQUIRED PLANS:
The following plans shall be required as a part of the processing of the
development of the Jordan Creek Tower Specific Plan:
   A.   Area Development Plan: An Area Development Plan is a plan that
identifies planning units, major circulation patterns, master storm water
drainage and detention concepts, utilities, shared public spaces, land use
assumptions and proposed densities. It is intended to be a tool used to promote
the communication and cooperation between adjacent property owners and
developers within a development to ensure cohesive and unified development.
An Area Development Plan shall be reviewed by the Plan and Zoning Commission
and approved by the City Council prior to, or in conjunction with, the review
of the Specific Plan for any property within said specific plan area. No major
changes to the Area Development Plan shall be made without approval of an
amended plan, if deemed necessary, from the appropriate reviewing bodies.
Attached to this document (Exhibit I) or on file with the City Clerk is the
City Council approved Area Development Plan for this development.
   B.   Specific Plan: A Specific Plan identifies the development intent for
each planning unit indicated on the Area Development Plan or more specifically
delineated on the Specific Plan Map. The Specific Plan shall conform to the
general development intent identified in the approved Area Development Plan, as
well as the Town Center Overlay District Guidelines. The Specific Plan shall be
reviewed by the Plan and Zoning Commission and adopted by the City Council by
Ordinance.
This document shall constitute the Specific Plan Ordinance for Jordan Creek
Tower. Attached to and made a part of this ordinance is a Specific Plan Map
that illustrates the overall site layout concept for Jordan Creek Tower
(Exhibit II). This document and the associated exhibits (included or on file
with the City Clerk) are intended to specify the components, parameters, and
requirements to be adhered to and implemented in order to ensure the
realization of the Jordan Creek Tower development concept. It is recognized
that modifications and changes in building footprints and layout may be
necessary in response to market demands and specific tenants. These changes may
be allowed with the appropriate City approvals if the shift does not have a
negative impact on the traffic patterns for the building/area and the total
number of vehicle trips does not exceed that which has been allocated to the
overall Jordan Creek Tower development. At the discretion of the Director of
Development Services, changes to the layout of the development that are deemed
to be 'major' changes shall require an amendment to the Specific Plan Map and/
or Ordinance, whichever is applicable. Major amendments shall require the
review and approval of the Plan and Zoning Commission and City Council.
Where the Specific Plan Map and Specific Plan Ordinance conflict, the Specific
Plan Ordinance shall prevail.
   C.   Site Development Applications (Overlay District Site Plans, Major
Modifications and Minor Modifications): Site Plans for development within the
Jordan Creek Tower development must meet the intent of the approved Specific
Plan. Site plans shall be submitted to the City of West Des Moines for review
and approval prior to the development or modification of any portion of the
associated supporting lot. Site plans for permitted uses which comply (as
determined by the Director of Development Services) with the design intent as
set forth in this Specific Plan will be subject to administrative review and
approval by the Director of Development Services. A one-week review and comment
period by each and all-available members of the Plan and Zoning Commission and
City Council shall precede the administrative approval. If upon review, two (2)
or more members of the City Council, Plan and Zoning Commission, or a
combination thereof request such; or if the Director of Development Services
deems the proposed site plan is not in compliance with the approved Specific
Plan or is potentially controversial, the site plan will be processed through
the traditional full site plan review and approval process.
At the discretion of the Director of Development Services, an amendment to the
Jordan Creek Tower Specific Plan Ordinance may be required to bring consistency
between the ordinance and site plan development proposed.
An overlay district site plan must be approved prior to the issuance of any
building permit, including footing and foundation permits, for construction of
any structure within the area proposed for development.
Upon approval of an Overlay District Site Plan, any modifications to that
intended or constructed shall first receive approval of a site modification
application (Major Modification or Minor Modification). Major Modifications
shall follow the same approval process as do Overlay District Site Plans. Minor
Modifications may be approved administratively by staff without Plan and Zoning
Commission or City Council review if no deviations from city code requirements
are proposed.
   D.   Preliminary and Final Platting: Platting for any parcel shall be at the
discretion of the developer. Platting, if needed for subdivision or right-of-
way dedication, shall be done in accordance with the City's Subdivision
Ordinance. Platted outlots are not buildable until such time that they are
replatted through the City's Subdivision process.
Unless otherwise specifically restricted by City Council action, ground work
and construction of private roads and utilities may be started, at the
developer's risk, upon approval of a preliminary plat or overlay district site
plan by the City Council. Public street and utility construction may begin, at
the risk of the developer, after approval of the preliminary plat or overlay
district site plan which includes the improvements by the City Council and
construction improvement plans by the City of West Des Moines.
Prior to approval of the final plat or first overlay district site plan, unless
otherwise allowed by Council, the developer shall provide the appropriate
agreements, easements, and sureties, as required, for all public rights-of-way
and other public improvements (utilities, sidewalks, street lights, etc.)
within and associated with the development. (Ord. 2502, 2-7-2022)
137-04: CONDITIONS:
Whereas, Title 9 of the West Des Moines City Code includes Chapter 9, PUD
Planned Unit Development District and establishes certain regulations and
guidelines pertaining to accompanying information required on plat and site
plan documents. Now, therefore, the following conditions, restrictions, and
regulations are adopted as part of this approval, to wit:
In addition to the Specific Plan Map, the following general development
criteria shall be integrated into and made a part of this Specific Plan
Ordinance:
   A.   General Conformance to Subdivision Ordinance: All subdivisions, public
streets, public street rights-of-way, and general development shall adhere to
the standards and design criteria set forth in the West Des Moines subdivision
ordinances and the most current design standards adopted by the City of West
Des Moines pertaining thereto unless otherwise stated within this ordinance.
   B.   General Conformance to Zoning Ordinance: Unless otherwise specified
herein, the development of the Jordan Creek Tower Specific Plan shall comply
with Title 9, Zoning, or any other applicable codes.
   C.   Flood Hazard: In all areas within a 100-year frequency flood hazard
zone, or adjoining drainageways, and detention ponding areas involving
potential flood hazards, no building shall be erected that has a lowest floor,
including basements, less that one foot (1') above the determining level of the
100-year frequency flood event, and no building shall be located within twenty-
five feet (25') of any easement or property boundary of a major drainageway,
storm water detention basin, or pond, unless said location is approved as part
of a development entitlement by the City Council and said building is
structurally designed accordingly. (Ord. 2502, 2-7-2022)
137-05: FIRE ACCESS:
   A.   All internal drive aisles and parking lots shall permit the travel of
the Fire Department's largest vehicle, including adequate accommodation of the
vehicle's turning needs. Approval of unique design solutions to accommodate
fire access may be granted by the City Council if, the solutions proposed are
recommended by the West Des Moines Fire Department.
   B.   At the discretion of the City's Fire Marshall, "No Parking Fire Lane"
areas may be established as necessary to ensure efficient movement and access
of the fire trucks. Unless otherwise privately agreed upon, the developer of
the Jordan Creek Tower development shall be responsible for the procurement and
erection of approved fire lane signage.
   C.   All access drives and drive aisles shall maintain a minimum of twenty
feet (20') of clear pavement.
   D.   A minimum of fourteen feet (14') of vertical clearance over the travel
portion shall be maintained at all times over all vehicle travel ways.
   E.   The developer or its designee shall be responsible for enforcement of
no parking lanes and maintaining adequate clearance of structures and
vegetation along and above all vehicle travel ways regardless if public or
private.
   F.   Adequate fire accesses as determined by the City's Fire Marshal shall
be provided at all times to those areas under construction. (Ord. 2502, 2-7-
2022)
137-06: DEVELOPER RESPONSIBILITY:
Unless otherwise provided in a separate agreement specifically approved by the
City Council, the developer, its successors and/or assigns, if any, shall pay
all planning, engineering, and construction costs for the development of the
planned unit development as required by this Ordinance, and shall pay all costs
related to approved site plans, which may include but is not limited to the
cost of all street improvements, storm sewers, sanitary sewers, water mains and
service lines, drainage-way improvements, detention basins, buffers, and other
improvements as required. No occupancy permits, either temporary or permanent,
shall be issued until all necessary improvements applicable to the area/lot or
structure requesting occupancy are installed and accepted by the City of West
Des Moines. Nothing in this Ordinance shall be construed to prevent the
developer, its successors and/or assigns, if any, from entering into private
agreement(s) as it/they may desire to share the cost of improvements.
Street Lighting: The Developer shall be responsible for all costs associated
with the installation of public and private streetlights within or adjacent to
this development.
Mailboxes: The Developer shall be responsible for installation of any required
Cluster Box Units (CBUs) as per standards of the local U.S. Postal Service Post
Office. (Ord. 2502, 2-7-2022)
137-07: REQUIREMENTS:
Unless provided otherwise in this Ordinance, all general use regulations,
performance standards and provisions set forth in Title 9, Zoning, of the City
Code for the Support Commercial (SC) District shall apply to all development
within the Jordan Creek Tower Specific Plan area, as more specifically
described below. To the extent that the provisions of this Section conflict
with or are more restrictive than similar provisions provided elsewhere in the
West Des Moines Zoning Ordinance, the provisions of this Section shall control.
The following land use, design criteria and development standards and
regulations shall apply to all parcels within the Jordan Creek Tower Specific
Plan area:
   A.   Land Use: All land uses as set forth in Title 9, Zoning, of the City
Code for the Support Commercial (SC) District as permitted and permitted
conditionally shall apply except as designated below:
      1.   Permitted Uses: Permitted uses shall include the following:
         a.   All Permitted (P) uses allowed within the Support Commercial (SC)
district except those that have been prohibited by this ordinance.
         b.   All Permitted Conditional (PC) uses allowed within the Support
Commercial (SC) district except those that have been prohibited by this
ordinance may be allowed with the approval of the appropriate review body.
         c.   Residential uses shall be allowed on upper floors of a mixed-use
building at a maximum density of four (4) dwelling units per acre.
      2.   Prohibited Uses: the following permitted and permitted conditional
uses otherwise allowed in the Support Commercial (SC) District shall be
prohibited:
            Agriculture, Forestry & Fishing except SIC 075 Veterinary Services
Division A  for Animal Specialties and SIC 0752: Animal Specialty Services
            Grooming and Boarding
            Transportation, Communication and Public Utilities except SIC 49
Division E  Small and Large Solar Energy Systems and Electric Vehicle Charging
            Stations
SIC 55      Automotive dealers and service stations
SIC 726     Funeral services and Crematories
SIC 7299-02 Massage therapy establishments and steam bath services
SIC 7299-03 Dating and escort services
SIC 75      Automotive repair, services, and parking
SIC 7699    Repair shops and related services, not elsewhere classified, except
            Lock and Key services
 
      3.   Bulk Regulations:
         a.   Lot Area: The minimum lot area for any developable parcel within
the development shall be 60,000 square feet.
         b.   Building Setback: Buildings shall be setback a minimum of twenty-
five feet (25') on all property boundaries. The setback shall be measured from
the property line to the visible primary vertical foundation wall. Intermittent
encroachment up to ten feet (10') into the setback for canopies, awnings,
building bump-outs, outdoor pedestrian and dining areas, etc. may be allowed at
the discretion of the Director of the Development Services.
         c.   Building Height: The maximum building height for buildings shall
not exceed sixty feet (60') in height as measured from the average finished
grade, except, an additional twelve feet (12') of height shall be allowed for
each additional ten feet (10') of setback from the perimeter PUD boundary line.
         d.   Parking Ratios:
            (1)   Parking ratios for the site shall be required as follows:
               (A)   Two (2) parking spaces per dwelling unit plus one (1)
visitor space per ten (10) dwelling units;
               (B)   Eight (8) parking spaces per one thousand (1,000) square
feet of restaurant gross floor area;
               (C)   Three and one half (3.5) spaces per one thousand (1,000)
square feet of retail tenant gross floor area;
               (D)   Two and one half (2.5) spaces per one thousand (1,000)
square feet of office tenant gross floor area;
               (E)   All other uses not defined herein shall follow city code.
            (2)   At the discretion of the Development Services Director, a
less stringent parking calculation may be used provided the applicant can
demonstrate a parking rate less than the above is adequate due to the type of
potential use, shared uses or off-peak uses.
            (3)   If the property is subdivided into two or more lots and
shared parking is intended, a shared parking agreement shall be executed in
conjunction with the approval of the subdivision plat.
         e.   Parking Setbacks:
            (1)   Parking and vehicle use areas should be located in areas away
from S. 60th Street and behind the building pad whenever possible. Adequate
screening of views from S. 60th Street and adjoining properties outside of the
development of any surface parking shall be appropriately mitigated as provided
for elsewhere in this ordinance.
            (2)   Off-street parking areas shall be setback from the perimeter
boundaries of the Jordan Creek Tower Specific Plan area as follows:
               (A)   Along east boundary (S. 60th Street) - Minimum of twenty-
five feet (25');
               (B)   Along south, west and north property boundaries - Minimum
of five feet (5') or as necessary to achieve adequate visual screening.
            (3)   Minimum parking stall measurements and drive aisle widths
shall conform to Chapter 15 of the City's Zoning Ordinance.
            (4)   No portion of any parking lot or drive aisle associated with
parking may be located within a required buffer or streetscape.
   B.   Landscaping: The landscaping requirements specified herein are intended
to create an aesthetically pleasing development which enhances the appearance
and character of the City of West Des Moines, while protecting the general
health, safety and welfare of the citizens. Landscaping is required to address
the following primary aspects or consequences of development:
Open space protection and enhancement;
Mitigation of paving expanses associated with off-street parking;
Visual screening of undesirable views, activities and/or site elements; and
Street side enhancement ('streetscapes')
At the time of overlay district site plan review for this parcel, landscaping
shall be evaluated to ensure achievement of the standards stated within this
Specific Plan ordinance. Additional vegetation beyond that required herein may
be required to be implemented in response to additional details of the use,
buildings, parking, site layout, etc. Details regarding specific varieties,
exact quantities, and the minimum size at time of planting shall be provided
and approved as part of the site plan submittal and shall meet the general
guidelines in respect to the minimum plant size traditionally applied to
development within the City.
      1.   Open Space: The intent of open space is to allow for a balance
between natural areas and the built environment and to provide for the overall
beautification and "greening" of the City.
         a.   A minimum of twenty-five percent (25%) open space shall be
provided within the parcel.
         b.   Open space shall be considered all areas unencumbered by
buildings or paved areas associated with parking, drive aisles, and loading
docks or zones. Plaza areas, water features (not for detention) and structures
such as gazebos, arbors, pergolas, etc. that are associated with outdoor
pedestrian use areas, as well as designated and enhanced pedestrian walkways
through and between areas within the development may be counted towards
fulfilling the minimum open space requirement.
         c.   Vegetation at a rate of two (2) trees and three (3) shrubs per
3,000 square feet of required open space shall be provided within the parcel.
            (1)   Vegetation substitution:
               (A)   One (1) evergreen tree or six (6) shrubs may be
substituted for one (1) required tree; however, no more than twenty-five
percent (25%) of the required number of trees may be substituted unless
specifically approved by the Director of Development Services in order to meet
a defined design intent.
               (B)   A twenty-five (25) square foot mass planting of perennials
or ornamental grasses may be substituted for three (3) shrubs.
         d.   Vegetation required as part of the open space may be placed into
off-street parking areas or streetscapes; however the open space vegetation is
in addition to that which would be required of streetscapes or parking islands
and may not be counted towards fulfilling the minimum amount of vegetation
required for these areas.
      2.   Off-Street Parking Areas:
         a.   All off-street parking areas shall be landscaped to screen their
visibility from street rights-of-way and adjoining property outside of the
Jordan Creek Tower development.
         b.   All off-street parking areas shall be aesthetically improved to
reduce obtrusive characteristics that are inherent to their function. Multiple
landscape islands combined with vegetation shall be incorporated to effectively
eliminate a "sea of asphalt/concrete" and to provide shade thus decreasing heat
reflection back into the environment. Landscape islands and/or pods shall be
implemented in accordance with the following:
            (1)   Islands or open areas shall be located at the terminus end of
all parking rows. Terminal islands shall measure at least ten feet (10') in
width and shall match, at a minimum, the stall length unless otherwise allowed
per the discretion of the Director of Development Services.
            (2)   Landscaped islands shall be placed, at a minimum, every
eighteen (18) stalls within a linear row of parking. At a minimum, internal
islands shall match the dimensions of one (1) parking stall.
         c.   Landscape Vegetation shall be provided as follows:
            (1)   Two trees in each 9' by 34' island;
            (2)   One tree in each 9' by 17' island;
            (3)   Additional shrubs, ground covers, grasses, and flowers may be
provided in landscaped islands but is not required.
      3.   Streetscaping: A landscaped edge or 'streetscape' shall be provided
along all public and private streets adjacent to the Jordan Creek Tower
Specific Plan area. These streetscapes are intended to provide desired green to
the City, interest, comfort to pedestrians, visual softening of pavement
expanses, bring human scale to adjoining buildings, minimize heat-reflection,
and provide traffic calming benefits. The streetscape should have a noticeable
planting pattern, design, or plant variety and should attempt to serve as a
distinguishing or identifiable landmark for the development.
         a.   Unless otherwise required to be located differently due to
presence of existing utilities and/or easements, Streetscaping shall be located
within the first fifteen feet (15') parallel and adjacent to the public street
right-of-way or back of curb of private streets and primary access drives.
         b.   Vegetation within streetscape areas shall be provided at a rate
of one (1) tree and three (3) shrubs per thirty-five (35) lineal feet of
streetscape. A twenty-five (25) square foot mass planting of perennials or
ornamental grasses may be substituted for three (3) shrubs.
         c.   Vegetation required of streetscapes shall be in addition to
vegetation required of parking and open space. Vegetation required as part of
open space may be placed into streetscapes; however, the open space vegetation
may not be counted towards fulfilling the minimum amount of vegetation required
for the streetscape.
      4.   Visual Screening:
         a.   Views from public streets and adjoining properties of the
negative aspects of development and land uses such as loading docks or overhead
doors; heating, ventilation, or air conditioning (HVAC) units; or similar
electrical or mechanical appurtenances shall be adequately screened. Said
screening shall be achieved by careful selection of location and/or orientation
of the buildings and elements, in combination with the use of architectural
enclosures and/or earth berming and landscaping consisting of evergreen
material for year-round screening.
         b.   Mechanical Equipment: All mechanical equipment (both ground and
roof mounted) shall be screened from ground level views from public streets and
adjoining properties through architecturally incorporated opaque screen walls,
raised parapet walls, penthouse feature, or other opaque material comprised of
materials consistent with the associated primary structure. Screening measures
and materials shall be reviewed as part of the site plan review process.
            (1)   Trash Enclosures: Trash receptacles and dumpsters shall be
screened by the use of a permanent enclosure. Enclosures shall be constructed
of materials consistent with or complementary to the primary structure.
Whenever possible, the trash enclosure shall be located as and incorporated as
an extension of the primary building rather than a free-standing element within
the site. Additionally, the enclosure should be landscaped to minimize the
visual presence and impact of the structure on surrounding properties,
businesses, and public streets.
            (2)   Loading Docks and Overhead Doors: Views of loading docks and
overhead doors shall be screened from adjacent properties and public rights-of-
way by the use of landscaping in combination with berming or other
architectural elements as approved by the city. The vegetation species shall be
selected for its density and height and shall be of sufficient size to provide
adequate screening.
            (3)   Vehicle Use Canopies: Canopies must be designed to
incorporate the building's architecture through the use of similar building
materials, roof design and color, including the application of brick or stone
to canopy support columns. When possible, canopies should be designed as an
extension of the building rather than an added on element.
               (A)   Unless appropriate site design measures are implemented to
mitigate the presence and visibility thereof, canopies shall not be located at
the intersection of major streets.
               (B)   The vehicle use area will be screened through landscaping
to minimize the visual presence and impact of the structure on surrounding
properties, businesses, and public streets. Said screening shall be achieved
through the use of location and/or earth berming and landscaping consisting of
evergreen material for year-round screening.
   C.   Pedestrian Use Areas and Elements: The Jordan Creek Tower development,
in alignment with Town Center Overlay District Guidelines, aims to encourage
pedestrian movement and opportunities for pedestrian interaction through
interconnected sidewalks and gathering areas. The attached Specific Plan Map
indicates the location of an anticipated pedestrian node on the site. Specific
details and final materials and layouts for the pedestrian area shall be
submitted, reviewed, and approved as part of the overlay district site plan for
this parcel. In general, pedestrian use areas shall abide by the following:
      1.   These areas shall encourage opportunities for interaction among
pedestrians through the provision of seating opportunities (benches, chairs,
tables, planter walls, etc.). Without compromising the design intent of the
plazas, the developer is encouraged to maximize the number of furniture/seating
opportunities throughout the development.
      2.   Open space plaza areas shall incorporate a variety of hardscape
landscape materials (stone pavers, stamped concrete, field boulders, etc.) for
visual interest and variety and shall implement landscape vegetation to soften,
enhance, and delineate the areas. All plaza/pedestrian areas are required to
incorporate 'green' through the incorporation of planter beds, containers, or
raised planters.
      3.   Appropriate lighting should be incorporated into the plaza areas and
along pedestrian pathways for safety reasons and to extend the usability of the
area into the evening hours. Such lighting may be provided by either pole
mounted fixture of bollard style lighting.
      4.   Plaza areas associated with establishments which serve alcoholic
beverages shall provide a definable boundary (change in material, unmovable
signage, physical feature, etc.) between the private establishments in which
alcohol consumption is allowed and the public area in which it is not. A
physical barrier (fencing, railing, landscaping, etc.) shall prohibit access
into the patio area from the public area; all access into the patio area shall
be through the interior of the establishment. The barrier specifications shall
be reviewed and approved as part of the alcohol permit application.
      5.   Unless provided prior to site development, the installation of these
pedestrian elements shall occur in conjunction with the development of the
parcel and shall be completed prior to issuance of a final occupancy permit.
   D.   Pedestrian Connections: Pedestrian walkways to allow and encourage
pedestrian movement within the Jordan Creek Tower area, as well as to
surrounding developments shall be provided. Pedestrian pathways internal to the
development and across parking areas and drive aisles shall be constructed with
contrasting color, paving material or pavement patterns to the adjoining paving
in order to provide a definable and highly visible crosswalk. Simply striping
pedestrian crosswalks shall not meet the intent of this section.
   E.   Lighting:
      1.   Light fixtures shall not exceed twenty-eight feet (28') in height as
measured from the ground to the top of the light structure.
      2.   The footcandle level at the north and west property lines shall be
less than one (1). Due to streetlights along the east and south, the
achievement of less than one (1) footcandle is not possible and shall not be
required.
      3.   Said fixtures are to be downcast, cut-off variety to direct lighting
to parking areas and pedestrian pathways and eliminate glare to neighboring
properties. Bulbs shall not be exposed or extend down past the fixture. Care
should be taken to ensure that adjoining residences are not looking up and into
the bulbs of light fixtures, which may include shields on the fixtures or other
means of shielding glare.
      4.   No wall packs or floodlighting without shields to direct the light
downward are allowed. In addition to cut-off fixtures, particular attention
shall be given to eliminate hot spots and light glare. To achieve this,
additional measures may include, but are not limited to, lowering parking lot
light levels after business hours, turning off lights not necessary for
security purposes, and use of landscaping for light screening/blockage.
      5.   As a part of the overlay district site plan for this parcel, a
photometric plan must be submitted. During the review, the applicant must
demonstrate how lighting will not adversely affect adjoining properties. (Ord.
2502, 2-7-2022)
137-08: ARCHITECTURE:
The intent is to create building façades that are varied and articulated to
provide visual interest to pedestrians and to establish a unique identity for
the development. The architectural design shall be acceptable to the City. The
architecture shall attempt to express a creative presentation by careful
attention to exterior building materials and details, use of fenestration, and
change in building mass within the plane and roof design to lessen the
plainness of appearance which can be characteristic of large commercial and
mixed-use buildings. All sides to buildings shall receive high quality
materials, finishes, and details (360° architectural treatment). There are no
"backs" to a building. Materials should be durable, economically maintained and
of a quality that will maintain their appearance over a prolonged time.
On file with the City are conceptual architectural illustrations of the
building style and material options. Once City approval is gained on a
particular building design, any alteration in design before or during
construction must be reviewed and approved by the City's Development Services
Department.
   A.   This development shall accommodate or incorporate the following in
building design and materials:
      1.   Corporate architecture shall be prohibited. Limited use of
architectural elements characteristic of prototypical architecture may be
allowed at the discretion of the Director of Development Services or the
appropriate reviewing and approval body. Implementation of these architectural
elements shall be minimized and whenever possible modified to give a unique
image to the establishment. No standard corporate building design without
modifications shall be implemented.
      2.   Buildings shall be organized to create a logical and identifiable
relationship with the site and other buildings, open spaces, and pedestrian
circulation paths.
      3.   The use of building articulation and materials which break up the
building mass into modules that respect a pedestrian scale and reflects
proportions similar to other buildings within the development.
      4.   The building's design should meet context and site objectives such
as providing gateways, creating visual and physical linkages and framing or
terminating views.
      5.   Variation in building height, mass and roof forms shall be provided
to create interest while still maintaining an overall building continuity.
Roofs should not be designed as attention-getting devices related to the
reinforcement of signage or as an identifiable corporate image.
      6.   Entrances into buildings should be easily identified through the use
of building design and detailing. Projected or recessed entryways, change in
rooflines, addition of awnings or changes in building material are examples
that can create this effect.
      7.   Shifts in building planes/facades and variation in exterior
materials shall be incorporated to minimize long expanses of wall. Long blank
walls shall be prohibited.
      8.   Variation in materials, material modules, expressed joints,
textures, colors and details should be used to break up the mass of the
buildings. Materials should change with the change in building planes.
      9.   Trim and structural elements such as posts or columns shall be sized
to the scale of the building.
      10.   Whenever possible, ground floor tenant areas should provide the
maximum possible glazing toward sidewalks to provide pedestrians with visual
interest. Use of reflective glass or mirrored glass is discouraged. Efforts
should be made to use clear glass on storefronts, windows and doors to promote
the linkage of the interior and exterior of buildings.
      11.   Natural materials such as brick and stone, architectural precast
concrete or metal acceptable to the City shall be the major cladding elements
of the facades. Concrete products shall have integrated color rather than
surface applied paint/staining and should generally have texture for interest;
smooth finish concrete products may be used in conjunction with texture for
accent purposes. The use of EIFS, synthetic stucco or composite materials shall
be used in moderation and primarily used as an accent or trim material and
cannot be the predominate building material. Use of EIFS is limited to areas of
the building 6' above grade and higher and Use of vinyl materials is
prohibited.
      12.   Architectural design for multi-family units shall include:
         a.   Unit design should incorporate elements such as balconies and
patios to reinforce the connection between the residents and the activities
within the development. A minimum of eighty percent (80%) of the multi-family
units within the development must provide a balcony or porch/patio with a
minimum usable area of forty (40) square feet and a minimum usable dimension of
five feet (5') deep in either direction. In lieu of outdoor living area for
individual units, area(s) of common defined and enhanced outdoor living space
can be provided.
         b.   Should covered parking be pursued, the architectural details of
detached garages should incorporate the materials and treatments of the
dwelling, such as windows, doors, trim and materials on all sides of the
garage. For parking incorporated within the primary building, the design should
place the garage doors on a non-street side façade and on facades not facing
single-family residential development. Screening or design elements will be
required to minimize the dominance of garage doors on the facade. (Ord. 2502,
2-7-2022)
137-09: SIGNAGE:
All proposed ground and exterior wall signage requires a sign permit issued by
the City of West Des Moines through normal sign review procedures. Signage
shall abide by the standards and regulations for the Support Commercial zoning
district as set forth in Title 9, Chapter 18: Signs. Illuminated signage shall
not be allowed on the north plane of the building nor shall it be visible to
the residential care facility to the north. (Ord. 2502, 2-7-2022)
137-10: PARKLAND DEDICATION:
An area of land calculated by a set formula based upon the density (total
number of dwelling units) of the proposed development is required to be
dedicated for purposes of a public park and greenway as per city code. A
Parkland Dedication Agreement, acceptable to the Parks and Recreation
Department, detailing the specifics related to the Parkland Dedication
obligations for the development of any area contained within the Specific Plan
area is required to be submitted.
Intended amenities and facilities to fulfill Parkland Dedication requirements
for the residential portion of the development shall be identified as part of
the overlay district site plan review of the parcel. (Ord. 2502, 2-7-2022)
137-11: VEHICLE TRIP ALLOCATION:
A traffic Impact Study (study) dated November 8, 2021, has been prepared for
the Jordan Creek Tower development. Per the study, the Jordan Creek Tower
development has been allocated 191 p.m. peak hour trips; 150 a.m. peak hour
trips; and 1,634 ADT trips. Approval of this proposed Specific Plan does not
constitute a guarantee that the proposed plan can be implemented. Development
of all parcels and implementation of desired land uses, including specific high
traffic generating tenants, will be limited by the available number of trips.
Should anticipated traffic exceed the total trips allocated for the Jordan
Creek Tower development prior to full build out, further development of any
remaining portion of the parcel may be limited or prohibited. Alternate uses to
those planned within the study and approved as part of this Jordan Creek Tower
Specific Plan Ordinance may be allowed, following completion of an amended
traffic study analyzing the proposed alternative and appropriate city approval
of an amendment to the respective specific plan ordinance and/or map, if
necessary, if the existing uses and the proposed change(s) collectively do not
exceed the total trips allocated to the development. (Ord. 2502, 2-7-2022)
137-12: STORM WATER MANAGEMENT PLAN:
A Storm Water Management Plan for the entire development which governs the
overall storm water management of the development shall be submitted to and
approved by the City of West Des Moines. The Storm Water Plan shall be prepared
at the developer's expense, by a Professional Engineer licensed in the State of
Iowa. The Storm Water Management Plan shall comply with the City's applicable
design standards for storm water management existing at the time of overlay
district site plan approval. (Ord. 2502, 2-7-2022)
137-13: PROPERTY OWNERS ASSOCIATION:
If deemed necessary, proper action shall be taken to establish development
specific property owners associations, as well as a master association, if
necessary. The owner's association(s) shall be responsible for the ongoing
upkeep and maintenance of any private infrastructure, common grounds such as
buffer parks, storm water detention facilities, greenbelts, plazas and other
common space, and any other specific development improvements noted as their
responsibility in this ordinance or otherwise determined as part of the overlay
district site plan review process. (Ord. 2502, 2-7-2022)
137-14: REPEALER:
All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with the provisions of this
ordinance are hereby repealed. (Ord. 2502, 2-7-2022)
137-15: SAVINGS CLAUSE:
If any section, provision, sentence, clause, phrase or part of the Ordinance
shall be adjudged invalid or unconstitutional, such adjudication shall not
affect the validity of the Ordinance as a whole or any provision, section,
subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or part hereof not adjudged invalid or
unconstitutional. (Ord. 2502, 2-7-2022)
137-16: VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES:
Any person who violates the provisions of this Ordinance upon conviction shall
be punished as set forth in Title 1, Chapter 4, Section 1 of the City Code of
the City of West Des Moines, Iowa. (Ord. 2502, 2-7-2022)
137-17: OTHER REMEDIES:
In addition to the provisions set out in the Violations and Penalties Section
herein, the City may proceed in law or equity against any person, firm or
corporation for violation of any section or subsection of this Ordinance. (Ord.
2502, 2-7-2022)
137-19: EFFECTIVE DATE:
This Ordinance shall be in full force and effect after its passage, approval
and publication as provided by law. (Ord. 2502, 2-7-2022)
137-99: LEGISLATIVE HISTORY:
Ord. 2502, 2-7-2022.
PUD #138
SUITE SHOTS
138-01: Legal Description
138-02: Development Intent
138-03: Sketch Plan
138-04: Required Plans
138-05: General Requirements
138-06: Requirements
138-07: Architecture
138-08: Traffic Generation
138-09: Storm Water Management Plan
138-99: Legislative History
138-01: LEGAL DESCRIPTION:
Parcel 1:
All that portion of Government Lot 3 in the N.W. Fractional 1/4 of Section 30,
Township 78 North, Range 25 West of the 5th P.M., lying South of and adjoining
the Southerly Right-of-way line of Grand Avenue (Iowa Highway 90), as it is
presently established and north of and adjoining the Northerly right-of-way
line of the Chicago-Rock Island and Pacific Railroad, as it is presently
established, all now included in and forming a part of the City of West Des
Moines, Polk County, Iowa is more accurately described as follows:
Commencing at the NW 1/4 Corner of said Section 30, said point also being the
N.E. corner of said Government Lot 3; Thence S. 0°-24'-36" W along the East
line of said Government Lot 3, 74.00 feet to the Southerly right -of-way line
of said Grand Avenue and to the Point of Beginning; thence continuing S 0°-24'-
36" W along the East line of said Government Lot 3, 623.3 feet to the Northerly
right-of-way line of said Chicago-Rock Island and Pacific Railroad; Thence
Westerly along the Northerly right-of-way of said railroad and along a 5,780.0
foot radius curve concave Southerly, whose long cord has a bearing of N 89°-
48'-16" W and a cord length of 1099.83 feet, for a distance of 1101.50 feet;
thence S 84°-44'-10" W along the Northerly right-of-way line of said Railroad
221.22 feet to the West line of said Government Lot 3; Thence N 0°-24'-39" E
along the West line of said Government Lot 3, 249.12 feet to the Southerly
right-of-way line of said Grand Avenue; Thence N 52°-15'38" E along the
Southerly right-of-way of said Grand Avenue, 357.55 feet; Thence Northeasterly
along the Southerly right of-way line of said Grand Avenue and along a 1,562.02
foot radius curve concave southeasterly whose long chord has a bearing of N
76°-26’-41" E and a chord length of 734.17 feet, for a distance of 741.11 feet;
Thence S 89° -57'-48" E along the Southerly right-of-way line of said Grand
Avenue 326.31 feet to the Pant of Beginning.
Parcel 2:
A parcel of land in the NW 1/4 NE 1/4 of Section 30, Township 78 North, Range
25 west of the 5th PM, Polk County, Iowa, more particularly described as
follows:
Commencing at the N 1/4 Comer of said Section 30: thence S 00°00° W, 119.4 feet
on the West line of said NW 1/4 Ne 1/4 1/4 to a point 120 feet normally distant
southerly from the enter-line of Primary Road No. 90, the Point of Beginning;
thence N 89°38 1/z' E, 346.6 feet parallel to said centerline to a point normal
to Sta. 1281+00 (prim. Rd. No. 90); thence S 29°27' E, 205.8 to a point 300
feet normally distant southerly from Sta. 1282.+00 (Prim. Rd. No. 90); thence S
52°57 1/z' E, 904.1 feet to a point 330 feet normally distant westerly from the
centerline of the northbound lane of Interstate Route No. 35 on the northerly
right of way line of the Chicago, Rock Island and Pacific Railroad; then N
82°47' W, 1017.2 feet on said right of way line; thence westerly on said right
of way line 161.1 feet on a 5780.0 foot radius curve, concave southerly, and
chord for which bears N 84°20' W, and has a length of 161.1 feet, to the West
line of said NW 1/4 NE 1/4 ; thence N 00°00' E, 578.0 feet on said west line to
the Point of Beginning, except that part conveyed to the State of Iowa by
Warranty Deed recorded in Book 13770, Page 629 in the Office of the Recorder of
Polk County, Iowa; and less and except that part conveyed to Iowa Interstate
Railroad, LTD, by Quit Claim Deeds recorded in Book 17084, Pages 474, 475, 476
and 478.
Parcel 3:
Commencing as a point of reference at the Northwest comer of the Northeast 1/
4 of the Northwest 1/4 of Section 30-78-25 (Being a part of the Government Lot
4): Thence S01° 12'17"E, 181.84 Feet along the West line of said Northeast 1/
4 to a point; Thence S00°48'32"W, 245.69 Feet along said West line to the Point
of the Beginning. Thence continuing S00°36'49W 243.49 Feet along said West line
to a point on the North Right-of-Way line of the Chicago Rock Island and
Pacific Railway; Thence S84°50'52"W, 291.29 Feet along said Right-of-Way to a
Point; Thence N39°52'31 "E, 138.26 Feet to a Point of curvature; Thence
Northerly along a curve to the right having a radius of 1567.10 Feet, and arc
length of 289.03 Feet to the Point of the Beginning. Said Parcel being also
known as Parcel "D" of the Acquisition Plat recorded in Book 7117, page 489.
(Ord. 2516, 5-6-2022)
138-02: DEVELOPMENT INTENT:
This PUD intends to establish a framework for the integration of a variety of
recreation, commercial and office land uses in a visually cohesive and walkable
development. (Ord. 2516, 5-6-2022)
138-03: SKETCH PLAN:
Attached to Ord. 2516, Exhibit "A" (or on file with the city) and made a part
of this rezoning approval is the Suite Shots PUD Sketch Plan detailing the
location, approximate size and configuration of each PUD parcel for the purpose
of easier reference for the applicable regulations of this Ordinance. The
subdivision of the PUD property will determine final parcel size and
configuration. Where the PUD Sketch Plan and PUD language conflict, the
language shall prevail. (Ord. 2516, 5-6-2022)
138-04: REQUIRED PLANS:
The following plans shall be required as a part of the processing of any
development application for any property within the PUD:
   A.   Platting: Should it be desired that individual lots be created, the
property shall be platted in accordance with the city's subdivision ordinance
and associated zoning regulations unless otherwise modified within this
ordinance. Lots without public street frontage may be allowed with the
execution of appropriate cross access easements which provide for the
unrestricted use and access of all vehicle drives across and through all other
property within the development. Platted outlots intended for future private
development must be re-platted through the preliminary and final plat process
prior to physical development.
   B.   Development Applications: Development Applications (Site Plans): Site
plans shall be submitted to the City of West Des Moines for review and approval
prior to any physical site development of that portion of the PUD property. At
the discretion of the Director of Development Services, an amendment to the
Suite Shots PUD Ordinance may be required to bring consistency between the
ordinance and the proposed site development. (Ord. 2516, 5-6-2022)
138-05: GENERAL REQUIREMENTS:
Unless otherwise specified herein, the development of the Suite Shots PUD shall
comply with the provisions of the city code.
Whereas, Title 9 of the City Code includes Chapter 9, Planned Unit Development
district and establishes certain regulations and guidelines pertaining to
accompanying information required on plat and site plan documents. Now,
therefore, the following conditions, restrictions, and regulations are adopted
as part of this approval, to wit:
In addition to the PUD Sketch Plan, the following general development criteria
shall be integrated into and made a part of this Planned Unit Development
(PUD):
   A.   General Conformance to Subdivision Ordinance: All subdivision, streets,
street rights of way, infrastructure and general development shall adhere to
the standards and design criteria set forth in the West Des Moines subdivision
ordinances and the most current design standards adopted by the City of West
Des Moines pertaining thereto unless otherwise stated within this ordinance.
   B.   General Conformance to Zoning Ordinance: Unless otherwise specified
herein, the development of the PUD shall comply with Title 9, "Zoning", of the
city code or any other applicable codes.
   C.   Flood Hazard: In all areas within a Base Flood (100 Year), or adjoining
drainage ways, and detention ponding areas involving potential flood hazards,
all buildings proposed to be located in a flood hazard area must be elevated
and designed in accordance with the American Society of Civil Engineers
publication ASCE 24 and no building shall be erected which has a minimum
opening elevation (including top of window well) less than one foot (1') above
the determined level of the Base Flood. In areas where historical high-water
levels are above the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) Base Flood Elevation or
special conditions exist, the City may require a Design Flood Elevation be
calculated and used as the Base Flood Elevation for determination of elevation
requirements. Buildings shall only be permitted within twenty-five feet (25')
of any easement or property boundary of a major drainageway, storm water
detention basin or pond if said location is approved as part of the development
entitlement by the city council and said building is structurally designed
accordingly.
   D.   Improvements: The developer, its successors and/or assigns, if any,
shall pay all planning, engineering, and construction costs for the development
of parcels within the PUD as required by this ordinance and approved site
plans.
Per the March 31, 2022, Traffic Analysis, the development shall be responsible
for the following roadway improvements adjacent to the property contained
within the PUD:
      1.   If development of the property occurs prior to the widening of Grand
Avenue, temporary improvements including the widening of Grand Avenue to create
a westbound left-turn lane and installation of a fully functioning traffic
signal. Should the City initiate widening of Grand Avenue, the applicant may be
financially responsible for a pro-rata share of road improvement and traffic
signalization costs.
      2.   Pro-rata share (1/4 cost) of a fully functioning traffic signal at
the Grand Avenue and Raccoon River Drive intersection.
No final occupancy permits shall be issued until all necessary improvements
applicable to the area/lot or structure requesting occupancy are installed and
accepted by the City of West Des Moines.
Nothing in this ordinance shall be construed to prevent the developer, its
successors and/or assigns, if any, from entering into private agreement(s) as
it/they may desire to share the cost of improvements.
   E.   Traffic Analysis: Unless otherwise modified by the City Council, site
development shall comply with recommendations stated within the March 31, 2022,
Traffic Analysis including but not limited to, access drive locations and
spacing, implementation of turn-lanes and other traffic management measures,
minimum throat distances of access drives, and traffic signalization.
   F.   Pedestrian Pathways:
      1.   Grand Avenue & Raccoon River Drive Public Trails: In accordance with
the City's Master Trail Plan, a public trail shall be implemented along the
south side of Grand Avenue and the east side of Raccoon River Drive adjacent to
the property. Unless otherwise provided by the City as part of road
improvements, the developer shall construct a ten foot (10') wide trail in lieu
of a standard four foot (4') public sidewalk along both Grand Avenue and
Raccoon River Drive. Prior to construction, the City and developer shall
execute a 60/40 Trail Agreement which provides that the developer is
responsible for the financial expense of four feet (4') of the trail
(equivalent to a standard four-foot (4') sidewalk) and the City shall reimburse
the developer for six feet (6') of the trail width. Said trails shall be
constructed in accordance with the City of West Des Moines' Standard
Specifications for trails. The trail along Grand Avenue shall be installed in
conjunction with the development of the first PUD parcel. Unless otherwise
deferred by the City Council, the trail along Raccoon River Drive shall be
installed in conjunction with development of PUD Parcel C.
      2.   Internal Pedestrian Connections: To allow and encourage pedestrian
movement between parcels and to and from the development, an internal
pedestrian sidewalk network connecting all lots, uses and buildings within the
development, as well as connecting to the Grand Avenue and Raccoon River Drive
trails shall be required. For safety, pedestrian pathways shall be physically
separated from vehicular drives by at least six feet (6'). To enhance
pedestrian comfort and extend use into the evening hours, amenities such as
trees, lighting, benches, trash receptacles and other pedestrian amenities
shall be incorporated along the pedestrian pathways.
   G.   Fire Access:
      1.    All access drives, internal drive aisles and parking lots shall
permit the travel of the fire department's largest vehicle, including adequate
accommodation of the vehicle's turning needs. Approval of unique design
solutions to accommodate fire access may be granted by the city council if the
solutions proposed are recommended by the West Des Moines Fire Department.    
      2.    At the discretion of the City's Fire Marshal, "no parking fire
lane" areas may be established as necessary to ensure efficient movement and
access of the fire trucks. The developer shall be responsible for the
procurement and erection of approved fire lane signage.
      3.    A minimum of fourteen feet (14') of vertical clearance over the
travel portion of all vehicle travel ways shall be maintained at all times.
      4.    The property owner or its designee shall be responsible for
enforcement of no parking lanes and maintaining adequate clearance of
structures and vegetation along and above all vehicle travel ways regardless of
whether public or private.
      5.    Adequate fire accesses as determined by the City's Fire Marshal
shall be provided at all times to those areas under construction.
   H.   Noise: All uses and site activities within the development shall comply
with the Noise Ordinance (City Code Title 4, Chapter 7).
   I.   Public Utilities and Easements: The placement of public utility
easements within landscape buffers and islands within parking areas is
discouraged due to the potential conflict between trees and the need to access
the lines for repair. Overstory and understory trees should be placed off
utility lines a minimum distance equal to the 1:1 excavation trench necessary
for the deepest utility. The placement of utility lines within buffers or
parking lot islands is not justification to negate the provision of landscape
vegetation as required by this ordinance or city code. Adequate access for
maintenance vehicles shall be provided into and through the easement areas.
All necessary easements to allow City access to public utilities for
maintenance and repair purposes shall be executed prior to the approval and
recordation of the first final plat for all known utility locations and prior
to approval of a site plan for all subsequent utilities within each PUD parcel.
Unless otherwise specified within a specific easement document, the City shall
not be responsible for reimbursement, restoration and/or replacement of any
improvements located within the public easements should the City be required to
excavate the public utilities for normal City operations.
   J.   Lighting:
      1.   Parking lot lights shall be limited to twenty-five feet (25') in
height including the fixture base and be of a downcast design with no exposed
bulbs. Except when adjacent to vehicle drive aisles and public roadways, light
levels at the perimeter of the PUD boundary shall be at one (1) footcandle (fc)
or less.
      2.   Wall packs without shields are not allowed. Wall and pole mounted
lights shall be directional in nature or shall incorporate the necessary
shields to direct the light down and to the intended target.
      3.   Building up-lighting for architectural interest shall be allowed
provided it does not produce light spillover or pollution.
      4.   In addition to cut-off fixtures, particular attention shall be given
to eliminate hot spots and light glare. To achieve this, additional measures
may include, but are not limited to, lowering parking lot light levels after
certain hours, turning off lights not necessary for security purposes, and use
of landscaping for light screening/blockage.
      5.   As a part of the review of a site plan, a photometric plan shall be
submitted.
      6.   See following section for limitations on golf facility range
illumination. (Ord. 2516, 5-6-2022)
138-06: REQUIREMENTS:
In addition to the general conditions as stated herein the PUD, the following
criteria shall apply to the area designated on the PUD Sketch Plan on file in
the City Clerk's Office. The PUD Sketch Plan document, which is made a part of
this rezoning action, delineates Parcels A through C.
   A.   Parcels A, B & C: Unless provided otherwise in this ordinance, all
general uses, bulk regulations, performance standards and provisions set forth
in title 9, "Zoning", of the City Code for the Regional Commercial (RC)
District shall apply to any development proposal within this parcel
      1.   Land Use: All Permitted (P) and Permitted Conditional (Pc) uses set
forth in Title 9, "Zoning" of the city code for the Regional Commercial (RC)
zoning district, shall be allowed with the approval of the appropriate review
body, except as follows:
         a.   The following shall be prohibited:
            (1)   Any use within Division E: Transportation, Communications,
Electric, Gas and Sanitary Services, except arrangement of transportation
services, offices only & utilities necessary to serve the development (Major
Groups 40 through 49)
            (2)   Outdoor storage or display component(s) associated with any
use within Division G: Retail Trade (Major Groups 52 through 59) - does not
include outdoor patios associated with Major Group 58: Eating and Drinking
Places
            (3)   Distribution of medical cannabidiol as part of a licensed
medical cannabidiol manufacturer (SIC 591)
            (4)   Liquor Store (SIC 592)
            (5)   Used Merchandise Stores (SIC 5932)
            (6)   Adult Entertainment Establishments (SIC 5999)
            (7)   Laundry, Cleaning and Garment Services (SIC 721)
            (8)   Funeral Service with or without crematories (SIC 726)
            (9)   Any use within SIC 7389: Miscellaneous Business Services, Not
Elsewhere Classified (NEC) which includes a warehouse or outdoor storage
component
            (10)   Automotive Repair, Services and Parking, (Major Group 75)
            (11)   Miscellaneous Repair Shops and Related Services (SIC 769)
which includes a warehouse or outdoor storage component
            (12)   Amusement and Recreation Services, NEC:
               (A)   Amusement rides;
               (B)   Animal Shows in circuses, fairs and carnivals;
               (C)   Carnival operation;
               (D)   Circus operation;
               (E)   Fireworks display service;
               (F)   Go-kart raceway operations;
               (G)   Moped or Motorcycle rentals;
               (H)   Shooting galleries and ranges, including skeet and
trapshooting (outside range); and
               (I)   Waterslide and wave pool operation except indoor
facilities.
            (13)   Rehabilitation Hospitals - Drug Addiction and Alcoholism
(SIC 8069).
         b.   Permitted Conditional (Pc) use SIC 7999, not otherwise prohibited
here within shall be considered a Permitted (P) use.
         c.   The existing cell tower in the southeast corner of the
development may continue, and with proper City approval, additional stealth
antennas may be added. Should the antenna be intentionally removed, no
replacement antenna may be erected.
         d.   The following operational restrictions shall apply:
            (1)   No Bar/Restaurant as defined per Flowchart 6.2, city code
title 9, chapter 6 shall be open later than midnight. Outdoor patios and
operable storefronts, if incorporated, shall comply with Title 9, Chapter 10,
Section 4, Subsection 18.
            (2)   No more than two (2) businesses with a drive-through
component shall be allowed within the development.
            (3)   SIC 7999 uses not otherwise prohibited by this PUD shall not
be open past 11:00 p.m. Sunday through Thursday; and shall not be open past
midnight Friday and Saturday. Exterior lights associated with a facility's
external recreational field shall be turned off within 20 minutes at the close
of business.
      2.   Setbacks:
         a.   Primary Buildings:
            (1)   North (Grand Avenue): a minimum forty-foot (40') setback
shall be provided from the perimeter PUD boundary or ultimate street right-of-
way line of Grand Avenue, whichever is located farther south.
            (2)   South and East: a minimum fifty-foot (50') setback shall be
provided from the perimeter PUD boundary.
            (3)   West: a minimum fifty-foot (50') setback shall be provided
from the perimeter PUD boundary or ultimate street right-of-way line of Raccoon
River Drive, whichever is located farther east.
            (4)   Along internal lot boundaries: No setback is required from
interior common lot lines unless otherwise required by building separation
regulations in adopted Building and Fire Codes.
         b.   Accessory Structures: (such as, trash enclosures, external
generators, private utility equipment enclosures, etc.)
            (1)   Along Grand Avenue and Raccoon River Drive: shall comply with
primary building setback requirements stated herein.
            (2)   All other parcel boundaries: a minimum fifteen-foot (15')
setback shall be provided unless the structure is shared between two (2) lots/
parcels.
      3.   Parking:
         a.   With the exception of the golf facility, the number of stalls to
be provided for each use within each parcel shall comply with city code title
9, chapter 15, section 7. The golf facility shall provide a minimum of 3.9
parking stalls per driving range bay.
         b.   The number of queuing spaces for uses with a drive-through
component shall comply with city code title 9, chapter 15, section 7. All
queuing spaces shall be out of internal circulation drives and shall not impede
traffic circulation within the parcel, on internal PUD roadways or adjacent
public streets. A drive-through may be prohibited within a PUD parcel if there
is reason to believe that queuing back-up may impact traffic circulation on
adjoining public roadways.
         c.   Parking lots shall be setback a minimum of thirty feet (30') from
Grand Avenue and Raccoon River Drive ultimate road right-of-way. A minimum
fifteen-foot (15') setback shall be provided from all other perimeter property
boundaries. Parking lots shall be setback a minimum of five feet (5') from
common interior lot/parcel boundaries unless designed as a shared parking lot
and with an executed shared parking agreement.
         d.   Parking stall dimension and drive aisle widths shall comply with
city code title 9, chapter 15.
         e.   Parking lot landscape requirements, including the incorporation
of landscape islands and tree pods and landscape vegetation shall comply with
city code title 9, chapter 19.
         f.   See Buffering and Visual Screening below for regulations for the
visual screening of off-street parking areas.
      4.   Open Space: The intent of open space is to allow for a balance
between natural areas and the built environment and to provide for the overall
beautification and "greening" of the city.
         a.   Open space shall be considered all areas unencumbered by
buildings or paved areas associated with parking, drive aisles, and loading
docks or zones. Plaza areas, water features and structures such as gazebos,
arbors, pergolas, etc., that are associated with outdoor pedestrian use areas,
as well as designated and enhanced pedestrian walkways through and between
parcels may be counted toward fulfilling the minimum open space requirement.
Recreational fields not under roof may be counted toward fulfilling the minimum
open space requirement.
         b.   A minimum of twenty-five percent (25%) open space shall be
provided within each lot within a PUD parcel.
         c.   Vegetation at a rate of two (2) trees and three (3) shrubs per
three thousand (3,000) square feet of required open space shall be provided
within each lot.
      5.   Buffers and Visual Screening:
         a.   Buffer:
            (1)   A minimum thirty foot (30') wide buffer shall be provided
along Grand Avenue and Raccoon River Drive.
               (A)   Earthen berming shall be incorporated to a minimum height
of three feet (3'). Said berming shall be undulating to provide a natural
appearance and shall be layered to ensure the minimum height required is
provided along the full length of the buffer, except as necessary to
accommodate access drives and vision triangles at intersections.
               (B)   Minimum amount of and type of landscape vegetation
consistent with city code title 9, chapter 19 shall be provided. Vegetation
required of this buffer shall be allowed to be counted towards vegetation
necessary to achieve parking lot and negative site element screening as
discussed elsewhere here within; however, additional vegetation above that
required for the buffer may be necessary to satisfactorily achieve visual
screening of off-street parking and negative site elements.
         b.   Visual Screening of Negative Site Elements:
            (1)   Trash receptacles and dumpsters shall be screened by the use
of a permanent enclosure. Enclosures shall be constructed consistent with city
code title 9, chapter 10. The enclosure should be landscaped to minimize the
visual presence and impact of the structure on surrounding properties,
businesses, and internal and external roadways.
            (2)   All heating, ventilation, or air conditioning (HVAC) units,
utility meters, or similar electrical or mechanical equipment shall be
adequately screened from ground level views from Grand Avenue and Raccoon River
Drive, internal PUD drive aisles and adjacent properties within or outside of
the development. Said screening shall be achieved through the use of
architectural enclosures, fencing and/or earthen berming in combination with
landscaping consisting of predominately evergreen material for year-round
screening.
            (3)   All rooftop mechanical units shall be screened from ground
level views from Grand Avenue and Raccoon River Drive, I-35, internal PUD drive
aisles and adjacent properties within or outside of the development. Said
screening shall be achieved through the use of architecturally incorporated
opaque screen walls, raised parapet walls, penthouse features, or other opaque
measure comprised of materials consistent with the associated primary
structure.
         c.   Buildings shall not be located or designed to expose loading
docks, overhead doors or the rear of buildings (excluding golf facility hitting
bays) to public streets unless appropriately screened from view.
         d.   Ground level views from Grand Avenue and Raccoon River Drive, I-
35, internal PUD drive aisles and adjacent properties within or outside of the
development of off-street parking areas and service and loading areas shall be
adequately screened. Said screening shall be achieved through the use of free-
standing decorative walls or earthen berming to a minimum height of three feet
(3') in combination with landscaping consisting of predominately evergreen
material for year-round screening.
      6.   Signage: The regulations and provisions for signs as set forth in
Title 9 of the City Code for the Regional Commercial (RC) zoning district shall
be met unless otherwise noted in this ordinance.
         a.   Wall signage for the building on Parcel A shall be calculated at
a rate of one (1) square foot per lineal foot of the longest side of the
primary structure. Placement on the building and size of individual letters and
logos shall comply with city code. Wall signage for all other parcels shall be
calculated consistent with city code.
         b.   No advertisement of any kind may be located on the poles or
netting associated with the golf facility.
         c.   Illumination of wall signs which orient towards a residential
dwelling(s) within the Glen Oaks development shall be limited to reverse
channel lit letters or halo-lighting. All other signs may be internally
illuminated as provided for within the city's sign code. (Ord. 2516, 5-6-2022)
138-07: ARCHITECTURE:
   A.   The intent is to create building facades throughout this development
that are varied and articulated to provide visual interest and to establish a
unique identity for the development. Each building shall include design
elements as well as common materials, complimentary colors and detailing to
provide continuity amongst buildings and to unite all structures within the
development into one project concept.
   B.   The architecture shall express a creative presentation by careful
attention to exterior building materials and details, use of fenestration, and
change in building mass within the plan and roof design to lessen the plainness
of appearance which can be characteristic of commercial buildings. The choice
of materials and texture has great visual significance and can affect the long-
term appearance of the city. Proper selection of exterior building material is
directly related to the durability of the building against weathering and
damage from natural forces. Materials should be durable, economically
maintained and of a quality that will maintain their appearance over a
prolonged time.
   C.   All buildings within this development shall accommodate or incorporate
the following in building design and materials:
      1.   All sides to each building shall receive high quality materials,
finishes, and details (360-degree architectural treatment). There are no
"backs" to a building.
      2.   No standard corporate building design without modifications shall be
implemented. Limited use of architectural elements characteristic of
prototypical architecture may be allowed at the discretion of the appropriate
reviewing and approval body. Implementation of these architectural elements
shall be minimized and whenever possible modified to give a unique image to the
establishment.
      3.   Entrances into buildings should be easily identified using building
design and detailing. Projected or recessed entryways, change in rooflines,
addition of awnings or changes in building material are examples that can
create this effect.
      4.   Variation in building height, mass and roof forms shall be provided
to create interest while still maintaining an overall building continuity.
Roofs should not be designed as attention getting devices related to the
reinforcement of signage or as an identifiable corporate image. Wall planes
shall not be increased in height for the sole purpose of signage placement.
      5.   The use of building articulation and materials which break up the
building mass into modules that respect a human scale and reflects proportions
similar to other buildings within the development.
      6.   Variation in materials, material modules, expressed joints,
textures, colors and details should be used to break up the mass of the
buildings. Changes in materials shall be aligned with changes in plan or roof
form to emphasize these changes in building mass and shall have the appearance
of 3-dimensional elements.
      7.   Shifts in building planes/facades and variation in exterior
materials shall be incorporated to minimize long expanses of wall.
      8.   Efforts should be made to use clear glass on windows and doors and
to define public entries for occupied spaces to promote the linkage of the
interior and exterior of buildings and provide natural light.
      9.   Hard materials such as brick, stone, architectural concrete, or
concrete masonry units shall be used as the major elements of the building
facades. Architectural metal, EIFS or synthetic stucco and composite materials
acceptable to the City may be incorporated as minor elements in the design but
shall not be within four feet (4') of grade. Use of vinyl materials is
prohibited.
      10.   Trim and structural elements such as posts or columns shall be
sized to the scale of the building.
   D.   Multiple buildings on a single parcel shall be permitted provided that
the buildings on the site are consistent or compatible in architectural design
and use of materials and organized utilizing a compatible planned open space,
landscape plan, and parking plan to serve and maintain a unified concept.
Buildings shall be organized to create a logical and identifiable relationship
with the site and other buildings, open spaces, pedestrian and vehicle
circulation. Site and building design should provide a visual demarcation of
the public vs. service areas to provide intuitive wayfinding for visitors to
the development.
   E.   The architectural design of any building within this development shall
be acceptable to the City. Once City approval is obtained on a particular
building, any alteration in design, materials, and/or color before, during or
after construction must be reviewed and approved by the City's Development
Services Department. (Ord. 2516, 5-6-2022)
138-08: TRAFFIC GENERATION:
   A.   The traffic study completed by the City of West Des Moines dated March
31, 2022 and approved for the Suite Shots PUD parcels estimated a total of
6,336 average daily trips (ADT); 494 A.M. peak; and 599 P.M. peak vehicle trips
within the development. These numbers constitute the number of total vehicle
trips allocated to the Suite Shots PUD. The combination of tenants/uses within
the development shall not collectively generate vehicle trips which exceed that
allocated to the development.
   B.   Development of each parcel and implementation of desired land uses will
be limited by the available number of trips designated above for the Suite
Shots PUD, as well as compliance with all applicable regulations within this
ordinance or city code. The traffic to be generated by these parcels must be
less than or equal to that allocated. The traffic allocation indicated above
shall be an entitlement to the parcels. Traffic generation due to subsequent
redevelopment, expansion or change of use for any parcel shall not exceed the
maximum traffic allocation stated previously for the development. Alternate
uses to that currently anticipated may be allowed, following completion of an
amendment to the approved traffic study analyzing the proposed alternative and
appropriate city approval if the existing uses and the proposed change(s) are
determined to not result in a negative impact to the public road network. (Ord.
2516, 5-6-2022)
138-09: STORM WATER MANAGEMENT PLAN:
   A.   A Master Storm Water Management Plan (SWMP) shall be required in
conjunction with the Preliminary Plat or first Site Plan if not subdividing the
property. Individual Storm Water Management Plans consistent with the Master
SWMP will be required with the site plan for each lot or PUD Parcel.
   B.   The Developer will have said Storm Water Management Plans prepared by a
Professional Engineer licensed in the State of Iowa. The storm water management
plan shall comply with the City's applicable design standards for storm water
management existing at the time each plat or site plan is approved. The method
of storm water management and the storm water conveyance system shall be
determined prior to City approval of a preliminary plat or site plan.
   C.   At time of final platting of a developable parcel or site plan if
development is not known at the time of platting, ownership and responsibility
for all storm water detention areas and private storm water detention outlet
structures will need to be established through the execution of a Storm Water
Management Facility Maintenance Agreement. This agreement essentially provides
that the property owner will maintain and repair their storm water facilities.
If they fail to do so, the city will make repairs or perform maintenance and
assess all costs back to the property owner.
   D.   Upon installation of storm water management facilities, as-built
drawings and a letter certifying the detention facility was constructed in
conformance with the approved Storm Water Management Plan will need to be
provided. The letter and as-built plans will be required prior to the issuance
of a final occupancy permit for the first building on property which is served
by a particular detention facility. Both the letter and as-builts will need to
be signed and sealed in accordance with Chapter 6, 193C-6.1(542B) of the Iowa
Code. (Ord. 2516, 5-6-2022)
138-99: LEGISLATIVE HISTORY:
Ord. 2516, 5-6-2022.
PUD #139
ASHWORTH 88
SECTION:
139-01: Legal Description
139-02: Development Intent
139-03: Sketch Plan
139-04: Required Plans
139-05: Conditions
139-06: Land Use Design Criteria
139-07: Streetscapes
139-08: Architecture
139-09: Signage
139-10: Parkland Dedication
139-11: Vehicle Trip Allocations
139-12: Internal Private Streets
139-13: Storm Water Management
139-14: Master Property Owners Association
139-15: Savings Clause
139-16: Effective Date
139-99: Legislative History
139-01: LEGAL DESCRIPTION:
   Legal Description
The west 543.33 feet of the north 1/2 of the Northwest Quarter 1/4 of section
11 in Township 78 North, of Range 26 West of the 5th p.m., Dallas County, Iowa
except the south 850 feet thereof and except a parcel of land deeded to the
State of Iowa, being described as all that part of the Northwest 1/4 of the
Northwest 1/4 of said section 11 lying north and west of a line beginning at a
point fifty feet radially distant southerly from the side road connection
centerline on the west line of said NW 1/4 of the NW 1/4 thence concentric with
or parallel to the centerline to a point fifty feed distant radially distant
southerly from the centerline on the east line of the west 543.33 feet of said
NW 1/4 of the NW 1/4, thence northerly along the east line of the west 543.33
feet of said NW 1/4 of the NW 1/4 to the north line of said NW 1/4 of the NW 1/
4. And except land deeded to the City of West Des Moines recorded in book 2017
page 22292 subject to easements for road purposes; and
The east 251.67 feet of the west 795 feet (measured along the north line of
section 11) of the north half (n 1/2) of the Northwest Quarter (NW 1/4) of
Section Eleven (11) Rownship seventy-eight (78) North of Range twenty-six (26)
West of the 5th p.m., Dallas County, Iowa except the south 850 feet thereof
(measured along a line parallel to the west line of said section 11) and
subject to an easement to Dallas County for road purposes over the north 45
feet thereof, except a parcel of land located in the NW 1/4, of the NW 1/4 of
Section 11 Township 78 N, Range 26W of the 5th p.m., Dallas County, Iowa, lying
on both sides of part of the following described centerline of relocated
Ashworth Road, as shown on official plans for Project I-IG80-3 (12) 121. The
centerline, designated by station points 100 feet apart, numbered consecutively
from west to east, is described as follows:
Commencing at the NW Corner of said Sec. 11, thence West 744.0 ft, thence S
62°40' west 575.7 ft, thence S 59°21' E 940.6 ft, thence N 53°28" E 915.7 ft to
STA. 246+63.7, the point of beginning, thence easterly 621.1 ft along a 955.0
ft radius curve, concave, southerly and tangent to the preceding course to STA.
252+84.8. said parcel is described as follows: all that part of the East 251.67
ft of the west 795 ft. (Measured along the north line of sec. 11) of the N 1/
2 NW 1/4 of said sec. 11, lying north of a line 50 ft. Radially distant
southerly of and concentric with said centerline. Said parcel contains 0.2
acres, more or less, exclusive of the present established road; and
Except land deeded to the City of West Des Moines recorded in Book 2017 page
13355 subject to easements for road purposes; and
The North 320 feet of the South 850 feet of the West 795 feet of the N 1/2 of
the nw 1/4 of Section 11, in Township 78 North, of Range 26 West of the 5th
p.m., Dallas County, Iowa, subject to easement to Dallas County for road
purposes and for use as a public highway the west 33 feet thereof; and
Except land deeded to the City of West Des Moines recorded in Book 2017 page
13603 and Book 2021 page 12044 subject to easements for road purposes; and
The North 270 feet of the South 530 feet of the West 795 feet of the north one-
half of the northwest quarter of Section 11 in Township 78 North of Range 26
West of the 5th p.m., in the City of West Des Moines, Dallas County, Iowa,
except that part deeded to the City of West Des Moines, Iowa by the warranty
deed recorded in Book 2021, Page 13814 filed on May 10th, 2021 in the Dallas
County Recorder's Office, subject to an easement to dallas county, iowa, for
road purposes and for use as a public highway for the West 33 feet thereof.
(Ord. 2533, 8-1-2022)
139-02: DEVELOPMENT INTENT:
The Ashworth 88 PUD intends to establish a framework for the integration of
high density residential, commercial, and office land uses in a visually
cohesive, walkable, and pedestrian focused development. The development will
take advantage of the existing greenway creek along the east side of the
development and provide a series of interconnected pedestrian-oriented sidewalk
and trails throughout the development. The development will include a privately
maintained north/south tree lined street through the center of the development
to provide internal access to all the parcels within the development and
promote walkability between establishments within the development. Priority
within the development shall be given to the pedestrian, rather than to
vehicles. (Ord. 2533, 8-1-2022)
139-03: SKETCH PLAN:
Attached hereto (or on file with the city) and made a part of this rezoning
approval, for concept description and delineation is the Sketch Plan document
for the Ashworth 88 PUD. The Sketch Plan is a graphic representation of the
property included in the PUD delineating the approximate location and
configuration of the PUD Parcels for the purpose of easier reference for the
applicable regulations of this Ordinance. It should be recognized that the
location of streets throughout the development shall define the final parcel
configuration and size. Wherever conflict occurs between the written text in
this document and the notations on the Sketch Plan, the written text shall
prevail. (Ord. 2533, 8-1-2022)
139-04: REQUIRED PLANS:
Prior to or in conjunction with development of any portion of the property
covered by this PUD, the following plans shall be required:
   A.   Preliminary Plat and Final Plat: All ground within the PUD shall be
platted in accordance with the City's Subdivision Ordinance and associated
zoning regulations unless otherwise modified within this ordinance. Outlots
within a plat shall have the proposed use clearly designated on the plat
documents. Platted outlots intended for future private development must be re-
platted through the preliminary and final plat process prior to physical
development. Outlots intended to provide for public utilities, or publicly
owned or accessible park ground, greenways, or other recreational amenities
(not to include private recreation based for-profit businesses) are not
required to be replatted prior to development.
   B.   Development Applications: Site plans for development within the
Ashworth 88 PUD must meet the intent of the approved PUD. Site plans (new,
Major Modifications and Minor Modifications) shall be submitted to the City of
West Des Moines for review and approval prior to the development or
modifications to any portion of the lot. New site plans and Major Modifications
for permitted uses which comply (as determined by the Director of Development
Services or designee) with the development intent as set forth in this PUD will
be subject to review via the City's review process and receive final approval
from the City Council following a recommendation from the Planning and Zoning
Commission. Minor Modifications to previously approved site plans may be
approved administratively in accordance with Title 9 of the City Code. Approval
by the Board of Adjustment for any use designated as a Permitted Conditional
(Pc) use shall occur prior to final approval of a subsequent site plan by the
City Council. At the discretion of the Director of Development Services, an
amendment to the Ashworth 88 PUD may be required to bring consistency between
the ordinance and site plan development proposed. (Ord. 2533, 8-1-2022)
139-05: CONDITIONS:
Whereas, Title 9, Chapter 9, Planned Unit Development District of the City
Code, establishes certain regulations and guidelines pertaining to accompanying
information required on plat and site plan documents. In addition, the
following conditions, restrictions, and regulations are adopted as part of this
approval:
   A.   General Conditions: The following general development criteria shall be
integrated into and made a part of this planned unit development.
      1.   General Conformance to City Code: Unless otherwise specified herein,
the development of the Ashworth 88 PUD shall comply with city code, including,
but not limited to title 9: Zoning, title 10: Subdivision Regulations and Des
Moines Metropolitan Design Standards or the more current design standards as
adopted by the city. To the extent that the provisions of this ordinance
conflict with or are more restrictive than provisions provided elsewhere in
city code, the provisions of this ordinance shall control.
      2.   Developer Responsibility: Unless otherwise specifically approved by
the City Council, the developer, its successors and/or assigns, if any, shall
pay all planning, engineering, and construction costs for execution of the
planned unit development as provided and required by this Ordinance or city
code and approved as part of plats and site plans. No occupancy permits, either
temporary or permanent, shall be issued until all necessary infrastructure and
improvements applicable to the area/lot or structure requesting occupancy are
installed and public improvements accepted by the City of West Des Moines.
Nothing in this Ordinance shall be construed to prevent the developer, its
successors and/or assigns, if any, from entering into private agreement(s) as
it/they may desire to share the cost of improvements.
      3.   Flood Hazard: In all areas within a Base Flood (100 Year), or
adjoining drainage ways, and detention ponding areas involving potential flood
hazards, all buildings proposed to be located in a flood hazard area must be
elevated and designed in accordance with the American Society of Civil
Engineers publication ASCE 24 and no building shall be erected which has a
minimum opening elevation (including top of window well) less than one foot
(1') above the determined level of the Base Flood. In areas where historical
high-water levels are above the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) Base Flood
Elevation or special conditions exist, the City may require a Design Flood
Elevation be calculated and used as the Base Flood Elevation for determination
of elevation requirements. Buildings shall only be permitted within twenty-five
(25) feet of any easement or property boundary of a major drainageway, storm
water detention basin or pond if said location is approved as part of the
development entitlement by the City Council and said building is structurally
designed accordingly.
      4.   Sanitary Sewer: Any proposed change in approved land uses and/or
densities for the PUD will require an analysis of the downstream sanitary sewer
capacity to assure that adequate capacity is available for the proposed change
(s).
      5.   Mailboxes: The Developer shall be responsible for installation of
any required Cluster Box Units (CBUs) as per the local U.S. Postal Service Post
Office. Locations of the CBUs shall be acceptable to the city to avoid traffic
circulation impacts.
      6.   To allow and encourage pedestrian movement between parcels and to
and from the development, an internal pedestrian sidewalk network connecting
all lots, uses and buildings within the development, as well as connecting to
adjacent trails shall be required. To enhance pedestrian comfort and extend use
into the evening hours, amenities such as trees, lighting, benches, trash
receptacles and other pedestrian amenities shall be incorporated along the
pedestrian pathways.
      7.   Fire Access:
         a.   All internal drive aisles and parking lots shall permit the
travel of the Fire Department's largest vehicle, including adequate
accommodation of the vehicle's turning needs. Approval of unique design
solutions to accommodate fire access may be granted by the City Council if, the
solutions proposed are recommended by the West Des Moines Fire Department.
         b.   At the discretion of the City's Fire Marshal, "No Parking Fire
Lane" areas may be established as necessary to ensure efficient movement and
access of the fire trucks. Unless otherwise agreed upon, the developer of each
site within the Ashworth 88 PUD shall be responsible for the procurement and
erection of approved fire lane signage.
         c.   All access drives and drive aisles shall maintain a minimum of
twenty (20) feet of clear pavement.
         d.   A minimum of fourteen (14) feet of vertical clearance over the
travel portion of all vehicle travel ways shall be maintained at all times.
         e.   The developer or its designee of each site within the Ashworth 88
PUD shall be responsible for enforcement of no parking lanes and maintaining
adequate clearance of structures and vegetation along and above all vehicle
travel ways regardless if public or private.
         f.   Adequate fire accesses as determined by the City's Fire Marshal
shall be provided at all times to those areas under construction.
      8.   Street Lighting: Unless otherwise provided for in a separate
development agreement, the Developer of each site within the Ashworth 88 PUD
shall be responsible for all costs associated with the installation of public
and private streetlights within or adjacent to any area included within the
development at the time of final platting.
      9.   Interior site lighting should be located, designed and directed in
such a way as to mitigate impact on adjacent uses.
         a.   As a part of the review of each site plan, a photometric plan
must be submitted. During the review, the applicant must demonstrate how
lighting will not adversely affect adjoining properties.
         b.   The footcandle level at property lines not adjacent to a roadway
shall be less than one.
         c.   All fixtures are to be downcast and of a cut-off variety to
direct lighting to parking areas and pedestrian pathways and eliminate glare to
neighboring properties. Bulbs shall not be exposed or extend down past the
fixture. Care should be taken to ensure that adjoining properties are not
looking up and into the bulbs of light fixtures. In addition to cut-off
fixtures, particular attention shall be given to eliminate hot spots and light
glare. To achieve this, additional measures may include, but are not limited
to, lowering parking lot light levels after business hours, turning off lights
not necessary for security purposes, the use of additional shields and use of
landscaping for light screening/blockage.
         d.   No wall packs without shields to direct light down or
floodlighting are allowed, except that sconces or decorative architectural
lighting shall be permitted.
         e.   Parking lot fixtures in proximity to residential dwellings on
another property (as measured from the dwelling itself), including properties
outside of the PUD area shall abide by the following:
            (1)   Fixtures greater than one hundred and fifty (150) feet away
shall not exceed twenty-eight (28) feet in height as measured from the ground
to the top of the light structure.
            (2)   Fixtures greater than one hundred (100) feet but less than
one hundred and fifty (150) feet away shall not exceed twenty-two feet (22') in
height as measured from the ground to the top of the light structure.
            (3)   Fixtures less than one hundred (100) feet away shall not
exceed sixteen (16) feet in height.
         f.   External fixtures located one hundred and fifty (150) feet or
less from a residential dwelling on another property, including properties
outside of the PUD area shall be turned off no later than thirty (30) minutes
after the closing of the last business, except those lights necessary for
security purposes.
         g.   Those businesses which have windows towards a residential
dwelling of any kind (single-family or multi-family) are not allowed nighttime
interior lighting intended to draw attention to the business (e.g., neon/LED
lighting which washes the building with light or a color) which is visible and
obtrusive to the residential dwelling. Limited intensity nighttime interior
lighting necessary for security shall be allowed. (Ord. 2533, 8-1-2022)
139-06: LAND USE DESIGN CRITERIA:
In addition to the general criteria as stated above, the following land use
regulations, development standards, and design criteria shall apply to the
development of all PUD parcels designated on the Sketch Plan.
   A.   Parcel 1: All bulk regulations and use provisions set forth in Title 9,
Zoning of the West Des Moines City Code for the Residential High Density (RH-
18) district shall apply to any development proposal within this parcel, unless
noted otherwise in this ordinance. Only residential uses shall be allowed
within this parcel.
      1.   Number of Dwellings: A maximum of thirty-seven (37) total dwellings
shall be allowed within Parcel 1.
      2.   Building Setbacks:
         a.   North (along Ashworth Rd): minimum sixty feet (60').
         b.   East: minimum thirty-five feet (35').
         c.   South: minimum fifteen feet (15').
      3.   Buffers: No buffer otherwise provided within city code to mitigate
adjacent uses shall be required along the south and east property lines of
Parcel 1; however, buffering for purposes of mitigating negative views of site
elements such as, but not limited to off-street parking, utility meters,
mechanical equipment, trash enclosures, etc. shall be provided.
      4.   Parking:
         a.   The number of stalls to be provided for each use within Parcel 1
shall comply with city code title 9, chapter 15, section 7.
         b.   Parking lots shall be setback a minimum of fifteen (15) foot from
the Ashworth Road ultimate road right-of-way. A minimum five (5) foot setback
shall be provided from all other perimeter property boundaries.
         c.   Parking stall dimension and drive aisle widths shall comply with
city code title 9, chapter 15.
         d.   Parking lot landscape requirements, including the incorporation
of landscape islands and landscape vegetation shall comply with city code title
9, chapter 19.
   B.   Parcels 2, 3 and4: The intent of development within these parcels is to
allow for commercial uses of a size and type that primarily serve the needs of
the surrounding area. The scale of buildings and intensity of uses shall
respect surrounding residential uses. All buildings within this area shall be
visually cohesive through design, materials and colors.
      1.   All general use and bulk regulations and provisions set forth in
Title 9, Zoning of the West Des Moines City Code for the Community Commercial
(CMC) district shall apply to any development proposal within these parcels,
unless noted otherwise in this ordinance.
         a.   All permitted (P) and permitted conditional (Pc) uses allowed
within the Community Commercial (CMC) zoning district may be allowed with the
approval of the appropriate review body unless otherwise noted in this
ordinance.
         b.   The following permitted (P) and permitted conditional uses (Pc)
shall have the following restrictions:
            (1)   SIC 58 - Eating and Drinking Places - Operation hours open to
the public shall be restricted to open no earlier than 7:00 A.M. to no later
than 10:30 P.M., Sunday through Thursday; and no earlier than 7:00 A.M. to no
later than 12:00 midnight on Friday and Saturdays.
            (2)   SIC 541 Grocery Stores - The maximum store size permitted
shall be 45,000 square feet. SIC 541 Convenience Stores, with or without pumps
- Hours of operation shall be restricted to opening at 5:00 A.M. and closing at
11:00 P.M., all days.
            (3)   Uses with Drive-thrus - If all aspects of a drive-thru
(visibility, lights, noise, etc.) can be negated, drive thrus shall be allowed
on Parcels 2 and 3. The drive thru lanes shall be located a minimum of fifty
(50) feet from the north property line of Parcels 2 and 3. The presence of
drive thrus shall be minimized through one or a combination of the following
methods:
               (A)   Integration of the drive thru into the building
architecture in order to eliminate the appearance as an added-on canopy
component.
               (B)   Situating the drive thru between two buildings in order to
limit the number of views thereof.
               (C)   Opaque visual screening to a minimum height of six (6)
feet. May be achieved through the use of earthen berming with vegetation, solid
fencing, decorative walls, etc. Screening method shall provide for year-round
visual mitigation of the drive thru.
         c.   The following permitted (P) and permitted conditional uses (Pc)
shall be prohibited within Parcels 2, 3 and 4:
            (1)   SIC 4225      General warehousing and storage
            (2)   SIC 4783      Packing & Crating
            (3)   SIC 55      Automotive Dealer and Gasoline Service Stations
               (Convenience stores are included in SIC 541: Grocery Stores,
with or without fuel pumps)
            (4)   SIC 5932      Pawn Shops
            (5)   SIC 5993      Tobacco Stores and stands
            (6)   SIC 5999      Misc. Retail Stores, Not Elsewhere Classified -
Adult entertainment establishment (films, books, magazines, sexually oriented
merchandise)
            (7)   SIC 726      Funeral Service
            (8)   SIC 7299-0A      Massage Therapy Establishments and Steam
Bath Services
            (9)   SIC 753      Automotive Repair Shops
            (10)   SIC 7539      Automotive Services, Not Elsewhere Classified
            (11)   SIC 754      Automotive Services - except repair
            (12)   SIC 7699      Recreational Vehicle Repair Services
            (13)   SIC 7699      Gun Services
            (14)   SIC 7699      Misc. Automotive Repair Services
            (15)   SIC 78      Motion Pictures
            (16)   SIC 7999      Amusement and recreation services, not
elsewhere classified (e.g., golf courses - miniature, driving ranges, circus
companies and fairs)
            (17)   SIC 806      Hospitals
            (18)   SIC 92      Public Order & Safety
      2.   Building Setbacks:
         a.   Adjacent to 88th Street: a minimum of one hundred (100) feet from
the ultimate right-of-way line shall be provided if parking is proposed along
the west property line. If the building is situated such that there is no
intervening parking between the ultimate right-of-way line and the building and
the west side of the building is designed with a pedestrian friendly facade
(entry doors, glass fronts, plaza areas, patios, etc., and does not present as
the back of the building) the minimum building setback shall be thirty (30)
feet.
         b.   Adjacent to internal ‘Private Streets’ as indicated on the PUD
Sketch Plan as measured from the curb of the private street except if drives
are platted as outlots then the setback shall be measured from the boundary of
the outlot: minimum thirty feet (30').
         c.   Adjacent to the south boundary of Parcel 4: minimum thirty feet
(30').
         d.   Adjacent to a dedicated drive internal to a parcel (no parking on
said drive) as measured from the curb of the drive: minimum fifteen feet (15').
         e.   Adjacent to north boundary of Parcels 2 and 3: minimum fifteen
feet (15').
         f.   Internal lot line between Parcels 2 and 3: 0', or as otherwise
required of building and fire code for separation.
         g.   Gas station canopy within Parcel 2 as measured from public road
right of way and/or property boundary, whichever is more internal to the site:
minimum fifty feet (50').
      3.   Buffers: Buffers otherwise required per city code shall not be
required between Parcels 1, 2 and 3; however, buffering may be required between
Parcel 1 and Parcels 2 and 3 at the time of development of Parcels 2 and 3 B to
mitigate activity and/or operations of uses implemented within the site,
negative elements such as views of parking lots, drive-thru lanes, mechanical
equipment, meters, trash enclosures, etc. Buffers as required by city code
shall be provided along the south lot line of Parcel 4 unless written
confirmation from the owner of the property immediately to the south waiving
the installation of a buffer is provided to the city.
      4.   Parking:
         a.   The number of stalls to be provided for each use within Parcels
2, 3, and 4 shall comply with city code title 9, chapter 15, section 7.
         b.   Parking lot Setbacks:
            (1)   Along 88th Street: minimum of thirty feet (30').
            (2)   Along the south boundary of Parcel 4: minimum thirty feet
(30') except if a written waiver of a required buffer is provided by the
adjoining property, then the parking shall be setback a minimum of fifteen feet
(15').
            (3)   Along internal ‘Private Streets’ as indicated on the PUD
Sketch Plan, as well as dedicated drive aisles (no parking on said drive)
internal to a parcel: minimum fifteen feet (15').
            (4)   Along common interior lot/parcel boundaries: minimum of five
feet (5') unless designed as a shared parking lot and when a shared parking
agreement has been executed then no setback.
            (5)   No parking shall encroach into a required buffer, including a
buffer with a modified or reduced width (south side of Parcel 4).
         c.   Parking stall dimension and drive aisle widths shall comply with
city code title 9, chapter 15.
         d.   Parking lot landscape requirements, including the incorporation
of landscape islands and landscape vegetation shall comply with city code title
9, chapter 19.
      5.   The design of buildings within Parcels 2, 3 and 4 shall comply with
the Architectural section included within this PUD and shall be cohesive in
design, materials and colors amongst all buildings within the PUD.
   C.   Parcels 5, 6, 7 and 8: To respect the residential to the east,
development within these parcels shall be limited to office uses only and which
have no outdoor event or activity areas, with the exception of patios for
employee breaks and/or meetings. The scale of buildings and intensity of uses
shall respect surrounding residential uses. All buildings within these parcels
shall be visually cohesive through design, materials and colors and shall be
visually complimentary to the design, materials and colors of buildings within
parcels 2, 3, and 4 and to a lesser degree, with the building on parcel 1.
      1.   All general use and bulk regulations and provisions set forth in
Title 9, Zoning of the West Des Moines City Code for the Office (OF) district
shall apply to any development proposal within these parcels, unless noted
otherwise in this ordinance.
         a.   All permitted (P) and permitted conditional (Pc) uses allowed
within the Office (OF) zoning district may be allowed with the approval of the
appropriate review body unless otherwise noted in this ordinance.
         b.   The following permitted (P) and permitted conditional uses (Pc)
shall be prohibited within Parcels 5, 6, 7, and 8:
            (1)   Division C - Construction.
            (2)   Division D - Manufacturing.
            (3)   SIC 58 Eating and Drinking Places.
            (4)   SIC 701 Hotels and Motels (with or without an event venue).
            (5)   SIC 726 Funeral Service.
            (6)   SIC 7299-02 Massage Therapy and Establishments and Steam Bath
Services.
            (7)   SIC 79 Event venue (all sizes).
            (8)   SIC 806 Hospitals.
            (9)   SIC 92 Public Order and Safety.
         c.   Operational Restrictions:
            (1)    No drive-thrus associated with any food or drink
establishment are allowed.
            (2)   Drive-throughs associated with non-food and drink
establishments (e.g., banks and pharmacies) shall be located on the western
side of the property and/or south side of a building. No drive-thru component
except an entrance or exit drive may be located on the east side of a building.
            (3)   All outdoor gathering or use areas on the east side of a
building shall open no earlier than 8:00am and close no later than 10:00pm, all
days.
      2.   Building Setbacks:
         a.   Adjacent to Ashworth Road and along the south boundary of Parcel
8 as measured from the ultimate right-of-way line: minimum thirty (30) feet.
         b.   Along the Future Access between Parcels 5 and 6 as shown on the
PUD Sketch Plan: fifteen (15) feet as measured from the curb of the private
drive except if the drive is platted as an outlot, then the setback shall be
measured from the boundary of the outlot.
         c.   East Property Boundaries:
            (1)   If at the time of the development of the first parcel (5, 6,
7, & 8), the residential property immediately to the east is still being used
as single family residential: minimum thirty-five feet (35'). This setback
shall be applied to all subsequent development of the remaining lots regardless
of if the eastern parcel has since redeveloped and is no longer a residential
use.
            (2)   If at the time of development of the first parcel (5, 6, 7, &
8), the property immediately to the east has been rezoned and has been
redeveloped with a use allowed in the Office zoning district: minimum fifteen
feet (15'). This setback will apply to development of each parcel 5, 6, 7 & 8.
         d.   Internal common lot lines between Parcels 6, 7, & 8: 0', unless
otherwise required by building separation regulations in adopted Building and
Fire Codes.
         e.   Along Private Streets as indicated on the PUD Sketch Plan as
measured from the curb of a private street, except if the private street is
platted as an outlot, then the setback shall be measured from the boundary of
the outlot: minimum thirty (30) feet.
      3.   Buffers:
         a.   No buffer otherwise required per city code shall be required
between Parcel 1 and 5.
         b.   A minimum thirty foot (30') buffer shall be required along the
south property line of Parcel 8 and the east property line of Parcels 5, 6, 7
and 8, except if a written waiver from the owner(s) of the immediately adjacent
property is provided then no buffer shall be required. The wishes of the
property owners to the east shall be accommodated separately of the wishes of
the property owner to the south.
            (1)   If at the time of development of Parcels 5, 6, 7 and/or 8 the
property to the east of said parcels has redeveloped with a use allowed in the
Office zoning district, no buffer shall be required.
            (2)   If at the time of development of Parcel 8 the property to the
south has redeveloped with a use allowed in the Office zoning district, no
buffer shall be required.
      4.   Parking:
         a.   The number of stalls to be provided for each use within Parcels
5, 6, 7 and 8 shall comply with city code title 9, chapter 15, section 7.
         b.   Parking lot Setbacks:
            (1)    Along Ashworth Road: minimum of thirty feet (30').
            (2)    Along Aspen Drive: minimum fifteen feet (15') except if a
buffer is required then the parking shall be setback a minimum of thirty feet
(30').
            (3)   Along the south boundary of Parcel 8 and east boundaries of
Parcels 5, 6, 7 & 8: minimum thirty feet (30') except if a written waiver of a
required buffer is provided by the respective adjoining property, then the
parking shall be setback a minimum of fifteen feet (15').
            (4)   From internal Private Streets as indicated on the PUD Sketch
Plan, as well as dedicated drive aisles (no parking on said drive) internal to
a parcel: minimum fifteen feet (15').
            (5)   From common interior lot/parcel boundaries: minimum of five
feet (5') unless designed as a shared parking lot and when a shared parking
agreement has been executed.
         c.   Parking stall dimension and drive aisle widths shall comply with
city code title 9, chapter 15.
         d.   Parking lot landscape requirements, including the incorporation
of landscape islands and landscape vegetation shall comply with city code title
9, chapter 19.
      5.   The design of buildings within Parcels 5, 6, 7 and 8 shall comply
with the Architectural section included within this PUD and shall be cohesive
in design, materials and colors amongst all buildings within the parcel, and
within adjacent parcels within the PUD area.
(Ord. 2533, 8-1-2022; amd. Ord. 2659, 6-2-2025)
139-07: STREETSCAPES:
   A.   A minimum fifteen feet (15') streetscape shall be required along
Ashworth Road, along the future extension of Aspen Drive, along the private
north/south street through the development, and along any east/west private
street that is installed through the site (if it is a defined roadway without
parking). Streetscape vegetation along both sides of the private north/south
street through the development shall be installed at the time of construction
of the street.
   B.   A minimum thirty feet (30') streetscape shall be required along 88th
Street. Streetscape landscaping shall be installed at the time of development
of the immediately adjacent lot or area to that particular street.
   C.   Earthen berming shall not be required except in situations in which
views of off-street parking and/or vehicle use areas are located adjacent to
the roadway.
   D.   Vegetation within streetscape areas shall be provided at a rate of one
tree and three shrubs per thirty-five lineal feet of streetscape. A twenty-five
square foot mass planting of perennials or ornamental grasses may be
substituted for three shrubs. Quality existing trees and shrubs as determined
by a qualified arborist and not otherwise listed on the City's prohibited tree
list or of an Ash variety may be counted toward the streetscape planting
requirements. (Ord. 2533, 8-1-2022)
139-08: ARCHITECTURE:
The intent is to create building facades throughout this development that are
varied and articulated to provide visual interest and to establish a unique
identity for each parcel within the development. Although it is understood and
preferred that not all buildings within a parcel are identical, each building
shall include design elements, materials, complimentary colors and detailing to
provide visual continuity amongst buildings and to unite all structures within
a parcel into one project concept. The architectural design of any building
within this development shall be acceptable to the City.
Final details of actual design, materials, colors and detailing will be
provided at the time of individual site plan approvals. Once City approval is
obtained on a particular building design, any alteration in design before,
during or after construction must be reviewed and approved by the City's
Development Services Department.
   A.   All buildings within this development shall accommodate or incorporate
the following in building design and materials:
      1.   All sides to each building shall receive high quality materials,
finishes, and details (360 degree architectural treatment). There are no
"backs" to a building.
      2.   Form and Scale: Building design shall consider the scale of the
building and create a distinct and intended transition to the height, bulk, and
scale of the building depending on the surrounding development. Building
entries, entries for residential uses, pedestrian areas, plazas and street
level uses and functions should be designed to engage the pedestrian with the
activities occurring within them and should be designed to be in the scale
appropriate to the use and function of the space.
      3.   Roof and Building Mounted Mechanical Equipment: Views of all
mechanical and meter equipment from roadways, adjacent PUD parcels and
adjoining property outside of the PUD area shall be mitigated by screening
incorporated into the design of the building through location and the use of
equipment penthouse, parapets, screening walls, or other acceptable solutions
as identified during the review of the site plan. Views of equipment placed on
the ground shall be mitigated accordingly through architectural elements or
landscape vegetation.
      4.   Material Quality and Detail:
         a.   The choice of materials and texture has great visual significance
and can affect the long-term appearance of the city. Proper selection of
exterior building material is directly related to the durability of the
building against weathering and damage from natural forces. Materials should be
durable, economically maintained and of a quality that will maintain their
appearance over a prolonged time. Natural materials such as brick and stone
shall be used as the major cladding elements of the facade. Acceptable cladding
for the balance of the building and trim materials will be determined with the
review of each parcel's site plan.
         b.   Variation in materials, material modules, expressed joints,
textures, colors and details shall be used to break up the mass of the
buildings. Changes in materials shall be aligned with changes in plan or roof
form to emphasize these changes in building mass and shall have the appearance
of three (3)-dimensional elements.
      5.   Outdoor Living Area: Residential dwelling unit design should
incorporate elements such as balconies and patios to reinforce the connection
between the residents and the activities within the development. A minimum of
eighty percent (80%) of the multi-family units within the development must
provide a balcony or porch/patio with a minimum usable area of forty (40)
square feet and a minimum usable dimension of five feet (5') in either
direction. In lieu of outdoor living area for individual units, area(s) of
common defined and enhanced outdoor living space can be provided and shall be
defined as part of the site plan approval. (Ord. 2533, 8-1-2022)
139-09: SIGNAGE:
All signage within the PUD shall be designed, constructed and maintained in
accordance with the West Des Moines Sign Code. The zoning district designated
for application of bulk regulations for each parcel shall govern signage
allowances and design. Halo or back lit signs may be allowed; however, no
internally illuminated signage shall face the residential building on parcel A
or the single-family dwellings located to the east of the PUD, including the
existing dwelling east of PUD Parcel D. (Ord. 2533, 8-1-2022)
139-10: PARKLAND DEDICATION:
All residential developments shall abide by the City's Parkland Dedication
regulations. Intended amenities and facilities to fulfill dedication
requirements shall be identified as part of preliminary plat/site plan review
of each PUD parcel or development proposal. A Parkland Dedication Agreement,
acceptable to the Parks and Recreation Department, detailing the specifics
related to the Parkland Dedication requirements for each area developed as
residential is required to be executed in conjunction with the associated site
plan. At the time of final platting of land intended to fulfill park and
greenway requirements, said land shall be deeded to the City as applicable.
(Ord. 2533, 8-1-2022)
139-11: VEHICLE TRIP ALLOCATIONS:
A Traffic Impact Study (study) dated June 17, 2022, has been prepared for the
Ashworth 88 development. Per the study, the development has been allocated 4:16
P.M. peak hour trips; 221 A.M. peak hour trips; and four thousand seven hundred
(4,700) Average Daily Trips (ADT). As development proposals are approved, the
number of vehicle trips generated by the proposed development will be
subtracted from the total trips allocated to the development. Approval of this
PUD does not constitute a guarantee that the proposed plan can be implemented.
Development of all parcels and implementation of desired land uses, including
specific high traffic generating tenants, will be limited by the available
number of trips.
Should anticipated traffic exceed the total trips allocated for the Ashworth 88
development prior to full build out, further development of parcels may be
limited or prohibited. Alternate uses to those planned within the study and
approved as part of this PUD ordinance may be allowed, following completion of
an amended traffic study analyzing the proposed alternative and appropriate
City approval of an amendment to the respective PUD ordinance and/or PUD Sketch
map, if necessary, if the existing uses and the proposed change(s) collectively
do not exceed the total trips allocated to the development. (Ord. 2533, 8-1-
2022)
139-12: INTERNAL PRIVATE STREETS:
   A.   Layout and Function:
      1.   Private Streets as shown on the PUD Sketch Plan shall be constructed
to connect Ashworth Road to 88th Street and Ashworth Road to Aspen Drive.
         a.   No parking shall be allowed on or along these private streets;
however, access drives that lead to off-street parking fields shall be allowed
in limited numbers and locations. Access drives to parking shall be aligned
with an access drive on the opposite side of the street or off-set a sufficient
distance, acceptable to the city, to alleviate unsafe vehicle movement
conflicts.
         b.   The location of all connections with both Ashworth Road and 88th
Street shall be acceptable to the city, including an evaluation of the current
access from Ashworth Road into Parcel 5. If deemed necessary to achieve proper
street/drive spacing and or due to safety concerns, the current access into
Parcel 5 may be required to be relocated and/or possibly combined with a new
drive that also serves the property to the east.
         c.   The Private Street connection at Ashworth Road (between Parcel 1
and 5) is intended to be a full-turn movement intersection. The private drive
into the west end of Parcel 1 will ultimately be a right-in/right-out movement
only intersection.
         d.   With the construction of a median on 88th Street, the Private
Street connection with 88th Street (between Parcel 2 and 4) will ultimately be
a right-in/right-out movement only intersection.
      2.   Aspen Drive: Aspen Drive shall be extended from its current terminus
at 84th Street, west and ultimately connect to 88th Street. The location of the
intersection with 88th Street shall be acceptable to the city. This
intersection of Aspen Drive and 88th Street is planned to be a full-turn
movement intersection.
      3.   To provide patrons of the business on Parcel 2 with a path to reach
the full-turn movement roadway on Ashworth Road (east of Parcel 1), a private
drive across the northern portion of Parcel 3 shall be provided to connect
Parcel 2 to the private street along the east boundary of Parcel 3. Due to
safety concerns, no parking directly on this drive shall be allowed; however, a
limited number of access drives into parking fields within Parcel 3 shall be
allowed. This drive shall be constructed in conjunction with development of
Parcel 3 or when the private drive on the south side of Parcel 2 becomes a
right-in-right-out at 88th Street.
      4.   Additional roadway connections between PUD parcels may be required.
   B.   Construction Timing of Internal Streets and Drives: Two points of
access acceptable to the city’s Fire Marshal must be provided with development
of each parcel. Internal drive connections to the Private Streets as shown on
the PUD Sketch Plan shall accommodate all movements of emergency response
vehicles and shall be in a location(s) acceptable to the city.
      1.   Parcel 1 constructed vehicle roadway connections to Ashworth Road
along their eastern and western parcel boundaries. No additional roadways are
required to be constructed within Parcel 1.
      2.   In conjunction with the construction of a building anywhere within
Parcel 2, the Private Street along the south boundary of the parcel as shown on
the PUD Sketch Plan shall be constructed. Additionally, the western drive
within Parcel 1 shall be extended into and south through Parcel 2 to connect to
the aforementioned Private Street along the south boundary.
      3.   In conjunction with the construction of a building anywhere within
Parcel 4, if not otherwise previously constructed, the Private Street along the
north and east boundaries of Parcel 4 as shown on the PUD Sketch Plan shall be
constructed. Two points of access shall be provided to Parcel 4 through the
construction of at least one drive from each the east and north Private
Streets. The location of the drives from the east and north Private Streets
shall accommodate the turn movements of the city’s largest fire apparatus.
      4.   In conjunction with the construction of the first building anywhere
within Parcels 3, 6, 7 or 8, the curved Private Street connection from Ashworth
Road to 88th Street as shown on the PUD Sketch Plan shall be constructed.
      5.   When deemed necessary by the City, Parcels 1-8 shall construct their
proportional share of Aspen Drive from 84th Street to 88th Street. At that
time, Parcels 4 and 8 shall dedicate all ROW necessary for Aspen Dr at no cost
to the City.
      6.   If at such time that the intersection of the western drive in Parcel
1 or the Private Street at 88th Street (between Parcels 2 and 4) is changed
from a full-turn movement intersection to a right-in/right-out only turn
movement intersection due to implementation of a median, and if the Private
Street connecting 88th Street to Ashworth Road has not been constructed, an
internal drive across Parcel 2 connecting to the Private Street along the east
boundary of Parcel 1 tying into Ashworth Road shall be constructed.
      7.    At the time of any development and/or redevelopment of Parcel 5,
including the development of additional new single-family homes, the existing
drive location to Ashworth Road within Parcel 5 shall be evaluated and
relocated accordingly if determined necessary to ensure adequate spacing with
other access drives along Ashworth Road. In addition to a connection to
Ashworth Road, a secondary connection at one of the following must be made to
provide the site with two points of access:
         a.   Directly to the Private Street along the east boundary of Parcel
1 at a location acceptable to city; or
         b.   To a drive within or along the shared common boundary with parcel
6 which provides a connection to the north-south private street constructed
along the east boundary of Parcel 1; or
         c.   Connection to the property to the east which provides a drive
connection to Ashworth Road in a location acceptable to the city unless it is
determined that Parcel 5 and the property to the east both cannot have access
drives off of Ashworth Road due to inadequate separations or safety concerns.
An access easement executed by the adjoining property owner allowing traffic to
route through the property shall be required; or
         d.   A connection directly to Ashworth Road within Parcel 5 in a
location acceptable to the city. The sharing of an access drive with the
property to the east may be required due to inadequate separation from the
existing drive in the property to the east and/or safety concerns. An access
easement must be granted to the property to the east allowing a drive
connection and traffic to route through Parcel 5.
(Ord. 2533, 8-1-2022; amd. Ord. 2659, 6-2-2025)
139-13: STORM WATER MANAGEMENT:
Individual Storm Water Management Plans will be required with each preliminary
plat or site plan for ground within the PUD area. The Developer will have said
Storm Water Management Plans prepared by a Professional Engineer licensed in
the State of Iowa. The Storm Water Management Plans shall comply with the
City's current design standards for storm water management. The method of storm
water management and the storm water conveyance system shall be determined
prior to City approval of a preliminary plat or site plan.
At time of final platting of a developable parcel or site plan if development
is not known at the time of platting, ownership and responsibility for all
storm water detention areas and private storm water detention outlet structures
will need to be established through the execution of a Storm Water Facility
Maintenance Agreement prepared by the City with information provided by the
developer. This agreement essentially provides that the property owner will
maintain and repair their storm water facilities. If they fail to do so, the
city will make repairs or perform maintenance and assess all costs back to the
property owner. Upon installation of storm water management facilities, the
property owner will be responsible to provide as-built drawings and a letter
certifying the detention facility was constructed in conformance with the
approved Storm Water Management Plan. The letter and as-built plans will be
required prior to the issuance of a final occupancy permit for the first
building or residential dwelling on property which is served by a particular
detention facility. Both the letter and as-builts will need to be signed and
sealed in accordance with Chapter 6, 193C-6.1(542B) of the Iowa Code. (Ord.
2533, 8-1-2022)
139-14: MASTER PROPERTY OWNERS ASSOCIATION:
If deemed necessary, proper action shall be taken to establish a property
owners association. The property owner's association shall be responsible for
the ongoing upkeep and maintenance of any private infrastructure, common
grounds such as buffer parks, storm water detention facilities, greenbelts,
plazas and other common space, and any other specific development improvements
noted as the development's responsibility in this ordinance or otherwise
determined as part of the platting or site plan process. (Ord. 2533, 8-1-2022)
139-15: SAVINGS CLAUSE:
If any section, provision, sentence, clause, phrase or part of the chapter
shall be adjudged invalid or unconstitutional, such adjudication shall not
affect the validity of the Ordinance as a whole or any provision, section,
subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or part hereof not adjudged invalid or
unconstitutional. (Ord. 2533, 8-1-2022)
139-16: EFFECTIVE DATE:
This Ordinance shall be in full force and effect after its passage, approval
and publication as provided by law. (Ord. 2533, 8-1-2022)
139-99: LEGISLATIVE HISTORY:
Ord. 2533, 8-1-2022.
PUD #140
WOODHOUSE
SECTION:
140-01: Legal Description
140-02: Intent
140-03: Sketch Plan
140-04: Required Plans
140-05: Conditions
140-06: Land Use Design Criteria
140-07: Architecture
140-08: Signage
140-09: Vehicle Trip Allocations
140-10: Storm Water Management
140-11: Repealer
140-12: Savings Clause
140-13: Violations And Penalties
140-14: Other Remedies
140-15: Effective Date
140-01: LEGAL DESCRIPTION:
   Legal Description
Lot 2 Earlham Park Plat 1, an official plat now in and forming a part of the
City of West Des Moines, Dallas County, Iowa, except Earlham Park Parcel A Lot
2, recorded at the Dallas County Recorder's Office, Dallas County, Iowa. (Ord.
2556, 1-17-2023)
140-02: INTENT:
The PUD intends to establish a framework for the development of Support
Commercial land uses which are visually cohesive and operationally respectful
of the surrounding built environment. All development shall adhere to City
Codes and regulations, except as provided herein. Where the PUD is silent, City
Codes and regulations will be the standard. (Ord. 2556, 1-17-2023)
140-03: SKETCH PLAN:
Attached hereto (or on file with the city) and made a part of the rezoning
approval, for concept description and delineation is the Sketch Plan document
for the PUD. The Sketch Plan is a graphic representation of the property
included in the PUD delineating the approximate location and configuration of
the development standards of the PUD Parcel for the purpose of easier reference
for the applicable regulations of this Ordinance. Wherever conflict occurs
between the written text in this document and the notations on the Sketch Plan,
the written text shall prevail. (Ord. 2556, 1-17-2023)
140-04: REQUIRED PLANS:
Prior to or in conjunction with development of any portion of the property
covered by this PUD, the following plans may be required:
   A.   Preliminary Plat and Final Plat: Any subdivisions of any ground within
the PUD shall be platted in accordance with the City's Subdivision Ordinance
and associated zoning regulations unless otherwise modified within this
ordinance. Outlots within a plat shall have the proposed use clearly designated
on the plat documents. Platted outlots intended for future private development
must be re-platted through the preliminary and final plat process prior to
physical development. Outlots intended to provide for public utilities, or
publicly owned or accessible park ground, greenways, or other recreational
amenities (not include private recreation based for-profit businesses) are not
required to be replatted prior to development.
   B.   Development Applications: Site plans for development within the PUD
must meet the intent of the approved PUD. Site plans (new, Major Modifications
and Minor Modifications) shall be submitted to the City of West Des Moines for
review and approval prior to the development or modifications to any portion of
the lot. New site plans and Major Modifications for permitted uses which comply
(as determined by the Director of Development Services or designee) with the
development intent as set forth in this PUD will be subject to review via the
City's review process and receive final approval from the City Council
following a recommendation from the Planning and Zoning Commission. Minor
Modifications to previously approved site plans may be approved
administratively when said development is in accordance with Title 9 of the
City Code. Approval by the Board of Adjustment for any use designated as a
Permitted Conditional (Pc) use shall occur prior to final approval of a
subsequent site plan by the City Council. At the discretion of the Director of
Development Services, an amendment to the PUD may be required to bring
consistency between the ordinance and site plan development proposed. (Ord.
2556, 1-17-2023)
140-05: CONDITIONS:
Whereas, Title 9, Chapter 9, Planned Unit Development District of the City
Code, establishes certain regulations and guidelines pertaining to accompanying
information required on plat and site plan documents. In addition, the
following conditions, restrictions, and regulations are adopted as part of this
approval:
   A.   General Conditions: The following general development criteria shall be
integrated into and made a part of this planned unit development.
      1.   General Conformance to City Code: Unless otherwise specified herein,
the development of the PUD shall comply with city code, including, but not
limited to Title 9: Zoning, Title 10: Subdivision Regulations and Des Moines
Metropolitan Design Standards or the more current design standards as adopted
by the city. To the extent that the provisions of this ordinance conflict with
or are more restrictive than provisions provided elsewhere in city code, the
provisions of this ordinance shall prevail.
      2.   Developer Responsibility: Unless otherwise specifically approved by
the City Council, the developer, its successors and/or assigns, if any, shall
pay all planning, engineering, and construction costs for execution of the
planned unit development as provided and required by this Ordinance or city
code and approved as part of plats and site plans. No occupancy permits, either
temporary or permanent, shall be issued until all necessary infrastructure and
improvements applicable to the area/lot or structure requesting occupancy are
installed and public improvements accepted by the City of West Des Moines.
Nothing in this Ordinance shall be construed to prevent the developer, its
successors and/or assigns, if any, from entering into private agreement(s) as
it/they may desire to share the cost of improvements.
      3.   Flood Hazard: In all areas within a Base Flood (100 Year), or
adjoining drainage ways, and detention ponding areas involving potential flood
hazards, all buildings proposed to be located in a flood hazard area must be
elevated and designed in accordance with the American Society of Civil
Engineers publication ASCE 24 and no building shall be erected which has a
minimum opening elevation (including top of window well) less than one foot
(1') above the determined level of the Base Flood. In areas where historical
high-water levels are above the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) Base Flood
Elevation or special conditions exist, the City may require a Design Flood
Elevation be calculated and used as the Base Flood Elevation for determination
of elevation requirements.
      4.   Buildings shall only be permitted within twenty-five (25) feet of
any easement or property boundary of a major drainageway, storm water detention
basin or pond if said location is approved as part of the development
entitlement by the City Council and said building is structurally designed
accordingly.
      5.   Sanitary Sewer: Any proposed change in approved land uses and/or
densities for the PUD will require an analysis of the downstream sanitary sewer
capacity to assure that adequate capacity is available for the proposed change
(s).
      6.   Mailboxes: The Developer shall be responsible for installation of
any required Cluster Box Units (CBUs) as per the local U.S. Postal Service Post
Office. Locations of the CBUs shall be acceptable to the city to avoid traffic
circulation impacts.
      7.   To allow and encourage pedestrian movement between parcels and to
and from the development, an internal pedestrian sidewalk network connecting
all lots, uses and buildings within the development, as well as connecting to
adjacent sidewalk/trails shall be required.
      8.   Fire Access:
         a.   All internal drive aisles and parking lots shall permit the
travel of the Fire Department's largest vehicle, including adequate
accommodation of the vehicle's turning needs. Approval of unique design
solutions to accommodate fire access may be granted by the City Council if, the
solutions proposed are recommended by the West Des Moines Fire Department.
         b.   At the discretion of the City's Fire Marshal, "No Parking Fire
Lane" areas may be established as necessary to ensure efficient movement and
access of the fire trucks. Unless otherwise agreed upon, the developer of each
site within the PUD shall be responsible for the procurement and erection of
approved fire lane signage.
         c.   All access drives and drive aisles shall maintain a minimum of
twenty (20) feet of clear pavement.
         d.   A minimum of fourteen (14) feet of vertical clearance over the
travel portion of all vehicle travel ways shall be maintained at all times.
         e.   The developer or its designee of each site within the PUD shall
be responsible for enforcement of no parking lanes and maintaining adequate
clearance of structures and vegetation along and above all vehicle travel ways,
regardless of if public or private.
         f.   Adequate fire accesses as determined by the City's Fire Marshal
shall be provided at all times to those areas under construction.
      9.   Street Lighting: Unless otherwise provided for in a separate
development agreement, the Developer of each site within the PUD shall be
responsible for all costs associated with the installation of public and
private streetlights within or adjacent to any area included within the
development at the time of final platting.
      10.   Interior site lighting should be located, designed and directed in
such a way as to mitigate impact on adjacent uses.
         a.   As a part of the review of each site plan, a photometric plan
must be submitted. During the review, the applicant must demonstrate how
lighting will not adversely affect adjoining properties.
         b.   The lighting level at property lines not adjacent to an exterior
roadway shall be less than one footcandle.
         c.   All fixtures are to be downcast and of a cut-off variety to
direct lighting to parking areas and pedestrian pathways and eliminate glare to
neighboring properties. Bulbs shall not be exposed or extend down past the
fixture. Care should be taken to ensure that adjoining properties are not
looking up and into the bulbs of light fixtures. In addition to cut-off
fixtures, particular attention shall be given to eliminate hot spots and light
glare. To achieve this, additional measures may include, but are not limited
to, lowering parking lot light levels after business hours, turning off lights
not necessary for security purposes, the use of additional shields and use of
landscaping for light screening/blockage.
         d.   No wall packs without shields to direct light down or
floodlighting are allowed, except that sconces or decorative architectural
lighting shall be permitted.
      11.   Those businesses which have windows towards the adjacent hotels are
not allowed nighttime interior lighting intended to draw attention to the
business (e.g., neon/LED lighting which washes the building with light or a
color) which is visible and obtrusive to the hotel guests. Limited-intensity
nighttime interior lighting necessary for security shall be allowed. (Ord.
2556, 1-17-2023)
140-06: LAND USE DESIGN CRITERIA:
In addition to the general criteria as stated above, the following land use
regulations, development standards, and design criteria shall apply to the
development of all areas of the PUD. All general use regulations and provisions
set forth in Title 9, Zoning of the West Des Moines City Code for the Support
Commercial (SC) district shall apply to development of all areas of the PUD,
unless noted otherwise in this ordinance.
   A.   Allowed Uses: All uses identified in Title 9, Zoning, as either
Permitted (P) or Permitted Conditional (PC) may be allowed with approval of the
appropriate review body unless otherwise noted herein.
   B.   Development Standards:
      1.   Setbacks: The setbacks applied to the PUD are as follows:
         a.   Front Yard (Lake Drive frontage) setback of 45 feet.
         b.   Rear Yard (interstate frontage) setback of 25 feet.
         c.   Side Yard setback of 25 feet.
      2.   Screening: Screening for purpose of mitigating negative views of
site elements such as, but not limited to off-street parking of employee
vehicles and vehicles being serviced/repaired (views of new and used vehicles
for sale are not required to be screened), utility meters, mechanical
equipment, overhead doors, trash enclosures, etc. shall be provided.
      3.   Parking:
         a.   The number of stalls to be provided for each use within the PUD
shall comply with city code title 9, chapter 15, section 7.
         b.   Parking lots shall be setback fifteen (15) feet with code
required screening; however, a smaller setback shall be allowed if a screen
wall or fence of at least three feet in height is provided to mitigate views of
parking areas from Lake Drive. In no case shall the parking lot be located
closer than five feet (5') from the ultimate right of way line of Lake Drive. A
minimum five (5) foot setback shall be provided from all other perimeter
property boundaries; however, a larger setback may be necessary to accommodate
achievement of screening of site elements noted above.
         c.   Parking stall dimension and drive aisle widths shall comply with
city code title 9, chapter 15.
         d.   Parking lot landscape requirements, including the incorporation
of landscape islands and landscape vegetation shall comply with city code title
9, chapter 19, except for defined auto sale areas as identified on the
associated site plan.
      4.   Uses with Drive-throughs and Service Bays: Unless all aspects of a
drive-through or service bay (such as visibility of garage doors, lights,
noise, etc.) can be completely negated, drive throughs and service bays shall
only be allowed facing west or east on any parcel in the PUD. The presence of
drive throughs and service bays shall be minimized through one or a combination
of the following methods:
         a.   Integration of the drive thru or service into the building
architecture in order to eliminate the appearance as an added-on canopy
component.
         b.   Situating the drive thru between two buildings in order to limit
the number of views thereof.
         c.   Opaque visual screening to a minimum height of six (6) feet. May
be achieved through the use of earthen berming with vegetation, solid fencing,
decorative walls, etc. Screening method shall provide for year-round visual
mitigation of the drive throughs. (Ord. 2556, 1-17-2023)
140-07: ARCHITECTURE:
The intent is to create building facades that are varied and articulated to
provide visual interest and to establish a unique identity for the PUD. Each
building shall include design elements, materials, complimentary colors and
detailing to provide visual continuity with the neighboring built environment.
The architectural design of any building within this development shall be
acceptable to the City.
Final details of actual design, materials, colors and detailing will be
provided at the time of individual site plan approvals. Once City approval is
obtained on a particular building design, any alteration in design before,
during or after construction must be reviewed and approved by the City's
Development Services Department.
   A.   All buildings within this development shall accommodate or incorporate
the following in building design and materials:
   B.   All sides to each building shall receive high quality materials,
finishes, and details (360 degree architectural treatment) and shall be
architecturally treated to produce an aesthetically pleasing facade which is of
a design compatible with surrounding buildings. There are no "backs" to a
building.
   C.   Form and Scale: Building design shall consider the scale of the
building and create a distinct and intended transition to the height, bulk, and
scale of the building depending on the surrounding development. Building
entries, entries for residential uses, pedestrian areas, plazas and street
level uses and functions should be designed to engage the pedestrian with the
activities occurring within them and should be designed to be in the scale
appropriate to the use and function of the space.
   D.   Roof and Building Mounted Mechanical Equipment: Views of all mechanical
and meter equipment from roadways, adjacent PUD parcels and adjoining property
outside of the PUD area shall be mitigated by screening incorporated into the
design of the building through location and the use of equipment penthouse,
parapets, screening walls, or other acceptable solutions as identified during
the review of the site plan. Views of equipment placed on the ground shall be
mitigated accordingly through architectural elements or landscape vegetation.
   E.   Material Quality and Detail:
      1.   The choice of materials and texture has great visual significance
and can affect the long-term appearance of the city. Proper selection of
exterior building material is directly related to the durability of the
building against weathering and damage from natural forces. Materials should be
durable, economically maintained and of a quality that will maintain their
appearance over a prolonged time. Natural materials such as brick and stone
shall be used as the major cladding elements of the facade. Acceptable cladding
for the balance of the building and trim materials will be determined with the
review of each site plan.
      2.   Variation in materials, material modules, expressed joints,
textures, colors and details shall be used to break up the mass of the
buildings. Changes in materials shall be aligned with changes in plan or roof
form to emphasize these changes in building mass and shall have the appearance
of three (3)-dimensional elements.
      3.   Building Lighting: Building lighting shall be downcast and night sky
compliant. Any use of neon, LED, or colored lighting shall be in a channel
which directs the light down and washes the building façade instead of exposed
lighting which is directed outward. The color shall be consistent with the
other colors used on the building and shall be acceptable to the City. (Ord.
2556, 1-17-2023)
140-08: SIGNAGE:
All signage within the PUD shall be designed, constructed and maintained in
accordance with the West Des Moines Sign Code. The zoning district designated
for application of bulk regulations for each parcel shall govern signage
allowances and design. (Ord. 2556, 1-17-2023)
140-09: VEHICLE TRIP ALLOCATIONS:
A Traffic Impact Study (study) dated October 18, 2022, has been prepared for
the PUD. Per the study, the development has been allocated 167 P.M. peak hour
trips; 152 A.M. peak hour trips; and 1,955 Average Daily Trips (ADT). As
development proposals are approved, the number of vehicle trips generated by
the proposed development will be subtracted from the total trips allocated to
the development. Approval of this PUD does not constitute a guarantee that the
proposed plan can be implemented. Development of all parcels and implementation
of desired land uses, including specific high traffic generating tenants, will
be limited by the available number of trips.
Should anticipated traffic exceed the total trips allocated for the PUD prior
to full build out, further development of parcels may be limited or prohibited.
Alternate uses to those planned within the study and approved as part of this
PUD ordinance may be allowed, following completion of an amended traffic study
analyzing the proposed alternative and appropriate City approval of an
amendment to the respective PUD ordinance and/or PUD Sketch map, if necessary,
if the existing uses and the proposed change(s) collectively do not exceed the
total trips allocated to the development. (Ord. 2556, 1-17-2023)
140-10: STORM WATER MANAGEMENT:
Individual Storm Water Management Plans will be required with each preliminary
plat or site plan for ground within the PUD. The Developer will have said Storm
Water Management Plans prepared by a Professional Engineer licensed in the
State of Iowa. The Storm Water Management Plans shall comply with the City's
current design standards for storm water management. The method of storm water
management and the storm water conveyance system shall be determined prior to
City approval of a preliminary plat or site plan.
At time of final platting of a developable parcel or site plan if development
is not known at the time of platting, ownership and responsibility for all
storm water detention areas and private storm water detention outlet structures
will need to be established through the execution of a Storm Water Facility
Maintenance Agreement prepared by the City with information provided by the
developer. This agreement essentially provides that the property owner will
maintain and repair their storm water facilities. If they fail to do so, the
city will make repairs or perform maintenance and assess all costs back to the
property owner.
Upon installation of storm water management facilities, the property owner will
be responsible to provide as-built drawings and a letter certifying the
detention facility was constructed in conformance with the approved Storm Water
Management Plan. The letter and as-built plans will be required prior to the
issuance of a final occupancy permit for the first building or residential
dwelling on property which is served by a particular detention facility. Both
the letter and as-builts will need to be signed and sealed in accordance with
Chapter 6, 193C-6.1(542B) of the Iowa Code. (Ord. 2556, 1-17-2023)
140-11: REPEALER:
All ordinances of parts of ordinances in conflict with the provisions of this
ordinance are hereby repealed. (Ord. 2556, 1-17-2023)
140-12: SAVINGS CLAUSE:
If any section, provision, sentence, clause, phrase or part of this Ordinance
shall be adjudged invalid or unconstitutional, such adjudication shall not
affect the validity of the Ordinance as a whole or any provision, section,
subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or part hereof not adjudged invalid or
unconstitutional. (Ord. 2556, 1-17-2023)
140-13: VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES:
Any person who violates the provisions of this Ordinance upon conviction shall
be punished as set forth in Title 1, Chapter 4, Section 1 of the City Code of
the City of West Des Moines, Iowa. (Ord. 2556, 1-17-2023)
140-14: OTHER REMEDIES:
In addition to the provisions set out in Violations and Penalties Section
herein, the City may proceed in law or equity against any person, firm or
corporation for violation of any section or subsection of this Ordinance. (Ord.
2556, 1-17-2023)
140-15: EFFECTIVE DATE:
This Ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after its passage,
approval and publication as provided by law. (Ord. 2556, 1-17-2023)
PUD #141
VALLEY WEST MALL
SECTION:
141-01: Legal Description
141-02: Development Intent
141-03: Sketch Plan
141-04: Required Plans
141-05: General Requirements
141-06: Site Design And Land Use Criteria
141-07: Architecture
141-08 : Storm Water Management Plan
141-01: LEGAL DESCRIPTION:
(SPECIAL WARRANTY DEED BOOK 14529, PAGE 411)
THE NORTH 80 ACRES OF THE WEST ONE-HALF OF THE NORTHWEST FRACTIONAL ONE-QUARTER
OF SECTION 4, TOWNSHIP 78 NORTH, RANGE 25 WEST OF THE FIFTH PRINCIPAL MERIDIAN,
EXCEPT THE FOLLOWING:
   THE EAST 40 FEET OF THE ABOVE DESCRIBED PARCEL;
   THE 50 FEET ALONG THE WEST SIDE TAKEN BY THE CITY OF WEST DES MOINES FOR THE
WIDENING OF 35TH STREET;
   THAT PORTION LYING SOUTH AND EAST OF THE NORTH AND WEST LINE OF THE
FOLLOWING DESCRIBED PARCEL:
   AN 80 FOOT STRIP OF LAND CENTERED ON THE FOLLOWING DESCRIBED CENTER LINE:
   BEGINNING AT A POINT 50 FEET EAST OF AND 942.8 FEET NORTH OF THE WEST
QUARTER CORNER OF SAID SECTION 4; THENCE EAST AT RIGHT ANGLES TO THE WEST
SECTION LINE OF SAID SECTION 1,063.72 FEET; THENCE NORTHEASTERLY ALONG A 27 17?
CURVE A DISTANCE OF 330.87 FEET TO THE INTERSECTION WITH THE QUARTER-QUARTER
SECTION LINE AND THERE TERMINATING.
   ALL SITUATED IN THE COUNTY OF POLK, STATE OF IOWA. (Ord. 2615, 6-17-2024)
141-02: DEVELOPMENT INTENT:
This PUD is intended to provide for and encourage the redevelopment of the
property with integration of high-density residential use(s) with a variety of
commercial, office, and light industrial (no-exterior activities or impacts)
land uses in a planned, cohesive and pedestrian-focused walkable development.
Uses, activities and enriching elements that encourage both day and evening
activity shall be incorporated in the master planning to enhance and define the
development.
Prior to any exterior modifications to the building, except signage for
interior tenants' additions or changes; and any physical changes or additions
to the site, except exterior patios associated with and directly attached to an
interior tenant and necessary maintenance and repair of all exterior common
areas, including, but not limited to, parking areas, sidewalks, landscaping,
and common utilities; and/or subdivision of the property to create defined
parcels/lots, a master redevelopment concept plan shall be submitted to and
approved by the city. As part of the approval of the master plan, an update to
this PUD ordinance shall be completed to detail the redevelopment intent,
identify specific allowed and prohibited uses and densities of specific use
areas, and establish regulations for redevelopment of the site, such as but not
limited to, minimum required setbacks, parking to be provided, open space and
landscape requirements, height allowances, etc., and establish an architectural
theme and material and color palette to ensure visual cohesiveness amongst all
areas within the Valley West Mall property.
Changes or addition of any tenant within the existing mall building may occur
as desired in accordance with use allowances identified in Title 9, Chapter 6
of city code for the Regional Commercial (RC) zoning district. (Ord. 2615, 6-
17-2024)
141-03: SKETCH PLAN:
Attached hereto as Exhibit "A" (or on file with the city) and made a part of
this rezoning approval is the Valley West Mall PUD Sketch Plan. It is intended
that in conjunction with creation of a master redevelopment concept plan for
the property, additional PUD parcels will be warranted. At the time of master
planning, an amendment to this PUD ordinance shall be completed to
appropriately update the Valley West Mall PUD Sketch Plan. (Ord. 2615, 6-17-
2024)
141-04: REQUIRED PLANS:
The following plans shall be required as a part of the processing of any
development application for any property within the PUD:
   A.   Master Redevelopment Concept Plan: Prior to development/redevelopment
of any portion of the Valley West Mall property, a detailed master plan of the
entire PUD parcel is required to be submitted to and be approved by the city.
      The master plan shall provide general ideas and details for the
coordination of vehicle, transit, bike and pedestrian transportation networks,
uses and building locations and relationships, parking areas and/or facilities,
storm water management areas and measures (e.g., detention pond, retention
pond, under-ground storage, etc.), planned open space and/or recreation areas
or elements, and streetscape or development unifying themes and elements. The
specifics of the master plan are intended to demonstrate unity and continuity
between the various areas within the overall PUD area. The master plan is
intended to provide a good understanding of the intended redevelopment plan and
opportunities; however, it is recognized that adjustments and changes in
building locations, footprints and layout, including the combining of multiple
smaller buildings into one larger building, may be necessary in response to
market demands and specific tenants. Additionally, unless otherwise
specifically restricted within this ordinance, it is recognized that building
areas may either be shifted from one building to another or increased or
decreased to accommodate specific users' needs. Assuming adequate sanitary
sewer and water infrastructure, these changes may be allowed if the shift does
not drastically alter the master plan intent, traffic patterns or result in an
increase to the total number of vehicle trips anticipated to be generated
within the PUD parcel. At the discretion of the Director of Development
Services, an amendment to an approved master plan may be required to bring
consistency between the master plan and intended later development.
   B.   Platting: Should it be desired that individual lots be created, the
property shall be platted in accordance with the city's subdivision ordinance
and compliant with associated zoning regulations unless otherwise modified
within this ordinance. Lots without public street frontage may be allowed with
the execution of appropriate cross access easements which provide for the
unrestricted use and access of all vehicle drives across and through all
property within the Valley West Mall property. Platted outlots intended for
future private development must be re-platted through the preliminary and final
plat process prior to physical development.
   C.   Development Applications: With the exception of demolition and site
grading when done as part of City approved Demolition Permit and Grading Plan
(s), site plans shall be submitted to the City of West Des Moines for review
and approval prior to any physical site development/redevelopment of any
portion of the PUD property. If not previously completed as part of an
amendment to this ordinance in response to the provision of the required master
redevelopment concept plan, an amendment to the Valley West Mall PUD Ordinance
will be required to bring consistency between the ordinance and the proposed
site development. Subsequent to an ordinance amendment in conjunction with
approval of the master redevelopment concept plan, at the discretion of the
Development Services Director, an amendment to this ordinance, including an
amendment to the PUD's Sketch Plan may be required to bring consistency between
the PUD and specific intended site development. (Ord. 2615, 6-17-2024)
141-05: GENERAL REQUIREMENTS:
Unless otherwise specified herein, the development of the Valley West Mall PUD
shall comply with the provisions of the city code.
Whereas, Title 9 of the City Code includes Chapter 9, Planned Unit Development
district and establishes certain regulations and guidelines pertaining to
accompanying information required on plat and site plan documents. Now,
therefore, the following development criteria, conditions, restrictions, and
regulations are adopted as part of this approval, to wit:
   A.   General Conformance to Subdivision Ordinance: All subdivision, streets,
street rights of way, infrastructure and general development shall adhere to
the standards and design criteria set forth in the West Des Moines subdivision
ordinances and the most current design standards adopted by the City of West
Des Moines pertaining thereto unless otherwise stated within this ordinance.
   B.   General Conformance to Zoning Ordinance: Unless otherwise specified
herein, the development of the PUD shall comply with Title 9, "Zoning", of the
city code or any other applicable codes. As previously indicated, in
conjunction with the submittal and approval of the master redevelopment concept
plan, this PUD will be amended to define the specifics of modified use and site
development code provisions necessary to enable the implementation of the
master plan concept.
   C.   Improvements: Unless otherwise provided for in a City Council approved
development agreement, the developer, its successors and/or assigns, if any,
shall pay all planning, engineering, and construction costs for the development
of property within the PUD as required by this ordinance and approved master
plan, plats and/or site plans.
      No final occupancy permits shall be issued until all necessary
improvements applicable to the area/lot or structure requesting occupancy are
installed and accepted by the City of West Des Moines.
      Nothing in this ordinance shall be construed to prevent the developer,
its successors and/or assigns, if any, from entering into private agreement(s)
as it/they may desire to share the cost of improvements.
   D.   Traffic Impact Study: As part of the review of the required master
redevelopment concept plan, a Traffic Impact Study (TIS) will be required. Said
study will be completed by city staff with the costs for the study being the
responsibility of the developer/property owner/applicant. Unless otherwise
modified by the City Council, site development shall comply with
recommendations stated within the TIS, including but not limited to, access
drive locations and spacing, implementation of turn-lanes and other traffic
management measures, minimum throat distances of access drives, and traffic
signalization.
   E.   Internal Pedestrian Connections: To allow and encourage pedestrian
movement between uses and areas within the development, as well as pedestrian
from other areas within the University Avenue corridor, an internal pedestrian
sidewalk network connecting all lots, uses and buildings within the
development, as well as connecting to public trail(s) and/or sidewalk(s)
adjacent to bordering roadways shall be required. For safety, pedestrian
pathways shall be physically separated from vehicular drives. To enhance
pedestrian comfort and extend use into the evening hours, amenities such as
trees, lighting, benches, trash receptacles and other pedestrian amenities
shall be incorporated along the pedestrian pathways.
   F.   Fire Access:
      1.   All access drives, internal drive aisles and parking lots shall
permit the travel of the fire department's largest vehicle, including adequate
accommodation of the vehicle's turning needs. Approval of unique design
solutions to accommodate fire access may be granted by the city council if the
solutions proposed are recommended by the West Des Moines Fire Department.
      2.   At the discretion of the City's Fire Marshal, "no parking fire lane"
areas may be established as necessary to ensure efficient movement and access
of the fire trucks. The developer shall be responsible for the procurement and
erection of approved fire lane signage.
      3.    A minimum of fourteen feet (14') of vertical clearance over the
travel portion of all vehicle travel ways shall be maintained at all times.
      4.    The property owner or its designee shall be responsible for
enforcement of designated no parking lanes and maintaining adequate clearance
of structures and vegetation along and above all vehicle travel ways regardless
of whether public or private.
      5.    Adequate fire accesses as determined by the City's Fire Marshal
shall be provided at all times to those areas under construction.
   G.   Visual Screening of Negative Site Elements:
      1.   Trash receptacles and dumpsters shall be screened by the use of a
permanent enclosure. Enclosures shall be constructed consistent with city code
title 9, chapter 10 and when possible, be designed as an extension of the
primary structure versus a stand-alone structure. The enclosure should be
landscaped to minimize the visual presence and impact of the structure on
surrounding properties, businesses, and internal and external roadways.
      2.   All heating, ventilation, or air conditioning (HVAC) units, utility
meters, or similar electrical or mechanical equipment shall be adequately
screened from ground level views from adjacent roadways, internal PUD drive
aisles and adjacent properties within or outside of the development. Said
screening shall be achieved through the use of architectural enclosures,
fencing and/or earthen berming in combination with landscaping consisting of
predominately evergreen material for year-round screening. Screening via
earthen berming and vegetation shall be of sufficient height to screen the
equipment day one.
      3.   All rooftop mechanical units shall be screened from ground level
views from adjacent roadways, I-235, internal PUD drive aisles and adjacent
properties within or outside of the development. Said screening shall be
achieved through the use of architecturally incorporated opaque screen walls,
raised parapet walls, penthouse features, or other opaque measure comprised of
materials consistent with the associated primary structure.
      4.   Buildings shall not be located or designed to expose loading docks,
overhead doors or the rear of buildings to public streets and or residential
within the development unless appropriately screened from view.
      5.   Ground level views from adjacent public roadways, internal PUD drive
aisles and adjacent properties within or outside of the development of off-
street parking areas and service and loading areas shall be adequately
screened. Said screening shall be achieved through the use of free-standing
decorative walls or earthen berming to a minimum height of three feet (3') in
combination with landscaping, preferably evergreen material for year-round
screening. (Ord. 2615, 6-17-2024)
141-06: SITE DESIGN AND LAND USE CRITERIA:
In addition to the general conditions as stated herein the PUD, the following
criteria shall apply to the area designated on the PUD Sketch Plan:
   A.   Site Development: Unless provided otherwise in this ordinance, all bulk
regulations, performance standards and provisions set forth in title 9,
"Zoning", of the City Code for the Regional Commercial (RC) District shall
apply to any development proposal within this parcel.
   B.   Land Use:
      1.   Prior to Approval of Master Plan: Until such time that a master
redevelopment concept plan is submitted and approved by the city, uses within
the existing mall building shall only be those allowed under Regional
Commercial (RC) zoning. As previously provided, no new exterior development or
redevelopment may occur unless otherwise provided for here within.
      2.   Land Use Subsequent to Approval of Master Plan: All Permitted (P)
and Permitted Conditional (Pc) uses set forth in Title 9, "Zoning" of the city
code for the Regional Commercial (RC), Office (OF), Light Industrial (LI) and
Residential High Density (RH) zoning districts, shall be allowed with the
approval of the appropriate review body. (As part of the PUD amendment required
in conjunction with the master redevelopment concept plan approval, specific
uses may be prohibited is deemed inappropriate or inconsistent with the
intended redevelopment plan. Additionally, the number of auto-oriented or
focused businesses, such as drive-thru restaurants and banks, car wash, auto
repair, etc., will be limited: the number to be allowed shall be determined as
part of the master plan process). (Ord. 2615, 6-17-2024)
141-07: ARCHITECTURE:
The intent is to create building facades throughout this development that are
varied and articulated to provide visual interest and to establish a unique
identity for the development. Each building shall include design elements as
well as common materials, complimentary colors and detailing to provide
continuity amongst buildings and to unite all structures within the development
into one project concept.
The architecture shall express a creative presentation by careful attention to
exterior building materials and details, use of fenestration, and change in
building mass within the plan and roof design to lessen the plainness of
appearance which can be characteristic of large commercial and multi-family
residential buildings. The choice of materials and texture has great visual
significance and can affect the long-term appearance of the city. Materials
should be durable, economically maintained and of a quality that will maintain
their appearance over a prolonged time. Proper selection of exterior building
material is directly related to the durability of the building against
weathering and damage from natural forces.
Buildings shall be organized to create a logical and identifiable relationship
with the site and other buildings, open spaces, pedestrian and vehicle
circulation. Site and building design should provide a visual demarcation of
the public vs. service areas to provide intuitive wayfinding for visitors to
the development.
Multiple buildings on a single parcel shall be permitted provided that the
buildings on the site are consistent or compatible in architectural design and
use of materials and organized utilizing a compatible planned open space,
landscape plan, and parking plan to serve and maintain a unified concept.
All buildings within this development shall accommodate or incorporate the
following in building design and materials:
   A.   All sides to each building shall receive high quality materials,
finishes, and details (three hundred and sixty-degree (360°) architectural
treatment). There are no "backs" to a building.
   B.   No standard corporate building design without modifications shall be
implemented. Limited use of architectural elements characteristic of
prototypical architecture may be allowed at the discretion of the appropriate
reviewing and approval body. Implementation of these architectural elements
shall be minimized and whenever possible modified to give a unique image to the
establishment.
   C.   Entrances into buildings should be easily identified using building
design and detailing. Projected or recessed entryways, change in rooflines,
addition of awnings or changes in building material are examples that can
create this effect.
   D.   Variation in building height, mass and roof forms shall be provided to
create interest while still maintaining an overall building continuity. Roofs
should not be designed as attention getting devices related to the
reinforcement of signage or as an identifiable corporate image. Wall planes
shall not be increased in height for the sole purpose of signage placement.
   E.   The use of building articulation and materials which break up the
building mass into modules that respect a human scale and reflects proportions
similar to other buildings within the development.
   F.   Variation in materials, material modules, expressed joints, textures,
colors and details should be used to break up the mass of the buildings.
Changes in materials shall be aligned with changes in plan or roof form to
emphasize these changes in building mass and shall have the appearance of
three-dimensional elements.
   G.   Shifts in building planes/facades and variation in exterior materials
shall be incorporated to minimize long expanses of wall.
   H.   Efforts should be made to use clear glass on windows and doors and to
define public entries for occupied spaces to promote the linkage of the
interior and exterior of buildings and provide natural light.
   I.   Hard materials such as brick, stone, architectural concrete, or
concrete masonry units are desired as the major elements of the building
facades. Architectural metal, EIFS or synthetic stucco and composite materials
acceptable to the city may be incorporated as minor elements in the design. Use
of vinyl materials is discouraged.
   J.   Trim and structural elements such as posts or columns shall be sized to
the scale of the building. (Ord. 2615, 6-17-2024)
141-08: STORM WATER MANAGEMENT PLAN:
A Master Storm Water Management Plan (SWMP) shall be required in conjunction
with the Preliminary Plat or first Site Plan if not subdividing the property.
Individual Storm Water Management Plans consistent with the Master SWMP will be
required with the site plan for each lot or PUD Parcel.
The Developer will have said Storm Water Management Plans prepared by a
Professional Engineer licensed in the State of Iowa. The storm water management
plan shall comply with the City's applicable design standards for storm water
management existing at the time each plat or site plan is approved. The method
of storm water management and the storm water conveyance system shall be
determined prior to City approval of a preliminary plat or site plan. (Ord.
2615, 6-17-2024)
PUD #142
VAL AIR BALLROOM
Publisher's Note: This Chapter has been AMENDED by new legislation (Ord. 2627,
passed 8-19-2024). The text of the amendment will be incorporated below when
the ordinance is codified.
SECTION:
142-01: Legal Description
142-02: Development Intent
142-03: Sketch Plan
142-04: Required Plans
142-05: Compliance With Code
142-06: Developer Responsibilities
142-07: Land Use
142-08: Bulk Regulations
142-09: Vehicle Trip Allocation
142-10: Stormwater Management Plan
142-11: Site Access
142-12: Parking
142-13: Pedestrian Elements
142-14: Landscaping
142-15: Signage
142-16: Lighting
142-17: Architecture
142-01: LEGAL DESCRIPTION:
LOT 169 IN CLEGG PARK PLAT 4, AN OFFICIAL PLAT, NOW IN AND FORMING A PART OF
THE CITY OF WEST DES MOINES, POLK COUNTY, IOWA, EXCEPTING THEREFROM THE
FOLLOWING TRACT OF LAND: BEGINNING AT THE SOUTHEASTERLY CORNER OF SAID LOT 169,
THENCE WEST ON THE SOUTH LINE THEREOF, 230 FEET, THENCE NORTH AT RIGHT ANGLES
TO SAID SOUTH LINE TO A POINT ON THE NORTHEASTERLY LINE OF SAID LOT, THEN
SOUTHEASTERLY ON SAID NORTHEASTERLY LINE TO BEGINNING. (Ord. 2595, 1-2-2024)
142-02: DEVELOPMENT INTENT:
The Val Air Ballroom PUD intends to provide a framework for development
standards reflective of the realities and constraints of redevelopment and to
establish design standards to reinforce the intent of the Grand Avenue
Redevelopment Plan to respect the context of the area and create a neighborhood
identity that recognizes the area's original development history. The Val Air
Ballroom PUD is located within the area identified for redevelopment by the
Grand Avenue Redevelopment Plan. Redevelopment in this area is intended to
create a special iconic district within the City of West Des Moines known as
the Val-Gate District. All development within this district must be in
furtherance of the goals of the Grand Avenue Redevelopment Plan. The City of
West Des Moines Val-Gate District Grand Avenue Redevelopment Plan and all
appendices and exhibits, as amended, are hereby incorporated as part of the Val
Air Ballroom PUD.
The Grand Avenue Redevelopment Plan identifies major street patterns, access
and interconnection points, district streetscape locations and typical design
including signage and pedestrian elements. The intent of the redevelopment plan
is to provide a tool that can be used to promote the communication and
cooperation between adjacent property owners and developers within the overall
district to create and ensure a cohesive and unified development.
Properties within the Grand Avenue Redevelopment Plan may be referred to as the
Val-Gate District. (Ord. 2595, 1-2-2024)
142-03: SKETCH PLAN:
Attached hereto (or on file with the city) and made a part of this rezoning
approval, for concept description and delineation is the Sketch Plan document
for Val Air Ballroom PUD marked Exhibit "A". The Sketch Plan is a graphic
representation of the property included in the PUD for the purpose of easier
reference for the applicable regulations of this Ordinance. Wherever conflict
occurs between the written text in this document and the notations on the
Sketch Plan, the written text shall prevail. (Ord. 2595, 1-2-2024)
142-04: REQUIRED PLANS:
The following plans shall be required as a part of the processing of any
development application for any property within the Val Air Ballroom PUD:
   A.   Planned Unit Development: A planned unit development (PUD) identifies
detailed development criteria for specific areas within the Grand Avenue
Redevelopment Plan area. The planned unit development shall conform to the
general development intent identified in the approved redevelopment plan. The
planned unit development shall be reviewed by the Planning and Zoning
Commission and adopted by the City Council by ordinance.
      This document shall constitute the Planned Unit Development Ordinance for
the Val Air Ballroom. On file in the city is a sketch plan that illustrates the
overall site layout concept (Exhibit A). This document and any referenced
documents or exhibits (on file with the city clerk) are intended to specify the
components, parameters, and requirements to be adhered to and implemented in
order to ensure the realization of the Grand Avenue Redevelopment Plan. It is
recognized that modifications and changes may be necessary due to changes in
building footprints, site details, and response to market demand. At the
discretion of the Director of Development Services, changes to the layout of
the development that are deemed to be "major" changes shall require an
amendment to the sketch plan and ordinance, if applicable. Major amendments
shall require the review of the Planning and Zoning Commission and approval by
the City Council.
      Where the sketch plan and PUD language conflict, the PUD language shall
prevail.
   B.    Development Applications (Site Plans or Modifications to a Site Plan):
Site plans for development within the Val Air Ballroom PUD must meet the intent
of the approved PUD. A Site Plan or Modifications to a Site Plan for the
development of the site shall be submitted to the City of West Des Moines for
review and approval prior to the development or modifications of any portion of
the lot. Site plans or Major Modifications to a Site Plan for permitted uses
which comply (as determined by the Director of Development Services or
designee) with the design intent as set forth in this PUD will be subject to
review via the City's development review process and shall receive final
approval from the City Council following a recommendation from the Planning and
Zoning Commission. Minor Modifications to an approved Site Plan will be subject
to review via the City's development review process and shall be approved
administratively if the site complies with all regulations provided in city
code, or which do not further an existing deficiency to city code. A Minor
Modification which does increase an existing deficiency shall be considered by
the appropriate approval body. Uses identified as Permitted Conditional (PC)
shall require approval from the Board of Adjustment of the use prior to review
and approval of any Site Plan or Modification to a Site Plan. At the discretion
of the Director of Development Services, an amendment to the Val Air Ballroom
PUD may be required to bring consistency between the ordinance and site plan
development proposed. (Ord. 2595, 1-2-2024)
142-05: COMPLIANCE WITH CODE:
Unless otherwise specified herein, the development of the Val Air Ballroom PUD
shall comply with the provisions of the West Des Moines city code. (Ord. 2595,
1-2-2024)
142-06: DEVELOPER RESPONSIBILITIES:
   A.   Unless otherwise specifically approved by the City Council, the
developer, its successors and/or assigns, if any, shall pay all planning,
engineering, and construction costs for the development of the Planned Unit
Development as required by this ordinance, and shall pay all costs related to
approved site plans, which may include, but is not limited to, the cost of all
storm sewers, sanitary sewers, water mains and service lines, drainageway
improvements, detention basins, buffers, and other improvements as required.
Nothing in this ordinance shall be construed to prevent the developer, its
successors and/or assigns, if any, from entering into private agreement(s) as
it/they may desire to share the cost of improvements.
   B.   The developer shall be responsible for the maintenance of the area
encompassing the streetscape easement and related public right of way,
including trash removal for the trash receptacles.
   C.   Developer's responsibilities include all obligations contained in this
section as well as those responsibilities set forth in this ordinance. (Ord.
2595, 1-2-2024)
142-07: LAND USE:  
All general use regulations and provisions set forth in title 9, "Zoning", of
the West Des Moines city code for the Community Commercial (CMC) zoning
district, shall apply to any development proposal within the Val Air Ballroom
PUD area, unless noted elsewhere within this ordinance.
   A.   Allowed Uses: Uses allowed for parcels within Val Air Ballroom PUD
shall be those uses identified as permitted or permitted conditional (with
approval of the Board of Adjustment) for the Community Commercial (CMC)
district, except Event Venue greater than five thousand (5,000) square feet
shall be considered a permitted use.
   B.   Prohibited Uses: The following uses identified as permitted or
permitted conditional in the Community Commercial (CMC) district shall be
prohibited in the Val Air Ballroom PUD:
 
SIC 15, 16, & 17 Building construction, contractor and operative builders
                 (offices only, no warehouse component)
SIC 4225         General Warehousing and storage
SIC 47           Transportation Services
SIC 5932-99      Used building materials (no outside storage)
 
   C.   Drive-Throughs: No drive-throughs, regardless of type, shall be
permitted within the Val Air Ballroom PUD. (Ord. 2595, 1-2-2024)
142-08: BULK REGULATIONS:
   A.   Lot Size: No minimum lot size shall be required.
   B.   Building Height: The height of a building shall conform to the limits
prescribed by the zoning code for the Community Commercial (CMC) district
unless otherwise specifically approved by the City Council after a
recommendation from the Planning and Zoning Commission that the additional
height is necessary and appropriate to achieve an architectural intent
consistent with the goals of the Grand Avenue Redevelopment Plan.
   C.   Building Setbacks:
      1.    Unless otherwise specifically stated, setbacks shall be measured
from the property line or ultimate street right of way line, whichever is more
restrictive.
      2.    Building setbacks are to the main plane of the building excluding
canopies and pedestrian arcades.
         a.    Buildings shall be set back a minimum of thirty feet (30') from
Ashworth Road, twenty feet (20') from side property lines and thirty-five feet
(35') from rear property lines.
         b.   Nothing herein, however, shall be construed as permitting the
location of a building that will interfere with pedestrian or vehicle
visibility at an intersection, sidewalks, trails, plazas, or maintenance of
utilities.
      3.    Dumpster enclosures shall be located no closer to Ashworth Road
than the front plane of the primary building and a minimum of five feet (5')
from all other parcel boundaries. Dumpsters should be opaquely screened from
visibility from Ashworth Road. Whenever possible, dumpsters should be located
and designed as an extension of the primary building. Freestanding dumpster
enclosures should be located and landscaped to blend with the landscape and
minimize their presence. (Ord. 2595, 1-2-2024)
142-09: VEHICLE TRIP ALLOCATION:
Traffic studies may be required in conjunction with the incorporation of new
additional or expansion of existing uses within the Val Air Ballroom PUD. (Ord.
2595, 1-2-2024)
142-10: STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN:
A master stormwater management plan (MSWMP) for the entire Grand Avenue
redevelopment area which governs the overall stormwater management of the Val-
Gate district has been prepared by the City of West Des Moines. Specific
stormwater management plans (SWMP) will be required with the submittal of each
site development plan. The specific stormwater plans shall be prepared at the
developer's expense, by a professional engineer licensed in the state of Iowa.
All specific stormwater management plans shall comply with the city's
applicable design standards for stormwater management existing at the time each
development (site plan) is approved. Said SWMP must demonstrate compliance with
the Grand Avenue Redevelopment master stormwater management plan, if available,
at the time of site plan approval. (Ord. 2595, 1-2-2024)
142-11: SITE ACCESS:
Two permanent access drives to the Val Air Ballroom PUD shall be provided.
   A.   Access Locations:
      1.   There are two existing access locations to the site that shall
remain unless the site is completely redeveloped in the future. The access
locations will be reviewed at that time.
      2.   At the time of redevelopment of the property to the east of the Val
Air Ballroom PUD, a connection shall be made to the Val Air Ballroom site via
an existing private ingress/egress easement (Book 12138, Page 875). (Ord. 2595,
1-2-2024)
142-12: PARKING:
   A.   Off Street Parking:
      1.    Parking stall measurements and drive aisle widths shall conform to
title 9, chapter 15 of the city code.
      2.    Parking Ratios:
         a.   Event Venue: The Val-Air is considered an event venue for the
purposes of determining parking requirements. One (1) parking space per fifty
(50) square feet of floor area of assembly space for patrons and staff is
required to be provided. The current assembly areas within the building consist
of nineteen thousand, nine hundred and thirty (19,930) square feet resulting in
399 parking spaces required within the site. There are currently four hundred
and twenty-nine (429) parking spaces on the site. Should a building expansion
or other use occur that increases the assembly space, additional parking may be
required. Additional parking may be provided on-site or through off-site
parking agreements with surrounding businesses. For additional parking provided
by written agreement with businesses located on the south side of Ashworth
Road, unless otherwise agreed to be provided by the city, the developer shall
be responsible for implementation of any pedestrian crossing identification and
safety measures deemed necessary by the city, including but not limited to
signage, pavement markings and electronic crossing signals.
         b.   Bar & Grill: During events in the main ballroom of the building,
the bar and grill located in the basement of the building shall only be open to
patrons of the ballroom event venue, regardless of the size of that event.
Since the bar and grill will not be open to the general public during events,
additional parking requirements for the bar and grill will not be required.
      3.   Off Street Parking Lot Setbacks: Parking shall be set back so as to
provide a minimum of ten feet (10') from the ultimate street right of way of
Ashworth Road, thirty-foot (30') setback along the west and north property
lines and a ten-foot (10') setback along the northeast and east property lines.
(Ord. 2595, 1-2-2024)
142-13: PEDESTRIAN ELEMENTS:
The Val Air Ballroom PUD, in alignment with the Grand Avenue Redevelopment
Plan, aims to encourage pedestrian movement and opportunities for pedestrian
interaction through the implementation of multiple and connected pathways to
and from parcels within the redevelopment area. In addition, to encourage
pedestrian activity, site furniture and benches for pedestrian use shall be
provided along public streets within an area of enhanced landscaping. One
pedestrian area shall be provided for every two hundred linear feet (200') of
frontage (streetscape). Each pedestrian area shall contain at a minimum two (2)
benches and one trash receptacle. These pedestrian areas may be spaced along
the frontage or grouped to create a larger plaza area. Development of these
areas shall comply with the Grand Avenue Redevelopment Plan guidelines with
details of the development of each area to be specified, reviewed, and approved
at the time of site plan development. Unless otherwise specified within an
agreement with the city, the installation of these pedestrian elements shall be
by the developer of the Val Air Ballroom PUD at the time of development. A
public access easement will be required for the streetscape area at the time of
installation to allow public use of the pedestrian elements. (Ord. 2595, 1-2-
2024)
142-14: LANDSCAPING:
Landscaping must be provided with any Major Modification or Site Plan in
accordance with city code unless otherwise modified within this ordinance.
Landscaping shall be provided as part of a Minor Modification for the subject
area of the modification site plan. Details regarding specific varieties, exact
quantities, and the minimum size at time of planting shall be provided and
approved as part of any site plan submittal and shall meet the general
guidelines in respect to the minimum plant sizes traditionally applied to
development within the city. The minimum vegetation quantities specified within
this ordinance will need to be provided. The provision of additional vegetation
above the minimum amount required may be necessary to fulfill the intent (i.e.,
visual mitigation/screening) of the required landscaping.
   A.   Open/Green Space: Due to the nature of the intended redevelopment in
respect to existing development pattern, uses, and densities, the amount and
locations of open space and green space/vegetation within the redevelopment
area will vary. As a general rule, the maximum amount of "green" (open lawn
areas and vegetation) should be provided within a site. To allow the most
flexibility in planning, the site shall attempt to provide a minimum of twenty-
five percent (25%) open space; however, the PUD area shall not contain less
than fifteen percent (15%) open space or more than eighty-five percent (85%)
impervious surface. Plaza and streetscape areas along with any areas associated
with outdoor pedestrian use may be counted toward fulfilling the minimum open
space requirement. Plazas and outdoor pedestrian use areas to be counted toward
fulfilling minimum open space requirements may be paved (impervious) as long as
the paving is part of a planned hardscape and softscape enhancement of the
plaza or pedestrian area.
      At the time of a Site Plan modification applications for the site, a
minimum of two (2) trees and three (3) shrubs shall be provided for every three
thousand (3,000) square feet of required open space which shall be based on
twenty-five percent (25%) of the site regardless of the actual amount provided.
Of the required trees, fifty percent (50%) shall be of an overstory or
evergreen variety unless otherwise done for design intent and specifically
approved by the appropriate reviewing body. No substitution for required trees
is allowed; however, a twenty (20) square foot mass planting of perennial
flowers or ornamental grasses may be substituted for three (3) shrubs. The
incorporation of evergreen vegetation is encouraged to provide winter substance
within the landscape. Vegetation required as part of the open space may be
placed into off street parking areas, streetscape areas or required buffers,
but is in addition to vegetation required of streetscape areas.
   B.   Streetscaping: A landscaped edge with hardscape elements or
"streetscape" shall be provided along Ashworth Road. This streetscape is
intended to provide desired green to the city, reinforce a district identity,
provide visual screening of parking and other negative site elements, bring
human scale to adjoining buildings and provide traffic calming benefits. The
streetscape shall be accomplished in accordance with the Grand Avenue
Redevelopment Plan streetscaping intent and shall include vegetation,
furniture, and ornamental stone wall screening elements as illustrated in the
Redevelopment plan. Monument signs and pedestrian elements such as patios and
walkways may encroach into the streetscape area; however, no buildings or off-
street parking may encroach.
      A minimum ten-foot (10') streetscape easement shall be provided parallel
with Ashworth Road to provide area for district streetscape, signage and to
maintain utility corridors. The developer shall provide the necessary easement
at the time of installation.
      Streetscape landscaping shall be placed within the streetscape easement
on the private property. Landscape vegetation and amenities such as pedestrian
benches and ornamental wall stones shall be implemented within the streetscape
area to provide screening of off-street parking areas to a minimum height of
three feet (3'). To aid in achieving this, a minimum of two (2) trees and ten
(10) shrubs shall be required for every fifty linear feet (50') of streetscape
distance. Of the required number of trees, a minimum of one-half (1/2) must be
overstory in nature. No substitution of shrubs for required trees shall be
allowed. Additionally, three (3) "ornamental wall stones" as illustrated in the
Grand Avenue Redevelopment Plan shall be provided for every one hundred linear
feet (100') of streetscape. It is recommended that the stones be clustered in
groups of at least three (3) stones amongst and between groups of shrubs to
provide mass and screening rather than be equally spaced along the streetscape
length.
      The streetscape landscaping, wall stones, benches and trash receptacles
will be installed with the reconstruction of Ashworth Road.
   C.    Screening Of Negative Site Elements: Electrical transformers, trash
dumpsters, service areas and loading docks, heating, ventilation, air
conditioning, generators, utility meters, and other mechanical equipment which
are located on, beside or adjacent to any building or development shall be
visually screened from views from adjacent roadways, pedestrian paths, and
adjoining properties. Any structures to enclose or otherwise screen negative
site elements which is attached to the building shall be reviewed and approved
by the State Historic Preservation Office prior to their installation.
   D.   Vegetation Placement: Understory trees are an acceptable replacement
for overstory trees and upright evergreen trees within public utility
easements. The presence of utility easements shall not provide a basis for
noncompliance with landscaping provisions found within this ordinance and
within any applicable codes. The placement of public utility easements within
streetscapes and buffer parks is discouraged due to the potential conflict
between trees and the need to access the lines for repair. (Ord. 2595, 1-2-
2024)
142-15: SIGNAGE:
All signage shall follow the precedent images contained in the Grand Avenue
Redevelopment Plan and shall comply with title 9, chapter 18 of the city code
except as modified herein or within the Grand Avenue Redevelopment Plan.
Recognizing that the ballroom building has been listed on the National Register
of Historic Places, new signage for the Val Air Ballroom shall be compatible
with the site's historic character by using design, materials, and technology
of the mid-century era (Googie style). All modifications to existing signage or
repair and/or replacement shall be of like kind or revert back to the original
historic appearance if not replacing original material. It is strongly
recommended that any alterations to the existing signage follow guidance
provided by the State Historic Preservation Office. Sign design and
construction not typically allowed by code may be permitted by the Director of
Development Services if it is deemed to carry and reinforce the design intent
of the Val-Gate district. Allowance of alternate design and construction
measures shall only be allowed if there is no other code compliant manner in
which to create the sign. The use of LED illumination for signage emulating
"neon style" lighting and relevant to the architectural theme of the district
may be allowed with the approval of the State Historic Preservation Office. The
following additional modifications to title 9, chapter 18 of the city code are
hereby made:
   A.   Business Identification Signs:
      1.    Business identification signs, including wall, ground monument,
roof, and projecting signs shall be consistent with and reinforce the design
intent of the redevelopment plan.
      2.   For existing iconic signage, or any proposed signage that is found
to reflect the intent of the redevelopment plan, this site shall be allowed one
and one half (1.5) square foot of wall signage per linear foot of the building
wall that contains the main entrance to the building. The allowed signage may
be divided into multiple signs as long as the total amount of sign area earned,
based upon the formula above, is not exceeded. Wall signage may project above
the roof line of the structure/wall of which it is attached. If the proposed
signage is not found to reflect the intent of the redevelopment plan
guidelines, the allowed wall signage shall be permitted at one (1) square foot
of wall signage per linear foot of the building wall that contains the main
entrance to the building.
      3.    Ground monument signs shall be allowed in accordance with city code
with the following exception:
         a.    The main sign structure shall not exceed thirty-five (35) square
feet and five feet (5') in height at a ten-foot (10') setback, or sixty-four
(64) square feet and seven-foot (7') in height at a twenty-foot (20') setback.
Up to an additional one foot (1') of height shall be allowed for columns or
other architectural elements. Changeable copy in compliance with Sign Code
regulations and appropriate for the era as depicted in the Grand Avenue
Redevelopment Plan (no electronic message boards) shall be allowed up to
seventy five percent (75%) of the sign face. (Ord. 2595, 1-2-2024)
142-16: LIGHTING:
Consistent with the redevelopment plan, the Val Air Ballroom PUD shall
incorporate a variety of light fixtures ranging from parking lot lights and
roadway fixtures to pedestrian pathway lights, as applicable. Included within
section 6 of the Grand Avenue Redevelopment Plan are design specifications and
requirements along with sketches and images of the intended lighting series.
All lighting within the PUD area that is changed in the future shall abide by
these standards and be consistent in character to that illustrated in the Grand
Avenue Redevelopment Plan and the Val-Gate district's iconic design intent.
If changes are made to the existing parking lot exterior lighting, including a
change to LED, a photometric plan must be submitted for review. During the
review, the applicant must demonstrate how lighting will not adversely affect
adjoining properties or patrons utilizing the public street system. Special
care must be given to ensure excess light does not spill onto properties
adjacent to, but not part of, the Val-Gate district.
The following general guidelines shall be in addition to the specific
regulations stated within the Grand Avenue Redevelopment Plan regulations:
   A.   Streetlights: Unless otherwise provided, the developer of the Val Air
Ballroom PUD shall pay the cost of streetlight installation adjacent to
Ashworth Road as needed.
   B.   Parking Luminaries: Fixtures shall be of a design to direct light
downward and shall not have bulbs which are exposed and extend below the frame
of the light fixture. Said fixtures shall not exceed twenty-five feet (25') in
height as measured from the ground to the top of the light structure. Fixtures
used shall be consistent throughout the Val Air Ballroom PUD.
   C.   Building Lighting: No wall packs or floodlighting without shields to
direct the light to its intended target are allowed. In addition to cut off
fixtures, particular attention shall be given to eliminate hot spots and light
glare. Architectural accent lighting in keeping with the design intent of the
Val-Gate District Redevelopment Plan may be allowed if approved as part of the
architectural design.
   D.   Pedestrian Pathways: Bollard or pole lighting may be implemented along
pedestrian pathways. Pole lights shall not exceed fourteen feet (14') as
measured from the ground to the top of the light fixture. (Ord. 2595, 1-2-2024)
142-17: ARCHITECTURE:
Included within the Grand Avenue Redevelopment Plan is indication of the
architectural style and illustrative examples of the architectural concepts
which shall serve to guide the design of all renovations of existing buildings
or new buildings within Val Air Ballroom PUD. All buildings in the PUD shall
reinforce the concept depicted in the Grand Avenue Redevelopment Plan. Specific
architecture for all buildings shall be evaluated as part of the site plan
review and approval process.
Recognizing that the ballroom building has been listed on the National Register
of Historic Places, all exterior modifications or building additions to the Val
Air Ballroom shall be compatible with the historic character of the existing
building or the midcentury era. Repair and/or replacement shall be of like kind
or revert back to the original historic appearance, as directed by the State
Historic Preservation Office. It is strongly recommended that any alterations
or additions follow The Secretary of the Interior's Standards for
Rehabilitation by the National Park Service.
All buildings within the Val Air Ballroom PUD shall accommodate the following
in building design:
   A.    Form And Scale: Buildings should reinforce the aesthetic concept as
depicted by the precedent images contained in the Grand Avenue Redevelopment
Plan. Buildings shall be designed to relate specifically to the pedestrian in
scale and variety. The following techniques should be used to meet this
objective:
      1.    Corporate architecture shall be prohibited except as permissible by
the Grand Avenue Redevelopment Plan in that it reinforces the iconic imagery
desired for the Val-Gate district.
      2.    Buildings shall be organized to create a logical balance and
relationship with the site, open spaces and circulation.
      3.    The building's design should meet context and site objectives such
as providing gateways, creating linkages and framing or terminating views.
      4.    Variation in building height, mass and roof forms shall be provided
while still maintaining an overall building continuity.
      5.    Shifts in building planes/facades and variation in exterior
materials shall be incorporated to minimize long expanses of wall.
      6.    Variation in materials, material modules, expressed joints,
textures, colors and details should be used to break up the mass of the
buildings.
      7.    Variation in horizontal planes through the use of materials, color
and projecting forms should be implemented to signify an entry and/or protect
the pedestrian.
      8.    Ground floor retail areas should provide the maximum possible
glazing toward sidewalks to provide pedestrians with visual interest.
      9.    A building's roof form and related details/materials are an
integral part of the architectural design aesthetic. Roofs should not be
designed as attention getting devices related to the reinforcement of signage
or as an identifiable corporate image unless said identification is in keeping
with the Grand Avenue Redevelopment Plan aesthetic.
   B.   Material Quality And Detail: All sides to each building are to receive
high quality materials and finishes (three-hundred and sixty (360) degree
architectural treatment). There are no "backs" to a building. Materials should
be durable, economically maintained and of a quality that will maintain their
appearance over a prolonged time.
      1.    Primary building materials shall include glass, steel or metal
siding, architectural precast concrete, composite materials, stone and brick.
The use of natural wood and architectural metals shall be used in moderation
and cannot be the predominate building material. Composite or metal panels
shall use concealed fasteners and have finished edges. Concrete products shall
have integrated color rather than surface applied paint or stain.
      2.    The following materials shall not be used for cladding unless
specifically approved by the city of West Des Moines as part of the
architectural elevations:
         a.    EIFS or synthetic stucco.
         b.    Concrete masonry units.
         c.    Tilt up precast concrete systems that are structural in
appearance.
         d.   Materials that are intended for interior use.
      3.    Changes in materials should occur at either inside corners or where
a detail is drawn to specifically accommodate a transition. Stone and brick
materials should wrap corners several feet in order to provide authenticity to
the materials. (Ord. 2595, 1-2-2024)
 
